LEONORA

A Novel

by

ARNOLD BENNETT

Author of The Grand Babylon Hotel, The Gates of Wrath, Anna of the Five Towns, etc.

1903

CONTENTS

I.    THE HOUSEHOLD AT HILLPORT II.   MESHACH AND HANNAH III.  THE CALL IV.   AN INTIMACY V.
THE CHANCE VI.   COMIC OPERA VII.  THE DEPARTURE VIII. THE DANCE IX.   A DEATH IN THE FAMILY
X.    IN THE GARDEN XI.   THE REFUSAL XII.  IN LONDON

CHAPTER I

THE HOUSEHOLD AT HILLPORT

She was walking, with her customary air of haughty and rapt leisure, across the market-place
of Bursley, when she observed in front of her, at the top of Oldcastle Street, two men conversing
and gesticulating vehemently, each seated alone in a dog-cart. These persons, who had met from
opposite directions, were her husband, John Stanway, the earthenware manufacturer, and David
Dain, the solicitor who practised at Hanbridge. Stanway's cob, always quicker to start than
to stop, had been pulled up with difficulty, drawing his cart just clear of the other one,
so that the two portly and middle-aged talkers were most uncomfortably obliged to twist their
necks in order to see one another; the attitude did nothing to ease the obvious asperity of
the discussion. She thought the spectacle undignified and silly; and she marvelled, as all
women marvel, that men who conduct themselves so magisterially should sometimes appear so infantile.
She felt glad that it was Thursday afternoon, and the shops closed and the streets empty.

Immediately John Stanway caught sight of her he said a few words to the lawyer in a somewhat
different key, and descended from his vehicle. As she came up to them Mr. Dain saluted her
with bashful abruptness, and her proud face broke as if by the loosing of a spell into a generous
and captivating smile; Mr. Dain blushed, the vision was too much for his composure; he moved
his horse forward a yard or two, and then jerked it back again, gruffly advising it to stand
still. Stanway turned to her bluntly, unceremoniously, as to a creature to whom he owed nothing.
She noticed once more how the whole character of his face was changed under annoyance.

'Here, Nora!' he said, speaking with the raw anger of a man with a new-born grievance, 'run
this home for me. I'm going over to Hanbridge with Mr. Dain.'

'Very well,' she agreed with soothing calmness, and taking the reins she climbed up to the
high driving-seat.

'And I say, Nora--Wo-back!' he flamed out passionately to the impatient cob, 'where're your
manners, you idiot? I say, Nora, I doubt I shall be late for tea--half-past six. Tell Milly
she must be in. The others too.' He gave these instructions in a lower tone, and emphasised
them by a stormy and ominous frown. Then with an injured 'Now, Dain!' he got into the equipage
of his legal adviser and departed towards Hanbridge, trailing clouds of vexation.

Leonora drove smartly but cautiously down the steep slope of Oldcastle Street; she could drive
as well as a woman may. A group of clay-soiled girls lounging in the archway of a manufactory
exchanged rude but admiring remarks about her as she passed. The paces of the cob, the dazzle
of the silver-plated harness, the fine lines of the cart, the unbending mien of the driver,
made a glittering cynosure for envy. All around was grime, squalor, servitude, ugliness; the
inglorious travail of two hundred thousand people, above ground and below it, filled the day
and the night. But here, as it were suddenly, out of that earthy and laborious bed, rose the
blossom of luxury, grace, and leisure, the final elegance of the industrial district of the
Five Towns. The contrast between Leonora and the rough creatures in the archway, between the
flower and the phosphates which nourished it, was sharp and decisive: and Leonora, in the September
sunshine, was well aware of the contrast. She felt that the loud-voiced girls were at one extremity
of the scale and she at the other; and this arrangement seemed natural, necessary, inevitable.

She was a beautiful woman. She had a slim perfect figure; quite simply she carried her head
so high and her shoulders so square that her back seemed to be hollowed out, and no tightness
on the part of a bodice could hide this charming concavity. Her face was handsome with its
large regular features; one noticed the abundant black hair under the hat, the thick eyebrows,
the brown and opaque skin, the teeth impeccably white, and the firm, unyielding mouth and chin.
Underneath the chin, half muffling it, came a white muslin bow, soft, frail, feminate, an enchanting
disclaimer of that facial sternness and the masculinity of that tailor-made dress, a signal
at once provocative and wistful of the woman. She had brains; they appeared in her keen dark
eyes. Her judgment was experienced and mature. She knew her world and its men and women. She
was not too soon shocked, not too severe in her verdicts, not the victim of too many illusions.
And yet, though everything about her witnessed to a serene temperament and the continual appeasing
of mild desires, she dreamed sadly, like the girls in the archway, of an existence more distinguished
than her own; an existence brilliant and tender, where dalliance and high endeavour, virtue
and the flavour of sin, eternal appetite and eternal satisfaction, were incredibly united.
Even now, on her fortieth birthday, she still believed in the possibility of a conscious state
of positive and continued happiness, and regretted that she should have missed it.

The imminence and the arrival of this dire birthday, this day of wrath on which the proudest
woman will kneel to implacable destiny and beg a reprieve, had induced the reveries natural
to it--the self-searching, the exchange of old fallacies for new, the dismayed glance forward,
the lingering look behind. Absorbed though she was in the control of the sensitive steed, the
field of her mind's eye seemed to be entirely filled by an image of the woman of forty as imagined
by herself at the age of twenty. And she was that woman now! But she did not feel like forty;
at thirty she had not felt thirty; she could only accept the almanac and the rules of arithmetic.
The interminable years of her marriage rolled back, and she was eighteen again, ingenuous and
trustful, convinced that her versatile husband was unique among his sex. The fading of a short-lived
and factitious passion, the descent of the unique male to the ordinary level of males, the
births of her three girls and their rearing and training: all these things seemed as trifles
to her, mere excrescences and depressions in the vast tableland of her monotonous and placid
career. She had had no career. Her strength of will, of courage, of love, had never been taxed;
only her patience. 'And my life is over!' she told herself, insisting that her life was over
without being able to believe it.

As the dog-cart was crossing the railway bridge at Shawport, at the foot of the rise to Hillport,
Leonora overtook her eldest daughter. She drew up. From the height of the dog-cart she looked
at her child; and the girlishness of Ethel's form, the self-consciousness of newly-arrived
womanhood in her innocent and timid eyes, the virgin richness of her vitality, made Leonora
feel sad, superior, and protective.

'Oh, mother! Where's father?' Ethel exclaimed, staring at her, struck with a foolish wonder
to see her mother where her father had been an hour before.

'What a schoolgirl she is! And at her age I was a mother twice over!' thought Leonora; but
she said aloud: 'Jump up quickly, my dear. You know Prince won't stand.'

Ethel obeyed, awkwardly. As she did so the mother scrutinised the rather lanky figure, the
long dark skirt, the pale blouse, and the straw hat, in a single glance that missed no detail.
Leonora was not quite dissatisfied; Ethel carried herself tolerably, she resembled her mother;
she had more distinction than her sisters, but her manner was often lackadaisical.

'Your father was very vexed about something,' said Leonora, when she had recounted the meeting
at the top of Oldcastle Street. 'Where's Milly?'

'I don't know, mother--I think she went out for a walk.' The girl added apprehensively: 'Why?'

'Oh, nothing!' said Leonora, pretending not to observe that Ethel had blushed. 'If I were you,
Ethel, I should let that belt out one hole ... not here, my dear child, not here. When you
get home. How was Aunt Hannah?'

Every day one member or another of John Stanway's family had to pay a visit to John's venerable
Aunt Hannah, who lived with her brother, the equally venerable Uncle Meshach, in a little house
near the parish church of St. Luke's. This was a social rite the omission of which nothing
could excuse. On that day it was Ethel who had called.

'Auntie was all right. She was making a lot of parkin, and of course I had to taste it, all
new, you know. I'm simply stodged.'

'Don't say "stodged."'

'Oh, mother! You won't let us say anything,' Ethel dismally protested; and Leonora secretly
sympathised with the grown woman in revolt.

'Oh! And Aunt Hannah wishes you many happy returns. Uncle Meshach came back from the Isle of
Man last night. He gave me a note for you. Here it is.'

'I can't take it now, my dear. Give it me afterwards.'

'I think Uncle Meshach's a horrid old thing!' said Ethel.

'My dear girl! Why?'

'Oh! I do. I'm glad he's only father's uncle and not ours. I do hate that name. Fancy being
called Meshach!'

'That isn't uncle's fault, anyhow,' said Leonora.

'You always stick up for him, mother. I believe it's because he flatters you, and says you
look younger than any of us.' Ethel's tone was half roguish, half resentful.

Leonora gave a short unsteady laugh. She knew well that her age was plainly written beneath
her eyes, at the corners of her mouth, under her chin, at the roots of the hair above her ears,
and in her cold, confident gaze. Youth! She would have forfeited all her experience, her knowledge,
and the charm of her maturity, to recover the irrecoverable! She envied the woman by her side,
and envied her because she was lightsome, thoughtless, kittenish, simple, unripe. For a brief
moment, vainly coveting the ineffable charm of Ethel's immaturity, she had a sharp perception
of the obscure mutual antipathy which separates one generation from the next. As the cob rattled
into Hillport, that aristocratic and plutocratic suburb of the town, that haunt of exclusiveness,
that retreat of high life and good tone, she thought how commonplace, vulgar, and petty was
the opulent existence within those tree-shaded villas, and that she was doomed to droop and
die there, while her girls, still unfledged, might, if they had the sense to use their wings,
fly away.... Yet at the same time it gratified her to reflect that she and hers were in the
picture, and conformed to the standards; she enjoyed the admiration which the sight of herself
and Ethel and the expensive cob and cart and accoutrements must arouse in the punctilious and
stupid breast of Hillport.

She was picking flowers for the table from the vivid borders of the lawn, when Ethel ran into
the garden from the drawing-room. Bran, the St. Bernard, was loose and investigating the turf.

'Mother, the letter from Uncle Meshach.'

Leonora took the soiled envelope, and handing over the flowers to Ethel, crossed the lawn and
sat down on the rustic seat, facing the house. The dog followed her, and with his great paw
demanded her attention, but she abruptly dismissed him. She thought it curiously characteristic
of Uncle Meshach that he should write her a letter on her fortieth birthday; she could imagine
the uncouth mixture of wit, rude candour, and wisdom with which he would greet her; his was
a strange and sinister personality, but she knew that he admired her. The note was written
in Meshach's scraggy and irregular hand, in three lines starting close to the top of half a
sheet of note paper. It ran: 'Dear Nora, I hear young Twemlow is come back from America. You
had better see as your John looks out for himself.' There was nothing else, no signature.

As she read it, she experienced precisely the physical discomfort which those feel who travel
for the first time in a descending lift. Fifteen quiet years had elapsed since the death of
her husband's partner William Twemlow, and a quarter of a century since William's wild son,
Arthur, had run away to America. Yet Uncle Meshach's letter seemed to invest these far-off
things with a mysterious and disconcerting actuality. The misgivings about her husband which
long practice and continual effort had taught her how to keep at bay, suddenly overleapt their
artificial barriers and swarmed upon her.

The long garden front of the dignified eighteenth-century house, nearly the last villa in Hillport
on the road to Oldcastle, was extended before her. She had played in that house as a child,
and as a woman had watched, from its windows, the years go by like a procession. That house
was her domain. Hers was the supreme intelligence brooding creatively over it. Out of walls
and floors and ceilings, out of stairs and passages, out of furniture and woven stuffs, out
of metal and earthenware, she had made a home. From the lawn, in the beautiful sadness of the
autumn evening, any one might have seen and enjoyed the sight of its high French windows, its
glowing sun-blinds, its faintly-tinted and beribboned curtains, its creepers, its glimpses
of occasional tables, tall vases, and dressing-mirrors. But Leonora, as she sat holding the
letter in her long white hand, could call up and see the interior of every room to the most
minute details. She, the housemistress, knew her home by heart. She had thought it into existence;
and there was not a cabinet against a wall, not a rug on a floor, not a cushion on a chair,
not a knicknack on a mantelpiece, not a plate in a rack, but had come there by the design of
her brain. Without possessing much artistic taste, Leonora had an extraordinary talent for
domestic equipment, organisation, and management. She was so interested in her home, so exacting
in her ideals, that she could never reach finality; the place went through a constant succession
of improvements; its comfort and its attractiveness were always on the increase. And the result
was so striking that her supremacy in the woman's craft could not be challenged. All Hillport,
including her husband, bowed to it. Mrs. Stanway's principles, schemes, methods, even her trifling
dodges, were mentioned with deep respect by the ladies of Hillport, who often expressed their
astonishment that, although the wheels of Mrs. Stanway's household revolved with perfect smoothness,
Mrs. Stanway herself appeared never to be doing anything. That astonishment was Leonora's pride.
As her brain marshalled with ease the thousand diverse details of the wonderful domestic machine,
she could appreciate, better than any other woman in Hillport, without vanity and without humility,
the singular excellence of her gifts and of the organism they had perfected. And now this creation
of hers, this complex structure of mellow brick-and-mortar, and fine chattels, and nice and
luxurious habit, seemed to Leonora to tremble at the whisper of an enigmatic message from Uncle
Meshach. The foreboding caused by the letter mingled with the menace of approaching age and
with the sadness of the early autumn, and confirmed her mood.

Millicent, her youngest, ran impulsively to her in the garden. Millicent was eighteen, and
the days when she went to school and wore her hair in a long plait were still quite fresh in
the girl's mind. For this reason she was often inordinately and aggressively adult.

'Mamma! I'm going to have my tea first thing. The Burgesses have asked me to play tennis. I
needn't wait, need I? It gets dark so soon.' As Millicent stood there, ardently persuasive,
she forgot that adult persons do not stand on one leg or put their fingers in their mouths.

Leonora looked fondly at the sprightly girl, vain, self-conscious, and blonde and pretty as
a doll in her white dress. She recognised all Millicent's faults and shortcomings, and yet
was overcome by the charm of her presence.

'No, Milly, you must wait.' Throned on the rustic seat, inscrutable and tyrannous Leonora,
a wistful, wayward atom in the universe, laid her command upon the other wayward atom; and
she thought how strange it was that this should be.

'But, Ma----'

'Father specially said you must be in for tea. You know you have far too much freedom. What
have you been doing all the afternoon?'

'I haven't been doing anything, Ma.'

Leonora feared for the strict veracity of her youngest, but she said nothing, and Milly retired
full of annoyance against the inconceivable caprices of parents.

At twenty minutes to seven John Stanway entered his large and handsome dining-room, having
been driven home by David Dain, whose residence was close by. Three languorous women and the
erect and motionless parlourmaid behind the door were waiting for him. He went straight to
his carver's chair, and instantly the women were alert, galvanised into vigilant life. Leonora,
opposite to her husband, began to pour out the tea; the impassive parlourmaid stood consummately
ready to hand the cups; Ethel and Millicent took their seats along one side of the table, with
an air of nonchalance which was far from sincere; a chair on the other side remained empty.

'Turn the gas on, Bessie,' said John. Daylight had scarcely begun to fail; but nevertheless
the man's tone announced a grievance, that, with half-a-dozen women in the house, he the exhausted
breadwinner should have been obliged to attend to such a trifle. Bessie sprang to pull the
chain of the Welsbach tap, and the white and silver of the tea-table glittered under the yellow
light. Every woman looked furtively at John's morose countenance.

Neither dark nor fair, he was a tall man, verging towards obesity, and the fulness of his figure
did not suit his thin, rather handsome face. His age was forty-eight. There was a small bald
spot on the crown of his head. The clipped brown beard seemed thick and plenteous, but this
effect was given by the coarseness of the hairs, not by their number; the moustache was long
and exiguous. His blue eyes were never still, and they always avoided any prolonged encounter
with other eyes. He was a personable specimen of the clever and successful manufacturer. His
clothes were well cut, the necktie of a discreet smartness. His grandfather had begun life
as a working potter; nevertheless John Stanway spoke easily and correctly in a refined variety
of the broad Five Towns accent; he could open a door for a lady, and was noted for his neatness
in compliment.

It was his ambition always to be calm, oracular, weighty; always to be sure of himself; but
his temperament was incurably nervous, restless, and impulsive. He could not be still, he could
not wait. Instinct drove him to action for the sake of action, instinct made him seek continually
for notice, prominence, comment. These fundamental appetites had urged him into public life--to
the Borough Council and the Committee of the Wedgwood Institution. He often affected to be
buried in cogitation upon municipal and private business affairs, when in fact his attention
was disengaged and watchful. Leonora knew that this was so to-night. The idea of his duplicity
took possession of her mind. Deeps yawned before her, deeps that swallowed up the solid and
charming house and the comfortable family existence, as she glanced at that face at once strange
and familiar to her. 'Is it all right?' she kept thinking. 'Is John all that he seems? I wonder
whether he has ever committed murder.' Yes, even this absurd thought, which she knew to be
absurd, crossed her mind.

'Where's Rose?' he demanded suddenly in the depressing silence of the tea-table, as if he had
just discovered the absence of his second daughter.

'She's been working in her room all day,' said Leonora.

'That's no reason why she should be late for tea.'

At that moment Rose entered. She was very tall and pale, her dress was a little dowdy. Like
her father and Millicent, she carried her head forward and had a tendency to look downwards,
and her spine seemed flaccid. Ethel was beautiful, or about to be beautiful; Millicent was
pretty; Rose plain. Rose was deficient in style. She despised style, and regarded her sisters
as frivolous ninnies and gadabouts. She was the serious member of the family, and for two years
had been studying for the Matriculation of London University.

'Late again!' said her father. 'I shall stop all this exam work.'

Rose said nothing, but looked resentful.

When the hot dishes had been partaken of, Bessie was dismissed, and Leonora waited for the
bursting of the storm. It was Millicent who drew it down.

'I think I shall go down to Burgesses, after all, mamma. It's quite light,' she said with audacious
pertness.

Her father looked at her.

'What were you doing this afternoon, Milly?'

'I went out for a walk, pa.'

'Who with?'

'No one.'

'Didn't I see you on the canal-side with young Ryley?'

'Yes, father. He was going back to the works after dinner, and he just happened to overtake me.'

Milly and Ethel exchanged a swift glance.

'Happened to overtake you! I saw you as I was driving past, over the canal bridge. You little
thought that I saw you.'

'Well, father, I couldn't help him overtaking me. Besides----'

'Besides!' he took her up. 'You had your hand on his shoulder. How do you explain that?'

Millicent was silent.

'I'm ashamed of you, regularly ashamed ... You with your hand on his shoulder in full sight
of the works! And on your mother's birthday too!'

Leonora involuntarily stirred. For more than twenty years it had been his custom to give her
a kiss and a ten-pound note before breakfast on her birthday, but this year he had so far made
no mention whatever of the anniversary.

'I'm going to put my foot down,' he continued with grieved majesty. 'I don't want to, but you
force me to it. I'll have no goings-on with Fred Ryley. Understand that. And I'll have no more
idling about. You girls--at least you two--are bone-idle. Ethel shall begin to go to the works
next Monday. I want a clerk. And you, Milly, must take up the housekeeping. Mother, you'll
see to that.'

Leonora reflected that whereas Ethel showed a marked gift for housekeeping, Milly was instinctively
averse to everything merely domestic. But with her acquired fatalism she accepted the ukase.

'You understand,' said John to his pert youngest.

'Yes, papa.'

'No more carrying-on with Fred Ryley--or any one else.'

'No, papa.'

'I've got quite enough to worry me without being bothered by you girls.'

Rose left the table, consciously innocent both of sloth and of light behaviour.

'What are you going to do now, Rose?' He could not let her off scot-free.

'Read my chemistry, father.'

'You'll do no such thing.'

'I must, if I'm to pass at Christmas,' she said firmly. 'It's my weakest subject.'

'Christmas or no Christmas,' he replied, 'I'm not going to let you kill yourself. Look at your
face! I wonder your mother----'

'Run into the garden for a while, my dear,' said Leonora softly, and the girl moved to obey.

'Rose,' he called her back sharply as his exasperation became fidgetty. 'Don't be in such a
hurry. Open the window--an inch.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Ethel and Millicent disappeared after the manner of young fox-terriers; they did not visibly
depart; they were there, one looked away, they were gone. In the bedroom which they shared,
the door well locked, they threw oft all restraints, conventions, pretences, and discussed
the world, and their own world, with terrible candour. This sacred and untidy apartment, where
many of the habits of childhood still lingered, was a retreat, a sanctuary from the law, and
the fastness had been ingeniously secured against surprise by the peculiar position of the
bedstead in front of the doorway.

'Father is a donkey!' said Ethel.

'And ma never says a word!' said Milly.

'I could simply have smacked him when he brought in mother's birthday,' Ethel continued, savagely.

'So could I.'

'Fancy him thinking it's you. What a lark!'

'Yes. I don't mind,' said Milly.

'You are a brick, Milly. And I didn't think you were, I didn't really.'

'What a horrid pig you are, Eth!' Milly protested, and Ethel laughed.

'Did you give Fred my note all right?' Ethel demanded.

'Yes,' answered Milly. 'I suppose he's coming up to-night?'

'I asked him to.'

'There'll be a frantic row one day. I'm sure there will,' Milly said meditatively, after a pause.

'Oh! there's bound to be!' Ethel assented, and she added: 'Mother does trust us. Have a choc?'

Milly said yes, and Ethel drew a box of bonbons from her pocket.

They seemed to contemplate with a fearful joy the probable exposure of that life of flirtations
and chocolate which ran its secret course side by side with the other life of demure propriety
acted out for the benefit of the older generation. If these innocent and inexperienced souls
had been accused of leading a double life, they would have denied the charge with genuine indignation.
Nevertheless, driven by the universal longing, and abetted by parental apathy and parental
lack of imagination, they did lead a double life. They chafed bitterly under the code to which
they were obliged ostensibly to submit. In their moods of revolt, they honestly believed their
parents to be dull and obstinate creatures who had lost the appetite for romance and ecstasy
and were determined to mortify this appetite in others. They desired heaps of money and the
free, informal companionship of very young men. The latter--at the cost of some intrigue and
subterfuge--they contrived to get. But money they could not get. Frequently they said to each
other with intense earnestness that they would do anything for money; and they repeated passionately,
'anything.'

'Just look at that stuck-up thing!' said Milly laughing. They stood together at the window,
and Milly pointed her finger at Rose, who was walking conscientiously to and fro across the
garden in the gathering dusk.

Ethel rapped on the pane, and the three sisters exchanged friendly smiles.

'Rosie will never pass her exam, not if she lives to be a hundred,' said Ethel. 'And can you
imagine father making me go to the works? Can you imagine the sense of it?'

'He won't let you walk up with Fred at nights,' said Milly, 'so you needn't think.'

'And your housekeeping!' Ethel exclaimed. 'What a treat father will have at meals!'

'Oh! I can easily get round mother,' said Milly with confidence. 'I can't housekeep, and ma
knows that perfectly well.'

'Well, father will forget all about it in a week or two, that's one comfort,' Ethel concluded
the matter. 'Are you going down to Burgesses to see Harry?' she inquired, observing Milly put
on her hat.

'Yes,' said Milly. 'Cissie said she'd come for me if I was late. You'd better stay in and be
dutiful.'

'I shall offer to play duets with mother. Don't you be long. Let's try that chorus for the
Operatic before supper.'

       *       *       *       *       *

That night, after the girls had kissed them and gone to bed, John and Leonora remained alone
together in the drawing-room. The first fire of autumn was burning in the grate, and at the
other end of the long room dark curtains were drawn across the French window. Shaded candles
lighted the grand piano, at which Leonora was seated, and a single gas jet illuminated the
region of the hearth, where John, lounging almost at full length in a vast chair, read the
newspaper; otherwise the room was in shadow. John dropped the 'Signal,' which slid to the hearthrug
with a rustle, and turned his head so that he could just see the left side of his wife's face
and her left hand as it moved over the keys of the piano. She played with gentle monotony,
and her playing seemed perfunctory, yet agreeable. John watched the glinting of the four rings
on her left hand, and the slow undulations of the drooping lace at her wrist. He moved twice,
and she knew he was about to speak.

'I say, Leonora,' he said in a confidential tone.

'Yes, my dear,' she responded, complying generously with his appeal for sympathy. She continued
to play for a moment, but even more softly; and then, as he kept silence, she revolved on the
piano-stool and looked into his face.

'What is it?' she asked in a caressing voice, intensifying her femininity, forgiving him, excusing
him, thinking and making him think what a good fellow he was, despite certain superficial faults.

'You knew nothing of this Ryley business, did you?' he murmured.

'Oh, no. Are you sure there's anything in it? I don't think there is for an instant.' And she
did not. Even the placing of Milly's hand on Fred Ryley's shoulder in full sight of the street,
even this she regarded only as the pretty indiscretion of a child. 'Oh! there's nothing in
it,' she repeated.

'Well, there's got to be nothing in it. You must keep an eye on 'em. I won't have it.'

She leaned forward, and, resting her elbows on her knees, put her chin in her long hands. Her
bangles disappeared amid lace.

'What's the matter with Fred?' said she. 'He's a relation; and you've said before now that
he's a good clerk,'

'He's a decent enough clerk. But he's not for our girls.'

'If it's only money----' she began.

'Money!' John cried. 'He'll have money. Oh! he'll have money right enough. Look here, Nora,
I've not told you before, but I'll tell you now. Uncle Meshach's altered his will in favour
of young Ryley.'

'Oh! Jack!'

John Stanway stood up, gazing at his wife with an air of martyrised virtue which said: 'There!
what do you think of that as a specimen of the worries which I keep to myself?'

She raised her eyebrows with a gesture of deep concern. And all the time she was asking herself:
'Why did Uncle Meshach alter his will? Why did he do that? He must have had some reason.' This
question troubled her far more than the blow to their expectations.

John's maternal grandfather had married twice. By his first wife he had had one son, Shadrach;
and by his second wife two daughters and a son, Mary (John's mother), Hannah, and Meshach.
The last two had never married. Shadrach had estranged all his family (except old Ebenezer)
by marrying beneath him, and Mary had earned praise by marrying rather well. These two children,
by a useful whim of the eccentric old man, had received their portions of the patrimony on
their respective wedding-days. They were both dead. Shadrach, amiable but incompetent, had
died poor, leaving a daughter, Susan, who had repeated, even more reprehensibly, her father's
sin of marrying beneath her. She had married a working potter, and thus reduced her branch
of the family to the status from which old Ebenezer had originally raised himself. Fred Ryley,
now an orphan, was Susan's only child. As an act of charity John Stanway had given Fred Ryley
a stool in the office of his manufactory; but, though Fred's mother was John's first cousin,
John never acknowledged the fact. John argued that Fred's mother and Fred's grandfather had
made fools of themselves, and that the consequences were irremediable save by Fred's unaided
effort. Such vicissitudes of blood, and the social contrasts resulting therefrom, are common
enough in the history of families in democratic communities.

Old Ebenezer's will left the residue of his estate, reckoned at some fifteen thousand pounds,
to Meshach and Hannah as joint tenants with the remainder absolutely to the survivor of them.
By this arrangement, which suited them excellently since they had always lived together, though
neither could touch the principal of their joint property during their joint lives, the survivor
had complete freedom to dispose of everything. Both Meshach and Hannah had made a will in sole
favour of John.

'Yes,' John said again, 'he's altered it in favour of young Ryley. David Dain told me the other
day. Uncle told Dain he might tell me.'

'Why has he altered it?' Leonora asked aloud at last.

John shook his head. 'Why does Uncle Meshach do anything?' He spoke with sarcastic irritation.
'I suppose he's taken a sudden fancy for Susan's child, after ignoring him all these years.'

'And has Aunt Hannah altered her will, too?'

'No. I'm all right in that quarter.'

'Then if your Aunt Hannah lives longest, you'll still come in for everything, just as if your
Uncle Meshach hadn't altered his will?'

'Yes. But Aunt Hannah won't live for ever. And Uncle Meshach will. The pleasant village of CHINGFORD,
in Essex, may be called a vignette of the topographer's "rus in urbe," it being only nine miles
distant from the heart of London, and consequently almost within
its vortex.

It stands on the banks of the river Lea, and derives its name from the Saxon word Cing and
ford, (signifying the king's ford,) there having formerly been a
ford here; the adjoining meadows being designated the king's meads,
and the Lea, the king's stream.

There appears to have been two manors in this parish, one of which was granted by Edward the
Confessor to the cathedral of St. Paul's, but surrendered at the
reformation to Henry VIII.; the other, according to Domesday Book,
was held by Orgar, the Thane; and from the latter another manor has
since been taken.

The "ivy-mantled" church, represented in the above vignette, is dedicated
to St. Peter and St. Paul, and consists of a chancel, nave, and south
aisle, with a low square tower at the west end, containing three bells.

Within the church are a few interesting monuments, among which is
one to the memory of Robert Rampton, who died in 1585 and was yeoman
of the chamber to Edward VI., and the Queens Mary and Elizabeth.

It stands in the south aisle, with an inscription on a brass plate against the wall, underneath
which is an altar tomb covered with a slab of black marble, on which are the effigies, in brass,
of Robert Rampton, and his wife Margaret, who died in 1590.

Altogether, Chingford is one of the prettiest villages near London, and its church is a picturesque
attraction for pedestrian tourists, and such as love to steal away from the maelstroom of an
overgrown metropolis, to glide into scenes of "calm contemplation
and poetic ease;" although much of the journey lies through avenues
of bricks and mortar, and trim roads that swarm with busy toil.

In the parish of Chingford is an estate called Scots Mayhew, or Brindwoods, which is held of
the rector by the following singular tenure:--"Upon every alienation,
the owner of the estate, with his wife, and a man and maid servant,
(each upon a horse) come to the parsonage, where the owner does his
homage, and pays his relief in manner following:--He blows three blasts
with his horn, carries a hawk on his fist, and his servant has a greyhound
in a slip--both for the use of the rector that day.

He receives a chicken for his hawk, a peck of oats for his horse, and a loaf of bread for his
greyhound.

They all dine, after which the master blows three blasts on his horn, and they all depart."[5]

[5]
Morant's Essex, vol. i. p. 57.

For the original of the engraving, and the substance of this description,
our thanks are due to S.I.B.

* * * * *

OLD SONG.

The old minstrels saw far and deep, and clear into all heart-mysteries--and,
low-born, humble men as they were, their tragic or comic strains strike
like electricity.--Blackwood.

* * * * *

SPIRIT OF THE Public Journals.

* * * * *

THE SHAVING SHOP

'Tis not an half hour's work-- A Cupid and a fiddle, and the thing's
done.

FLETCHER.

       "Hold back your head, if you please, sir, that I may get this napkin
properly fastened--there now," said Toby Tims, as, securing the pin,
he dipped his razor into hot water, and began working up with restless
brush the lather of his soapbox.

"I dare say you have got a newspaper there," said I; "are you a politician, Mr. Tims?"

"Oh, just a little bit of one. I get Bell's Messenger at second hand from a neighbour, who has
it from his cousin in the Borough, who, I believe, is the last reader
of a club of fourteen, who take it among them; and, being last, as
I observed, sir, he has the paper to himself into the bargain.--Please
exalt your chin, sir, and keep your head a little to one side--there,
sir," added Toby, cammencing his operations with the brush, and hoarifying
my barbal extremity, as the facetious Thomas Hood would probably express
it.

"Now, sir--a leetle more round, if you please--there, sir, there.

It is a most entertaining paper, and beats all for news.

In fact, it is full of every thing, sir--every, every thing--accidents--charity sermons--markets--boxing--Bible
societies--horse racing--child murders--the theatres--foreign wars--Bow-street reports--electioneering--and
Day and Martin's blacking."

"Are you a bit of a bruiser, Mr. Tims?"

"Oh, bless your heart, sir, only a leetle--a very leetle. A turn-up with the gloves, or so, your
honour.

I'm but a light weight--only a light weight--seven stone and a half, sir; but a rare bit of stuff,
though I say it myself, sir--Begging your pardon. I dare say I have put some of the soap into your mouth.
Now, sir, now--please let me hold your nose, sir."

"Scarcely civil, Mr. Toby," said I, "scarcely civil--Phroo! let me spit out the suds."

"I will be done in a moment, sir--in half a moment.

Well, sir, speaking of razors, they should be always properly tempered
with hot water, a leetle dip more or less.

You see now how it glides over, smooth and smack as your hand.--Keep still, sir; I might have
given you a nick just now. You don't choose a leetle of the mustachy left?"

"No, no--off with it all. No matrimonial news stirring in this quarter just now, Mr. Tims?"

"Nothing extremely particular.--Now, sir, you are fit for the king's levee, so far as my department
is concerned. But you cannot go out just now, sir--see how it rains--a perfect water-spout. Just feel
yourself at home, sir, for a leetle, and take a peep around you. That block, sir, has been
very much admired--extremely like the Wenus de Medicine--capital nose--and as for the wig department,
catch me for that, sir. But of all them there pictures hanging around, yon is the favourite
of myself and the connessoors."

"Ay, Mr. Tims," said I, "that is truly a gem--an old lover kneeling at the foot of his young sweetheart,
and two fellows in buckram taking a peep at them from among the trees."

"Capital, sir--capital. I'll tell you a rare good story, sir, connected with that picture and
my own history, with your honour's leave, sir."

"With all my heart, Mr. Tims--you are very obliging."

"Well then, sir, take that chair, and I will get on like a house on fire; but if you please, don't
put me off my clew, sir.--Concerning that picture and my courtship, the most serious epoch of my
life, there is a leetle bit of a story which I would like to be a beacon to others; and if your
honour is still a bachelor, and not yet stranded on the shoals of matrimony, it may be Werbum Sapienti,
as O'Toole, the Irish schoolmaster, used to observe, when in the act of applying the birch
to the booby's back.

"Well, sir, having received a grammatical education, and been brought up as a peruke-maker from
my earliest years--besides having seen a deal of high life, and the world in general, in carrying
false curls, bandeaux, and other artificial head-gear paraphernalia, in bandboxes to boarding
schools, and so on--a desire naturally sprung up within me, being now in my twenty-first year,
and worth a guinea a week of wages, to look about for what old kind Seignor Fiddle-stringo,
the minuet-master, used to recommend under the title of a cara sposa--open shop--and act head frizzle
in an establishment of my own.

"Very good, sir--In the pursuit of this virtuous purpose, I cast a sheep's eye over the broad
face of society, and at length, from a number of eligible specimens, I selected three, who,
whether considered in the light of natural beauty, or mental accomplishment, struck me forcibly
as suitable coadjutors for a man--for a man like your humble servant."

"A most royal bow that, Mr. Tims. Well, proceed, if you please."

"Very good, sir--well, then, to proceed. The first of these was Miss Diana Tonkin, a young lady,
who kept her brother's snuff-shop, at the sign of the African astride the Tobacco Barrel--a rare
beauty, who was on the most intimate talking terms with half a hundred young bloods and beaux, who
looked in during lounging hours, being students of law, physic, and divinity, half-pay ensigns,
and theatrical understrappers, to replenish their boxes with Lundyfoot, whiff a Havannah cigar,
or masticate pigtail. No wonder that she was spoiled by flattery, Miss Diana, for she was a
bit of a beauty; and though she had but one eye--by heavens, what an eye that was!"

"She must have been an irresistible creature, certainly, Mr. Tims," said I. "Well, how did you
come on?"

"Irresistible! but you shall hear, sir. I foresaw that, in soliciting the honour of the fair
damsel's hand, I should have much opposition to encounter from the rivalry of the three learned professions,
to say nothing of the gentlemen of the sword and of the buskin; but, thinks I to myself, 'faint
heart never won fair lady,' so I at once set up a snuff-box, looked as tip-topping as possible,
and commenced canvassing.

"The second elite (for I know a leetle French, having for three months, during my apprenticeship, had
the honour of frizling the head-gear of Count Witruvius de Caucason, who occupied private state-lodgings
at the sign of the Blue Boar in the Poultry, and who afterwards decamped without clearing
scores)--the second elite (for I make a point, sir, of having two strings to my bow) was Mrs.
Joan Sweetbread, a person of exquisite parts, but fiery temper, at that time aged thirty-three,
twelve stone weight, head cook and housekeeper to Sir Anthony Macturk, a Scotch baronet, who
rusticated in the vicinity of town. I made her a few evening visits, and we talked love affairs
over muffins and a cup of excellent congou. Then what a variety of jams and jellies! I never
returned without a disordered stomach, and wishing Highland heather-honey at the devil. Yet,
after all, to prove a hoax!--for even when I was on the point of popping the question, and had
fastened my silk Jem Belcher with a knowing leetle knot to set out for that purpose, I learned
from Francie, the stable-boy, that she had the evening before eloped
with the coachman, and returned to her post that forenoon metamorphosed
into Madam Trot.

"I first thought, sir, of hanging myself over the first lamp-post;
but, after a leetle consideration, I determined to confound Madam
Trot, and all other fickle fair ones, by that very night marrying
Miss Diana.

I hastened on, rushed precipitately into the shop, and on the subject--and
hear, oh heaven, and believe, oh earth! was met, not by a plump denial,
but was shown the door."

"Upon my word, Mr. Tims," said I, "you have been a most unfortunate man. I wonder you recovered
after such mighty reverses; but I hope----"

"Hope! that is the word, sir, the very word, I still had hope; so,
after ten days' horrible melancholy, in which I cropped not a few
heads in a novel and unprecedented style, I at it again, and laid
immediate and close siege to the last and loveliest of the trio--one
by whom I was shot dead at first sight, and of whom it might be said,
as I once heard Kean justly observe in a very pretty tragedy, and
to a numerous audience, 'We ne'er shall look upon her like again!'"

"Capital, Mr. Tims. Well, how did you get on?"

"A moment's patience, with your honour's leave.--Ah! truly might it be said of her, that she was
descended from the high and great--her grandfather having been not only six feet three, without the
shoes, but for forty odd years principal bell-ringer in the steeple of St. Giles's, Cripplegate;
and her grandmother, for long and long, not only head dry-nurse to one of the noblest families
in all England, but bona fide twenty-two stone avoirdupois--so that it was once proposed,
by the undertaker, to bury her at twice! As to this nonpareil of lovely flesh and blood, her
name was Lucy Mainspring, the daughter of a horologer, sir,--a watchmaker--vulgo so called--and though
fattish, she was very fair--fair! by Jupiter, (craving your honour's pardon for swearing,) she fairly
made me give all other thoughts the cut, and twisted the passions of my heart with the red-hot
torturing irons of love. 'Pon honour, sir, I almost grow foolish when I think of those days;
but love, sir, nothing can resist love."

"I hope, Mr. Tims, you were in better luck with Miss Mainspring?"

"A leetle a leetle patience, your honour, and all will be out as quick as directly--in the twinkling
of a bed-post.--For three successive nights I sat up in a brown study, with a four-in-the-pound
candle burning before me till almost cock-crow, composing a love-letter, a most elaborate affair, the
pure overflowing of la belle passion, all about Venus, Cupids, bows and arrows, hearts, darts,
and them things, which, having copied neatly over on a handsome sheet of foolscap, turned
up with gilt, (for, though I say it myself, I scribble a smart fist,) I made a blotch of red wax
on the back as large as a dollar, that thereon I might the more indelibly impress a seal, with a
couple of pigeons cooing upon it, and 'toujours wotre' for the motto. This I popped into the post-office,
and waited patiently--may I add confidently?--for the result.

"No answer having come as I expected per return, I began to smell that I was in the wrong box;
so, on the following evening, I had a polite visit from her respectable old father, Daniel
Mainspring, who asked me what my intentions were?--'To commence wig-maker on my own bottom,' answered
I.--'But with respect to my daughter, sir?'--'Why, to be sure, to make her mistress, sir.'--'Mistress!'
quoth he, 'did I hear you right, sir?'--'I hope you are not hard of hearing, Mr. Mainspring.
I wish, sir--between us, sir--you understand, sir--to marry her, sir.'--'Then you can't have her,
sir.'--'But I must, sir, for I can't do without her, sir.'--'Then you may buy a rope.'--'Ah!
you would not sign my death-warrant--wouldn't you not now, Mr. Mainspring?'--'Before going,'
said he, rummaging his huge coat-pockets with both hands at once, 'there is your letter, which
I read over patiently, instead of my daughter, who has never seen it; and I hope you will excuse
the liberty I take of calling you a great fool, and wishing you a good morning.'

"Now, though a lad of mettle, you know, sir, it would not have been quite the thing to have called
out my intended father-in-law; so, with amazing forbearance, bridling my passion, I allowed
him to march off triumphantly, and stood, with the letter in my hand, looking down the alley after
him, strutting along, staff in hand, like a recruiting sergeant,
as if he had been a phoenix.

"A man of my penetration was not long in scenting out who was the formidable rival to whom Daddy
Mainspring alluded. Sacre! to think the mercenary old hunks could dream of sacrificing my lovely
Lucy to such a hobgoblin of a fellow as a superannuated dragoon quartermaster, with a beak
like Bardolph's in the play. But I had some confidence in my own qualifications; and as I
gave a sly glance down at my nether person, 'Dash-the-wig-of-him!' thought I to myself, 'if he
can sport a leg like that of Toby Tims.' I accordingly determined not to be discomfited, and
took the earliest opportunity of presenting Miss Lucy, through a sure channel, with a passionate
billet doux, a patent pair of gilt bracelets, and a box of Ruspini's tooth-powder. By St. Patrick
and all the powers, it was shocking to suppose that such an angel as the cherry-cheeked Lucy
should be stolen from me by such an apology for a gallant, as Quartermaster Bottlenose of the
Tipperary Rangers. 'Twas murder, by Jupiter."

"I perfectly agree
with you, Mr. Tims; Did you challenge him to the duello?"

"A leetle
patience, if you please, sir, and you shall hear all. During the violence
of my love-fits, I committed a variety of professional mistakes. I
sent at one time a pot of bear's grease away by the mail, in a wig-box,
to a member of parliament in Yorkshire; and burned a whole batch of
baked hair to ashes, while singing Moore's 'When he who adores thee,'
in attitude, before a block, dressed up for the occasion with a fashionable
wig upon it--to say nothing of my having, in a fit of abstraction,
given a beautiful young lady, who was going that same evening to a
Lord Mayor's ball, the complete charity-workhouse cut, leaving her
scalp as bare as the back of my hand. But cheer up!--to my happy astonishment,
sir, matters worked like a charm. What a parley-vooing and billet-dooing
passed between us! We would have required a porter for the sole purpose.
Then we had stolen interviews of two hours' duration each, for several
successive nights, at the old horologer's back-door, during which,
besides a multiplicity of small-talk--thanks to his deafness--I tried
my utmost to entrap her affections, by reciting sonnets, and spouting
bits of plays in the manner of the tragedy performers. These were
the happy times, sir! The world was changed for me. Paddington canal
seemed the river Pactolus, and Rag-Fair Elysium!

"The old boy, however,
ignorant of our orgies, was still bothering his brains to bring about
matrimony between his daughter and the veteran--who, though no younger
than Methusalem, as stiff as the Monument, and as withered as Belzoni's
Piccadilly mummy, had yet the needful, sir--had abundance of the wherewithal--crops
of yellow shiners--lots of the real--sported a gig, and kept on board
wages a young shaver of all work, with a buff jacket, turned up with
sky-blue facings. Only think, sir--only ponder for a moment what a
formidable rival I had!"

"I hope you beat him off, however," said
I. "The greater danger the more honour you know, Mr. Tims."

"Of that
anon, sir.--Lucy, on her part, angelic creature, professed that she
could not dream of being undutiful towards kind old Pa; and that,
unless desperate measures were resorted to, quamprimum, in the twinkling
of a bed-post she would be under the disagreeable necessity to bundle
and go with the disabled man of war to the temple of Hymen. Sacrilegious
thought!

When William Twemlow's will was proved a few weeks later, Meshach Myatt made no comment whatever.
From time to time he heard news of Arthur Twemlow: that he had set up in New York as an earthenware
and glassware factor, that he was doing well, that he was doing extremely well, that his buyer
had come over to visit the more aristocratic manufactories at Knype and Cauldon, that some
one from Bursley had met Arthur at the Leipzig Easter Fair and reported him stout, taciturn,
and Americanised. Then, one morning in Lord Street, Liverpool, fifteen years after the death
of old Twemlow and the misappropriation of the little book, Meshach encountered Arthur Twemlow
himself; Meshach was returning from his autumn holiday in the Isle of Man, and Arthur had just
landed from the 'Servia.' The two men were mutually impressed by each other's skill in nicely
conducting an interview which ninety-nine people out of a hundred would have botched; for they
had last met as boy of seventeen and man of forty. They lunched richly at the Adelphi, and
gave news for news. Arthur's buyer, it seemed, was dead, and after a day or two in London Arthur
was coming to the Five Towns to buy a little in person. Meshach inquired about Alice in Australia,
and was told that things were in a specially bad way with the tea-blender. He said that you
couldn't cure a fool, and remarked casually upon the smallness of the amount left by old Twemlow.
Arthur, unaware that Meshach Myatt was raising up an idea which for fifteen years had been
buried but never forgotten in his mind, answered with nonchalance that the amount certainly
was rather small. Arthur added that in his dying letter of forgiveness to Alice the old man
had stated that his income from the works during the last years of his life had been less than
two hundred per annum. Meshach worked his shut thin lips up and down and then began to discuss
other matters. But as they parted at Lime Street Station the observer of life said to Arthur
with presaging calm: 'You'll be i' th' Five Towns at the end of the week. Come and have a cup
o' tea with me and Hannah on Saturday afternoon. The old spot, you know it, top of Church Street.
I've something to show you as 'll interest you.' There was a pause and an interchange of glances.
'Right!' said Arthur Twemlow. 'Thank you! I'll be there at a quarter after four or thereabouts.'
'It's like as if what must be!' Meshach murmured to himself with almost sad resignation, in
the enigmatic idiom of the Five Towns. But he was highly pleased that he, the first of all
the townsfolk, should have seen Arthur Twemlow after twenty-five years' absence.

When Hannah, in silk, met the most interesting and disconcerting American stranger in the lobby,
the sound and the smell of Bursley sausage frizzling in the kitchen added a warm finish to
her confused welcome. She remembered him perfectly, 'Eh! Mr. Arthur,' she said, 'I remember
you that well....' And that was all she could say, except: 'Now take off your overcoat and
do make yourself at home, Mr. Arthur.'

'I guess I know you,' said Twemlow, touched by the girlish shyness, the primeval innocence,
and the passionate hospitality of the little grey-haired thing.

As he took off his glossy blue overcoat and hung it up he seemed to fill the narrow lobby with
his large frame and his quiet but penetrating attractive American accent. He probably weighed
fourteen stone, but the elegance of his suit and his boots, the clean-shaven chin, the fineness
of the lines of the nose, and the alert eyes set back under the temples, redeemed him from
grossness. He looked under rather than over forty; his brown hair was beginning to recede from
the forehead, but the heavy moustache, which entirely hid his mouth and was austerely trimmed
at the sides, might have aroused the envy of a colonel of hussars.

'Come in, wut,'[1] cried Meshach impatiently from the hob, 'come in and let's be pecking a
bit,' and as Arthur and Hannah entered the parlour, he added: 'She's gotten sausages for you.
She would get 'em, though I told her you'd take us as you found us. I told her that. But women--well,
you know what they are!'

  [1] Wut = wilt.

'Eh, Meshach, Meshach!' the old damsel protested sadly, and escaped into the kitchen.

And when Meshach insisted that the guest should serve out the sausages, and Hannah, passing
his tea, said it was a shame to trouble him, Twemlow slipped suddenly back into the old life
and ways and ideas. This existence, which he thought he had utterly forgotten, returned again
and triumphed for a time over all the experiences of his manhood; it alone seemed real, honest,
defensible. Sensations of his long and restless career in New York flashed through his mind
as he impaled Hannah's sausages in the curious parlour--the hysteric industry of his girl-typist,
the continuous hot-water service in the bedroom of his glittering apartment at the Concord
House, youthful nights at Coster and Bial's music-hall, an insanely extravagant dinner at Sherry's
on his thirtieth birthday, a difficulty once with an emissary of Pinkerton, the incredible
plague of flies in summer. And during all those racing years of clangour and success in New
York, the life of Bursley, self-sufficient and self-contained, had preserved its monotonous
and slow stolidity. Bursley had become a museum to him; he entered it as he might have entered
the Middle Ages, and was astonished to find that beautiful which once he had deemed sordid
and commonplace. Some of the streets seemed like a monument of the past, a picturesque survival;
the crate-floats, drawn by swift shaggy ponies and driven by men who balanced themselves erect
on two thin boards while flying round corners, struck him as the quaintest thing in the world.

'And what's going on nowadays in old Bosley, Miss Myatt?' he asked expansively, trying to drop
his American accent and use the dialect.

'Eh, bless us!' exclaimed Hannah, startled. 'Nothing ever happens here, Mr. Arthur.'

He felt that nothing did happen there.

'Same here as elsewhere,' said Meshach. 'People living, and getting childer to worry 'em, and
dying. Nothing'll cure 'em of it seemingly. Is there anything different to that in New York?
Or can they do without cemeteries?'

Twemlow laughed, and again he had the illusion of having come back to reality after a long,
hurried dream. 'Nothing seems to have changed here,' he remarked idly.

'Nothing changed!' said Meshach. 'Nay, nay! We're up in the world. We've got the steam-car.
And we've got public baths. We wash oursen nowadays. And there's talk of a park, and a pond
with a duck on it. We're moving with the times, my lad, and so's the rates.'

It gave him pleasure to be called 'my lad' by old Meshach. It was piquant to him that the first
earthenware factor in New York, the Jupiter of a Fourteenth Street office, should be addressed
as a stripling. 'And where is the park to be?' he suavely inquired.

'Up by the railway station, opposite your father's old works as was--it's a row of villas now.'

'Well,' said Twemlow. 'That sounds pretty nice. I believe I'll get you to come around with
me and show off the sights. Say!' he added suddenly, 'do you remember being on that works one
day when my poor father was on to me like half a hundred of bricks, and you said, "The boy's
all right, Mr. Twemlow"? I've never forgotten that. I've thought of it scores of times.'

'Nay!' Meshach answered carelessly, 'I remember nothing o' that.'

Twemlow was dashed by this oblivion. It was his memory of the minute incident which more than
anything else had encouraged him to respond so cordially to Meshach's advances in Liverpool;
for he was by no means facile in social intercourse. And Meshach had rudely forgotten the affecting
scene! He felt diminished, and saw in the old bachelor a personification of the blunt independent
spirit of the Five Towns.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Milly's late to-day,' said Hannah to her brother, timorously breaking the silence which ensued.

'Milly?' questioned Twemlow.

'Millicent her proper name is,' Hannah said quickly, 'but we call her Milly. My nephew's youngest.'

'Yes, of course,' Twemlow commented, when the Myatt family-tree had been sketched for him by
the united effort of brother and sister, 'I recollect now you told me in Liverpool that Mr.
Stanway was married. Who did he marry?'

Meshach Myatt pushed back his chair and stood up. 'John catched on to Knight's daughter, the
doctor at Turnhill,' he said, reaching to a cigar-cabinet on the sideboard. 'Best thing he
ever did in his life. John's among the better end of folk now. People said it were a come-down
for her, but Leonora isn't the sort that comes down. She's got blood in her. That!' He snapped
his fingers. 'She's a good bred 'un. Old Knight's father came from up York way. Ah! She's a
cut above Twemlow & Stanway, is Leonora.'

Twemlow smiled at this persistence of respect for caste.

'Have a weed,' said Meshach, offering him a cigar. 'You'll find it all right; it's a J.S. Murias.
Yes,' he resumed, 'maybe you don't remember old Knight's sister as had that far house up at
Hillport? When she died she left it to Leonora, and they've lived there this dozen year and more.'

'Well, I guess she's got a handsome name to her,' Twemlow remarked perfunctorily, rising and
leaving Hannah alone at the table.

'And she's the handsomest woman in the Five Towns: that I do know,' said Meshach as, in the
grand manner of a connoisseur, he lighted his cigar. 'And her was forty, day afore yesterday,'
he added with caustic emphasis.

'Meshach!' cried Hannah, 'for shame of yourself!' Then she turned to Twemlow smiling and blushing
a little. 'Oughtn't he? Eh, but Mrs. John's a great favourite of my brother's. And I'm sure
her girls are very good and attentive. Not a day but one or another of them calls to see me,
not a day. Eh, if they missed a day I should think the world was coming to an end. And I'm
expecting Milly to-day. What's made the dear child so late----'

'I will say this for John,' asserted Meshach, as though the little housewife had not been speaking,
'I will say this for John,' he repeated, settling himself by the hob. 'He knew how to pick
up a d----d fine woman.'

'Meshach!' Hannah expostulated again.

Something in the excellence of Meshach's cigars, in his way of calling a woman fine, in the
dry, aloof masculinity of his attitude towards Hannah, gave Twemlow to reflect that in the
fundamental deeps of experience New York was perhaps not so far ahead of the old Five Towns
after all.

There was a fluttering in the lobby, and Millicent ran into the parlour, hurriedly, negligently.

'I can't stay a minute, auntie,' the vivacious girl burst out in the unmistakable accents of
condescending pertness, and then she caught sight of the well-dressed, good-looking man in
the corner, and her bearing changed as though by a conjuring trick. She flushed sensitively,
stroked her blue serge frock, composed her immature features to the mask of the finished lady
paying a call, and summoned every faculty to aid her in looking her best. 'So this chit is
the daughter of our admired Leonora,' thought Twemlow.

'I suppose you don't remember old Mr. Twemlow, my dear?' said Hannah after she had proudly
introduced her niece.

'Oh, auntie! how silly you are! Of course I remember him quite well. I really can't stay, auntie.'

'You'll stay and drink this cup of tea with me,' Hannah insisted firmly, and Milly was obliged
to submit. It was not often that the old lady exercised authority; but on that afternoon the
famous New York visitor was just as much an audience for Hannah as for Hannah's greatniece.

Twemlow could think of nothing to say to this pretty pouting creature who had rushed in from
a later world and dissipated the atmosphere of mediævalism, and so he addressed himself to
Meshach upon the eternal subject of the staple trade. The women at the table talked quietly
but self-consciously, and Twemlow saw Milly forced to taste parkin after three refusals. Even
while still masticating the viscid unripe parkin, Milly rose to depart. She bent down and dutifully
grazed with her lips the cheek of the parkin-maker. 'Good-bye, auntie; good-bye, uncle.' And
in an elegant, mincing tone, 'Good afternoon, Mr. Twemlow.'

'I suppose you've just got to be on time at the next place?' he said quizzically, smiling at
her vivid youth in spite of himself. 'Something very important?'

'Oh, very important!' she laughed archly, reddening, and then was gone; and Aunt Hannah followed
her to the door.

'What th' old folks lose,' murmured Meshach, apparently to the fire, as he put his half-consumed
cigar into a meerschaum holder, 'goes to the profit of young Burgess, as is waiting outside
the Bank at top o' th' Square.'

'I see,' said Twemlow, and thought primly that in his day such laxities were not permitted.

Hannah and the servant cleared the tea-table, and the two men were left alone, each silently
reducing an J.S. Murias to ashes. Meshach seemed to grow smaller in his padded chair by the
hob, to become torpid, and to lose that keen sense of his own astuteness which alone gave zest
to his life. Arthur stared out of the window at the confined backyard. The autumn dusk thickened.

Suddenly Meshach sprang up and lighted the gas, and as he adjusted the height of the flame,
he remarked casually: 'So your sister Alice is as poorly off as ever?'

Twemlow assented with a nod. 'By the way,' he said, 'you told me on Wednesday you had something
interesting to show me.'

Meshach made no answer, but picked up the poker and struck several times a large pewter platter
on the mantelpiece.

'Do you want anything, brother?' said Hannah, hastening into the room.

'Go up into my bedroom, sister, and in the left-hand pigeon-hole in the bureau you'll see a
little flat tissue-paper parcel. Bring it me. It's marked J.S.'

'Yes, brother,' and she departed.

'You said as your father had told your sister as he never got no more than two hundred a year
from th' partnership after he retired.'

'Yes,' Twemlow replied. 'That's what she wrote me. In fact she sent me the old chap's letter
to read. So I reckoned it cost him most all he got to live.'

'Well,' the old man said, and Hannah returned with the parcel, which he carefully unwrapped.
'That'll do, sister.' Hannah disappeared. 'Sithee!' He mysteriously drew Arthur's attention
to a little green book whose cover still showed traces of mud and water.

'And what's this?' Twemlow asked with assumed lightness.

Meshach gave him the history of his adventure at the fire, and then laboriously displayed and
expounded the contents of the book, peering into the yellow pages through the steel-rimmed
spectacles which he had put on for the purpose.

'And you've kept it all this time?' said Twemlow.

'I've kept it,' answered the old man grimly, and Twemlow felt that that was precisely what
Meshach Myatt might have been expected to do.

'See,' said Meshach, and their heads were close together,' that's the year before your father's
death--eight hundred and ninety-two pounds. And year afore that--one thousand two hundred and
seven pounds. And year afore that--bless us! Have I turned o'er two pages at once?' And so
he continued.

Twemlow's heart began to beat heavily as Meshach's eyes met his. He seemed to see his father
as a pathetic cheated simpleton, and to hear the innumerable children of his sister crying
for food; he remembered that in the old Bursley days he had always distrusted John Stanway,
that conceited fussy imposing young man of twenty-two whom his father had taken into partnership
and utterly believed in. He forgot that he had hated his father, and his mind was obsessed
by a sentimental and pure passion for justice.

'Say! Mr. Myatt,' he exclaimed with sudden gruffness, 'do you suggest that John Stanway didn't
do my father right?'

'My lad, I'm doing no suggesting.... You can keep the book if you've a mind to. I've said nothing
to no one, and if I had not met you in Liverpool, and you hadn't told me that your sister was
poorly off again, happen I should ha' been mum to my grave. But that's how things turn out.'

'He's your own nephew, you know,' said Twemlow.

'Ay!' said the old man, 'I know that. What by that? Fair's fair.'

Meshach's tone, frigidly jocular, almost frightened the American.

'According to you,' said he, determined to put the thing into words, 'your nephew robbed my
father each year of sums varying from one to three hundred pounds--that's what it comes to.'

'Nay, not according to me--according to that book, and what your father told your sister Alice,'
Meshach corrected.

'But why should he do it? That's what I want to know.'

'Look here,' said Meshach quietly, resuming his chair. 'John's as good a man of business as
you'd meet in a day's march. But never sin' he handled money could he keep off stocks and shares.
He speculates, always has, always will. And now you know it--and 'tisn't everybody as does,
either.'

'Then you think----'

'Nay, my lad, I don't,' said Meshach curtly.

'But what ought I to do?'

Meshach cackled in laughter. 'Ask your sister Alice,' he replied, 'it's her as is interested,
not you. You aren't in the will.'

'But I don't want to ruin John Stanway,' Twemlow protested.

'Ruin John!' Meshach exclaimed, cackling again. 'Not you! We mun have no scandals in th' family.
But you can go and see him, quiet-like, I reckon. Dost think as John'll be stuck fast for six
or seven hundred, or eight hundred? Not John! And happen a bit of money'll come in handy to
th' old parson tea-blender, by all accounts.'

'Suppose my father--made some mistake--forgot?'

'Ay!' said Meshach calmly. 'Suppose he did. And suppose he didna'.'

'I believe I'll go and talk to Stanway,' said Twemlow, putting the book in his pocket. 'Let
me see. The works is down at Shawport?'

'On th' cut,'[2] said Meshach.

  [2] Cut = canal.

'I can say Alice had asked me to look at the accounts. Oh! Perhaps I can straighten it out
neat----' He spoke cheerfully, then stopped. 'But it's fifteen years ago!'

'Fifteen!' said Meshach with gravity.

'I'm d----d if I can make you out!' thought Twemlow as he walked along King Street towards
the steam-tram for Knype, where he was staying at the Five Towns Hotel. Hannah had sped him,
with blushings, and rustlings of silk, from Meshach's door. 'I'm d----d if I can make you out,
Meshach.' He said it aloud. And yet, so complex and self-contradictory is the mind's action
under certain circumstances, he could make out Meshach perfectly well; he could discern clearly
that Meshach had been actuated partly by the love of chicane, partly by a quasi-infantile curiosity
to see what he should see, and partly by an almost biblical sense of justice, a sense blind,
callous, cruel.

CHAPTER III

THE CALL

It was the Trust Anniversary at the Sytch Chapel, and two sermons were to be delivered by the
Reverend Dr. Simon Quain; during fifteen years none but he had preached the Trust sermons.
Even in the morning, when pillars of the church were often disinclined to assume the attitude
proper to pillars, the fane was almost crowded. For it was impossible to ignore the Doctor.
He was an expert geologist, a renowned lecturer, the friend of men of science and sometimes
their foe, a contributor to the 'Encyclopædia Britannica,' and the author of a book of travel.
He did not belong to the school of divines who annihilated Huxley by asking him, from the pulpit,
to tell them, if protoplasm was the origin of all life, what was the origin of protoplasm.
Dr. Quain was a man of genuine attainments, at which the highest criticism could not sneer;
and when he visited Bursley the facile agnostics of the town, the young and experienced who
knew more than their elders, were forced to take cover. Dr. Quain, whose learning exceeded
even theirs--so the elders sarcastically ventured to surmise--was not ashamed to believe in
the inspiration of the Old Testament; he could reconcile the chronology of the earth's crust
with the first chapter of Genesis; he had a satisfactory explanation of the Johannine gospel;
and his mere existence was an impregnable fortress from which the adherents of the banner of
belief could not be dislodged. On this Sunday morning he offered a simple evangelical discourse,
enhanced by those occasional references to palæozoic and post-tertiary periods which were expected
from him, and which he had enough of the wisdom of the serpent to supply. His grave and assured
utterances banished all doubts, fears, misgivings, apprehensions; and the timid waverers smiled
their relief at being freed, by the confidence of this illustrious authority, from the distasteful
exertion of thinking for themselves.

The collection was immense, and, in addition to being immense, it provided for the worshippers
an agreeable and legitimate excitement of curiosity; for the plate usually entrusted to Meshach
Myatt was passed from pew to pew, and afterwards carried to the communion rails, by a complete
stranger, a man extremely self-possessed and well-attired, with a heavy moustache, a curious
dimple in his chin, and melancholy eyes, a man obviously of considerable importance somewhere.
'Oh, mamma,' whispered Milly to her mother, who was alone with her in the Stanway pew, 'do
look; that's Mr. Twemlow.' Several men in the congregation knew his identity, and one, a commercial
traveller, had met him in New York. Before the final hymn was given out, half the chapel had
pronounced his name in surprise. His overt act of assisting in the offertory was favourably
regarded; it was thought to show a nice social feeling on his part; and he did it with such
distinction! The older people remembered that his father had always been a collector; they
were constrained now to readjust their ideas concerning the son, and these ideas, rooted in
the single phrase, ran away from home, and set fast by time, were difficult of adjustment.
The impressiveness of Dr. Quain's sermon was impaired by this diversion of interest.

The members of the Stanway family, in order to avoid the crush in the aisles and portico, always
remained in their pew after service, until the chapel had nearly emptied itself; and to-day
Leonora chose to sit longer than usual. John had been too fatigued to rise for breakfast; Rose
was struck down by a sick headache; and Ethel had stayed at home to nurse Rose, so far as Rose
would allow herself to be nursed. Leonora felt no desire to hurry back to the somewhat perilous
atmosphere of Sunday dinner, and moreover she shrank nervously from the possibility of having
to make the acquaintance of Mr. Twemlow. But when she and Milly at length reached the outer
vestibule, a concourse of people still lingered there, and among them Arthur was just bidding
good-bye to the Myatts. Hannah, rather shortsighted, did not observe Leonora and Milly; Meshach
gave them his curt quizzical nod, and the aged twain departed. Then Millicent, proud of her
acquaintance with the important stranger, and burning to be seen in converse with him, left
her mother's side and became an independent member of society.

'How do you do, Mr. Twemlow?' she chirped.

'Ah!' he replied, recognising her with a bow the sufficiency of which intoxicated the young
girl. 'Not in such a hurry this morning?'

'Oh! no!' she agreed with smiling effusion, and they both glanced with furtive embarrassed
swiftness at Leonora. 'Mamma, this is Mr. Twemlow. Mr. Twemlow my mother.' The dashing modish
air of the child was adorable. Having concluded her scene she retired from the centre of the
stage in a glow.

Arthur Twemlow's manner altered at once as he took Leonora's hand and saw the sudden generous
miracle which happened in her calm face when she smiled. He was impressed by her beautiful
maturity, by the elegance born of a restrained but powerful instinct transmitted to her through
generations of ancestors. His respect for Meshach rose higher. And she, as she faced the self-possessed
admiration in Arthur's eyes, was conscious of her finished beauty, even of the piquancy of
the angle of her hat, and the smooth immaculate whiteness of her gloves; and she was proud,
too, of Millicent's gracile, restless charm. They walked down the steps side by side, Leonora
in the middle, watched curiously from above and below by little knots of people who still lingered
in front of the chapel.

'You soon got to work here, Mr. Twemlow,' said Leonora lightly.

He laughed. 'I guess you mean that collecting box. That was Mr. Myatt's game. He didn't do
me right, you know. He got me into his pew, and then put the plate on to me.'

Leonora liked his Americanism of accent and phrase; it seemed romantic to her; it seemed to
signify the quick alertness, the vivacious and surprising turns, of existence in New York,
where the unexpected and the extraordinary gave a zest to every day.

'Well, you collected perfectly,' she remarked.

'Oh, yes you did, really, Mr. Twemlow,' echoed Millicent.

'Did I?' he said, accepting the tribute with frank satisfaction. 'I used to collect once at
Talmage's Church in Brooklyn--you've heard Talmage over here of course.' He faintly indicated
contempt for Talmage. 'And after my first collection he sent for me into the church parlour,
and he said to me: "Mr. Twemlow, next time you collect, put some snap into it; don't go shuffling
along as if you were dead." So you see this morning, although I haven't collected for years,
I thought of that and tried to put some snap into it.'

Milly laughed obstreperously, Leonora smiled.

At the corner they could see Mrs. Burgess's carriage waiting at the vestry door in Mount Street.
The geologist, escorted by Harry Burgess, got into the carriage, where Mrs. Burgess already
sat; Harry followed him, and the stately equipage drove off. Dr. Quain had married a cousin
of Mrs. Burgess's late husband, and he invariably stayed at her house. All this had to be explained
to Arthur Twemlow, who made a point of being curious. By the time they had reached the top
of Oldcastle Street, Leonora felt an impulse to ask him without ceremony to walk up to Hillport
and have dinner with them. She knew that she and Milly were pleasing him, and this assurance
flattered her. But she could not summon the enterprise necessary for such an unusual invitation;
her lips would not utter the words, she could not force them to utter the words.

He hesitated, as if to leave them; and quite automatically, without being able to do otherwise,
Leonora held her hand to bid good-bye; he took it with reluctance. The moment was passing,
and she had not even asked him where he was staying: she had learnt nothing of the man of whom
Meshach had warned her husband to beware.

'Good morning,' he said, 'I'm very glad to have met you. Perhaps----'

'Won't you come and see us this afternoon, if you aren't engaged?' she suggested quickly. 'My
husband will be anxious to meet you, I know.'

He appeared to vacillate.

'Oh, do, Mr. Twemlow!' urged Milly, enchanted.

'It's very good of you,' he said, 'I shall be delighted to call. It's quite a considerable
time since I saw Mr. Stanway.' He laughed. This was his first reference to John.

'I'm so glad you asked him, ma,' said Milly, as they walked down Oldcastle Street.

'Your father said we must be polite to Mr. Twemlow,' her mother replied coldly.

'He's frightfully rich, I'm sure,' Milly observed.

At dinner Leonora told John that Arthur Twemlow was coming.

'Oh, good!' he said: nothing more.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the afternoon the mother and her eldest and youngest, supine and exanimate in the drawing-room,
were surprised into expectancy by the sound of the front-door bell before three o'clock.

'He's here!' exclaimed Milly, who was sitting near Leonora on the long Chesterfield. Ethel,
her face flushed by the fire, lay like a curving wisp of straw in John's vast arm-chair. Leonora
was reading; she put down the magazine and glanced briefly at Ethel, then at the aspect of
the room. In silence she wished that Ethel's characteristic attitudes could be a little more
demure and sophisticated. She wondered how often this apparently artless girl had surreptitiously
seen Fred Ryley since the midnight meeting on Thursday, and she was amazed that a child of
hers, so kindly disposed, could be so naughty and deceitful. The door opened and Ethel sat
up with a bound.

'Mr. Burgess,' the parlourmaid announced. The three women sank back, disappointed and yet relieved.

Harry Burgess, though barely of age, was one of the acknowledged dandies of Hillport. Slim
and fair, with a frank, rather simple countenance, he supported his stylistic apparel with
a natural grace that attracted sympathy. Just at present he was achieving a spirited effect
by always wearing an austere black necktie fastened with a small gold safety-pin; he wore this
necktie for weeks to a bewildering variety of suits, and then plunged into a wild polychromatic
debauch of neckties. Upon all the niceties of masculine dress, the details of costume proper
to a particular form of industry or recreation or ceremonial, he was a genuine authority. His
cricketing flannels--he was a fine cricketer and lawn-tennis player of the sinuous oriental
sort--were the despair of other dandies and the scorn of the sloven; he caused the material,
before it was made up, to be boiled for many hours by the Burgess charwoman under his own superintendence.
He had extraordinary aptitudes for drawing corks, lacing boots, putting ferrules on walking-sticks,
opening latched windows from the outside, and rolling cigarettes; he could make a cigarette
with one hand, and not another man in the Five Towns, it was said, could do that. His slender
convex silver cigarette-case invariably contained the only cigarettes worthy of the palate
of a connoisseur, as his pipes were invariably the only pipes fit for the combustion of truly
high-class tobacco. Old women, especially charwomen, adored him, and even municipal seigniors
admitted that Harry was a smart-looking youth. Fatherless, he was the heir to a tolerable fortune,
the bulk of which, during his mother's life, he could not touch save with her consent; but
his mother and his sister seemed to exist chiefly for his convenience. His fair hair and his
facile smile vanquished them, and vanquished most other people also; and already, when he happened
to be crossed, there would appear on his winning face the pouting, hard, resentful lines of
the man who has learnt to accept compliance as a right. He had small intellectual power, and
no ambition at all. A considerable part of his prospective fortune was invested in the admirable
shares of the Birmingham, Sheffield and District Bank, and it pleased him to sit on a stool
in the Bursley branch of this bank, since he wanted, pro tempore, a dignified avocation without
either the anxieties of trade or the competitive tests of a profession. He was a beautiful
bank clerk; but he had once thrown a bundle of cheques into the office fire while aiming at
a basket on the mantelpiece; the whole banking world would have been agitated and disorganised
had not another clerk snatched the bundle from peril at the expense of his own fingers: the
incident, still legendary behind the counter of the establishment at the top of St. Luke's
Square, kept Harry awake to the seriousness of life for several weeks.

'Well, Harry,' said Leonora with languid good nature. He paid his homage in form to the mistress
of the house; raised his eyebrows at Milly, who returned the gesture; smiled upon Ethel, who
feebly waved a hand as if too exhausted to do more; and then sat down on the piano-stool, carefully
easing the strain on his trousers at the knees and exposing an inch of fine wool socks above
his American boots. He was a familiar of the house, and had had the unconditional entrée since
he and the Stanway girls first went to the High Schools at Oldcastle.

'I hope I haven't disturbed your beauty sleep--any of you,' was his opening remark.

'Yes, you have,' said Ethel.

He continued: 'I just came in to seek a little temporary relief from the excellent Quain. Quain
at breakfast, Quain at chapel, Quain at dinner.... I got him to slumber on one side of the
hearth and mother on the other, and then I slipped away in case they awoke. If they do, I've
told Cissie to say that I've gone out to take a tract to a sick friend--back in five minutes.'

'Oh, Harry, you are silly!' Millicent laughed. Every one, including the narrator, was amused
by this elaborate fiction of the managing of those two impressive persons, Mrs. Burgess and
the venerable Christian geologist, by a kind, indulgent, bored Harry. Leonora, who had resumed
her magazine, looked up and smiled the guarded smile of the mother.

'I'm afraid you're getting worse,' she murmured, and his candid seductive face told her that
while he was on no account not to be regarded as a gay dog, and a sad dog, and a worldly dog,
yet nevertheless he and she thoroughly appreciated and understood each other. She did indeed
like him, and she found pleasure in his presence; he gratified the eye.

'I wish you'd sing something, Milly,' he began again after a pause.

'No,' said Milly, 'I'm not going to sing now.'

'But do. Can't she, Mrs. Stanway?'

'Well, what do you want me to sing?'

'Sing "Love is a plaintive song," out of the second act.'

Harry was the newly appointed secretary of the Bursley Amateur Operatic Society, of which both
Ethel and Millicent were members. In a few weeks' time the Society was to render Patience in
the Town Hall for the benefit of local charities, and rehearsals were occurring frequently.

'Oh! I'm not Patience,' Milly objected stiffly; she was only Ella. 'Besides, I mayn't, may
I, mamma?'

'Your father might not like it,' said Leonora.

'The dad has taken Bran out for a walk, so it won't trouble him,' Ethel interjected sleepily
under her breath.

'Well, but look here, Mrs. Stanway,' said Harry conclusively, 'the organist at the Wesleyan
chapel actually plays the sextet from Patience for a voluntary. What about that? If there's
no harm in that----' Leonora surrendered. 'Come on, Mill,' he commanded. 'I shall have to return
to my muttons directly,' and he opened the piano.

'But I tell you I'm not Patience.'

'Come on! You know the music all right. Then we'll try Ella's bit in the first act. I'll play.'

Millicent arose, shook her hair, and walked to the piano with the mien of a prima donna who
has the capitals of Europe at her feet, exultant in her youth, her charm, her voice, revelling
unconsciously in the vivacity of her blood, and consciously in her power over Harry, which
Harry strove in vain to conceal under an assumed equanimity.

And as Millicent sang the ballad Leonora was beguiled, by her singing, into a mood of vague
but overpowering melancholy. It seemed tragic that that fresh and pure voice, that innocent
vanity, and that untested self-confidence should change and fade as maturity succeeded adolescence
and decay succeeded maturity; it seemed intolerable that the ineffable charm of the girl's
youth must be slowly filched away by the thefts of time. 'I was like that once! And Jack too!'
she thought, as she gazed absently at the pair in front of the piano. And it appeared incredible
to her that she was the mother of that tall womanly creature, that the little morsel of a child
which she had borne one night had become a daughter of Eve, with a magic to mesmerise errant
glances and desires. She had a glimpse of the significance of Nature's eternal iterance. Then
her mood developed a bitterness against Millicent. She thought cruelly that Millicent's magic
was no part of the girl's soul, no talent acquired by loving exertion, but something extrinsic,
unavoidable, and unmeritorious. Why was it so? Why should fate treat Milly like a godchild?
Why should she have prettiness, and adorableness, and the lyric gift, and such abounding confident
youth? Why should circumstances fall out so that she could meet her unacknowledged lover openly
at all seasons? Leonora's eyes wandered to the figure of Ethel reclining with shut eyes in
the arm-chair. Ethel in her graver and more diffident beauty had already begun to taste the
sadness of the world. Ethel might not stand victoriously by her lover in the midst of the drawing-room,
nor joyously flip his ear when he struck a wrong note on the piano. Ethel, far more passionate
than the active Milly, could only dream of her lover, and see him by stealth. Leonora grieved
for Ethel, and envied her too, for her dreams, and for her solitude assuaged by clandestine
trysts. Those trysts lay heavy on Leonora's mind; although she had discovered them, she had
done nothing to prevent them; from day to day she had put off the definite parental act of
censure and interdiction. She was appalled by the serene duplicity of her girls. Yet what could
she say? Words were so trivial, so conventional. And though she objected to the match, wishing
with ardour that Ethel might marry far more brilliantly, she believed as fully in the honest
warm kindliness of Fred Ryley as in that of Ethel. 'And what else matters after all?' she tried
to think.... Her reverie shifted to Rose, unfortunate Rose, victim of peculiar ambitions, of
a weak digestion, and of a harsh temperament that repelled the sympathy it craved but was too
proud to invite. She felt that she ought to go upstairs and talk to the prostrate Rose in the
curt matter-of-fact tone that Rose ostensibly preferred, but she did not wish to talk to Rose.
'Ah well!' she reflected finally with an inward sigh, as though to whisper the last word and
free herself of this preoccupation, 'they will all be as old as me one day.'

'Mr. Twemlow,' said the parlourmaid.

Milly deliberately lengthened a high full note and then stopped and turned towards the door.

'Bravo!' Arthur Twemlow answered at once the challenge of her whole figure; but he seemed to
ignore the fact that he had caused an interruption, and there was something in his voice that
piqued the cantatrice, something that sent her back to the days of short frocks. She glanced
nervously aside at Harry, who had struck a few notes and then dropped his hands from the keyboard.
Twemlow's demeanour towards the blushing Ethel when Leonora brought her forward was much more
decorous and simple. As for Harry, to whom his arrival was a surprise, at first rather annoying,
Twemlow treated the young buck as one man of the world should treat another, and Harry's private
verdict upon him was extremely favourable. Nevertheless Leonora noticed that the three young
ones seemed now to shrink into themselves, to become passive instead of active, and by a common
instinct to assume the character of mere spectators.

'May I choose this place?' said Twemlow, and sat down by Leonora in the other corner of the
Chesterfield and looked round. She could see that he was admiring the spacious room and herself
in her beautiful afternoon dress, and the pensive and the sprightly comeliness of her daughters.
His wandering eyes returned to hers, and their appreciation pleased her and increased her charm.

'I am expecting my husband every minute,' she said.

'Papa's gone out for a walk with Bran,' Milly added.

'Oh! Bran!' He repeated the word in a voice that humorously appealed for further elucidation,
and both Ethel and Harry laughed.

'The St. Bernard, you know,' Milly explained, annoyed.

'I wouldn't be surprised if that was a St. Bernard out there,' he said pointing to the French
window. 'What a fine fellow! And what a fine garden!'

Bran was to be seen nosing low down at the window; and alternately lifting two huge white paws
in his futile anxiety to enter the room.

'Then I dare say John is in the garden,' Leonora exclaimed, with sudden animation, glad to
be able to dismiss the faint uneasy suspicion which had begun to form in her mind that John
meant after all to avoid Arthur Twemlow. 'Would you like to look at the garden?' she demanded,
half rising, and lifting her brows to a pretty invitation.

'Very much indeed,' he replied, and he jumped up with the impulsiveness of a boy.

'It's quite warm,' she said, and thanked Harry for opening the window for them.

'A fine severe garden!' he remarked enthusiastically outside, after he had descanted to Bran
on Bran's amazing perfections, and the dog had greeted his mistress. 'A fine severe garden!'
he repeated.

'Yes,' she said, lifting her skirt to cross the lawn. 'I know what you mean. I wouldn't have
it altered for anything, but many people think it's too formal. My husband does.'

'Why! It's just English. And that old wall! and the yew trees! I tell you----'

She expanded once more to his appreciation, which she took to herself; for none but she, and
the gardener who was also the groom, and worked under her, was responsible for the garden.
But as she displayed the African marigolds and the late roses and the hardy outdoor chrysanthemums,
and as she patted Bran, who dawdled under her hand, she looked furtively about for John. She
hoped he might be at the stables, and when in their tour of the grounds they reached the stables
and he was not there, she hoped they would find him in the drawing-room on their return. Her
suspicion reasserted itself, and it was strengthened, against her reason, by the fact that
Arthur Twemlow made no comment on John's invisibility. In the dusk of the spruce stable, where
an enamelled name-plate over the manger of a loose box announced that 'Prince' was its pampered
tenant, she opened the cornbin, and, entering the loose-box, offered the cob a handful of crushed
oats. And when she stood by the cob, Twemlow looking through the grill of the door at this
picture which suggested a beast-tamer in the cage, she was aware of her beauty and the beauty
of the animal as he curved his neck to her jewelled hand, and of the ravishing effect of an
elegant woman seen in a stable. She smiled proudly and yet sadly at Twemlow, who was pulling
his heavy moustache. Then they could hear an ungoverned burst of Milly's light laughter from
the drawing-room, and presently Milly resumed her interrupted song. Opposite the outer door
of the stable was the window of the kitchen, whence issued, like an undertone to the song,
the subdued rattle of cups and saucers; and the glow of the kitchen fire could be distinguished.
And over all this complex domestic organism, attractive and efficient in its every manifestation,
and vigorously alive now in the smooth calm of the English Sunday, she was queen; and hers
was the brain that ruled it while feigning an aloof quiescence. 'He is a romantic man; he understands
all that,' she felt with the certainty of intuition. Aloud she said she must fasten up the dog.

When they returned to the drawing-room there was no sign of John.

'Hasn't your father come in?' she asked Ethel in a low voice; Milly was still singing.

'No, mother, I thought he was with you in the garden.' The girl seemed to respond to Leonora's
inquietude.

Milly finished her song, and Twemlow, who had stationed himself behind her to look at the music,
nodded an austere approval.

'You have an excellent voice,' he remarked, 'and you can use it.' To Leonora this judgment
seemed weighty and decisive.

'Mr. Twemlow,' said the girl, smiling her satisfaction, 'excuse me asking, but are you married?'

'No,' he answered, 'are you?'

'Mr. Twemlow!' she giggled, and turning to Ethel, who in anticipation blushed once again: 'There!
I told you.'

'You girls are very curious,' Leonora said perfunctorily.

Bessy came in and set a Moorish stool before the Chesterfield, on the stool an inlaid Sheraton
tray with china and a copper kettle droning over a lamp, and near it a cakestand in three storeys.
And Leonora, manoeuvring her bangles, commenced the ritual of refection with Harry as acolyte.
'If he doesn't come--well, he doesn't come,' she thought of her husband, as she smiled interrogatively
at Arthur Twemlow, holding a lump of sugar aloft in the tongs.

'The Reverend Simon Quain asked who you were, at dinner to-day,' said Harry. During the absence
of Leonora and her guest, Harry had evidently acquired information concerning Arthur.

'Oh, Mr. Twemlow!' Milly appealed quickly, 'do tell Harry and Ethel what Dr. Talmage said to
you. I think it's so funny--I can't do the accent.'

'What accent?' he laughed.

She hesitated, caught. 'Yours,' she replied boldly.

'Very amusing!' Harry said judicially, after the episode of the Brooklyn collection had been
related. 'Talmage must be a caution.... I suppose you're staying at the Five Towns Hotel?'
he inquired, with an implication in his voice that there was no other hotel in the district
fit for the patronage of a man of the world. Twemlow nodded.

'What! At Knype?' Leonora exclaimed. 'Then where did you dine to-day?'

'I had dinner at the Tiger, and not a bad dinner either,' he said.

'Oh dear!' Harry murmured, indicating an august sympathy for Arthur Twemlow in affliction.

'If I had only known--I don't know what I was thinking of not to ask you to come here for dinner,'
said Leonora. 'I made sure you would be engaged somewhere.'

'Fancy you eating all alone at the Tiger, on Sunday too!' remarked Milly.

'Tut! tut!' Twemlow protested, with a farcical exactness of pronunciation; and Ethel laughed.

'What are you laughing at, my dear?' Leonora asked mildly.

'I don't know, mother--really I don't.' Whereupon they all laughed together and a state of
absolute intimacy was established.

'I hadn't the least notion of being at Bursley to-day,' Twemlow explained. 'But I thought that
Knype wasn't much of a place--I always did think that, being a native of Bursley. The Day and
Martin of my boots reflected on the shady side of the street. I took half an hour in tying and
retying my neckcloth en mode. My handkerchief smelt of lavender, and my hair of oil of thyme--my
waistcoat of bergamot, and my inexpressibles of musk. I was a perfect civet for perfumery. My
coat, cut in the jemmy fashion, I buttoned to suffocation; but 'pon
honour, believe me, sir, no stays, and my shirt neck had been starched
per order, to the consistence of tin.

In short, to be brief, I found, or fancied myself killing--a most irresistible fellow.

"I did not dare, however, to call for Miss Lucy at old Pa's, but waited
for her at the corner of the street, patiently drumming on my boot,
with a knowing little bit of bamboo; and projecting my left arm to
her, off we marched in triumph.

"The Exhibition Rooms were crowded with the ton; and to be sure a
great many fine things were there.

Would you had seen them, sir. There were admirals in blue, and generals in red--portraits
of my lord this, and my lady that--land scenes, and sea scenes, and hunting scenes, with thips,
and woods, and old castles, all amazingly like life. In short, sir, Providence seems to have
guided us to the spot, where we saw a picture--the picture, sir--the pattern copy of that there
picture, sir--and heavens! such a piece of work--but of that anon--it did the business, sir.
No sooner had I perused it through my quizzing-glass, which, I confess, that I had brought with
me more for ornament than use--having eyes like a hawk--than I pathetically exclaimed to Lucy--'Behold,
my love, the history of our fates!' Lucy said, 'Tuts, Toby Tims,' and gave a giggle; but I went
on in solemn gravity, before a circle of seemingly electrified spectators.


At length John came in, hurried, fidgetty, nervous, and Ethel slipped out of the room.

'Ah! Twemlow!' he broke forth, 'how d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you. Hadn't given me
up, had you? How d'ye do?'

'Not quite,' said Twemlow gravely as they shook hands.

Leonora took the water-jug from the tray and went to a chrysanthemum in the farthest corner
of the room, where she remained listening, and pretending to be busy with the plant. The men
talked freely but vapidly with the most careful politeness, and it seemed to her that Twemlow
was annoyed, while Stanway was determined to offer no explanation of his absence from tea.
Once, in a pause, John turned to Leonora and said that he had been upstairs to see Rose. Leonora
was surprised at the change in Twemlow's demeanour. It was as though the pair were fighting
a duel and Twemlow wore a coat of mail. 'And these two have not seen each other for twenty-five
years!' she thought. 'And they talk like this!' She knew then that something lay between them;
she could tell from a peculiar well-known look in her husband's eyes.

When she summoned decision to approach them where they stood side by side on the hearthrug,
both tall, big, formal, and preoccupied, Twemlow at once said that unfortunately he must go;
Stanway made none but the merest perfunctory attempt to detain him. He thanked Leonora stiffly
for her hospitality, and said good-bye with scarcely a smile. But as John opened the door for
him to pass out, he turned to glance at her, and smiled brightly, kindly, bowing a final adieu,
to which she responded. She who never in her life till then had condescended to such a device
softly stepped to the unlatched door and listened.

'This one yours?' she heard John say, and then the sound of a hat bouncing on the tiled floor.

'My fault entirely,' said Twemlow's voice. 'By the way, I guess I can see you at your office
one day soon?'

'Yes, certainly,' John answered with false glib lightness. 'What about? Some business?'

'Well, yes--business,' drawled Twemlow.

They walked away towards the outer hall, and she heard no more, except the indistinct murmur
of a sudden brief dialogue between the visitor and the two girls, who must have come in from
the garden. Then the front door banged heavily. He was gone. The vast and arid tedium of her
life closed in upon her again; she seemed to exist in a colourless void peopled only by ominous
dim elusive shapes of disaster.

But as involuntarily she clenched her hands the formidable thought swept through her brain
that Arthur Twemlow was not so calm, nor so impassive, nor so set apart, but that her spell
over him, if she chose to exert it, might be a shield to the devious man her husband.

CHAPTER IV

AN INTIMACY

'Does father really mean it about me going to the works to-morrow?' Ethel asked that night.

'I suppose so, my dear,' replied Leonora, and she added: 'You must do all you can to help him.'

Ethel's clear gift of interpreting even the most delicate modulations in her mother's voice,
instantly gave her the first faint sense of alarm.

'Why, mamma! what do you mean?'

'What I say, dear,' Leonora murmured with neutral calm. 'You must do all you can to help him.
We look on you as a woman now.'

'You don't, you don't!' Ethel thought passionately as she went upstairs. 'And you never will.
Never!'

The profound instinctive sympathy which existed between her mother and herself was continually
being disturbed by the manifest insincerity of that assertion contained in Leonora's last sentence.
The girl was in arms, without knowing it, against a whole order of things. She could scarcely
speak to Millicent in the bedroom. She was disgusted with her father, and she was disgusted
with Leonora for pretending that her father was sagacious and benevolent, for not admitting
that he was merely a trial to be endured. She was disgusted with Fred Ryley because he was
not as other young men were--Harry Burgess for instance. The startling hint from Leonora that
perhaps all was not well at the works exasperated her. She held the works in abhorrence. With
her sisters, she had always regarded the works as a vague something which John Stanway went
to and came away from, as the mysterious source of food, raiment, warmth. But she was utterly
ignorant of its mechanism, and she wished to remain ignorant. That its mechanism should be
in danger of breaking down, that it should even creak, was to her at first less a disaster
than a matter for resentment. She hated the works as one is sometimes capable of unreasonably
hating a benefactor.

On Monday morning, rising a little earlier than usual, she was surprised to find her mother
alone at a disordered breakfast-table.

'Has dad finished his breakfast already?' she inquired, determined to be cheerful. Sleep, and
her fundamental good-nature, had modified her mood, and for the moment she meant to play the
rôle of dutiful daughter as well as she could.

'He has had to go off to Manchester by the first train,' said Leonora. 'He'll be away all day.
So you won't begin till to-morrow.' She smiled gravely.

'Oh, good!' Ethel exclaimed with intense momentary relief.

But now again in Leonora's voice, and in her eye, there was the soft warning, which Ethel seized,
and which, without a relevant word spoken, she communicated to her sisters. John Stanway's
young women began to reflect apprehensively upon the sudden irregularities of his recent movements,
his conferences with his lawyer, his bluffing air; a hundred trifles too insignificant for
separate notice collected themselves together and became formidable. A certain atmosphere of
forced and false cheerfulness spread through the house.

'Not gone to bed!' said Stanway briskly, when he returned home by the late train and discovered
his three girls in the drawing-room. They allowed him to imagine that his jaunty air deceived
them; they were jaunty too; but all the while they read his soul and pitied him with the intolerable
condescension of youth towards age.

The next day Ethel had a further reprieve of several hours, for Stanway said that he must go
over to Hanbridge in the morning, and would come back to Hillport for dinner, and escort Ethel
to the works immediately afterwards. None asked a question, but everyone knew that he could
only be going to Hanbridge to consult with David Dain. This time the programme was in fact
executed. At two o'clock Ethel found herself in her father's office.

As she took off her hat and jacket in the hard sinister room, she looked like a violet roughly
transplanted and bidden to blossom in the mire. She knew that amid that environment she could
be nothing but incapable, dull, stupid, futile, and plain. She knew that she had no brains
to comprehend and no energy to prevail. Every detail repelled her--the absence of fire-irons
in the hearth, the business almanacs on the discoloured walls, the great flat table-desk, the
dusty samples of tea-pots in the window, the vast green safe in the corner, the glimpses of
industrial squalor in the yard, the sound of uncouth voices from the clerks' office, the muffled
beat of machinery under the floor, and the strange uninhabited useless appearance of a small
room seen through a half-open door near the safe. She would have given a year of life, in that
first moment, to be helping her mother in some despised monotonous household task at Hillport.

She felt that she was being outrageously deprived of a natural right, hitherto enjoyed without
let, to have the golden fruits of labour brought to her in discreet silence as to their origin.

Stanway struck a bell with determination, and the manager appeared, a tall, thin, sandy-haired
man of middle age, who wore a grey tailed-coat and a white apron.

'Ha! Mayer! That you?'

'Yes, sir.... Good afternoon, miss.'

'Good afternoon,' Ethel simpered foolishly, and she had it in her to have slain both men because
she felt such a silly schoolgirl.

'I wanted Ryley. Where is he?'

'He's somewhere on the bank,[3] sir--speaking to the mouldmaker, I think.'

  [3] Bank = earthenware manufactory. But here the word is used in a
      limited sense, meaning the industrial, as distinguished from the
      bureaucratic, part of the manufactory.

'Well, just bring me in that letter from Paris that came on Saturday, will you?' Stanway requested.

'I've several things to speak to you about,' said Mr. Mayer, when he had brought the letter.

'Directly,' Stanway answered, waving him away, and then turning to Ethel: 'Now, young lady,
I want this letter translating.' He placed it before her on the table, together with some blank
paper.

'Yes, father,' she said humbly.

Three hours a week for seven years she had sat in front of French manuals at the school at
Oldcastle; but she knew that, even if the destiny of nations turned on it, she could not translate
that letter of ten lines. Nevertheless she was bound to make a pretence of doing so.

'I don't think I can without a dictionary,' she plaintively murmured, after a few minutes.

'Oh! Here's a French dictionary,' he replied, producing one from a drawer, much to her chagrin;
she had hoped that he would not have a dictionary.

Then Stanway began to look through a pile of correspondence, and to scribble in a large saffron-coloured
diary. He went out to Mr. Mayer; Mr. Mayer came in to him; they called to each other from room
to room. The machinery stopped beneath and started again. A horse fell down in the yard, and
Stanway, watching from the window, exclaimed: 'Tsh! That carter!'

Various persons unceremoniously entered and asked questions, all of which Stanway answered
with equal dryness and certainty. At intervals he poked the fire with an old walking-stick,
Ethel never glanced up. In a dream she handled the dictionary, the letter, the blank paper,
and wrote unfinished phrases with the thick office pen.

'Done it?' he inquired at last.

'I--I--can't make out the figures,' she stammered. 'Is that a 5 or a 7?' She pushed the letter
across.

'Oh! That's a French 7,' he replied, and proceeded to make shots at the meaning of sentences
with a flair far surpassing her own skill, though it was notorious that he knew no French whatever.
She had a sudden perception of his cleverness, his capacity, his force, his mysterious hold
on all kinds of things which eluded her grasp and dismayed her.

'Let's see what you've done,' he demanded. She sighed in despair, hesitating to give up the paper.

'Mr. Twemlow, by appointment,' announced a clerk, and Arthur Twemlow walked into the office.

'Hallo, Twemlow!' said Stanway, meeting him gaily. 'I was just expecting you. My new confidential
clerk. Eh?' He pointed to Ethel, who flushed to advantage. 'You've plenty of them over there,
haven't you--girl-clerks?'

Twemlow assented, and remarked that he himself employed a 'lady secretary.'

'Yes,' Stanway eagerly went on. 'That's what I mean to do. I mean to buy a type-writer, and
Miss shall learn shorthand and type-writing.'

Ethel was astounded at the glibness of invention which could instantly bring forth such an
idea. She felt quite sure that until that moment her father had had no plan at all in regard
to her attendance at the office.

'I'm sure I can't learn,' she said with genuine modesty, and as she spoke she became very attractive
to Twemlow, who said nothing, but smiled at her sympathetically, protectively. She returned
the smile. By a swift miracle the violet was back again in its native bed.

'You can go in there and finish your work, we shall disturb you,' said her father, pointing
to the little empty room, and she meekly disappeared with the letter, the dictionary, and the
piece of paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Well, how's business, Twemlow? By the way, have a cigar.'

Ethel, at the dusty table in the little room, could just see her father's broad back through
the door which, in her nervousness, she had forgotten to close. She felt that the door ought
to have been latched, but she could not find courage deliberately to get up and latch it now.

'Thanks,' said Arthur Twemlow. 'Business is going right along.'

She heard the striking of a match, and the pleasant twang of cigar-smoke greeted her nostrils.
The two men seemed splendidly masculine, important, self-sufficient. The triviality of feminine
atoms like herself, Rose, and Millicent, occurred to her almost as a new fact, and she was
ashamed of her existence.

'Buying much this trip?' asked Stanway.

'Not much, and not your sort,' said Twemlow. 'The truth is, I'm fixing up a branch in London.'

'But, my dear fellow, surely there's no American business done through London in English goods?'

'No, perhaps not,' said Twemlow. 'But that don't say there isn't going to be. Besides, I've
got a notion of coming in for a share of your colonial shipping trade. And let me tell you
there's a lot of business done through London between the United States and the Continent,
in glass and fancy goods.'

'Oh, yes, I know there is,' Stanway conceded. 'And so you think you're going to teach the old
country a thing or two?'

'That depends.'

'On what?'

'On whether the old country's made up her mind yet to sit down and learn.' He laughed.

Ethel saw by the change of colour in her father's neck that the susceptibilities of his patriotism
had been assailed.

'What do you mean?' Stanway asked pugnaciously.

'I mean that you are falling behind here,' said Twemlow with cold, nonchalant firmness. 'Every
one knows that. You're getting left. Look how you're being cut out in cheap toilet stuff. In
ten years you won't be shipping a hundred dollars' worth per annum of cheap toilet to the States.'

'But listen, Twemlow,' said Stanway impressively.

Twemlow continued, imperturbable: 'You in the Five Towns stick to old-fashioned methods. You
can't cut it fine enough.'

'Old-fashioned? Not cut it fine enough?' Stanway exclaimed, rising.

Twemlow laughed with real mirth. 'Yes,' he said.

'Give me one instance--one instance,' cried Stanway.

'Well,' said Twemlow, 'take firing. I hear you still pay your firemen by the oven, and your
placers by the day, instead of settling all oven-work by scorage.'

'Tell me about that--the Trenton system. I'd like to hear about that. It's been mentioned once
or twice,' said Stanway, resuming his chair.

'Mentioned!'

Ethel perceived vaguely that the forceful man who held her in the hollow of his hand had met
more than his match. Over that spectacle she rejoiced like a small child; but at the same time
Arthur Twemlow's absolute conviction that the Five Towns was losing ground frightened her,
made her feel that life was earnest, and stirred faint longings for the serious way. It seemed
to her that she was weighed down by knowledge of the world, whereas gay Millicent, and Rose
with her silly examinations.... She plunged again into the actuality of the letter from Paris....

'I called really to speak to you about my father's estate.'

Ethel was startled into attention by the sudden careful politeness in Arthur Twemlow's manner
and by a quivering in his voice. 

Natural History.

The Ichneumon Fly.

There are several species of ichneumon which make thinnings among the caterpillars of the cabbage
butterfly. The process of one species is this:--while the caterpillar is feeding, the ichneumon
fly hovers over it, and, with its piercer, perforates the fatty part of the caterpillar's back in
many places, and in each deposits an egg, by means of the two parts of the sheath uniting together,
and thus forming a tube down which the egg is conveyed into the perforation
made by the piercer of the fly.

The caterpillar unconscious of what will ensue keeps feeding on,
until it changes into a chrysalis; while in that torpid state, the
eggs of the ichneumon are hatched, and the interior of the body of
the caterpillar serves as food for the caterpillars of the ichneumon
fly.

When these have fed their accustomed time, and are about to change
into the pupa state, they, by an instinct given them, attack the vital
part of the caterpillar (a most wonderful economy in nature, that
this process should be delayed until they have no more occasion for
food.) They then spin themselves minute cases within the body of the
caterpillar; and instead of a butterfly coming forth (which, if a
female, would have probably laid six hundred eggs, thus producing
as many caterpillars, whose food would be the cabbage,) a race of
these little ichneumon flies issues forth, ready to perform the task
assigned them, of keeping within due limits those fell destroyers
of our vegetables.--Mr. Carpenter--in Gill's Repository.

Hawking.

Professional falconers have been for many years natives of the village
of Falconsward, near Bois le Duc, in Holland.

A race of them was there born and bred, whence supplies have been
drawn for the service of all Europe; but as there has been no sufficient
inducement for the young men to follow the employment of their forefathers,
numbers are dead or worn out; and there only remains John Pells, now
in the service of John Dawson Downes, Esq., of Old Gunton Hill, Suffolk.

The

hawks which have been trained for the field, are the slight falcon
and the goshawk, which are the species generally used in falconry.

The former is called a long-winged hawk, or one of the lure; the
latter, a short-winged hawk, or one of the fist.

The Icelander is the largest hawk that is known, and highly esteemed
by falconers, especially for its great powers and tractable disposition.

The gyr falcon is less than the Icelander, but much larger than the
slight falcon.

These powerful birds are flown at herons and hares, and are the only hawks that are fully a match
for the fork-tailed kite. The merlin and hobby are both small hawks and fit only for small birds,
as the blackbird, &c. The sparrow-hawk may be also trained to hunt;
his flight is rapid for a short distance, kills partridges well in
the early season, and is the best of all for landrails.

The slight falcon takes up his abode every year, from October and
November until the spring, upon Westminster Abbey, and other churches
in the metropolis.

This is well known to the London pigeon-fanciers, from the great havoc they make in their
flight.--Sir John Sebright

Technicalities of Science.

The inutility of science, written in a merely technical form, is well
exemplified in the instance of Cicero.

He was advised by his friends not to write his works on Greek Philosophy
in Latin; because those who cared for it would prefer his work in
Greek, and those who did not would read neither Greek nor Latin.

The splendid success of his De Officiis, his De Finibus, his De Natura
Deorum, &c., showed that his friends were wrong.

He persevered in the popular style, and led the fashion.--Mag. Nat. Hist.

Doubtful Discoveries.

It may serve, in some measure, to confirm M. Dutroehet's recent opinion of the non-existence of
miscroscopic animalcula, that the celebrated Spallanzani persuaded
himself that he could see Animálcula infusòria which could be seen
by nobody else.

He attributed his own superiority of vision, in this respect, to long practice in using the microscope.
The philosopher exulted in his enviable distinction, when a peasant, to whom he showed his animalcula,
could perceive nothing but muddy water.--Ibid.

       

Faculties of Brutes.

The dog is the only animal that dreams; and he and the elephant the only animals that understand
looks; the elephant is the only animal that, besides man, feels ennui; the dog, the only quadruped
that has been brought to speak.
 And he liked them all. He liked even Rose, so pale,
strange, and contentious. In regard to Milly, whom he had begun by despising, he silently admitted
that a girl so vivacious, supple, sparkling, and pretty, had the right to be as pertly foolish
as she chose. He took a direct fancy to Ethel. And he decided once for ever that Leonora was
a magnificent creature.

In the play of conversation on domestic trifles, the most ordinary phrases seemed to him to
be charged with a peculiar fascination. The little discussions about Milly's attempts at housekeeping,
about the austere exertions of Rose, Ethel's first day at the office, Bran's new biscuits,
the end of the lawn-tennis season, the propriety of hockey for girls, were so mysteriously
pleasant to his ears that he felt it a sort of privilege to have been admitted to them. And
yet he clearly perceived the shortcomings of each person in this little world of which the
totality was so delightful. He knew that Ethel was languidly futile, Rose cantankerous, Milly
inane, Stanway himself crafty and meretricious, and Leonora often supine when she should not
be. He dwelt specially on the more odious aspects of Stanway's character, and swore that, had
Stanway forty womenfolk instead of four, he, Arthur Twemlow, should still do his obvious duty
of finishing what he had begun. In chatting with his host after tea, he marked his own attitude
with much care, and though Stanway pretended not to observe it, he knew that Stanway observed
it well enough.

The three girls disappeared and returned in street attire. Rose was going to the science classes
at the Wedgwood Institution, Ethel and Millicent to the rehearsal of the Amateur Operatic Society.
Again, in this distribution of the complex family energy, there reappeared the suggestion of
a mysterious domestic charm.

'Don't be late to-night,' said Stanway severely to Millicent.

'Now, grumbler,' retorted the intrepid child, putting her gloved hand suddenly over her father's
mouth; Stanway submitted. The picture of the two in this delicious momentary contact remained
long in Twemlow's mind; and he thought that Stanway could not be such a brute after all.

'Play something for us, Nora,' said the august paterfamilias, spreading at ease in his chair
in the drawing-room, when the girls were gone. Leonora removed her bangles and began to play
'The Bees' Wedding.' But she had not proceeded far before Milly ran in again.

'A note from Mr. Dain, pa.'

Milly had vanished in an instant, and Leonora continued to play as if nothing had happened,
but Arthur was conscious of a change in the atmosphere as Stanway opened the letter and read it.

'I must just go over the way and speak to a neighbour,' said Stanway carelessly when Leonora
had struck the final chord. 'You'll excuse me, I know. Sha'n't be long.'

'Don't mention it,' Arthur replied with politeness, and then, after Stanway had gone, leaving
the door open, he turned to Leonora at the piano, and said: 'Do play something else.'

Instead of answering, she rose, resumed her jewellery, and took the chair which Stanway had
left. She smiled invitingly, evasively, inscrutably at her guest.

'Tell me about American women,' she said: 'I've always wanted to know.'

He thought her attitude in the great chair the most enchanting thing he had ever seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leonora had watched Twemlow's demeanour from the moment when she met him in her husband's office.
She had guessed, but not certainly, that it was still inimical at least to John, and the exact
words of Uncle Meshach's warning had recurred to her time after time as she met his reluctant,
cautious eyes. Nevertheless, it was by the sudden uprush of an instinct, rather than by a calculated
design, that she, in her home and surrounded by her daughters, began the process of enmeshing
him in the web of influences which she spun ceaselessly from the bright threads of her own
individuality. Her mind had food for sombre preoccupation--the lost battle with Milly during
the day about Milly's comic-opera housekeeping; the tale told by John's nervous, effusive,
guilty manner; and especially the episode of the letter from Dain and John's disappearance:
these things were grave enough to the mother and wife. But they receded like negligible trifles
into the distance as she rose so suddenly and with such a radiant impulse from the piano. In
the new enterprise of consciously arousing the sympathy of a man, she had almost forgotten
even the desperate motive which had decided her to undertake it should she get the chance.

'Tell me about American women,' she said. All her person was a challenge. And then: 'Would
you mind shutting the door after Jack?' She followed him with her gaze as he crossed and recrossed
the room.

'What about American women?' he said, dropping all his previous reserve like a garment. 'What
do you want to know?'

'I've never seen one. I want to know what makes them so charming.'

The fresh desirous interest in her voice flattered him, and he smiled his content.

'Oh!' he drawled, leaning back in his chair, which faced hers by the fire. 'I never noticed
they were so specially charming. Some of them are pretty nice, I expect, but most of the young
ones put on too much lugs, at any rate for an Englishman.'

'But they're always marrying Englishmen. So how do you explain that? I did think you'd be able
to tell me about the American women.'

'Perhaps I haven't met enough of just the right sort,' he said.

'You're too critical,' she remarked, as though his case was a peculiarly interesting one and
she was studying it on its merits.

'You only say that because I'm over forty and unmarried, Mrs. Stanway. I'm not at all critical.'

'Over forty!' she exclaimed, and left a pause. He nodded. 'But you are too critical,' she went
on. 'It isn't that women don't interest you--they do----'

'I should think they did,' he murmured, gratified.

'But you expect too much from them.'

'Look here!' he said, 'how do you know?'

She smiled with an assumption of the sadness of all knowledge; she made him feel like a boy
again: 'If you didn't expect too much from them, you would have married long ago. It isn't
as if you hadn't seen the world.'

'Seen the world!' he repeated. 'I've never seen anything half so charming as your home, Mrs.
Stanway.'

Both were extremely well satisfied with the course of the conversation. Both wished that the
interview might last for indefinite hours, for they had slipped, as into a socket, into the
supreme topic, and into intimacy. They were happy and they knew it. The egotism of each tingled
sensitively with eager joy. They felt that this was 'life,' one of the justifications of existence.

She shook her head slowly.

'Yes,' he continued, 'it's you who stay quietly at home that are to be envied.'

'And you, a free bachelor, say that! Why, I should have thought----'

'That's just it. You're quite wrong, if you'll let me say so. Here am I, a free bachelor, as
you call it. Can do what I like. Go where I like. And yet I would sell my soul for a home like
this. Something ... you know. No, you don't. People say that women understand men and what
men feel, but they can't--they can't.'

'No,' said Leonora seriously, 'I don't think they can--still, I have a notion of what you mean.'
She spoke with modest sympathy.

'Have you?' he questioned.

She nodded. For a fraction of an instant she thought of her husband, stolid with all his impulsiveness,
over at David Dain's.

'People say to me, "Why don't you get married?"' Twemlow went on, drawn by the subtle invitation
of her manner. 'But how can I get married? I can't get married by taking thought. They make
me tired. I ask them sometimes whether they imagine I keep single for the fun of the thing....
Do you know that I've never yet been in love--no, not the least bit.'

He presented her with this fact as with a jewel, and she so accepted it.

'What a pity!' she said, gently.

'Yes, it's a pity,' he admitted. 'But look here. That's the worst of me. When I get talking
about myself I'm likely to become a bore.'

Offering him the cigarette cabinet she breathed the old, effective, sincere answer: 'Not at
all, it's very interesting.'

'Let me see, this house belongs to you, doesn't it?' he said in a different casual tone as
he lighted a cigarette.

Shortly afterwards he departed. John had not returned from Dain's, but Twemlow said that he
could not possibly stay, as he had an appointment at Hanbridge. He shook hands with restrained
ardour. Her last words to him were: 'I'm so sorry my husband isn't back,' and even these ordinary
words struck him as a beautiful phrase. Alone in the drawing-room, she sighed happily and examined
herself in the large glass over the mantelpiece. The shaded lights left her loveliness unimpaired;
and yet, as she gazed at the mirror, the worm gnawing at the root of her happiness was not
her husband's precarious situation, nor his deviousness, nor even his mere existence, but the
one thought: 'Oh! That I were young again!'

       *       *       *       *       *

'Mother, whatever do you think?' cried Millicent, running in eagerly in advance of Ethel at
ten o'clock. 'Lucy Turner's sister died to-day, and so she can't sing in the opera, and I am
to have her part if I can learn it in three weeks.'

'What is her part?' Leonora asked, as though waking up.

'Why, mother, you know! Patience, of course! Isn't it splendid?'

'Where are father and Mr. Twemlow? Ethel inquired, falling into a chair.

CHAPTER V

THE CHANCE

Leonora was aware that she had tamed one of the lions which menaced her husband's path; she
could not conceive that Arthur Twemlow, whatever his mysterious power over John, would find
himself able to exercise it now; Twemlow was a friend of hers, and so disarmed. She wished
to say proudly to John: 'I neither know nor wish to know the nature of the situation between
you and Arthur Twemlow. But be at ease. He is no longer dangerous. I have arranged it.' The
thing was impossible to be said; she was bound to leave John in ignorance; she might not even
hint. Nevertheless, Leonora's satisfaction in this triumph, her pleasure in the mere memory
of the intimate talk by the fire, her innocent joyous desire to see Twemlow again soon, emanated
from her in various subtle ways, and the household was thereby soothed back into a feeling
of security about John. Leonora ignored, perhaps deliberately, that Stanway had still before
him the peril of financial embarrassment, that he was mortgaging the house, and that his colloquies
with David Dain continued to be frequent and obviously disconcerting. When she saw him nervous,
petulant, preoccupied, she attributed his condition solely to his thought of the one danger
which she had secretly removed. She had a strange determined impulse to be happy and gay.

An episode at an extra Monday night rehearsal of the Amateur Operatic Society seemed to point
to the prevalence of certain sinister rumours about Stanway's condition. Milly, inspired by
dreams of the future, had learnt her part perfectly in five days. She sang and acted with magnificent
assurance, and with a vivid theatrical charm which awoke enthusiasm in the excitable breasts
of the male chorus. Harry Burgess lost his air of fatigued worldliness, and went round naïvely
demanding to be told whether he had not predicted this miracle. Even the conductor was somewhat
moved.

'She'll do, by gad!' said that man of few illusions to his crony the accompanist.

But it is not to be imagined that such a cardinal event as the elevation of a chit like Millicent
Stanway to the principal rôle could achieve itself without much friction and consequent heat.
Many ladies of the chorus thought that the committee no longer deserved the confidence of the
society. At least three suspected that the conductor had a private spite against themselves.
And one, aged thirty-five, felt convinced that she was the victim of an elaborate and scandalous
plot. To this maid had been offered Milly's old part of Ella; it was a final insult--but she
accepted it. In the scene with Angela and Bunthorne in the first act, the new Ella made the
same mistake three times at the words, 'In a doleful train,' and the conductor grew sarcastic.

'May I show you how that bit goes, Miss Gardner?' said Milly afterwards with exquisite pertness.

'No, thank you, Milly,' was the freezing emphasised answer; 'I dare say I shall be able to
manage without your assistance.'

'Oh, ho!' sang Milly, delighted to have provoked this exhibition, and she began a sort of Carmen
dance of disdain.

'Girls grow up so quick nowadays!' Miss Gardner exclaimed, losing control of herself; 'who
are you, I should like to know!' and she proceeded with her irrelevant inquiries: 'who's your
father? Doesn't every one know that he'll have gone smash before the night of the show?' She
was shaking, insensate, brutal.

Millicent stood still, and went very white.

'Miss Gardner!'

'Miss Stanway!'

The rival divas faced each other, murderous, for a few seconds, and then Milly turned, laughing,
to Harry Burgess, who, consciously secretarial, was standing near with several others.

'Either Miss Gardner apologises to me at once,' she said lightly, 'at once, or else either
she or I leave the Society.'

Milly tapped her foot, hummed, and looked up into Miss Gardner's eyes with serene contempt.
Ethel was not the only one who was amazed at the absolute certitude of victory in little Millicent's
demeanour. Harry Burgess spoke apart with the conductor upon this astonishing contretemps,
and while he did so Milly, still smiling, hummed rather more loudly the very phrase of Ella's
at which Miss Gardner had stumbled. It was a masterpiece of insolence.

'We think Miss Gardner should withdraw the expression,' said Harry after he had coughed.

'Never!' said Miss Gardner. 'Good-bye all!'

Thus ended Miss Gardner's long career as an operatic artist--and not without pathos, for the
ageing woman sobbed as she left the room from which she had been driven by a pitiless child.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to custom Harry Burgess set out from the National School, where the rehearsals were
held, with Ethel and Milly for Hillport. But at the bottom of Church Street Ethel silently
fell behind and joined a fourth figure which had approached. The two couples walked separately
to Hillport by the field-path. As Harry and Milly opened the wicket at the foot of Stanway's
long garden, Ethel ran up, alone again.

'That you?' cried a thin voice under the trees by the gate. It was Rose, taking late exercise
after her studies.

'Yes, it's us,' replied Harry. 'Shall you give me a whisky if I come in?'

And he entered the house with the three girls.

'I'm certain Rose saw you with Fred in the field, and if she did she's sure to split to mother,'
Milly whispered as she and Ethel ran upstairs. They could hear Harry already strumming on the
piano.

'I don't care!' said Ethel callously, exasperated by three days of futility at the office,
and by the manifest injustice of fate.

'My dear, I want to speak to you,' said Leonora to Ethel, when the informal supper was over,
and Harry had buckishly departed, and Rose and Milly were already gone upstairs. Not a word
had been mentioned as to the great episode of the rehearsal.

'Well, mother?' Ethel answered in a tone of weary defiance.

Leonora still sat at the supper-table, awaiting John, who was out at a meeting; Ethel stood
leaning against the mantelpiece like a boy.

'How often have you been seeing Fred Ryley lately?' Leonora began with a gentle, pacific inquiry.

'I see him every day at the works, mother.'

'I don't mean at the works; you know that, Ethel.'

'I suppose Rose has been telling you things.'

'Rose told me quite innocently that she happened to see Fred in the field to-night.'

'Oh, yes!' Ethel sneered with cold irony. 'I know Rose's innocence!'

'My dear girl,' Leonora tried to reason with her. 'Why will you talk like that? You know you
promised your father----'

'No, I didn't, ma,' Ethel interrupted her sharply. 'Milly did; I never promised father anything.'

Leonora was astonished at the mutinous desperation in Ethel's tone. It left her at a loss.

'I shall have to tell your father,' she said sadly.

'Well, of course, mother,' Ethel managed her voice carefully. 'You tell him everything.'

'No, I don't, my dear,' Leonora denied the charge like a girl. 'A week last night I heard Fred
Ryley talking to you at your window. And I have said nothing.'

Ethel flushed hotly at this disclosure.

'Then why say anything now?' she murmured, half daunted and half daring.

'Your father must know. I ought to have told him before. But I have been wondering how best
to act.'

'What's the matter with Fred, mother?' Ethel demanded, with a catch in her throat.

'That isn't the point, Ethel. Your father has distinctly said that he won't permit any'--she
stopped because she could not bring herself to say the words; and then continued: 'If he had
the slightest suspicion that there was anything between you and Fred Ryley he would never have
allowed you to go to the works at all.'

'Allowed me to go! I like that, mother! As if I wanted to go to the works! I simply hate the
place--father knows that. And yet--and yet----' She almost wept.

'Your father must be obeyed,' Leonora stated simply.

'Suppose Fred is poor,' Ethel ran on, recovering herself. 'Perhaps he won't be poor always.
And perhaps we shan't be rich always. The things that people are saying----' She hesitated,
afraid to proceed.

'What do you mean, dear?'

'Well!' the girl exclaimed, and then gave a brief account of the Gardner incident.

'My child,' was Leonora's placid comment, 'you ought to know that Florence Gardner will say
anything when she is in a temper. She is the worst gossip in Bursley. I only hope Milly wasn't
rude. And really this has got nothing to do with what we are talking about.'

'Mother!' Ethel cried hysterically, 'why are you always so calm? Just imagine yourself in my
place--with Fred. You say I'm a woman, and I am, I am, though you don't think so, truly. Just
imagine----No, you can't! You've forgotten all that sort of thing, mother.' She burst into
gushing tears at last. 'Father can kill me if he likes! I don't care!'

She fled out of the room.

'So I've forgotten, have I!' Leonora said to herself, smiling faintly, as she sat alone at
the table waiting for John.

She was not at all hurt by Ethel's impassioned taunt, but rather amused, indulgently amused,
that the girl should have so misread her. She felt more maternal, protective, and tender towards
Ethel than she had ever felt since the first year of Ethel's existence. She seemed perfectly
to comprehend, and she nobly excused, the sudden outbreak of violence and disrespect on the
part of her languid, soft-eyed daughter. She thought with confidence that all would come right
in the end, and vaguely she determined that in some undefined way she would help Ethel, would
yet demonstrate to this child of hers that she understood and sympathised. The interview which
had just terminated, futile, conflicting, desultory, muddled, tentative, and abrupt as life
itself, appeared to her in the light of a positive achievement. She was not unhappy about it,
nor about anything. Even the scathing speech of Florence Gardner had failed to disturb her.

'I want to tell you something, Jack,' she began, when her husband at length came home.

'Who's been drinking whisky?' was Stanway's only reply as he glanced at the table.

'Harry brought the girls home. I dare say he had some. I didn't notice,' she said.

'H'm!' Stanway muttered gloomily, 'he's young enough to start that game.'

'I'll see it isn't offered to him again, if you like,' said Leonora. 'But I want to tell you
something, Jack.'

'Well?' He was thoughtlessly cutting a piece of cheese into small squares with the silver butter-knife.

'Only you must promise not to say a word to a soul.'

'I shall promise no such thing,' he said with uncompromising bluntness.

She smiled charmingly upon him. 'Oh yes, Jack, you will, you must.'

He seemed to be taken unawares by her sudden smile. 'Very well,' he said gruffly.

She then told him, in the manner she thought best, of the relations between Ethel and Fred
Ryley, and she pointed out to him that, if he had reflected at all upon the relations between
Harry Burgess and Millicent, he would not have fallen into the error of connecting Milly, instead
of her sister, with Fred.

'What relations between Milly and young Burgess?' he questioned stolidly.

'Why, Jack,' she said, 'you know as much as I do. Why does Harry come here so often?'

'He'd better not come here so often. What's Milly? She's nothing but a child.'

Leonora made no attempt to argue with him. 'As for Ethel,' she said softly, 'she's at a difficult
age, and you must be careful----'

'As for Ethel,' he interrupted, 'I'll turn Fred Ryley out of my office to-morrow.'

She tried to look grave and sympathetic, to use all her tact. 'But won't that make difficulties
with Uncle Meshach? And people might say you had dismissed him because Uncle Meshach had altered
his will.'

'D----n Fred Ryley!' he swore, unable to reply to this. 'D----n him!'

He walked to and fro in the room, and all his secret, profound resentment against Ryley surged
up, loose and uncontrolled.

'Wouldn't it be better to take Ethel away from the works?' Leonora suggested.

'No,' he answered doggedly. 'Not for a moment! Can't I have my own daughter in my own office
because Fred Ryley is on the place? A pretty thing!'

'It is awkward,' she admitted, as if admitting also that what puzzled his sagacity was of course
too much for hers.

'Fred Ryley!' he repeated the hateful syllables bitterly. 'And I only took him out of kindness!
Simply out of kindness! I tell you what, Leonora!' He faced her in a sort of bravado. 'It would
serve 'em d----n well right if Uncle Meshach died to-morrow, and Aunt Hannah the day after.
I should be safe then. It would serve them d----n well right, all of 'em--Ryley and Uncle Meshach;
yes, and Aunt Hannah too! She hasn't altered her will, but she'd no business to have let uncle
alter his. They're all in it. She's bound to die first, and they know it.... Well, well!' He
was a resigned martyr now, and he turned towards the hearth.

'Jack!' she exclaimed, 'what's the matter?'

'Ruin's the matter,' he said. 'That's what's the matter. Ruin!'

He laughed sourly, undecided whether to pretend that he was not quite serious, or to divulge
his real condition.

Her calm confident eyes silently invited him to relieve his mind, and he could not resist the
temptation.

'You know that mortgage on the house,' he said quickly. 'I got it all arranged at once. Dain
was to have sent the deed in last Tuesday night for you to sign, but he sent in a letter instead.
That's why I had to go over and see him. There was some confounded hitch at the last moment,
a flaw in the title----'

'A flaw in the title!' It was the phrase only that alarmed her.

'Oh! It's all right,' said Stanway, wondering angrily why women should always, by the trick
of seizing on trifles, destroy the true perspective of a business affair. 'The title's all
right, at least it will be put right. But it means delay, and I can't wait. I must have money
at once, in three days. Can you understand that, my girl?'

By an effort she conquered the impulses to ask why, and why, and why; and to suggest economy
in the house. Something came to her mysteriously out of her memory of her own father's affairs,
a sudden inspiration; and she said:

'Can't you deposit my deeds at the bank and get a temporary advance?' She was very proud of
this clever suggestion.

He shook his head: 'No, the bank won't.'

The fact was that the bank had long been pressing him to deposit security for his over-draft.

'I tell you what might be done,' he said, brightening as her idea gave birth to another one
in his mind. 'Uncle Meshach might lend some money on the deeds. You shall go down to-morrow
morning and ask him, Nora.'

'Me!' She was scared at this result.

'Yes, you,' he insisted, full of eagerness. 'It's your house. Ask him to let you have five
hundred on the house for a short while. Tell him we want it. You can get round him easily enough.'

'Jack, I can't do it, really.'

'Oh yes, you can,' he assured her. 'No one better. He likes you. He doesn't like me--never
did. Ask him for five hundred. No, ask him for a thousand. May as well make it a thousand.
It'll be all the same to him. You go down in the morning, and do it for me.'

Stanway's animation became quite cheerful.

'But about the title--the flaw?' she feebly questioned.

'That won't frighten uncle,' said Stanway positively. 'He knows the title is good enough. That's
only a technical detail.'

'Very well,' she agreed, 'I'll do what I can, Jack.'

'That's good,' he said.

And even now, the resolve once made, she did not lose her sense of tranquil optimism, her mild
happiness, her widespreading benevolence. The result of this talk with John aroused in her
an innocent vanity, for was it not indirectly due to herself that John had been able to see
a way out of his difficulties?

They soon afterwards dismissed the subject, put it with care away in a corner; and John finished
his supper.

'Is Mr. Twemlow still in the district?' she asked vivaciously.

'Yes,' said John, and there was a pause.

'You're doing some business together, aren't you, Jack?' she hazarded.

John hesitated. 'No,' he said, 'he only wanted to see me about old Twemlow's estate--some details
he was after.'

'I felt it,' she mused. 'I felt all the time it was that that was wrong. And John is worrying
over it! But he needn't--he needn't--and he doesn't know!'

She exulted.

She could read plainly the duplicity in his face. She knew that he had done some wicked thing,
and that all his life was a maze of more or less equivocal stratagems. But she was so used
to the character of her husband that this aspect of the situation scarcely impressed her. It
was her new active beneficent interference in John's affairs that seemed to occupy her thoughts.

'I told you I wouldn't say anything about Ethel's affair,' said John later, 'and I won't.'
He was once more judicial and pompous. 'But, of course, you will look after it. I shall leave
it to you to deal with. You'll have to be firm, you know.'

'Yes,' she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not till after breakfast the next day did Leonora realise the utter repugnance with which she
shrank from the mission to Uncle Meshach. She had declined to look the project fairly in the
face, to examine her own feelings concerning it. She had said to herself when she awoke in
the dark: 'It is nothing. It is a mere business matter. It isn't like begging.' But the idea,
the absurd indefensible idea, of its similarity to begging was precisely what troubled her
as the moment approached for setting forth. She pondered, too, upon the intolerable fact that
such a request as she was about to prefer to Uncle Meshach was a tacit admission that John,
with all his ostentations, had at last come to the end of the tether. She felt that she was
a living part of John's meretriciousness. She had the fancy that she should have dressed for
the occasion in rusty black. Was it not somehow shameful that she, a suppliant for financial
aid, should outrage the ugly modesty of the little parlour in Church Street by the arrogant
and expensive perfection of her beautiful skirt and street attire?

Moreover, she would fail.

The morning was fine, and with infantile pusillanimity she began to hope that Uncle Meshach
would be taking his walks abroad. In order to give him every chance of being out she delayed
her departure, upon one domestic excuse or another, for quite half an hour. 'How silly I am!'
she reflected. But she could not help it, and when she had started down the hill towards Bursley
she felt sick. She had a suspicion that her feet might of their own accord turn into a by-road
and lead her away from Uncle Meshach's. 'I shall never get there!' she exclaimed. She called
at the fishmonger's in Oldcastle Street, and was delighted because the shop was full of customers
and she had to wait. At last she was crossing St. Luke's Square and could distinguish Uncle
Meshach's doorway with its antique fanlight. She wished to stop, to turn back, to run, but
her traitorous feet were inexorable. They carried her an unwilling victim to the house. Uncle
Meshach, by some strange accident, was standing at the window and saw her. 'Ah!' she thought,
'if he had not been at the window, if he had not caught sight of me, I should have walked past!'
And that chance of escape seemed like a lost bliss.

Uncle Meshach himself opened the door.

'Come in, lass,' he said, looking her up and down through his glasses. 'You're the prettiest
thing I've seen since I saw ye last. Your aunt's out, with the servant too; and I'm left here
same as a dog on the chain. That's how they leave me.'

She was thankful that Aunt Hannah was out: that made the affair simpler.

'Well, uncle,' she said, 'I haven't seen you since you came back from the Isle of Man, have I?'

Some inspiration lent her a courage which rose far beyond embarrassment. She saw at once that
the old man was enchanted to have her in the house alone, and flattered by the apparatus of
feminine elegance which she always displayed for him at its fullest. These two had a sort of
cult for each other, a secret sympathy, none the less sincere because it seldom found expression.
His pale blue eyes, warmed by her presence, said: 'I'm an old man, and I've seen the world,
and I keep a few of my ideas to myself. But you know that no one understands a pretty woman
better than I do. A glance is enough.' And in reply to this challenge she gave the rein to
her profoundest instincts. She played the simple feminine to his masculine. She dared to be
the eternal beauty who rules men, and will ever rule them, they know not why.

'My lass,' he said in a tone that granted all requests in advance, after they had talked a
while, 'you're after something.'

His wrinkled features, ironic but benevolent, intimated that he knew she wished to take an
unfair advantage of the gifts which Nature had bestowed on her, and that he did not object.

She allowed herself to smile mysteriously, provocatively at him.

'Yes,' she admitted frankly, 'I am.'

'Well?' He waited indulgently for the disclosure.

She paused a moment, smiling steadily at him. The contrast of his wizened age made her feel
deliciously girlish.

'It's about my house, at Hillport,' she began with assurance. 'I want you----'

And she told him, with no more than a sufficiency of detail, what she wanted. She did not try
to conceal that the aim was to help John, that, in crude fact, it was John who needed the money.
But she emphasised 'my house,' and 'I want you to lend me.' The thing was well done, and she
knew it was well done, and felt satisfied accordingly. As for Meshach, he was decidedly caught
unawares. He might, perhaps, have suspected from the beginning that she was only an emissary
of John's, but the form and magnitude of her proposal were a violent surprise to him. He hesitated.
She could see clearly that he sought reasons by which to justify himself in acquiescence.

'It's your affair?' he questioned meditatively.

'Quite my own,' she assured him.

'Let me see----'

'I shall get it!' she said to herself, and she was astounded at the felicitous event of the
enterprise. She could scarcely believe her good luck, but she knew beyond any doubt that she
was not mistaken in the signs of Meshach's demeanour. She thought she might even venture to
ask him for an explanation of his warning letter about Arthur Twemlow.

At that moment Aunt Hannah and the middle-aged servant re-entered the house, and the servant
had to pass through the parlour to reach the kitchen. The atmosphere which Meshach and Leonora
had evolved in solitude from their respective individualities was dissipated instantly. The
parlour became nothing but the parlour, with its glass partition, its antimacassars, its Meshach
by the hob, and its diminutive Hannah uttering fatuous, affectionate exclamations of pleasure.

Leonora's heart was pierced by a sudden stab of doubt, as she waited for the result.

'Sister,' said Meshach, 'what dost think? Here's your nephew been speculating in stocks and
shares till he can't hardly turn round----'

'Uncle!' Leonora exclaimed horrified, 'I never said such a thing!'

'Sh!' said Hannah in an awful whisper, as she shut the kitchen door.

'Till he can't hardly turn round,' Meshach continued; 'and now he wants Leonora here to mortgage
her house to get him out of his difficulties. Haven't I always told you as John would find
himself in a rare fix one of these days?'

Few human beings could dominate another more completely than Meshach dominated his sister.
But here, for Leonora's undoing, was just a case where, without knowing it, Hannah influenced
her brother. He had a reputation to keep up with Hannah, a great and terrible reputation, and
in several ways a loan by him through Leonora to John would have damaged it. A few minutes
later, and he would have been committed both to the loan and to the demonstration of his own
consistency in the humble eyes of Hannah; but the old spinster had arrived too soon. The spell
was broken. Meshach perceived the danger of his position, and retired.

'Nay, nay!' Hannah protested. 'That's very wrong of John. Eh, this speculation!'

'But, really, uncle,' Leonora said as convincingly as she could. 'It's capital that John wants.'

She saw that all was lost.

'Capital!' Meshach sarcastically flouted the word, and he turned with a dubious benevolence
to Leonora. 'No, my lass, it isn't,' he said, pausing. 'John'll get out of this mess as he's
gotten out of many another. Trust him. He's your husband, and he's in the family, and I'm saying
nothing against him. But trust him for that.'

'No,' Hannah inserted, 'John's always been a good nephew.... If it wasn't----'

Meshach quelled her and proceeded: 'I'll none consent to John raising money on your property.
It's not right, lass. Happen this'll be a lesson to him, if anything will be.'

'Five hundred would do,' Leonora murmured with mad foolishness.

Of what use to chronicle the dreadful shame which she endured before she could leave the house,
she who for a quarter of an hour had been a queen there, and who left as the pitied wife of
a wastrel nephew?

'You're not short, my dear?' Hannah asked at the end in an anxious voice.

'Not he!' Uncle Meshach testily ejaculated, fastening the button of that droll necktie of his.

'Oh dear no!' said Leonora, with such dignity as she could assume.

As she walked home she wondered what 'speculation' really was. She could not have defined the
word. She possessed but a vague idea of its meaning. She had long apprehended, ignorantly and
indifferently and uneasily, that John was in the habit of tampering with dangerous things called
stocks and shares. But never before had the vital import of these secret transactions been
revealed to her. The dramatic swiftness of the revelation stunned her, and yet it seemed after
all that she only knew now what she had always known.

When she reached home John was already in the hall, taking off his overcoat, though the hour
of one had not struck. Was this a coincidence, or had he been unable to control his desire
to learn what she had done?

In silence she smiled plaintively at him, shaking her head.

'What do you mean?' he asked harshly.

'I couldn't arrange it,' she said. 'Uncle Meshach refused.'

John gave a scarcely perceptible start. 'Oh! That!' he exclaimed. 'That's all right. I've fixed
it up.'

'This morning?'

'Eh? Yes, this morning.'

During dinner he showed a certain careless amiability.

'You needn't go to the works any more to-day,' he said to Ethel.

To celebrate this unexpected half-holiday, Ethel and Millicent decided that they would try
to collect a scratch team for some hockey practice in the meadow.

'And, mother, you must come,' said Millicent. 'You'll make one more anyway.'

'Yes,' John agreed, 'it will do your mother good.'

'He will never know, and never guess, and never care, what I have been through!' she thought.

Before leaving for the works John helped the girls to choose some sticks.

When he reached his office, the first thing he did was to build up a good fire. Next he looked
into the safe. Then he rang the bell, and Fred Ryley responded to the summons.

This family connection, whom he both hated and trusted, was a rather thickset, very neatly
dressed man of twenty-three, who had been mature, serious, and responsible for eight years.
His fair, grave face, with its short thin beard, showed plainly his leading qualities of industry,
order, conscientiousness, and doggedness. It showed, too, his mild benevolence. Ryley was never
late, never neglectful, never wrong; he never wasted an hour either of his own or his employer's
time. And yet his colleagues liked him, perhaps because he was unobtrusive and good-natured.
At the beginning of each year he laid down a programme for himself, and he was incapable of
swerving from it. Already he had acquired a thorough knowledge of both the manufacturing and
the business sides of earthenware manufacture, and also he was one of the few men, at that
period, who had systematically studied the chemistry of potting. He could not fail to 'get
on,' and to win universal respect. His chances of a truly striking success would have been
greater had he possessed imagination, humour, or any sort of personal distinction. In appearance,
he was common, insignificant; to be appreciated, he 'wanted knowing'; but he was extremely
sensitive and proud, and he could resent an affront like a Gascon. He had apparently no humour
whatever. The sole spark of romance in him had been fanned into a small steady flame by his
passion for Ethel. Ryley was a man who could only love once for all.

'Did you find that private ledger for me out of the old safe?' Stanway demanded.

'Yes,' said Ryley, 'and I put it in your safe, at the front, and gave you the key back this
morning.'

'I don't see it there,' Stanway retorted.

'Shall I look?' Ryley suggested quietly, approaching the safe, of which the key was in the lock.

'Never mind, now! Never mind, now!' Stanway stopped him. 'I don't want to be bothered now.
Later on in the afternoon, before Mr. Twemlow comes.... Did you write and ask him to call at
four thirty?'

'Yes,' said Ryley, departing without a sign on his face, the model clerk.

'Fool!' whispered Stanway. It would have been impossible for Ryley to breathe without irritating
his employer, and the fact that his plebeian cousin's son was probably the most reliable underling
to be got in the Five Towns did not in the slightest degree lessen Stanway's dislike of him;
it increased it.

Stanway had been perfectly aware that the little ledger was in his safe, and as soon as Ryley
had shut the door he jumped up, unlatched the safe, removed the book, and after tearing it
in two stuck first one half and then the other into the midst of the fire.

'That ends it, anyhow!' he thought, when the leaves were consumed.

Then he selected some books of cheque counterfoils, a number of prospectuses of companies,
some share certificates (exasperating relic of what rich dreams!), and a lot of letters. All
these he burnt with much neatness and care, putting more coal on the fire so as to hide every
trace of their destruction. Then he opened a drawer in the desk, and took out a revolver which
he unloaded and loaded again.

'I'm pretty cool,' he flattered himself.

He was the sort of flamboyant man who keeps a loaded revolver in obedience to the theory that
a loaded revolver is a necessary and proper part of the true male's outfit, like a gold watch
and chain, a gold pencil case, a razor for every day in the week, and a cigar-holder with a
bit of good amber to it. He had owned that revolver for years, with no thought of utilising
the weapon. But in justice to him, it must be said that when any of his contemporaries--Titus
Price, for instance--had made use of revolvers or ropes in a particular way, he had always
secretly justified and commended them.

He put the revolver in his hip-pocket, the correct location, and donned his 'works' hat. He
did not reflect. Memories of his past life did not occur to him, nor visions of that which
was to come. He did not feel solemn. On the contrary he felt cross with everyone, and determined
to pay everyone out; in particular he was vexed, in a mean childish way, with Uncle Meshach,
and with himself for having fancied for a moment that an appeal to Uncle Meshach could be successful.
One other idea struck him forcibly by reason of its strangeness: namely, that the works was
proceeding exactly as usual, raw material always coming in, finished goods always going out,
the various shops hot and murmurous with toil, money tinkling in the petty cash-box, the very
engine beneath his floor beating its customary monotonous stroke; and his comfortable home
was proceeding exactly as usual, the man hissing about the stable yard, the servants discreetly
moving in the immaculate kitchens, Leonora elegant with sovereigns in her purse, the girls
chattering and restless; not a single outward sign of disaster; and yet he was at the end,
absolutely at the end at last. There was going to be a magnificent and unparalleled sensation
in the town of Bursley ... He seemed for an instant dimly to perceive ways, or incomplete portions
of ways, by which he might still escape ... Then with a brusque gesture he dismissed such futile
scheming and yielded anew to the impulse which had suddenly and piquantly seized him, three
hours before, when Leonora said: 'Uncle Meshach won't,' and he replied, 'I've fixed it up.'
His dilemma was too complicated. No one, not even Dain, was aware of its intricacies; Dain
knew a lot, Leonora a little, and sundry other persons odd fragments. But he himself could
scarcely have drawn the outlines of the whole sinister situation without much reference to
books and correspondence. No, he had finished. He was bored, and he was irritable. The impulse
hurried him on.

'In half an hour that ass Twemlow will be here,' he thought, looking at the office dial over
the mantelpiece.

And then he left his room, calling out to the clerks' room as he passed: 'Just going on to
the bank. I shall be back in a minute or two.'

At the south-western corner of the works was a disused enamel-kiln which had been built experimentally
and had proved a failure. He walked through the yard, crept with some difficulty into the kiln,
and closed the iron door. A pale silver light came down the open chimney. He had decided as
he crossed the yard that he should place the mouth of the revolver between his eyes, so that
he had nothing to do in the kiln but to put it there and touch the trigger. The idea of this
simple action preoccupied him. 'Yes,' he reflected, taking the revolver from his pocket, 'that
is where I must put it, and then just touch the trigger.' He thought neither of his family,
nor of his sins, nor of the grand fiasco, but solely of this physical action. Then, as he raised
the revolver, the fear troubled him that he had not burnt a particular letter from a Jew in
London, received on the previous day. 'Of course I burnt it,' he assured himself. 'Did I, though?'
He felt that a mysterious volition over which he had no control would force him to return to
his office in order to make sure. He gave a weary curse at the prospect of having to put back
the revolver, leave the kiln, enter the kiln again, and once more raise the revolver.

As he passed by the archway near the packing house the afternoon postman appeared and gave
him a letter. Without thinking he halted on the spot and opened it. It was written in haste,
and ran: 'My Dear Stanway,--I am called away to London and may have to sail for New York at
once. Sorry to have to break the appointment. We must leave that affair over. In any case it
could only be a mere matter of form. As I told you, I was simply acting on behalf of my sister.
My kindest regards to your wife and your daughters. Believe me, yours very truly,--ARTHUR TWEMLOW.'

He read the letter a second time in his office, standing up against the shut door. Then his
eye wandered to the desk and he saw that an envelope had been placed with mathematical exactitude
in the middle of his blotting-pad. 'Ryley!' he thought. This other letter was marked private,
and as the envelope said 'John Stanway, Esq.,' without an address, it must have been brought
by special messenger. It was from David Dain, and stated that the difficulty as to the title
of the house had been settled, that the mortgage would be sent in for Mrs. Stanway to sign
that night, and that Stanway might safely draw against the money to-morrow.

'My God!' he exclaimed, pushing his hat back from his brow. 'What a chance!'

In five minutes he was drawing cheques, and simultaneously planning how to get over the disappearance
of the old private ledger in case Twemlow should after all, at some future date, ask to see
original documents.

'What a chance!' The thought ran round and round in his brain.

As he left the works by the canal side, he paused under Shawport Bridge and furtively dropped
the revolver into the water. 'That's done with!' he murmured.

He saw now that his preparations for departure, which at the moment he had deemed to be so
well designed and so effective, were after all ridiculous. No amount of combustion could have
prevented the disclosure at an inquest of the ignominious facts.

       *       *       *       *       *

During tea he laughed loudly at Milly's descriptions of the hockey match, which had been a
great success. Leonora had kept goal with distinction, and admitted that she rather enjoyed
the game.

'So it is arranged?' said Leonora, with a hint of involuntary surprise, when he handed her
the mortgage to sign.

'Didn't I tell you so this morning?' he answered loftily. There is always a despicable joy
in resuscitating a lie which events have changed into a truth.

He insisted on retiring early that night. In the bedroom he remarked: 'Your friend Twemlow's
had to go to London to-day, and may return straight from there to New York. I had a note from
him. He sent you his kindest regards and all that sort of thing.'

'Then we mayn't see him again?' she said, delicately fingering her hair in front of the pier-glass.

CHAPTER VI

COMIC OPERA

Early one evening a few weeks later, Leonora, half attired for the gala night of the operatic
performance, was again delicately fingering her hair in that large bedroom whose mirrors daily
reflected the leisured process of her toilette. Her black skirt trimmed with yellow made a
sudden sharp contrast with the pale tints of her corset and her long bare arms. The bodice
lay like a trifling fragment on the blue-green eiderdown of her bed, a pair of satin shoes
glistened in front of the fire, and two chairs bore the discarded finery of the day. The dressing-table
was littered with silver and ivory. A faint and charming odour of violets mingled mysteriously
with the warmth of the fire as Leonora moved away from the pier-glass between the two curtained
windows where the light was centred, and with accustomed hands picked up the bodice apparently
so frail that a touch might have ruined it.

The door was brusquely opened, and some one entered.

'Not dressed, Rose?' said Leonora, a little startled. 'We ought to be going in ten minutes.'

'Oh, mother! I mustn't go. I mustn't really!'

The tall slightly-stooping girl, with her flat figure, her plain shabby serge frock, her tired
white face, and the sinister glance of the idealist in her great, fretful eyes, seemed to stand
there and accuse the whole of Leonora's existence. Utterly absorbed in the imminent examination,
her brain a welter of sterile facts, Rose found all the seriousness of life in dates, irregular
participles, algebraic symbols, chemical formulas, the altitudes of mountains, and the areas
of inland seas. To the cruelty of the too earnest enthusiast she added the cruelty of youth,
and it was with a merciless justice that she judged everyone with whom she came into opposition.

'But, my dear, you'll be ill if you keep on like this. And you know what your father said.'

Rose smiled, bitterly superior, at the misguided creature whose horizons were bounded by domesticity
on one side and by dress on the other.

'I shall not be ill, mother,' she said firmly, sniffing at the scent in the room. 'I can't
help it. I must work at my chemistry again to-night. Father knows perfectly well that chemistry
is my weak point. I must work. I just came in to tell you.'

She departed slowly, as it were daring her mother to protest further.

Leonora sighed, overpowered by a feeling of impotence. What could she do, what could any person
do, when challenged by an individuality at once so harsh and so impassioned? She finished her
toilette with minute care, but she had lost her pleasure in it. The sense of the contrariety
of things deepened in her. She looked round the circle of her environment and saw hope and
gladness nowhere. John's affairs were perhaps running more smoothly, but who could tell? The
shameful fact that the house was mortgaged remained always with her. And she was intimately
conscious of a soilure, a moral stain, as the result of her recent contacts with the man of
business in her husband. Why had she not been able to keep femininely aloof from those puzzling
and repellent matters, ignorant of them, innocent of them? And Ethel, too! Twelve days of the
office had culminated for Ethel in a slight illness, which Doctor Hawley described as lack
of tone. Her father had said airily that she must resume her clerkship in due season, but the
entire household well knew that she would not do so, and that the experiment was one of the
failures which invariably followed John's interference in domestic concerns. As for Milly's
housekeeping, it was an admitted absurdity. Millicent had lived of late solely for the opera,
and John resented any preoccupation which detached the girls' interest from their home. When
Ethel recovered in the nick of time to attend the final rehearsals, he grew sarcastic, and
irrelevantly made cutting remarks about the letter from Paris which Ethel had never translated
and which she thought he had forgotten. Finally he said he probably could not go to the opera
at all, and that at best he might look in at it for half an hour. He was careful to disclaim
all interest in the performance.

Carpenter had driven the two girls to the Town Hall at seven o'clock, and at a quarter to eight
he returned to fetch his mistress. Enveloped in her fur cloak, Leonora climbed silently into
the cart.

'I did hear,' said Carpenter, respectfully gossiping, 'as Mr. Twemlow was gone back to America;
but I seed him yesterday as I was coming back from taking the mester to that there manufacturers'
meeting at Knype.... Wonderful like his mother he is, mum.'

'Oh, indeed!' said Leonora.

Her first impatient querulous thought was that she would have preferred Mr. Twemlow to be in
America.

The illuminated windows of the Town Hall, and the knot of excited people at the principal portico,
gave her a sort of preliminary intimation that the eternal quest for romance was still active
on earth, though she might have abandoned it. In the corridor she met Uncle Meshach, wearing
an antique frock-coat. His eye caught hers with quiet satisfaction. There was no sign in his
wrinkled face of their last interview.

'Your aunt's not very well,' he answered her inquiry. 'She wasn't equal to coming, she said.
I bid her go to bed. So I'm all alone.'

'Come and sit by me,' Leonora suggested. 'I have two spare tickets.'

'Nay, I think not,' he faintly protested.

'Yes, do,' she said, 'you must.'

As his trembling thin hands stole away her cloak, disclosing the perfection and dark magnificence
of her toilette, and as she perceived in his features the admiration of a connoisseur, and
in the eyes of other women envy and astonishment, she began to forget her despondencies. She
lived again. She believed again in the possibility of joy. And perhaps it was not strange that
her thought travelled at once to Ethel--Ethel whom she had not questioned further about her
lover, Ethel whom till then she had figured as the wretched victim of love, but whom now she
saw wistfully as love's elect.

       *       *       *       *       *

The front seats of the auditorium were filled with all that was dashing, and much that was
solidly serious, in Bursley. Hoarded wealth, whose religion was spotless kitchens and cash
down, sat side by side with flightiness and the habit of living by credit on rather more than
one's income. The members of the Society had exerted themselves in advance to impress upon
the public mind that the entertainment would be nothing if not fashionable and brilliant; and
they had succeeded. There was not a single young man, and scarcely an old one, but wore evening-dress,
and the frocks of the women made a garden of radiant blossoms. Supreme among the eminent dandies
who acted as stewards in that part of the house was Harry Burgess, straight out of Conduit
Street, W., with a mien plainly indicating that every reserved seat had been sold two days
before. From the second seats the sterling middle classes, half envy and half disdain, examined
the glittering ostentation in front of them; they had no illusions concerning it; their knowledge
of financial realities was exact. Up in the gloom of the balcony the crowded faces of the unimportant
and the obscure rose tier above tier to the organ-loft. Here was Florence Gardner, come incognito
to deride; here was Fred Ryley, thief of an evening's time; and here were sundry dressmakers
who experienced the thrill of the creative artist as they gazed at their confections below.

The entire audience was nervous, critical, and excited: partly because nearly every unit of
it boasted a relative or an intimate friend in the Society, and partly because, as an entity
representing the town, it had the trepidations natural to a mother who is about to hear her
child say a piece at a party. It hoped, but it feared. If any outsider had remarked that the
youthful Bursley Operatic Society could not expect even to approach the achievements of its
remarkable elder sister at Hanbridge, the audience would have chafed under that invidious suggestion.
Nevertheless it could not believe that its native talent would be really worth hearing. And
yet rumours of a surprising excellence were afloat. The excitement was intensified by the tuning
of instruments in the orchestra, by certain preliminary experiments of a too anxious gasman,
and most of all by a delay in beginning.

At length the Mayor entered, alone; the interesting absence of the Mayoress had some connection
with a silver cradle that day ordered from Birmingham as a civic gift.

'Well, Burgess,' the Mayor whispered benevolently, 'what sort of a show are we to have?'

'You will see, Mr. Mayor,' said Harry, whose confident smile expressed the spirit of the Society.

Then the conductor--the man to whom twenty instrumentalists and thirty singers looked for guidance,
help, encouragement, and the nullifying of mistakes otherwise disastrous; the man on whose
nerve and animating enthusiasm depended the reputation of the Society and of Bursley--tapped
his baton and stilled the chatter of the audience with a glance. The footlights went up, the
lights of the chandelier went down, and almost before any one was aware of the fact the overture
had commenced. There could be no withdrawal now; the die was cast; the boats were burnt. In
the artistic history of Bursley a decisive moment had arrived.

In a very few seconds people began to realise, slowly, timidly, but surely, that after all
they were listening to a real orchestra. The mere volume of sound startled them; the verve
and decision of the players filled them with confidence; the bright grace of the well-known
airs laid them under a spell. They looked diffidently at each other, as if to say: 'This is
not so bad, you know.' And when the finale was reached, with its prodigious succession of crescendos,
and its irresistible melody somehow swimming strongly through a wild sea of tone, the audience
forgot its pose of critical aloofness and became unaffectedly human. The last three bars of
the overture were smothered in applause.

The conductor, as pale as though he had seen a ghost, turned and bowed stiffly. 'Put that in
your pipe and smoke it,' his unrelaxing features said to the audience; and also: 'If you have
ever heard the thing better played in the Five Towns, be good enough to inform me where!'

There was a hesitation, the brief murmur of a hidden voice, and the curtains of the fit-up
stage swung apart and disclosed the roseate environs of Castle Bunthorne, ornamented by those
famous maidens who were dying for love of its æsthetic owner. The audience made no attempt
to grasp the situation of the characters until it had satisfactorily settled the private identity
of each. That done, it applied itself to the sympathetic comprehension of the feelings of a
dozen young women who appeared to spend their whole existence in statuesque poses and plaintive
but nonsensical lyricism. It failed, honestly; and even when the action descended from song
to banal dialogue, it was not reassured. 'Silly' was the unspoken epithet on a hundred tongues,
despite the delicate persuasion of the music, the virginal charm of the maidens, and the illuminated
richness of costumes and scene. The audience understood as little of the operatic convention
as of the æstheticism caricatured in the roseate environs of Castle Bunthorne. A number of
people present had never been in a theatre, either for lack of opportunity or from a moral
objection to theatres. Many others, who seldom missed a melodrama at the Hanbridge Theatre
Royal, avoided operas by virtue of the infallible instinct which caused them to recoil from
anything exotic enough to disturb the calm of their lifelong mental lethargy. As for the minority
which was accustomed to opera, including the still smaller minority which had seen Patience
itself, it assumed the right that evening critically to examine the convention anew, to reconsider
it unintimidated by the crushing prestige of the Savoy or of D'Oyly Carte's No. 1 Touring Company.
And for the most part it found in the convention small basis of common sense.

Then Patience appeared on the eminence. She was a dairymaid, and she could not understand the
philosophy prevalent in the roseate environs of Castle Bunthorne. The audience hailed her with
joy and relief. The dairymaid and her costume were pretty in a familiar way which it could
appreciate. She was extremely young, adorably impudent, airy, tripping, and supple as a circus-rider.
She had marvellous confidence. 'We are friends, are we not, you and I?' her gestures seemed
to say to the audience. And with the utmost complacency she gazed at herself in the eyes of
the audience as in a mirror. Her opening song renewed the triumph of the overture. It was recognisably
a ballad, and depended on nothing external for its effectiveness. It gave the bewildered listeners
something to take hold of, and in return for this gift they acclaimed and continued to acclaim.
Milly glanced coolly at the conductor, who winked back his permission, and the next moment
the Bursley Operatic Society tasted the delight of its first encore. The pert fascinations
of the heroine, the bravery of the Colonel and his guards, the clowning of Bunthorne, combined
with the continuous seduction of the music and the scene, very quickly induced the audience
to accept without reserve this amazing intrigue of logical absurdities which was being unrolled
before it. The opera ceased to appear preposterous; the convention had won, and the audience
had lost. Small slips in delivery were unnoticed, big ones condoned, and nervousness encouraged
to depart. The performance became a homogeneous whole, in which the excellence of the best
far more than atoned for the clumsy mediocrity of the worst. When the curtains fell amid storms
of applause and cut off the stage, the audience perceived suddenly, like a revelation, that
the young men and women whom it knew so well in private life had been creating something--an
illusion, an ecstasy, a mood--which transcended the sum total of their personalities. It was
this miracle, but dimly apprehended perhaps, which left the audience impressed, and eager for
the next act.

       *       *       *       *       *

'That madam will go her own road,' said Uncle Meshach under cover of the clapping.

Leonora's smile was embarrassed. 'What do you mean?' she asked him.

He bent his head towards her, looking into her face with a sort of generous cynicism.

'I mean she'll go her own road,' he repeated.

And then, observing that most of the men were leaving their seats, he told Leonora that he
should step across to the Tiger if she would let him. As he passed out, leaning forward on
a stick lightly clutched in the left hand, several people demanded his opinion about the spectacle.
'Nay, nay----' he replied again and again, waving one after another out of his course.

In the bar-parlour of the Tiger, the young blades, the genuine fast men, the deliberate middle-aged
persons who took one glass only, and the regular nightly customers, mingled together in a dense
and noisy crowd under a canopy of smoke. The barmaid and her assistant enjoyed their brief
minutes of feverish contact with the great world. Behind the counter, walled in by a rampart
of dress-shirts, they conjured with bottles, glasses, and taps, heard and answered ten men
at once, reckoned change by a magic beyond arithmetic, peered between shoulders to catch the
orders of their particular friends, and at the same time acquired detailed information as to
the progress of the opera. Late comers who, forcing a way into the room, saw the multitude
of men drinking and smoking, and the unapproachable white faces of these two girls distantly
flowering in the haze and the odour, had that saturnalian sensation of seeing life which is
peculiar to saloons during the entr'actes of theatrical entertainments. The success of the
opera, and of that chit Millicent Stanway, formed the staple of the eager conversation, though
here and there a sober couple would be discussing the tramcars or the quinquennial assessment
exactly as if Gilbert and Sullivan had never been born. It appeared that Milly had a future,
that she was the best Patience yet seen in the district amateur or professional, that any burlesque
manager would jump at her, that in five years, if she liked, she might be getting a hundred
a week, and that Dolly Chose, the idol of the Tivoli and the Pavilion, had not half her style. It
was more open country here, and at least I was able to get a glimpse of my own men and exercise
some control over them. There was much firing going on, but for the life of me I could not
see any Spaniards, and neither could any one else. Finally we made up our minds that they were shooting
at us from a set of red-tiled ranch buildings a good way in front, and these I assaulted, finally
charging them. Before we came anywhere near, the Spaniards, who, as it proved, really were
inside and around them, abandoned them, leaving a few dead men.

By the time I had taken possession of these buildings all firing had
ceased everywhere.

I had not the faintest idea what had happened: whether the fight was over; or whether this was
merely a lull in the fight; or where the Spaniards were; or whether we might be attacked again;
or whether we ought ourselves to attack somebody somewhere else.

I got my men in order and sent out small parties to explore the ground
in front, who returned without finding any foe.

(By this time, as a matter of fact, the Spaniards were in full retreat.) Meanwhile I was extending
my line so as to get into touch with our people on the right.

Word was brought to me that Wood had been shot--which fortunately proved not to be true--and as,
if this were so, it meant that I must take charge of the regiment,
I moved over personally to inquire.

Soon I learned that he was all right, that the Spaniards had retreated along the main road, and that
Colonel Wood and two or three other officers were a short distance
away.

Before I reached them I encountered a captain of the Ninth Cavalry, very glum because his troopers
had not been up in time to take part in the fight, and he congratulated me--with visible effort!--upon
my share in our first victory. I thanked him cordially, not confiding in him that till that
moment I myself knew exceeding little about the victory; and proceeded
to where Generals Wheeler, Lawton, and Chaffee, who had just come
up, in company with Wood, were seated on a bank.

       They expressed appreciation of the way that I had handled my troops,
first on the right wing and then on the left!

As I was quite prepared to find I had committed some awful sin, I did my best to accept this in a
nonchalant manner, and not to look as relieved as I felt. As throughout the morning I had preserved
a specious aspect of wisdom, and had commanded first one and then the other wing, the fight was really
a capital thing for me, for practically all the men had served under my actual command, and thenceforth
felt an enthusiastic belief that I would lead them aright.

It was a week after this skirmish before the army made the advance on Santiago. Just before
this occurred General Young was stricken down with fever. General Wheeler, who had commanded
the Cavalry Division, was put in general charge of the left wing of the army, which fought before
the city itself. Brigadier-General Sam Sumner, an excellent officer, who had the second cavalry
brigade, took command of the cavalry division, and Wood took command of our brigade, while,
to my intense delight, I got my regiment. I therefore had command of the regiment before the
stiffest fighting occurred. Later, when Wood was put in command in Santiago, I became the brigade
commander.

Late in the evening we camped at El Poso. There were two regular officers, the brigade commander's
aides, Lieutenants A. L. Mills and W. E. Shipp, who were camped by our regiment. Each of my
men had food in his haversack, but I had none, and I would have gone supperless to bed if Mills
and Shipp had not given me out of their scanty stores a big sandwich, which I shared with my
orderly, who also had nothing. Next morning my body servant Marshall, an ex-soldier of the Ninth
(Colored) Cavalry, a fine and faithful fellow, had turned up and I was able in my turn to ask Mills
and Shipp, who had eaten all their food the preceding evening, to take breakfast with me. A few
hours later gallant Shipp was dead, and Mills, an exceptionally able officer, had been shot
through the head from side to side, just back of the eyes; yet he lived, although one eye was blinded,
and before I left the Presidency I gave him his commission as Brigadier-General.

Early in the morning our artillery began firing from the hill-crest immediately in front of where
our men were camped. Several of the regiment were killed and wounded
by the shrapnel of the return fire of the Spaniards.

One of the shrapnel bullets fell on my wrist and raised a bump as big as a hickory nut, but did
not even break the skin.

Then we were marched down from the hill on a muddy road through thick
jungle towards Santiago.

The heat was great, and we strolled into the fight with no definite idea on the part of any one as
to what we were to do or what would happen.

There was no plan that our left wing was to make a serious fight that day; and as there were
no plans, it was naturally exceedingly hard to get orders, and each
of us had to act largely on his own responsibility.

Lawton's infantry division attacked the little village of El Caney, some miles to the right.
Kent's infantry division and Sumner's dismounted cavalry division were supposed to detain the Spanish
army in Santiago until Lawton had captured El Caney. Spanish towns and villages, however, with
their massive buildings, are natural fortifications, as the French found in the Peninsular War,
and as both the French and our people found in Mexico.

The Spanish troops in El Caney fought very bravely, as did the Spanish troops in front of us,
and it was late in the afternoon before Lawton accomplished his task.

Meanwhile we of the left wing had by degrees become involved in a
fight which toward the end became not even a colonel's fight, but
a squad leader's fight.

The cavalry division was put at the head of the line.

We were told to march forward, cross a little river in front, and
then, turning to the right, march up alongside the stream until we
connected with Lawton.

Incidentally, this movement would not have brought us into touch with Lawton in any event.
But we speedily had to abandon any thought of carrying it out. The maneuver brought us within
fair range of the Spanish intrenchments along the line of hills which we called the San Juan
Hills, because on one of them was the San Juan blockhouse. On that day my regiment had the lead
of the second brigade, and we marched down the trail following in trace behind the first brigade.
Apparently the Spaniards could not make up their minds what to do as the three regular regiments
of the first brigade crossed and defiled along the other bank of the stream, but when our regiment
was crossing they began to fire at us.

Under this flank fire it soon became impossible to continue the march.

The first brigade halted, deployed, and finally began to fire back. Then our brigade was halted.
From time to time some of our men would fall, and I sent repeated
word to the rear to try to get authority to attack the hills in front.

Finally General Sumner, who was fighting the division in fine shape, sent word to advance.
The word was brought to me by Mills, who said that my orders were to support the regulars in
the assault on the hills, and that my objective would be the red-tiled ranch-house in front,
on a hill which we afterwards christened Kettle Hill. I mention Mills saying this because
it was exactly the kind of definite order the giving of which does so much to insure success
in a fight, as it prevents all obscurity as to what is to be done. The order to attack did
not reach the first brigade until after we ourselves reached it, so that at first there was
doubt on the part of their officers whether they were at liberty to join in the advance.

I had not enjoyed the Guasimas fight at all, because I had been so uncertain as to what I ought
to do. But the San Juan fight was entirely different. The Spaniards had a hard position to attack,
it is true, but we could see them, and I knew exactly how to proceed. I kept on horseback, merely
because I found it difficult to convey orders along the line, as the men were lying down; and it
is always hard to get men to start when they cannot see whether their comrades are also going.
So I rode up and down the lines, keeping them straightened out, and gradually worked through line
after line until I found myself at the head of the regiment. By the time I had reached the lines
of the regulars of the first brigade I had come to the conclusion that it was silly to stay in
the valley firing at the hills, because that was really where we were most exposed, and that the thing
to do was to try to rush the intrenchments.

Where I struck the regulars there was no one of superior rank to mine, and after asking why they
did not charge, and being answered that they had no orders, I said
I would give the order.

There was naturally a little reluctance shown by the elderly officer in command to accept my order,
so I said, "Then let my men through, sir," and I marched through, followed by my grinning men. The
younger officers and the enlisted men of the regulars jumped up and joined us. I waved my hat, and we
went up the hill with a rush. Having taken it, we looked across at the Spaniards in the trenches
under the San Juan blockhouse to our left, which Hawkins's brigade was assaulting. I ordered our men
to open fire on the Spaniards in the trenches.

Memory plays funny tricks in such a fight, where things happen quickly, and all kinds of mental
images succeed one another in a detached kind of way, while the work goes on. As I gave the
order in question there slipped through my mind Mahan's account of Nelson's orders that each ship
as it sailed forward, if it saw another ship engaged with an enemy's
ship, should rake the latter as it passed.

When Hawkins's soldiers captured the blockhouse, I, very much elated, ordered a charge on
my own hook to a line of hills still farther on. Hardly anybody heard this order, however;
only four men started with me, three of whom were shot. I gave one of them, who was only wounded,
my canteen of water, and ran back, much irritated that I had not been followed--which was quite unjustifiable,
because I found that nobody had heard my orders. General Sumner had come up by this time, and
I asked his permission to lead the charge. He ordered me to do so, and this time away we went,
and stormed the Spanish intrenchments. There was some close fighting, and we took a few prisoners.
We also captured the Spanish provisions, and ate them that night with great relish. One of
the items was salted flying-fish, by the way. There were also bottles of wine, and jugs of
fiery spirit, and as soon as possible I had these broken, although not before one or two of
my men had taken too much liquor. Lieutenant Howze, of the regulars, an aide of General Sumner's,
brought me an order to halt where I was; he could not make up his mind to return until he had
spent an hour or two with us under fire. The Spaniards attempted a counter-attack in the middle
of the afternoon, but were driven back without effort, our men laughing and cheering as they
rose to fire; because hitherto they had been assaulting breastworks, or lying still under artillery
fire, and they were glad to get a chance to shoot at the Spaniards in the open. We lay on
our arms that night and as we were drenched with sweat, and had no blankets save a few we took
from the dead Spaniards, we found even the tropic night chilly before morning came.

During the afternoon's fighting, while I was the highest officer at our immediate part of the
front, Captains Boughton and Morton of the regular cavalry, two as
fine officers as any man could wish to have beside him in battle,
came along the firing line to tell me that they had heard a rumor
that we might fall back, and that they wished to record their emphatic
protest against any such course.

       I did not believe there was any truth in the rumor, for the Spaniards
were utterly incapable of any effective counter-attack.

However, late in the evening, after the fight, General Wheeler visited
us at the front, and he told me to keep myself in readiness, as at
any moment it might be decided to fall back.

Jack Greenway was beside me when General Wheeler was speaking. I answered, "Well, General, I
really don't know whether we would obey an order to fall back. We can take that city by a rush,
and if we have to move out of here at all I should be inclined to make the rush in the right direction."
Greenway nodded an eager assent. The old General, after a moment's pause, expressed his hearty
agreement, and said that he would see that there was no falling back. He had been very sick
for a couple of days, but, sick as he was, he managed to get into
the fight.

He was a gamecock if ever there was one, but he was in very bad physical shape on the day of
the fight. If there had been any one in high command to supervise
and press the attack that afternoon, we would have gone right into
Santiago.

In my part of the line the advance was halted only because we received
orders not to move forward, but to stay on the crest of the captured
hill and hold it.

We are always told that three-o'clock-in-the-morning courage is the
most desirable kind.

Well, my men and the regulars of the cavalry had just that brand
of courage.

At about three o'clock on the morning after the first fight, shooting
began in our front and there was an alarm of a Spanish advance.

I was never more pleased than to see the way in which the hungry, tired, shabby men all jumped
up and ran forward to the hill-crest, so as to be ready for the attack;
which, however, did not come.

As soon as the sun rose the Spaniards again opened upon us with artillery.

A shell burst between Dave Goodrich and myself, blacking us with powder, and killing and wounding
several of the men immediately behind us.

Next day the fight turned into a siege; there were some stirring incidents;
but for the most part it was trench work.

A fortnight later Santiago surrendered.

Wood won his brigadier-generalship by the capital way in which he handled his brigade in the fight,
and in the following siege.

He was put in command of the captured city; and in a few days I succeeded
to the command of the brigade.

The health of the troops was not good, and speedily became very bad. There was some dysentery,
and a little yellow fever; but most of the trouble was from a severe
form of malarial fever.

The Washington authorities had behaved better than those in actual command of the expedition
at one crisis.

Immediately after the first day's fighting around Santiago the latter
had hinted by cable to Washington that they might like to withdraw,
and Washington had emphatically vetoed the proposal.

I record this all the more gladly because there were not too many
gleams of good sense shown in the home management of the war; although
I wish to repeat that the real blame for this rested primarily with
us ourselves, the people of the United States, who had for years pursued
in military matters a policy that rendered it certain that there would
be ineptitude and failure in high places if ever a crisis came.

After the siege the people in Washington showed no knowledge whatever of the conditions around Santiago,
and proposed to keep the army there.

This would have meant that at least three-fourths of the men would
either have died or have been permanently invalided, as a virulent
form of malaria was widespread, and there was a steady growth of dysentery
and other complaints.

No object of any kind was to be gained by keeping the army in or near the captured city. General
Shafter tried his best to get the Washington authorities to order
the army home.

As he failed to accomplish anything, he called a council of the division and brigade commanders
and the chief medical officers to consult over the situation.

Although I had command of a brigade, I was only a colonel, and so
I did not intend to attend, but the General informed me that I was
particularly wanted, and accordingly I went.

At the council General Shafter asked the medical authorities as to
conditions, and they united in informing him that they were very bad,
and were certain to grow much worse; and that in order to avoid frightful
ravages from disease, chiefly due to malaria, the army should be sent
back at once to some part of the northern United States.

The General then explained that he could not get the War Department to understand the situation;
that he could not get the attention of the public; and that he felt
that there should be some authoritative publication which would make
the War Department take action before it was too late to avert the
ruin of the army.

All who were in the room expressed their agreement.

Then the reason for my being present came out. It was explained to me by General Shafter, and
by others, that as I was a volunteer officer and intended immediately to return to civil life,
I could afford to take risks which the regular army men could not afford to take and ought not to
be expected to take, and that therefore I ought to make the publication in question; because
to incur the hostility of the War Department would not make any difference
to me, whereas it would be destructive to the men in the regular army,
or to those who hoped to get into the regular army.

I thought this true, and said I would write a letter or make a statement which could then be
published.

Brigadier-General Ames, who was in the same position that I was,
also announced that he would make a statement.

When I left the meeting it was understood that I was to make my statement as an interview in
the press; but Wood, who was by that time Brigadier-General commanding the city of Santiago,
gave me a quiet hint to put my statement in the form of a letter
to General Shafter, and this I accordingly did.

When I had written my letter, the correspondent of the Associated Press, who had been informed
by others of what had occurred, accompanied me to General Shafter.

I presented the letter to General Shafter, who waved it away and said: "I don't want to take
it; do whatever you wish with it." I, however, insisted on handing it to him, whereupon he
shoved it toward the correspondent of the Associated Press, who took hold of it, and I released
my hold. General Ames made a statement direct to the correspondent, and also sent a cable
to the Assistant Secretary of the Navy at Washington, a copy of which
he gave to the correspondent.

By this time the other division and brigade commanders who were present felt that they had better
take action themselves.

       They united in a round robin to General Shafter, which General Wood
dictated, and which was signed by Generals Kent, Gates, Chaffee, Sumner,
Ludlow, Ames, and Wood, and by myself.

General Wood handed this to General Shafter, and it was made public
by General Shafter precisely as mine was made public.[*] Later I was
much amused when General Shafter stated that he could not imagine
how my letter and the round robin got out!



'Ay! It's the heart.'

Twemlow and Leonora sat silent, embarrassed in the little parlour with its antimacassars, its
stiff chairs, its high mantelpiece, and the glass partition which seemed to swallow up like
a pit the rays from the hissing gas-jet over the table. The image of the diminutive frail creature
concealed upstairs obsessed them, and Leonora felt guilty because she had been unwittingly
absorbed in the gaiety of the opera while Aunt Hannah was in such danger.

'I doubt I munna' tap that again,' Meshach remarked with a short dry plaintive laugh, pointing
to the pewter platter on the mantelpiece by means of which he was accustomed to summon his
sister when he wanted her.

The visitors looked at each other; Leonora's eyes were moist.

'But isn't there anything I can do, uncle?' she demanded.

'I'll see if her's asleep. Sit thee still,' said Meshach, and he crept out of the room, and
up the creaking stair.

'Poor old fellow!' Twemlow murmured, glancing at his watch.

'What time is it?' she asked, for the sake of saying something. 'It's no use me staying.'

'Five to eleven. If I run off at once I can catch the last train. Good-night. Tell Mr. Myatt,
will you?'

She took his hand with a feeling of intimacy.

It seemed to her that they had shared many emotions that night.

'I'll let you out,' she suggested, and in the obscurity of the narrow lobby they came into
contact and shook hands again; she could not at first find the upper latch of the door.

'I shall be seeing you all soon,' he said in a low voice, on the step. She nodded and closed
the door softly.

She thought how simple, agreeable, reliable, honest, good-natured, and sympathetic he was.

'Her's sleeping like a babby,' Meshach stated, returning to the parlour. He lighted his pipe,
and through the smoke looked at Leonora in her dark magnificent dress.

Then John arrived, pompous and elaborately calm; but he had driven Prince to Hillport and back
in twenty-five minutes. John listened to the recital of events.

'You're sure there's no danger now?' He could disguise neither his present relief nor his fear
for the future.

'Thou'rt all right yet, nephew,' said Meshach with an ironic inflection, as he gazed into the
dying fire. 'Her may live another ten year. And I might flit to-morrow. Thou'rt too anxious,
my lad. Keep it down.'

John, deeply offended, made no reply.

'Why shouldn't I be anxious?' he exclaimed angrily as they drove home. 'Whose fault is it if
I am? Does he expect me not to be?'

CHAPTER VII

THE DEPARTURE

As I approach the crisis in Leonora's life, I hesitate, fearing lest by an unfit phrase I should
deprive her of your sympathies, and fearing also that this fear may incline me to set down
less than the truth about her.

She was possessed by a mysterious sensation of content. She wished to lie supine--except in
her domestic affairs--and to dream that all was well or would be well. It was as though she
had determined that nothing could extinguish or even disturb the mild flame of happiness which
burned placidly within her. And yet the anxieties of her existence were certainly increasing
again. On the morning after the opera, John had departed on one of his sudden flying visits
to London; these journeys, formerly frequent, had been in abeyance for a time, and their resumption
seemed to point to some renewal of his difficulties. He had called at Church Street on his
way to Knype, and Carpenter had brought back word that Miss Myatt was wonderfully better; but
when Leonora herself called at Church Street later in the morning and at last saw Aunt Hannah,
she was impressed by the change in the old creature, whose nervous system had the appearance
of being utterly disorganised. Then there was the difficult case of Ethel and Fred Ryley, in
which Leonora had done nothing whatever; and there was the case of Rose, whose alienation from
the rest of the household became daily more marked. Finally there was the new and portentous
case of Millicent, probably the most disconcerting of the three. Nevertheless, amid all these
solicitudes, Leonora remained equable, optimistic, and quietly joyous. Her state of mind, so
miraculously altered in a few hours, gave her no surprise. It seemed natural; everything seemed
natural; she ceased for a period to waste emotion in the futile desire for her lost youth.

On the second day after the opera she was sitting at her Sheraton desk in the small nondescript
room which opened off the dining-room. In front of her lay a large tablet with innumerable
names of things printed on it in three columns; opposite each name a little hole had been drilled,
and in many of the holes little sticks of wood stood upright. Leonora uprooted a stick, exiling
it to a long horizontal row of holes at the top of the tablet, and then wrote in a pocket-book;
she uprooted another stick and wrote again, so continuing till only a few sticks were left
in the columns; these she spared. Then she rang the bell for the parlourmaid and relinquished
to her the tablet; the peculiar rite was over.

'Is dinner ready?' she asked, looking at the small clock which she usually carried about with
her from room to room.

'Yes 'm.'

'Then ring the gong. And tell Carpenter I shall want the trap at a quarter past two, for two.
I'm going to shop in Hanbridge and then to meet Mr. Stanway at Knype. We shall be in before
four. Have some tea ready. And don't forget the eclairs to-day, Bessie.' She smiled.

'No 'm. Did you think on to write about them new dog-biscuits, ma'am?'

'I'll write now,' said Leonora, and she turned to the desk.

The gong sounded; the dinner was brought in. Through the doorway between the two rooms--there
was no door, only a portière--Leonora heard Ethel's rather heavy footsteps. 'I don't think
mother will want you to wait to-day, Bessie,' Ethel's voice said. Then followed, after the
maid's exit, the noise of a dish-cover being lifted and dropped, and Ethel's exclamation: 'Um!'
And then the voices of Rose and Millicent approached, in altercation.

'Come along, mother,' Ethel called out.

'Coming,' answered Leonora, putting the note in an envelope.

'The idea!' said Rose's voice scornfully.

'Yes,' retorted Milly's voice. 'The idea.'

Leonora listened as she wrote the address.

'You always were a conceited thing, Milly, and since this wonderful opera you're positively
ridiculous. I almost wish I'd gone to it now, just to see what you were like.'

'Ah well! You just didn't, and so you don't know.'

'No indeed! I'd got something better to do than watch a pack of amateurs----' There was a pause
for silent contempt.

'Well? Keep it up, keep it up.'

'Anyhow I'm perfectly certain father won't let you go.'

'I shall go.'

'And besides, I want to go to London, and you may be absolutely certain, my child, that he
won't let two of us go.'

'I shall speak to him first.'

'Oh no, you won't.'

'Shan't I? You'll see.'

'No, you won't. Because it just happens that I spoke to him the night before last. And he's
making inquiries and he'll tell me to-night. So what do you think of that?'

Leonora drew aside the portière.

'My dear girls!' she protested benevolently, standing there.

The feud, always apt thus to leap into a perfectly Corsican fury of bitterness, sank back at
once to its ordinary level of passive mutual repudiation. Rose and Millicent were not bereft
of the finer feelings which distinguish humanity from the beasts of the jungle; sometimes they
could be almost affectionate. There were, however, moments when to all appearance they hated
each other with a tigerish and crouching hatred such as may be found only between two opposing
feminine temperaments linked together by the family tie.

'What's this about your going to London, Rosie?' Leonora asked in a voice soothing but surprised,
when the meal had begun.

'You know, mamma. I mentioned it to you the other day.' The girl's tone implied that what she
had said to Leonora perhaps went in at one ear and out at the other.

Leonora remembered. Rose had in fact casually told her that a school friend in Oldcastle who
was studying for the same examination as herself had gone to London for six weeks' final coaching
under what Rose called a 'lady-crammer.'

'But you didn't tell me that you wanted to go as well,' Leonora said.

'Yes, mother, I did,' Rose affirmed with calm. 'You forget. I'm sure I shan't pass if I don't
go. So I asked father while you were all at this opera affair.'

'And what did he say?' Ethel demanded.

'He said he would make inquiries this morning and see.'

Ethel gave a laugh of good-natured derision. 'Yes,' she exclaimed, 'and you'll see, too!'

In response to this oracular utterance, Rose merely bent lower over her plate.

Millicent, conscious of a brilliant vocation and of an impassioned resolve, refrained from
the discussion, and the sense of her ineffable superiority bore hard on that lithe, mercurial
youthfulness. The 'Signal,' in praising Millicent's performance at the opera, had predicted
for her a career, and had thoughtfully quoted instances of well-born amateurs who had become
professionals and made great names on the stage. Millicent knew that all Bursley was talking
about her. And yet the family life was unaltered; no one at home seemed to be much impressed,
not even Ethel, though Ethel's sympathy could be depended upon; Milly was still Milly, the
youngest, the least important, the chit of a thing. At times it appeared to her as though the
triumph of that ecstatic and glorious night was after all nothing but an illusion, and that
only the interminable dailiness of family life was real. Then the ruthless and calculating
minx in her shut tight those pretty lips and coldly determined that nothing should stand against
ambition.

'I do hope you will pass,' said Leonora cordially to Rose. 'You certainly deserve to.'

'I know I shan't, unless I get some outside help. My brain isn't that sort of brain. It's another
sort. Only one has to knuckle down to these wretched exams first.'

Leonora did not understand her daughter. She knew, however, that there was not the slightest
chance of Rose being allowed to go to London alone for any lengthened period, and she wondered
that Rose could be so blind as not to perceive this. As for Millicent's vague notions, which
the child had furtively broached during her father's absence, the more Leonora thought upon
them, the more fantastically impossible they seemed. She changed the subject.

The repast, which had commenced with due ceremony, degenerated into a feminine mess, hasty,
informal, counterfeit. That elaborate and irksome pretence that a man is present, with which
women when they are alone always begin to eat, was gradually dropped, and the meal ended abruptly,
inconclusively, like a bad play.

'Let's go for a walk,' said Ethel.

'Yes,' said Milly, 'let's.'

       *       *       *       *       *

'Mamma!' Milly called from the drawing-room window.

Leonora was walking about the misty garden, where little now remained that was green, save
the yews, the cypresses, and the rhododendrons; Bran, his white-and-fawn coat glittering with
minute drops of water, plodded heavily and content by her side along the narrow damp paths.
She was dressed for driving, and awaited Carpenter with the trap.

In reply to Leonora's gesture of attention, Milly, instead of speaking from the window, ran
quickly to her across the sodden lawn. And Milly's running was so girlish, simple, and unaffected,
that Leonora seemed by means of it to have found her daughter again, the daughter who had disappeared
in the adroit and impudent creature of the footlights. She was glad of the reassurance.

'Here's Mr. Twemlow, mamma,' said Milly, with a rather embarrassed air; and they looked at
each other, while Bran frowned in glancing upwards.

At the same moment, Arthur Twemlow and Ethel entered the garden together. The social atmosphere
was rendered bracing by this invasion of the masculine; every personality awoke and became
vigilantly itself.

'We met Mr. Twemlow on the marsh, mother, walking from Oldcastle to Bursley,' said Ethel, after
the ritual of greeting, 'and so we brought him in.'

As Leonora was on the point of leaving the house, the situation was somewhat awkward, and a
slight hesitation on her part showed this.

'You're going out?' he said.

'Oh, mamma,' Milly cried quickly, 'do let me go and meet father instead of you. I want to.'

'What, alone?' Leonora exclaimed in a kind of dream.

'I'll go too,' said Ethel.

'And suppose you have the horse down?'

'Well then, we'll take Carpenter,' Milly suggested. 'I'll run and tell him to put his overcoat
on and put the back-seat in.' And she scampered off.

Twemlow was fondling the dog with an air of detachment.

In the fraction of an instant, a thousand wild and disturbing thoughts swept through Leonora's
brain. Was it possible that Arthur Twemlow had suggested this change of plan to the girls?
Or had the girls already noticed with the keen eyes of youth that she and Arthur Twemlow enjoyed
each other's society, and naïvely wished to give her pleasure? Would Arthur Twemlow, but for
the accidental encounter on the Marsh, have passed by her home without calling? If she remained,
what conclusion could not be drawn? If she persisted in going, might not he want to come with
her? She was ashamed of the preposterous inward turmoil.

'And my shopping?' she smiled, blushing.

'Give me the list, mater,' said Ethel, and took the morocco book out of her hand.

Never before had Leonora felt so helpless in the sudden clutch of fate. She knew she was a
willing prey. She wished to remain, and politeness to Arthur Twemlow demanded that this wish
should not be disguised. Yet what would she not have given even to have felt herself able to
disguise it?

'How incredibly stupid I am!' she thought.

No sooner had the two girls departed than Twemlow began to laugh.

'I must tell you,' he said, with candid amusement, 'that this is a plant. Those two daughters
of yours calculated to leave you and me here alone together.'

'Yes?' she murmured, still constrained.

'Miss Milly wants me to talk you round about her going in for the stage. When I met them on
the Marsh, of course I began to pay her compliments, and I just happened to say I thought she
was a born comédienne, and before I knew it T was blindfolded, handcuffed, and carried off,
so to speak.'

This was the simple, innocent explanation! 'Oh, how incredibly stupid, stupid, stupid, I was!'
she thought again, and a feeling of exquisite relief surged into her being. Mingled with that
relief was the deep joy of realising that Ethel and Milly fully shared her instinctive predilection
for Arthur Twemlow. Here indeed was the supreme security.

'I must say my daughters get more and more surprising every day,' she remarked, impelled to
offer some sort of conventional apology for her children's unconventional behaviour.

'They are charming girls,' he said briefly.

On the surface of her profound relief and joy there played like a flying fish the thought:
'Was he meaning to call in any case? Was he on his way here?'

They talked about Aunt Hannah, whom Twemlow had seen that morning and who was improving rapidly.
But he agreed with Leonora that the old lady's vitality had been irretrievably shattered. Then
there was a pause, followed by some remarks on the weather, and then another pause. Bran, after
watching them attentively for a few moments as they stood side by side near the French window,
rose up from off his haunches, and walked gloomily away.

'Bran, Bran!' Twemlow cried.

'It's no use,' she laughed. 'He's vexed. He thinks he's being neglected. He'll go to his kennel
and nothing will bring him out of it, except food. Come into the house. It's going to rain again.'

       *       *       *       *       *

'Well,' the visitor exclaimed familiarly.

They were seated by the fire in the drawing-room. Leonora was removing her gloves.

'Well?' she repeated. 'And so you still think Milly ought to be allowed to go on the stage?'

'I think she will go on the stage,' he said.

'You can't imagine how it upsets me even to think of it.' Leonora seemed to appeal for his
sympathy.

'Oh, yes, I can,' he replied. 'Didn't I tell you the other night that I knew exactly how you
felt? But you've got to get over that, I guess. You've got to get on to yourself. Mr. Myatt
told me what he said to you----'

'So Uncle Meshach has been talking about it too?' she interrupted.

'Why, yes, certainly. Of course he's quite right. Milly's bound to go her own way. Why not
make up your mind to it, and help her, and straighten things out for her?'

'But----'

'Look here, Mrs. Stanway,' he leaned forward; 'will you tell me just why it upsets you to think
of your daughter going on the stage?'

'I don't know. I can't explain. But it does.'

She smiled at him, smoothing out her gloves one after the other on her lap.

'It's nothing but superstition, you know,' he said gently, returning her smile.

'Yes,' she admitted. 'I suppose it is.'

He was silent for a moment, as if undecided what to say next. She glanced at him surreptitiously,
and took in all the details of his attire--the high white collar, the dark tweed suit obviously
of American origin, the thin silver chain that emerged from beneath his waistcoat and disappeared
on a curve into the hip pocket of his trousers, the boots with their long pointed toes. His
heavy moustache, and the smooth bluish chin, struck her as ideally masculine.

'No parents,' he burst out, 'no parents can see things from their children's point of view.'

'Oh!' she protested. 'There are times when I feel so like my daughters that I am them.'

He nodded. 'Yes,' he said, abandoning his position at once, 'I can believe that. You're an
exception. If I hadn't sort of known all the time that you were, I wouldn't be here now talking
like this.'

'It's so accidental, the whole business,' she remarked, branching off to another aspect of
the case in order to mask the confusion caused by the sincere flattery in his voice. 'It was
only by chance that Milly had that particular part at all. Suppose she hadn't had it. What then?'

'Everything's accidental,' he replied. 'Everything that ever happened is accidental, in a way--in
another it isn't. If you look at your own life, for instance, you'll find it's been simply
a series of coincidences. I'm sure mine has been. Sheer chance from beginning to end.'

'Yes,' she said thoughtfully, and put her chin in the palm of her left hand.

'And as for the stage, why, nearly every one goes on the stage by chance. It just occurs, that's
all. And moreover I guarantee that the parents of fifty per cent. of all the actresses now
on the boards began by thinking what a terrible blow it was to them that their daughters should
want to do that. Can't you see what I mean?' He emphasised his words more and more. 'I'm certain
you can.'

She signified assent. It seemed to her, as he continued to talk, that for the first time she
was listening to natural convincing common sense in that home of hers, where existence was
governed by precedent and by conventional ideas and by the profound parental instinct which
meets all requests with a refusal. It seemed to her that her children, though to outward semblance
they had much freedom, had never listened to anything but 'No,' 'No, dear,' 'Of course you
can't,' 'I think you had better not,' and 'Once for all, I forbid it.' She wondered why this
should have been so, and why its strangeness had not impressed her before. She had a distant
fleeting vision of a household in which parents and children behaved like free and sensible
human beings, instead of like the virtuous and the martyrised puppets of a terrible system
called 'acting for the best.' And she thought again what an extraordinary man Arthur Twemlow
was, strong-minded, clear-headed, sympathetic, and delightful. She enjoyed intensely the sensation
of their intimacy.

'Jack will never agree,' she said, when she could say nothing else.

'Ah! "Jack!"' He slightly imitated her tone. 'Well, that remains to be seen.'

'Why do you take all this trouble for Milly?' she asked him. 'It's very good of you.'

'Because I'm a fool, a meddling ass,' he replied lightly, standing up and stroking his clothes.

'You aren't,' her eyes said, 'you are a dear.'

'No,' he went on, in a serious tone, 'Milly just wanted me to speak to you, and after all I
didn't see why I shouldn't. It's no earthly business of mine, but--oh, well! Good-bye, I must
be getting along.'

'Have you got an appointment to keep?' she questioned him.

'No--not an appointment.'

'Well then, you will stay a little longer. The trap will be back quite soon.' Her voice seemed
playfully to indicate that, as she had submitted to his domination, so he must submit now to
hers. 'And if you will excuse me one moment, I will go and take off this thick jacket.'

Up in the bedroom, as she removed her coat in front of the pier-glass, she smiled at her image
timorously, yet in full content. Milly's prospects did not appear to her to have been practically
improved, nor could she piece out of Arthur Twemlow's conversation a definite argument; nevertheless
she felt that he had made her see something more clearly than heretofore, that he had induced
in her, not by logic but by persuasiveness, a mood towards her children which was brighter,
more sanguine, and even more loving, than any in her previous experience. She was glad that
she had left him alone for a minute, because such familiar treatment of him somehow established
definitely his status as a friend of the house.

'Listen, Twemlow,' said Stanway loudly, 'I meant to run down to the office for an hour this
afternoon, but if you'll stay, I'll stay. That's a bargain, eh?'

       *       *       *       *       *

John had returned from London blusterously cheerful, and Twemlow stood in the centre of his
vehement noisy hospitality as in the centre of a typhoon. He consented to stay, because the
two girls, with hair blown and still in their wet macintoshes, took him by the arm and said
he must. He was not the first guest in that house whom the apparent heartiness of the host
had failed to convince. Always there was something sinister, insincere, and bullying in the
invitations which John gave, and in his reception of visitors. Hence it was, perhaps, that
visitors did not abound under his roof, despite the richness of the table and the ordered elegance
of every appointment. Women paid calls; the girls, unlike Leonora, had their intimates, including
Harry; but men seldom came; and it was not often that the principal meals of the day were shared
by an outsider of either sex.

Arthur's presence on a second occasion was therefore the more stimulating. It affected the
whole house, even to the kitchen, which, indeed, usually vibrates in sympathy with the drawing-room.
In Bessie's vivacious demeanour as she served the high-tea at six o'clock might be observed
the symptoms of the agreeable excitation which all felt. Even Rose unbent, and Leonora thought
how attractive the girl could be when she chose. But towards the end of the meal, it became
evident that Rose was preoccupied. Leonora, Ethel, and Millicent passed into the drawing-room.
John pulled out his immense cigar-case, and the two men began to smoke.

'Come along,' said Stanway, speaking thickly with the cigar in his mouth.

'Papa,' said Rose ominously, just as he was following Twemlow out of the door. She spoke with
quiet, cold distinctness.

'What is it?'

'Did you inquire about that?'

He paused. 'Oh yes, Rose,' he answered rapidly.' I inquired. She seemed a very clever woman,
I must say. But I've been thinking it over, and I've come to the conclusion that it won't do
for you to go. I don't like the idea of it--you in London for six weeks or more alone. You
must do what you can here. And if you fail this time you must try again.'

'But I can stay in the same lodgings as Sarah Fuge. The house is kept by her cousin or some
relation.'

'And then there's the expense,' he proceeded.

'Father, I told you the other night I didn't want to put you to any expense. I've got thirty-seven
pounds of my own, and I will pay; I prefer to pay.'

'Oh, no, no!' he exclaimed.

'Well, why can't I go?' she demanded bluntly.

'I'll think it over again--but I don't like it, Rose, I don't like it.'

'But there isn't a day to waste, father!' she complained.

Bessie entered to clear the table.

'Hum! Well! I'll think it over again.' He breathed out smoke, and departed. Rose set her lips
hard. She was seen no more that evening.

In the drawing-room, Stanway found Twemlow and Millicent talking in low voices on the hearthrug.
Ethel lounged on the sofa. Leonora was not present, but she came in immediately.

'Let's have a game at solo,' John suggested. And because five was a convenient number they
all played. Twemlow and Milly were the best performers; Milly's gift for card-playing was notorious
in the family.

'Do you ever play poker?' Twemlow asked, when the other three had been beggared of counters.

'No,' said John, cautiously. 'Not here.'

'It's lots of fun,' Twemlow went on, looking at the girls.

'Oh, Mr. Twemlow,' Milly cried. 'It's awfully gambly, isn't it? Do teach us.'

In a quarter of an hour Milly was bluffing her father with success. She said that in future
she should never want to play at any other game. As for Leonora, though she lost and gained
counters with happy equanimity, she did not like the game; it frightened her. When Milly had
shown a straight flush and scooped the kitty she sent the child out of the room with a message
to the kitchen concerning coffee and sandwiches.

'Won't Milly sing?' Twemlow asked.

'Certainly, if you wish,' Leonora responded.

'Ay! Let's have something,' said Stanway, lazily.

And when Millicent returned, she was told that she must sing before eating. She sang 'Love
is a Plaintive Song,' to Ethel's inert accompaniment, and she gave it exactly as though she
had been on the stage, with all the dramatic action, all the freedom, all the allurements,
which she had lavished on the audience in the Town Hall.

'Very good,' said her father. 'I like that. It's very pretty. I didn't hear it the other night.'
Twemlow merely thanked the artist. Leonora was silently uncomfortable.

After coffee both the girls disappeared. Twemlow looked round, and then spoke to Stanway.

'I've been very much impressed by your daughter's talent,' he said. His tone was extremely
serious. It implied that, now the children were gone, the adults could talk with freedom.

Stanway was a little startled, and more than a little flattered.

'Really?' he questioned.

'Really,' said Twemlow, emphasising still further his seriousness. 'Has she ever been taught?'

'Only by a local teacher up here at Hillport,' Leonora told him.

'She ought to have lessons from a first-class master.'

'Why?' asked Stanway abruptly.

'Well,' Twemlow said, 'you never know----'

'You honestly think her voice is worth cultivating?' John demanded, impelled to participate
in Twemlow's gravity.

'I do. And not only her voice----'

'Ah,' Stanway mused, 'there's no first-class masters in this district.'

'Why, I met a man from Manchester at the Five Towns Hotel last night,' said Twemlow, 'who comes
down to Knype once a week to give lessons. He used to sing in opera. They say he's the best
man about, and that he's taught a lot of good people. I forget his name.'

'I expect you mean Cecil Corfe,' Leonora said cheerfully. She had been amazed at the compliance
of John's attitude.

'Yes, that's it.'

At the same moment there was a faint noise at the French window. John went to investigate.
As soon as his back was turned, Twemlow glanced at Leonora with eyes full of a private amusement
which he invited her to share. 'Can't I just handle him?' he seemed to say. She smiled, but
cautiously, less she should disclose too fully her intense appreciation of his personality.

'Why, it's the dog!' Stanway proclaimed, 'and wet through! What's he doing loose? It's raining
like the devil.'

'I'm afraid I didn't fasten him up this afternoon. I forgot,' said Leonora. 'Oh! my new rug!'

Bran plunged into the room with a glad deafening bark, his tail thwacking the furniture like
the flat of a sword.

'Get out, you great brute!' Stanway ordered, and then, on the step, he shouted into the darkness
for Carpenter.

Twemlow rose to look on.

'I can't let you walk to the station to-night, Twemlow,' said Stanway, still outside the room.
'Carpenter shall drive you. Yes, he shall, so don't argue. And while he's about it he may as
well take you straight to Knype. You can go in the buggy--there's a hood to it.'

When the time came for departure, John insisted on lending to Twemlow a large driving overcoat.
They stood in the hall together, while Twemlow fumbled with the complicated apparatus of buttons.
Stanway whistled.

'By the way,' he said, 'when are you coming in to look through those old accounts?'

'Oh, I don't know,' Twemlow answered, somewhat taken by surprise.

'I tell you what I'll do--I'll send you copies of them, eh?'

'I think you needn't trouble,' said Twemlow, carelessly. 'I guess I shall write to my sister,
and tell her I can't see any use in trying to worry out the old man's finances at this time
of day.'

'However,' Stan way repeated, 'I'll send you the copies all the same. And when you write to
your sister, will you give her my kindest regards?'

The whole family, except Rose, came into the porch to bid him good-night. In the darkness and
the heavy rain could dimly be seen the rounded form of the buggy; the cob's flanks shone in
the glittering ray of the lamps; Carpenter was hidden under the hood; his mysterious hand raised
the apron, and Twemlow stepped quickly in.

'Good-night,' said Ethel.

'Good-night, Mr. Twemlow,' said Milly. 'Be good.'

'You'll see us again before you leave, Twemlow?' said John's imperious voice.

'You aren't going back to America just yet, are you?' Leonora asked, from the back.

No reply came from within the hood.

'Mother says you aren't going back to America just yet, are you, Mr. Twemlow?' Milly screamed
in her treble.

Arthur Twemlow showed his face. 'No, not yet, I think,' he called. 'See you again, certainly....
And thanks once more.'

'Tchick!' said Carpenter.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next evening, after tea, John, Leonora, and Rose were in the drawing-room. Milly had run
down to see her friend Cissie Burgess, having with fine cruelty chosen that particular night
because she happened to know that Harry would be out. Ethel was invisible. Rose had returned
with bitter persistence to the siege of her father's obstinacy. 

Marshall thought the following day would suit him better, but I was
very pressing.

He offered to meet me at my hotel; or would I come with him to his
rooms, and he would show me some pictures--some trifles he had brought
up from the country?

Nothing would please me better. We got into a cab.

Then every moment revealed new qualities, new superiorities, in my
new-found friend.

Not only was he tall, strong, handsome, and beautifully dressed,
infinitely better dressed than I, but he could talk French like a
native.

It was only natural that he should, for he was born and had lived
in Brussels all his life, but the accident of birth rather stimulated
than calmed my erubescent admiration.

He spoke of, and he was clearly on familiar terms with, the fashionable
restaurants and actresses; he stopped at a hairdresser's to have his
hair curled.

All this was very exciting, and a little bewildering.

I was on the tiptoe of expectation to see his apartments; and, not
to be utterly outdone, I alluded to my valet.

His apartments were not so grand as I expected; but when he explained
that he had just spent ten thousand pounds in two years, and was now
living on six or seven hundred francs a month, which his mother would
allow him until he had painted and had sold a certain series of pictures,
which he contemplated beginning at once, my admiration increased to
wonder, and I examined with awe the great fireplace which had been
constructed at his orders, and admired the iron pot which hung by
a chain above an artificial bivouac fire.

This detail will suggest the rest of the studio--the Turkey carpet,
the brass harem lamps, the Japanese screen, the pieces of drapery,
the oak chairs covered with red Utrecht velvet, the oak wardrobe that
had been picked up somewhere,--a ridiculous bargain, and the inevitable
bed with spiral columns.

There were vases filled with foreign grasses, and palms stood in
the corners of the rooms.

Marshall pulled out a few pictures; but he paid very little heed to my compliments; and, sitting
down at the piano, with a great deal of splashing and dashing about
the keys, he rattled off a waltz.

"What waltz is that?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing; something I composed the other evening.

I had a fit of the blues, and didn't go out. What do you think of
it?"

"I think it beautiful; did you really compose that the other evening?"

At this moment a knock was heard at the door, and a beautiful English girl entered. Marshall
introduced me.

With looks that see nothing, and words that mean nothing, an amorous woman receives the man
she finds with her sweetheart. But it subsequently transpired that Alice had an appointment,
that she was dining out.

She would, however, call in the morning, and give him a sitting for
the portrait he was painting of her.

I had hitherto worked very regularly and attentively at the studio,
but now Marshall's society was an attraction I could not resist.

For the sake of his talent, which I religiously believed in, I regretted he was so idle; but his
dissipation was winning, and his delight was thorough, and his gay,
dashing manner made me feel happy, and his experience opened to me
new avenues for enjoyment and knowledge of life.

On my arrival in Paris I had visited, in the company of my taciturn
valet, the Mabille and the Valentino, and I had dined at the Maison
d'Or by myself; but now I was taken to strange students' cafés, where
dinners were paid for in pictures; to a mysterious place, where a
table d'hôte was held under a tent in a back garden; and afterwards
we went in great crowds to Bullier, the Château Rouge, or the Élysée
Montmartre.

The clangour of the band, the unreal greenness of the foliage, the
thronging of the dancers, and the chattering of women, whose Christian
names we only knew.

And then the returning in open carriages rolling through the white dust beneath the immense heavy
dome of the summer night, when the dusty darkness of the street is
chequered by a passing glimpse of light skirt or flying feather, and
the moon looms like a magic lantern out of the sky.

Now we seemed to live in fiacres and restaurants, and the afternoons were filled with febrile
impressions.

Marshall had a friend in this street, and another in that.

       It was only necessary for him to cry "Stop" to the coachman, and
to run up two or three flights of stairs....

"Madame--, est-elle
chez elle?"

"Oui, Monsieur; si Monsieur veut se donner la peine d'entrer." And we were shown into a handsomely furnished
apartment. A lady would enter hurriedly, and an animated discussion was begun. I did not know French
sufficiently well to follow the conversation, but I remember it always commenced mon cher ami,
and was plentifully sprinkled with the phrase vous avez tort. The ladies themselves had only just
returned from Constantinople or Japan, and they were generally involved in mysterious lawsuits,
or were busily engaged in prosecuting claims for several millions of francs against different
foreign governments.

And just as I had watched the chorus girls and mummers, three years
ago, at the Globe Theatre, now, excited by a nervous curiosity, I
watched this world of Parisian adventurers and lights o' love.

And this craving for observation of manners, this instinct for the rapid notation of gestures
and words that epitomise a state of feeling, of attitudes that mirror
forth the soul, declared itself a main passion; and it grew and strengthened,
to the detriment of the other Art still so dear to me.

With the patience of a cat before a mouse-hole, I watched and listened,
picking one characteristic phrase out of hours of vain chatter, interested
and amused by an angry or loving glance.

Like the midges that fret the surface of a shadowy stream, these
men and women seemed to me; and though I laughed, danced, and made
merry with them, I was not of them.

But with Marshall it was different: they were my amusement, they
were his necessary pleasure.

And I knew of this distinction that made twain our lives; and I reflected
deeply upon it.

Why could I not live without an ever-present and acute consciousness
of life?

Why could I not love, forgetful of the harsh ticking of the clock in the perfumed silence
of the chamber?

And so my friend became to me a study, a subject for dissection. The general attitude of his mind
and its various turns, all the apparent contradictions, and how they
could be explained, classified, and reduced to one primary law, were
to me a constant source of thought.

Our confidences knew no reserve.

I say our confidences, because to obtain confidences it is often necessary to confide. All
we saw, heard, read, or felt was the subject of mutual confidences:
the transitory emotion that a flush of colour and a bit of perspective
awakens, the blue tints that the sunsetting lends to a white dress,
or the eternal verities, death and love.

But, although I tested every fibre of thought and analysed every
motive, I was very sincere in my friendship, and very loyal in my
admiration.

Nor did my admiration wane when I discovered that Marshall was shallow
in his appreciations, superficial in his judgments, that his talents
did not pierce below the surface; il avait se grand air; there was
fascination in his very bearing, in his large, soft, colourful eyes,
and a go and dash in his dissipations that carried you away.

To any one observing us at this time it would have seemed that I was
but a hanger-on, and a feeble imitator of Marshall.

I took him to my tailor's, and he advised me on the cut of my coats;
he showed me how to arrange my rooms, and I strove to copy his manner
of speech and his general bearing; and yet I knew very well indeed
that mine was a rarer and more original nature.

I was willing to learn, that was all.

There was much that Marshall could teach me, and I used him without shame, without stint. I
used him as I have used all those with whom I have been brought into
close contact.

Search my memory as I will, I cannot recall a case of man or woman
who ever occupied any considerable part of my thoughts and did not
contribute largely towards my moral or physical welfare.

In other words, and in very colloquial language, I never had useless friends hanging about me.
From this crude statement of a signal fact, the thoughtless reader
will at once judge me rapacious, egotistical, false, fawning, mendacious.

Well, I may be all this and more, but not because all who have known me have rendered me eminent
services. I can say that no one ever formed relationships in life
with less design than myself.

Never have I given a thought to the advantage that might accrue from
being on terms of friendship with this man and avoiding that one.

"Then how do you explain," cries the angry reader, "that you have never had a friend whom you
did not make a profit out of? You must have had very few friends."

On the contrary, I have had many friends, and of all sorts and kinds--men and women: and, I repeat, none
took part in my life who did not contribute something towards my
well-being.

It must, of course, be understood that I make no distinction between
mental and material help; and in my case the one has ever been adjuvant
to the other.

"Pooh, pooh!" again exclaims the reader; "I for one will not believe that chance has only sent across
your way the people who were required to assist you." Chance! dear
reader, is there such a thing as chance?

Do you believe in chance?

Do you attach any precise meaning to the word?

Do you employ it at haphazard, allowing it to mean what it may? Chance! What a field for psychical
investigation is at once opened up; how we may tear to shreds our past lives in search of--what?
Of the Chance that made us. I think, reader, I can throw some light on the general question,
by replying to your taunt: Chance, or the conditions of life under which we live, sent, of
course, thousands of creatures across my way who were powerless to
benefit me; but then an instinct of which I knew nothing, of which
I was not even conscious, withdrew me from them, and I was attracted
to others.

Have you not seen a horse suddenly leave a corner of a field to seek pasturage further away?

Never
could I interest myself in a book if it were not the exact diet my
mind required at the time, or in the very immediate future.

The mind asked, received, and digested. So much was assimilated, so much expelled; then, after
a season, similar demands were made, the same processes were repeated
out of sight, below consciousness, as is the case in a well-ordered
stomach.

Shelley, who fired my youth with passion, and purified and upbore it for so long, is now to me as
nothing: not a dead or faded thing, but a thing out of which I personally have drawn all the sustenance
I may draw from him; and, therefore, it (that part which I did not
absorb) concerns me no more.

And the same with Gautier.

Mdlle. de Maupin, that godhead of flowing line, that desire not "of
the moth for the star," but for such perfection of hanging arm and
leaned thigh as leaves passion breathless and fain of tears, is now,
if I take up the book and read, weary and ragged as a spider's web,
that has hung the winter through in the dusty, forgotten corner of
a forgotten room.

My old rapture and my youth's delight I can regain only when I think of that part of Gautier
which is now incarnate in me.

As I picked up books, so I picked up my friends. I read friends and books with the same passion,
with the same avidity; and as I discarded my books when I had assimilated as much of them as
my system required, so I discarded my friends when they ceased to be of use to me. I use the
word "use" in its fullest, not in its limited and twenty-shilling sense. This reduction of
the intellect to the blind unconsciousness of the lower organs will strike some as a violation
of man's best beliefs, and as saying very little for the particular intellect that can be so
reduced. But I am not sure these people are right. I am inclined to think that as you ascend
the scale of thought to the great minds, these unaccountable impulses, mysterious resolutions, sudden,
but certain knowings, falling whence, or how it is impossible to say, but falling somehow into
the brain, instead of growing rarer, become more and more frequent; indeed, I think that if the really
great man were to confess to the working of his mind, we should see him constantly besieged
by inspirations ... inspirations! Ah! how human thought only turns in a circle, and how, when we
think we are on the verge of a new thought, we slip into the enunciation of some time-worn truth.
But I say again, let general principles be waived; it will suffice for the interest of these
pages if it be understood that brain instincts have always been, and still are, the initial and
the determining powers of my being.

* * * * *

But the studio, where I had been working for the last three or four months so diligently, became
wearisome to me, and for two reasons. First, because it deprived me of many hours of Marshall's
company. Secondly--and the second reason was the graver--because I was beginning to regard the
delineation of a nymph, or youth bathing, etc., as a very narrow channel to carry off the
strong, full tide of a man's thought. For now thoughts of love and death, and the hopelessness
of life, were in active fermentation within me and sought for utterance with a strange unintermittingness
of appeal. I yearned merely to give direct expression to my pain. Life was then in its springtide;
every thought was new to me, and it would have seemed a pity to disguise even the simplest emotion
in any garment when it was so beautiful in its Eden-like nakedness. The creatures whom I met in
the ways and by ways of Parisian life, whose gestures and attitudes I devoured with my eyes,
and whose souls I hungered to know, awoke in me a tense irresponsible
curiosity, but that was all,--I despised, I hated them, thought them
contemptible, and to select them as subjects of artistic treatment,
could not then, might never, have occurred to me, had the suggestion
to do so not come direct to me from the outside.

At the time I am writing I lived in an old-fashioned hotel on the Boulevard, which an enterprising
Belgian had lately bought and was endeavouring to modernise; an old-fashioned hotel, that still
clung to its ancient character in the presence of half a dozen old people, who, for antediluvian
reasons, continue to dine on certain well-specified days at the table d'hôte. Fifteen years
have passed away, and these old people, no doubt, have joined their ancestors; but I can see
them still sitting in that salle à manger; the buffets en vieux chêne;
the opulent candelabra en style d'empire; the waiter lighting the
gas in the pale Parisian evening.

That white-haired man, that tall, thin, hatchet-faced American, has dined at this table d'hôte
for the last thirty years--he is talkative, vain, foolish, and authoritative. The clean, neatly-dressed
old gentleman who sits by him, looking so much like a French gentleman, has spent a great part
of his life in Spain. With that piece of news, and its subsequent developments, your acquaintance
with him begins and ends; the eyes, the fan, the mantilla, how it began, how it was broken off,
and how it began again. Opposite sits another French gentleman, with beard and bristly hair. He
spent twenty years of his life in India, and he talks of his son who has been out there for the
last ten, and who has just returned home.

There is the Italian comtesse of sixty summers, who dresses like a girl of sixteen and smokes
a cigar after dinner,--if there are not too many strangers in the room. She terms a stranger any
one whom she has not seen at least once before. The little fat, neckless man, with the great bald
head, fringed below the ears with hair, is M. Duval. He is a dramatic author--the author of
a hundred and sixty plays. He does not intrude himself on your notice, but when you speak to
him on literary matters he fixes a pair of tiny, sloe-like eyes on you, and talks affably of
his collaborateurs.

I was soon deeply interested in M. Duval, and I invited him to come to the café after dinner. I
paid for his coffee and liqueurs, I offered him a choice cigar. He did not smoke; I did. It was,
of course, inevitable that I should find out that he had not had a play produced for the last twenty
years, but then the aureole of the hundred and sixty was about his
poor bald head.

I thought of the chances of life, he alluded to the war; and so this unpleasantness was passed
over, and we entered on more genial subjects of conversation. He had written plays with everybody;
his list of collaborateurs was longer than any list of lady patronesses for an English county
ball; there was no literary kitchen in which he had not helped to dish up. I was at once amazed
and delighted. Had M. Duval written his hundred and sixty plays in the seclusion of his own
rooms, I should have been less surprised; it was the mystery of the séances of collaboration, the
rendezvous, the discussion, the illustrious company, that overwhelmed me in a rapture of wonder
and respectful admiration. Then came the anecdotes. They were of all sorts. Here are a few specimens:
He, Duval, had written a one-act piece with Dumas père; it had been refused at the Français,
and then it had been about, here, there, and everywhere; finally the Variétés had asked for some
alterations, and c'était une affaire entendue. "I made the alterations one afternoon, and wrote
to Dumas, and what do you think,--by return of post I had a letter
from him saying he could not consent to the production of a one-act
piece, signed by him, at the Variétés, because his son was then giving
a five-act piece at the Gymnase."

Then came a string of indecent witticisms by Suzanne Lagier and Dejazet. They were as old as
the world, but they were new to me, and I was amused and astonished. These bon-mots were followed
by an account of how Gautier wrote his Sunday feuilleton, and how
he and Balzac had once nearly come to blows.

       They had agreed to collaborate.

Balzac was to contribute the scenario, Gautier the dialogue. One morning Balzac came with the
scenario of the first act. "Here it is, Gautier! I suppose you can let me have it back finished
by to-morrow afternoon?" And the old gentleman would chirp along in this fashion till midnight.
I would then accompany him to his rooms in the Quartier Montmartre--rooms high up on the fifth floor--where,
between two pictures, supposed to be by Angelica Kaufmann, M. Duval had written unactable plays
for the last twenty years, and where he would continue to write unactable plays until God called
him to a world, perhaps, of eternal cantatas, but where, by all accounts, l'exposition de la
pièce selon la formule de M. Scribe is still unknown.

How I used to enjoy these conversations! I remember how I used to stand on the pavement after
having bid the old gentleman good-night, regretting I had not demanded some further explanation regarding
le mouvement Romantique, or la façon de M. Scribe de ménager la situation.

Why not write a comedy? So the thought came. I had never written anything save a few ill-spelt
letters; but no matter. To find a plot, that was the first thing to do. Take Marshall for hero
and Alice for heroine, surround them with the old gentlemen who dined at the table d'hôte,
flavour with the Italian countess who smoked cigars when there were not too many strangers
present. After three weeks of industrious stirring, the ingredients did begin to simmer into
something resembling a plot. Put it upon paper. Ah! there was my difficulty. I remembered suddenly
that I had read "Cain," "Manfred," "The Cenci," as poems, without ever thinking of how the dialogue
looked upon paper; besides, they were in blank verse. I hadn't a notion how prose dialogue
would look upon paper. Shakespeare I had never opened; no instinctive
want had urged me to read him.

He had remained, therefore, unread, unlooked at. Should I buy a copy?

No; the name repelled me--as all popular names repelled me. In preference I went to the Gymnase,
and listened attentively to a comedy by M. Dumas fils. But strain my imagination as I would,
I could not see the spoken words in their written form. Oh, for a look at the prompter's copy,
the corner of which I could see when I leaned forward!

At last I discovered in Galignani's library a copy of Leigh Hunt's
edition of the old dramatists, and after a month's study of Congreve
Wycherley, Vanbrugh, and Farquhar, I completed a comedy in three acts,
which I entitled "Worldliness."

It was, of course, very bad; but, if my memory serves me well, I
do not think it was nearly so bad as might be imagined.

No sooner was the last scene written than I started at once for London,
confident I should find no difficulty in getting my play produced.

CHAPTER III

Is it necessary to say that I did not find a manager to produce my
play?

A printer was more attainable, and the correction of proofs amused
me for a while.

I wrote another play; and when the hieing after theatrical managers began to lose its attractiveness
my thoughts reverted to France, which always haunted me; and which now possessed me as if with
the sweet and magnetic influence of home.


       *       *       *       *       *

The floor was thronged by entwined couples who, under the rhythmic domination of the music,
glided and revolved in the elaborate pattern of a mazurka. With their rapt gaze, and their
rigid bodies floating smoothly over a hidden mechanism of flying feet, they seemed to be the
victims of some enchantment, of which the music was only a mode, and which led them enthralled
through endless curves of infallible beauty and grace. Form, colour, movement, melody, and
the voluptuous galvanism of delicate contacts were all combined in this unique ritual of the
dance, this strange convention whose significance emerged from one mystery deeper than the
fundamental notes of the bass-fiddle, and lost itself in another more light than the sudden
flash of a shirt-front or the tremor of a lock of hair. The goddess reigned. And round about
the hall, the guardians of decorum, the enemies of Aphrodite, enchanted too, watched with the
simplicity of doves the great Aphrodisian festival, blind to the eternal verities of a satin
slipper, a drooping eyelash, a parted lip.

The music ceased, the spell was lifted for a time. And while old alliances were being dissolved
and new ones formed in the eager promiscuity of this interval, all remarked proudly on the
success of the evening; in the gleam of every eye the sway of the goddess was acknowledged.
Romance was justified. Life itself was justified. The shop-girl who had put ten thousand stitches
into the ruching of her crimson skirt well symbolised the human attitude that night. As leaning
heavily on a man's arm she crossed the floor under the blazing chandelier, she secretly exulted
in each stitch of her incredible labour. Two hours, and she would be back in the cold, celibate
bedroom, littered with the shabby realities of existence; and the spotted glass would mirror
her lugubrious yawn! Eight hours, and she would be in the dreadful shop, tying on the black
apron! The crimson skirt would never look the same again; such rare blossoms fade too soon!
And in exchange for the toil, the fatigue, and the distressing reaction, what had she won?
She could not have said what she had won, but she knew that it was worth the ruinous cost--this
bright fallacy, this fleeting chimera, this delusive ecstasy, this shadow and counterfeit of
bliss which the goddess vouchsafed to her communicants.

       *       *       *       *       *

So thick and confused was the crowd that Leonora and Arthur, having inserted themselves into
a corner near the west door, escaped the notice of any of their friends. They were as solitary
there as on the landing outside. But Leonora saw quite near, in another corner, Ethel talking
to Fred Ryley; she noticed how awkward Fred looked in his new dress-suit, and she liked him
for his awkwardness; it seemed to her that Ethel was very beautiful. Arthur pointed out Rose,
who was standing up with the lady member of the School Board. Then Leonora caught sight of
Millicent in the distance, handing her programme to the conductor of the opera; she recalled
the notorious boast of the conductor that he never knowingly danced with a bad dancer, whatever
her fascinations. Always when they met at a ball the conductor would ask Leonora for a couple
of waltzes, and would lead her out with an air of saying to the company: 'Now see what fine
dancing is!' Like herself, he danced with the frigidity of a professor. She wondered whether
Arthur could dance really well.

The placard by the orchestra said, 'Extra.'

'Shall we?' Arthur whispered.

He made a way for her through the outer fringe of people to the middle space where the couples
were forming. Her last thoughts as she gave him her hand were thoughts half-pitiful and half-scornful
of John, David Dain, and the doctor, brutishly content in the refreshment-room.

There stole out, troubling the expectant air, softly, alluringly, invocatively, the first warning
notes of that unique classic of the ball-room, that extraordinary composition which more than
any other work of art unites all western nations in a common delight, which is adored equally
by profound musicians and by the lightest cocottes, and which, unscathed and splendid, still
miraculously survives the deadly ordeal of eternal perfunctory reiterance: the masterpiece
of Johann Strauss.

'Why,' Leonora exclaimed, her excitement straining impatiently in the leash, 'The Blue Danube!'

He laughed, quietly gay.

While the chords, with tantalising pauses and deliberation, approached the magic moment of
the waltz itself, she was conscious that his hold of her became firmer and more assertive,
and she surrendered to an overmastering influence as one surrenders to chloroform, desperately,
but luxuriously.

And when at the invitation of the melody the whole company in the centre of the floor broke
into movement, and the spell was resumed, she lost all remembrance of that which had passed,
and all apprehension of that which was to come. She lived, passionately and yet languorously,
in the vivid present. Her eyes were level with his shoulder, and they looked with an entranced
gaze along his arm, seeing automatically the faces, the lights, and the colours which swam
in a rapid confused procession across their field of vision. She did not reason nor recognise.
These fleeting images, appearing and disappearing on the horizon of Arthur's elbow, produced
no effect on her. She had no thoughts. Her entire being was absorbed in a transport of obedience
to the beat of the music, and to Arthur's directing pressures. She was happy, but her bliss
had in it that element of stinging pain, of intolerable anticipation, which is seldom absent
from a felicity too intense. 'Surely I shall sink down and die!' said her heart, seeming to
faint at the joyous crises of the music, which rose and fell in tides of varying rapture. Nevertheless
she was determined to drink the cup slowly, to taste every drop of that sweet and excruciating
happiness. She would not utterly abandon herself. The fear of inanition was only a wayward
pretence, after all, and her strong nature cried out for further tests to prove its fortitude
and its power of dissimulation. As the band slipped into the final section of the waltz, she
wilfully dragged the time, deepening a little the curious superficial languor which concealed
her secrets, and at the same time increasing her consciousness of Arthur's control. She dreaded
now that what had been intolerable should cease; she wished ardently to avert the end. The
glare of lights, the separate sounds of the instruments, the slurring of feet on the smooth
floor, the lineaments of familiar faces, all the multitudinous and picturesque detail of gyrating
humanity around her--these phenomena forced themselves on her unwilling perception; and she
tried to push them back, and to spend every faculty in savouring the ecstasy of that one physical
presence which was so close, so enveloping, and so inexplicably dear. But in vain, in vain!
The band rioted through the last bars of the waltz, a strange, disconcerting silence and inertia
supervened, and Arthur loosed her.

       *       *       *       *       *

As she sat down on the cane chair which Arthur had found, Leonora's characteristic ease of
manner deserted her. She felt conspicuous and embarrassed, and she could neither maintain her
usual cold nonchalant glance in examining the room, nor look at Arthur in a natural way. She
had the illusion that every one must be staring at her with amazed curiosity. Yet her furtive
searching eye could not discover a single person except Arthur who seemed to notice her existence.
All were preoccupied that night with immediate neighbours.

'Will you come down into the refreshment-room?' Arthur asked. She observed with annoyance that
he too was confused, nervous, and still very pale.

She shook her head, without meeting his gaze. She wished above all things to behave simply
and sincerely, to speak in her ordinary voice, and to use familiar phrases. But she could not.
On the contrary she was seized with a strong impulse to say to him entreatingly: 'Leave me,'
as though she were a person on the stage. She thought of other phrases, such as 'Please go
away,' and 'Do you mind leaving me for a while?' but her tongue, somehow insisting on the melodramatic,
would not utter these.

'Leave me!' She was frightened by her own words, and added hastily, with the most seductive
smile that her lips had ever-framed: 'Do you mind?'

'I shall call to-morrow,' he said anxiously, almost gruffly. 'Shall you be in?'

She nodded, and he left her; she did not watch him depart.

'May I have the honour, gracious lady?'

It was the conductor of the opera who addressed her in his even, apparently sarcastic tones.

'I'm afraid I must rest a bit,' she said, smiling quite naturally. 'I've hurt my foot a little--Oh,
it's nothing, it's nothing. But I must sit still for a bit.'

She could not comprehend why, unintentionally and without design, she should have told this
stupid lie, and told it so persuasively. She foresaw how the tedious consequences of the fiction
might continue throughout the evening. For a moment she had the idea of announcing a sprained
ankle and of returning home at once. But the thought of old Dr. Hawley's presence in the building
deterred her. She perceived that her foot must get gradually better, and that she must be resigned.

'Oh, mamma!' cried Rose, coming up to her. 'Just fancy Mr. Twemlow being back again! But why
did you let him leave?'

'Has he gone?'

'Yes. He just saw me on the stairs, and told me he must catch the last car to Knype.'

'Our dance, I think, Miss Rose,' said a young man with a gardenia, and Rose, flushed and sparkling,
was carried off. The ball proceeded.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Stanway had a singular capacity for not enjoying himself on those social occasions when
to enjoy one's self is a duty to the company. But this evening, as the hour advanced, he showed
the symptoms of a sharp attack of gaiety such as visited him from time to time. He and Dr.
Hawley and Dain formed an ebullient centre of high spirits, and they upheld the ancient traditions;
they professed a liking for old-fashioned dances, and for old-fashioned ways of dancing the
steps which modern enthusiasm for the waltz had not extinguished. And they found an appreciable
number of followers. The organisers of the ball, the upholders of correctness, punctilio, and
the mode, fretted and fought against the antagonistic influence. 'Ass!' said the conductor
of the opera bitterly when Harry Burgess told him that Stanway had suggested Sir Roger de Coverley
for an extra, 'I wonder what his wife thinks of him!' Sir Roger de Coverley was not danced,
but twenty or thirty late stayers, with Stanway and Dain in charge, crossed hands in a circle
and sang 'Auld Lang Syne' at the close. It was one of those incredible things that can only
occur between midnight and cock-crow. During this revolting rite, the conductor and his friends
sought sanctuary in the refreshment-room. Leonora, Ethel, and Milly were also there, but Rose
and the lady-member of the School Board had remained upstairs to sing 'Auld Lang Syne.'

'Now, girls,' said Stanway with loud good humour, invading the select apartment with his followers,
'time to go. Carpenter's been waiting half-an-hour. Your foot all right again, Nora?'

'Quite,' she replied. 'Are you really ready?'

She had so interminably waited that she could not believe the evening to be at length actually
finished.

They all exchanged adieux, Stanway and his cronies effusively, the opposing and outraged faction
with a certain fine acrimony. 'Good-night, Fred,' said John, throwing a backward patronising
glance at Ryley, who had strolled uneasily into the room. The young man paused before replying.
'Good-night,' he said stiffly, and his demeanour indicated: 'Do not patronise me too much.'
Fred could not dance, but he had audaciously sat out four dances with Ethel, at this his first
ball, and the serious young man had the strange agreeable sensation of feeling a dog. He dared
not, however, accompany Ethel to the carriage, as Harry Burgess accompanied Millicent. Harry
had been partially restored to favour again during the latter half of the entertainment, just
in time to prevent him from getting tipsy. The fact was that Millicent had vaguely expected,
in view of her position as prima donna, to be 'the belle of the ball'; but there had been no
belle, and Millicent was put to the inconvenience of discovering that she could do nothing
without footlights.

'I asked Twemlow to come up to-morrow night, Nora,' said John, still elated, turning on the
box-seat as the waggonette rattled briskly over the paved crossing at the top of Oldcastle Street.

She mumbled something through her furs.

'And is he coming?' asked Rose.

'He said he'd try to.' John lighted a cigar.

'He's very queer,' said Millicent.

'How?' Rose aggressively demanded.

'Well, imagine him going off like that. He's always going off suddenly.' Millicent stopped
and then added: 'He only danced with mother. But he's a good dancer.'

'I should think he was!' Ethel murmured, roused from lethargy. 'Isn't he just, mother?'

Leonora mumbled again.

'Your mother's knocked up,' said John drily. 'These late nights don't suit her. So you reckon
Mr. Twemlow's a good dancer, eh?'

No one spoke further. John threw his cigar into the road.

Under the rug Leonora could feel the knees of all her daughters as they sat huddled and limp
with fatigue in the small body of the waggonette. Her shoulders touched Ethel's, and every
one of Milly's fidgety movements communicated itself to her. Mother and children were so close
that they could not have been closer had they lain in the same grave. And yet the girls, and
John too, had no slightest suspicion how far away the mother was from them, how blind they
were, how amazingly they had been deceived. They deemed Leonora to be like themselves, the
victim of reaction and weariness; so drowsy that even the joltings of the carriage could not
prevent a doze. She marvelled, she could not help marvelling, that her spiritual detachment
should remain unnoticed; the phenomenon frightened her as something full of strange risks.
Was it possible that none had caught a glimpse of the intense illumination and activity of
her brain, burning and labouring there so conspicuously amid the other brains sombre and dormant?
And was it possible that the girls had observed the qualities of Arthur's dancing and had observed
nothing else? Common sense tried to reassure her, and did not quite succeed. Her attitude resembled
that of a person who leans against a firm rail over the edge of a precipice: there is no danger,
but the precipice is so deep that he fears; and though the fear is a torture the sinister magnetism
of the abyss forbids him to withdraw. She lived again in the waltz; in the gliding motions
of it, the delicious fluctuations of the reverse, the long trance-like union, the instinctive
avoidances of other contact. She whispered the music, endlessly repeating those poignant and
voluptuous phrases which linger in the memory of all the world. And she recalled and reconstituted
Arthur's physical presence, and the emanating charm of his disposition, and dwelt on them long
and long. Instead of lessening, the secret commotion within her increased and continued to
increase. While brooding with feverish joy over the immediate past, her mind reached forward
and existed in the appalling and fatal moment, for whose reality however her eagerness could
scarcely wait, when she should see him once more. And it asked unanswerable questions about
his surprising return from New York, and his pallor, and the tremor in his voice, and his swift
departure. Suddenly she knew that she was planning to have the girls out of the house to-morrow
afternoon between four and five o'clock.... Her spine shivered, she grew painfully hot, and
tears rushed to her eyes. She pitied herself profoundly. She said that she did not know what
was the matter with her, or what was going to happen. She could not give names to things. She
only felt that she was too violently alive.

'Now, missis,' John roused her. The carriage had stopped and he had already descended. She
got out last, and Carpenter drove away while John was still fumbling in his hip-pocket for
the latchkey. The night was humid and very dark. Leonora and the girls stood waiting on the
gravel, and John groped his way into the blackness of the portico to unfasten the door. A faint
gleam from the hall-gas came through the leaded fanlight. This scarcely perceptible glow and
the murmur of John's expletives were all that came to the women from the mystery of the house.
The key grated in the lock, and the door opened.

'G----d d----n!' Stanway exclaimed distinctly, with fierce annoyance. He had fallen headlong
into the hall, and his silk hat could be heard hopping towards the staircase.

'Pa! 'Milly protested, shocked.

John sprang up, fuming, turned the gas on to the full, and rushed back to the doorway.

'Ah!' he shouted. 'I knew it was a tramp lying there. Get up. Is the beggar asleep?'

They all bent down, startled into gravity, to examine a form which lay in the portico, nearly
parallel with the step and below it.

'It's Uncle Meshach,' said Ethel. 'Oh! mother!'

'Then my aunt's had another attack,' cried John, 'and he's come up to tell us, and--Milly,
run for Carpenter.'

It seemed to Leonora, as with sudden awe she vaguely figured an august and capricious power
which conferred experience on mortals like a wonderful gift, that that bestowing hand was never
more full than when it had given most.

CHAPTER IX

A DEATH IN THE FAMILY

While Prince, tethered summarily outside the stable-door with all his harness on, was trying
in vain to understand this singular caprice on the part of Carpenter, Carpenter and the head
of the house lifted Uncle Meshach's form and carried it into the hall. The women watched, ceasing
their wild useless questions.

'Into the breakfast-room, on the sofa,' said John, breathing hard, to the man.

'No, no,' Leonora intervened, 'you had better take him upstairs at once, to Ethel and Milly's
bedroom.'

The procession, undignified and yet impressive, came to a halt, and Carpenter, who was holding
Meshach's feet, glanced with canine anxiety from his master to his mistress.

'But look here, Nora,' John began.

'Yes, father, upstairs,' said Rose, cutting him short.

Preoccupied with the cumbrous weight of Meshach's shoulders, John could not maintain the discussion;
he hesitated, and then Carpenter moved towards the stairs. The small dangling body seemed to
say: 'I am indifferent, but it is perhaps as well that you have done arguing.'

'Run over to Dr. Hawley's, and ask him to come across at once, John instructed Carpenter, when
they had steered Uncle Meshach round the twist of the staircase, and insinuated him through
a doorway, and laid him at length, in his overcoat and his muffler and his quaint boots, on
Ethel's virginal bed.

'But has the doctor come home, Jack?' Leonora inquired.

'Of course he has,' said John. 'He drove up with Dain, and they passed us at Shawport. Didn't
you hear me call out to them?'

'Oh yes,' she agreed.

Then John, hatless but in his ulster, and the women, hooded and shawled, drew round the bed;
but Ethel and Milly stood at the foot. The inanimate form embarrassed them all, made them feel
self-conscious and afraid to meet one another's eyes.

'Better loosen his things,' said Leonora, and Rose's fingers were instantly at work to help her.

Uncle Meshach was white, rigid, and stonecold; the stiff 'Myatt' jaw was set; the eyes, wide
open, looked upwards, and strangely outwards, in a fixed stare. And his audience thought, as
they gazed in a sort of foolish astonishment at the puny, grotesque, and unfamiliar thing,
'Is this really Uncle Meshach?' John lifted the wrist and felt for the pulse, but he could
distinguish no beat, and he shook his head accordingly. 'Try the heart, mother,' Rose suggested,
and Leonora, after penetrating beneath garment after garment, placed her hand on Meshach's
icy and tranquil breast. And she too shook her head. Then John, with an air of finality, took
out his gold repeater and when he had polished the glass he held it to Uncle Meshach's parted
lips. 'Can you see any moisture on it?' he asked, taking it to the light, but none of them
could detect the slightest dimness.

'I do wish the doctor would be quick,' said Milly.

'Doctor'll be no use,' John remarked gruffly, returning to gaze again at the immovable face.
'Except for an inquest,' he added.

'I think some one had better walk down to Church Street at once, and tell Aunt Hannah that
uncle is here,' said Leonora. 'Perhaps she is ill. Anyhow, she'll be very anxious.' But she
faltered before the complicated problem. 'Rose, go and wake Bessie, and ask her if uncle called
here during the evening, and tell her to get up at once and light the gas-stove and put some
water on to boil, and then to light a fire here.'

'And who's to go to Church Street?' John asked quickly.

Leonora looked for an instant at Rose, as the girl left the room. She felt that on such an
occasion she could more easily spare Ethel's sweet eagerness to help than Rose's almost sinister
self-possession. 'Ethel and Milly,' she said promptly. 'At least they can run on first. And
be very careful what you say to Aunt Hannah, my dears. And one of you must hurry back at once
in any case, by the road, not by the fields, and tell us what has happened.'

Rose came in to say that Bessie and the other servants had seen nothing of Uncle Meshach, and
that they were all three getting up, and then she disappeared into the kitchen. Ethel and Milly
departed, a little scared, a little regretful, but inspirited by the dreadful charm and fascination
of the whole inexplicable adventure.

'Aunt Hannah's had another attack, depend on it,' said John, 'that's it.'

'I hope not,' Leonora murmured perfunctorily. Now that she had broken the spell of futile inactivity
which the discovery of Uncle Meshach's body seemed for a few dire moments to have laid upon
them, she was more at ease.

'I fancy you'd better go down there yourself as soon as the doctor's been,' John continued.
'You're perhaps more likely to be useful there than here. What do you think?'

She looked at him under her eyelids, saying nothing, and reading all his mind. He had obstinately
determined that Uncle Meshach was dead, and he was striving to conceal both his satisfaction
on that account and his rapidly growing anxiety as to the condition of Aunt Hannah. His terrible
lack of frankness, that instinct for the devious and the underhand which governed his entire
existence, struck her afresh and seemed to devastate her heart. She felt that she could have
tolerated in her husband any vice with less effort than that one vice which was specially his,
that vice so contemptible and odious, so destructive of every noble and generous sentiment.
Her silent, measured indignation fed itself on almost nothing--on a mere word, a mere inflection
of his voice, a single transient gleam of his guilty eye. And though she was right by unerring
intuition, John, could he have seen into her soul, might have been excused for demanding, 'What
have I said, what have I done, to deserve this scorn?'

Rose returned, bearing materials for a fire; she had changed her Liberty dress for the dark
severe frock of her studious hours, and she had an irritating air of being perfectly equal
to the occasion. John, having thrown off his ulster, endeavoured to assist her in lighting
the fire, but she at once proved to him that his incapacity was a hindrance to her; whereupon
he wondered what in the name of goodness Carpenter and the doctor were doing to be so long.
Leonora began to tidy the room, which bore witness to the regardless frenzy of anticipation
with which its occupants had cast aside the soiled commonplaces of life six hours before.

'But look!' Rose cried suddenly, examining Uncle Meshach anew, after the fire was lighted.

'What?' John and Leonora demanded together, rushing to the bed.

'His lips weren't like that!' the girl asserted with eagerness.

All three gazed long at the impassive face.

'Of course they were,' said John, coldly discouraging. Leonora made no remark.

The unblinking eyes of Uncle Meshach continued to stare upwards and outwards, indifferently,
interested in the ceiling. Outside could be heard the creaking of stairs, and the affrighted
whisper of the maids as they descended in deshabillé from their attics at the bidding of this
unconscious, cynical, and sardonic enigma on the bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

'His heart is beating faintly.'

Old Dr. Hawley dropped the antique stethoscope back into the pocket of his tight dress coat,
and, still bending over Uncle Meshach, but turning slightly towards John and Leonora, smiled
with all his invincible jollity.

'Is it, by Jove?' John exclaimed.

'You thought he was dead?' said the doctor, beaming.

Leonora nodded.

'Well, he isn't,' the doctor announced with curt cheerfulness.

'That's good,' said John.

'But I don't think he can get over it,' the doctor concluded, with undiminished brightness,
his eyes twinkling.

While he spoke he was busy with the hot water and the cloths which Leonora and Rose had produced
immediately upon demand. In a few minutes Uncle Meshach was covered almost from head to foot
with cloths drenched in hot mustard-and-water; he had hot-water bags under his arms, and he
was swathed in a huge blanket.

'There!' said the rotund doctor. 'You must keep that up, and I'll send a stimulant at once.
I can't stop now; not another minute. I was called to an obstetric case just as I started out.
I'll come back the moment I'm free.'

'What is it--this thing?' John inquired.

'What is it!' the doctor repeated genially. 'I'll tell you what it is. Put your nose there.'
He indicated Uncle Meshach's mouth. 'Do you notice that ammoniacal smell? That's due to uraemia,
a sequel of Bright's disease.'

'Bright's disease?' John muttered.

'Bright's disease,' affirmed the doctor, dwelling on the famous and striking syllables. 'Your
uncle is the typical instance of the man who has never been ill in his life. He walks up a
little slope or up some steps to a friend's house, and just as he is lifting his hand to the
knocker, he has a convulsion and falls down unconscious. That's Bright's disease. Never been
ill in his life! Not so far as he knew! Not so far as he knew! Nearly all you Myatts had weak
kidneys. Do you remember your great-uncle Ebenezer? You've sent down to Miss Myatt, you say?
Good.... Perhaps he was lying on your steps for two or three hours. He may pull round. He may.
We must hope so.'

The doctor put on his overcoat, and his cap with the ear-flaps, and after a final glance at
the patient and a friendly, reassuring smile at Leonora, he went slowly to the door. Girth
and good humour and funny stories had something to do with his great reputation in Bursley
and Hillport. But he possessed shrewdness and sagacity; he belonged to a dynasty of doctors;
and he was deeply versed in the social traditions of the district. Men consulted him because
their grandfathers had consulted his father, and because there had always been a Dr. Hawley
in Bursley, and because he was acquainted with the pathological details of their ancestral
history on both sides of the hearth. His patients, indeed, were not individuals, but families.
There were cleverer doctors in the place, doctors of more refined appearance and manners, doctors
less monotonously and loudly gay; but old Hawley, with his knowledge of pedigrees and his unique
instinctive sympathy with the idiosyncrasies of local character, could hold his own against
the most assertive young M.D. that ever came out of Edinburgh to monopolise the Five Towns.

'Can you send some one round with me for the medicine?' he asked in the doorway. 'Happen you'll
come yourself, John?'

There was a momentary hesitation.

'I'll come, doctor,' said Rose. 'And then you can give me all your instructions. Mother must
stay here.' She completely ignored her father.

'Do, my dear; come by all means.' And the doctor beamed again suddenly with the maximum of
cheerfulness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meshach had given no sign of life; his eyes, staring upwards and outwards, were still unchangeably
fixed on the same portion of the ceiling. He ignored equally the nonchalant and expert attentions
of the doctor, the false solicitude of John, Leonora's passionate anxiety, and Rose's calm
self-confidence. He treated the fomentations with the apathy which might have been expected
from a man who for fifty years had been accustomed to receive the meek skilled service of women
in august silence. One could almost have detected in those eyes a glassy and profound secret
amusement at the disturbance which he had caused--a humorous appreciation of all the fuss:
the maids with their hair down their backs bending and whispering over a stove; Ethel and Milly
trudging scared through the nocturnal streets; Rose talking with demure excitement to old Hawley
in his aromatic surgery; John officiously carrying kettles to and fro, and issuing orders to
Bessie in the passage; Leonora cast violently out of one whirlpool into another; and some unknown
expectant terrified pair wondering why the doctor, who had been warned months before, should
thus culpably neglect their urgent summons. As he lay there so grim and derisive and solitary,
so fatigued with days and nights, so used up, so steeped in experience, and so contemptuously
unconcerned, he somehow baffled all the efforts of blankets, cloths, and bags to make his miserable
frame look ridiculous. He had a majesty which subdued his surroundings. And in this room hitherto
sacred to the charming mysteries of girlhood his cadaverous presence forced the skirts and
petticoats on Milly's bed, and the disordered apparatus on the dressing-table, and the scented
soaps on the washstand, and the row of tiny boots and shoes which Leonora had arranged near
the wardrobe, to apologise pathetically and wistfully for their very existence.

'Is that enough mustard?' John inquired idly.

'Yes,' said Leonora.

She realised--but not in the least because he had asked a banal question about mustard--that
he was perfectly insensible to all spiritual significances. She had been aware of it for many
years, yet the fact touched her now more sharply than ever. It seemed to her that she must
cry out in a long mournful cry: 'Can't you see, can't you feel!' And once again her husband
might justifiably have demanded: 'What have I done this time?'

'I wish one of those girls would come back from Church Street,' he burst out, frowning. 'They're
here!' He became excited as he listened to light rapid footsteps on the stair. But it was Rose
who entered.

'Here's the medicine, mother,' said Rose eagerly. She was flushed with running. 'It's chloric
ether and nitrate of potash, a highly diffusible stimulant. And there's a chance that sooner
or later it may put him into a perspiration. But it will be worse than useless if the hot applications
aren't kept up, the doctor said. You must raise his head and give it him in a spoon in very
small doses.'

And then Meshach impassively submitted to the handling of his head and his mouth. He gurgled
faintly in accepting the medicine, and soon his temples and the corners of his lips showed
a very slight perspiration. But though the doses were repeated, and the fomentations assiduously
maintained, no further result occurred, save that Meshach's eyes, according to the shifting
of his head, perused new portions of the ceiling.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the futile minutes passed, John grew more and more restless. He was obliged to admit to
himself that Uncle Meshach was not dead, but he felt absolutely sure that he would never revive.
Had not the doctor said as much? And he wanted desperately to hear that Aunt Hannah still lived,
and to take every measure of precaution for her continuance in this world. The whole of his
future might depend upon the hazard of the next hour.

'Look here, Nora,' he said protestingly, while Rose was on one of her journeys to the kitchen.
'It's evidently not much use you stopping here, whereas there's no knowing what hasn't happened
down at Church Street.'

'Do you mean you wish me to go down there?' she asked coldly.

'Well, I leave it to your common sense,' he retorted.

Rose appeared.

'Your father thinks I ought to go down to Church Street,' said Leonora.

'What! And leave uncle?' Rose added nothing to this question, but proceeded with her tasks.

'Certainly,' John insisted.

Leonora was conscious of an acute resentment against her husband. The idea of her leaving Uncle
Meshach at such a crisis seemed to her to be positively wicked. Had not John heard what Rose
said to the doctor: 'Mother must stay here'? Had he not heard that? But of course he desired
that Uncle Meshach should die. Yes, every word, every gesture of his in the sick-room was an
involuntary expression of that desire.

'Why don't you go yourself, father?' Rose demanded of him bluntly, after a pause.

'Simply because, if there is any illness, I shouldn't be any use.' John glared at his daughter.

Then, quite suddenly, Leonora thought how vain, how pitiful, how unseemly, were these acrimonious
conflicts of opinion in presence of the strange and awe-inspiring riddle in the blanket. An
impulse seized her to give way, and she found a dozen reasons why she should desert Uncle Meshach
for Aunt Hannah.

'Can you manage?' she asked Rose doubtfully.

'Oh yes, mother, we can manage,' answered Rose, with an exasperating manufactured sweetness
of tone.

'Tell Carpenter to put the horse in,' John suggested. 'I expect he's waiting about in the kitchen.'

'No,' said Leonora, 'I'll pin my skirt up and walk. I shall be half way there before he's ready
to start.'

When Leonora had departed, John redoubled his activity as a nurse. 'There's no object in changing
the cloths as often as that,' said Rose. But his suspense forbade him to keep still. Rose annoyed
him excessively, and the nervous energy which should have helped towards self-control was expended
in concealing that annoyance. He felt as though he should go mad unless something decisive
happened very soon. To his surprise, just after the hall clock (which was always kept half-an-hour
fast) had sounded three through the dark passages of the apprehensive house, Rose left the
room. He was alone with what remained of Uncle Meshach. He moved the blanket, and touched the
cloth which lay on Meshach's heart. 'Not too hot, that,' he said aloud. Taking the cloth he
walked to the fire, where was a large saucepan full of nearly boiling water. He picked up the
lid of the saucepan, dropped it, crossed over to the washstand with a brusque movement, and
plunged the cloth into the cold water of the ewer. Holding it there, he turned and gazed in
a sort of abstract meditation at Uncle Meshach, who steadily ignored him. He was possessed
by a genuine feeling of righteous indignation against his uncle.... He drew the cloth from
the ewer, squeezed it a little, and approached the bed again. And as he stood over Meshach
with the cloth in his hand, he saw his wife in the doorway. He knew in an instant that his
own face had frightened her and prevented her from saying what she was about to say.

'How you startled me, Nora!' he exclaimed, with his surpassing genius for escaping from an
apparently fatal situation.

She ran up to the bed. 'Don't keep uncle uncovered like that,' she said; 'put it on.' And she
took the cloth from his hand. 'Why,' she cried, 'it's like ice! What on earth are you doing?
Where's Rose?'

'I was just taking it off,' he replied. 'What about aunt?'

'I met the girls down the road,' she said. 'Your aunt is dead.'

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later Uncle Meshach's rigid frame suffered a convulsion; the whole surface of
his skin sweated abundantly; his eyes wavered, closed, and opened again; his mouth made the
motion of swallowing. He had come back from unconsciousness. He was no longer an enigma, wrapped
in supercilious and inflexible calm; but a sick, shrivelled little man, so pitiably prostrate
that his condition drew the sympathy out of Leonora with a sharp violent pain, as very cold
metal burns the fingers. He could not even whisper; he could only look. Soon afterwards Dr.
Hawley returned, explaining that the anxiety of a husband about to be a father had called him
too soon by several hours. The doctor, who had been informed of Aunt Hannah's death as he entered
the house, said at once, on seeing him, that Uncle Meshach had had a marvellous escape. Then,
when he had succoured the patient further, he turned rather formidably to Leonora.

'I want to speak to you,' he said, and he led her out of the room, leaving Rose, Ethel, and
John in charge of Meshach.

'What is it, doctor?' she asked him plaintively on the landing.

'Which is your bedroom? Show it me,' he demanded. She opened a door, and they both went in.
'I'll light the gas,' he said, doing so. 'And now,' he proceeded, 'you'll kindly retire to
bed, instantly. Mr. Myatt is out of danger.' He smiled warmly, just as he had smiled when he
predicted that Meshach would probably not recover.

'But, doctor,' Leonora protested.

'Instantly,' he said, forcing her gently on to the sofa at the foot of the two beds.

'But some one ought to go down to Church Street to look after things,' she began.

'Church Street can wait. There's no hurry at Church Street now.'

'And uncle hasn't been told yet ... I'm not at all over-tired, doctor.'

'Yes, mother dear, you are, and you must do as the doctor orders.' It was Ethel who had come
into the room; she touched Leonora's arm caressingly.

'And where are you girls to sleep? The spare room isn't----'

'Oh, mother!----Just listen to her, doctor!' said Ethel, stroking her mother's hand, as though
she and the doctor were two old and sage persons, and Leonora was a small child.

'They think I'm ill! They think I'm going to collapse!' The idea struck her suddenly. 'But
I'm not. I'm quite well, and my brain is perfectly clear. And anyhow, I'm sure I can't sleep.'
She said aloud: 'It wouldn't be any use; I shouldn't sleep.'

'Ah! I'll attend to that, I'll attend to that!' the doctor laughed. 'Ethel, help your mother
to bed.' He departed.

'This is really most absurd,' Leonora reflected. 'It's ridiculous. However, I'm only doing
it to oblige them.'

Before she was entirely undressed, Rose entered with a powder in a white paper, and a glass
of hot milk.

'You are to swallow this, mother, and then drink this. Here, Eth, hold the glass a second.'

And Leonora accepted the powder from Rose and the milk from Ethel, as they stood side by side
in front of her. Great waves seemed to surge through her brain. In walking to the bed, she
saw herself all white in the mirror of the wardrobe.

'My face looks as if it was covered with flour,' she said to Ethel, with a short laugh. It
did not occur to her that she was pale. 'Don't forget to----' But she had forgotten what Ethel
was not to forget. Her head reeled as it lay firmly on the pillow. The waves were waves of
sound now, and they developed into a rhythm, a tune. She had barely time to discover that the
tune was the Blue Danube Waltz, and that she was dancing, when the whole world came to an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

She awoke to feel the radiant influence of the afternoon sun through the green blinds. Impregnated
with a delicious languor, she slowly stretched out her arms, and, lifting her head, gazed first
at the intricate tracery of the lace on her silk nightgown, and then into the silent dreamy
spaces of the room. Everything was in perfect order; she guessed that Ethel must have trod
softly to make it tidy before leaving her, hours ago. John's bed was turned down, and his pyjamas
laid out, with all Bessie's accustomed precision. Presently she noticed on her night-table
a sheet of note-paper, on which had been written in pencil, in large letters: 'Ring the bell
before getting up.' She could not be sure whether the hand was Ethel's or Rose's. 'Oh!' she
thought, 'how good my girls are!' She was quite well, quite restored, and slightly hungry.
And she was also calm, content, ready to commence existence anew.

'I suppose I had better humour them,' she murmured, and she rang the bell.

Bessie entered. The treasure was irreproachably neat and prim in her black and white.

'What time is it, Bessie?' Leonora inquired.

'It's a straight-up three, ma'am.'

'Then I must have slept for eleven hours! How is Mr. Myatt going on?'

Bessie dropped her hands, and smiled benevolently: 'Oh! He's much better, ma'am. And when the
doctor told him about poor Miss Myatt, ma'am, he just said the funeral must be on Saturday
because he didn't like Sunday funerals, and it wouldn't do to wait till Monday. He didn't say
nothing else. And he keeps on telling us he shall be well enough to go to the funeral, and
he's sent master down to Guest's in St. Luke's Square to order it, and the hearse is to have
two horses, but not the coaches, ma'am. He's asleep just now, ma'am, and I'm watching him,
but Miss Rose is resting on Miss Milly's bed in case, so I can come in here for a minute or
two. He told the doctor and master that Miss Myatt was took with one of them attacks at half-past
eleven o'clock, and he went for Dr. Adams as lives at the top of Oldcastle Street. Dr. Adams
wasn't in, and then he saw a cab--it must have been coming from the ball, ma'am, but Mr. Myatt
didn't know as there was any ball--and he drove up to Hillport for Dr. Hawley, him being the
family doctor. And then he said he felt bad-like, and he thought he'd come here and send master
across the way for Dr. Hawley. And he got out of the cab and paid the cabman, and then he doesn't
remember no more. Wasn't it dreadful, ma'am? I don't believe he rightly knew what he was doing,
the poor old gentleman!'

Leonora listened. 'Where are Miss Ethel and Miss Milly?' she asked.

'Master said they was to go to Oldcastle to order mourning, ma'am. They've but just gone. And
master said he should be back himself about six. He never slept a wink, ma'am; nor even sat
down. He just had his bath, and Miss Ethel crept in here for his clothes.'

'And have you been to bed, Bessie?'

'Me? No, ma'am. What should I go to bed for? I'm as well as well, ma'am. Miss Milly slept in
Miss Rose's bedroom, for a bit, and Miss Ethel on the sofy in the drawing-room--not as you
might call that sleeping. Miss Rose said you was to have some tea before you got up, ma'am.
Shall I tell cook to get it now?'

'I really think I should prefer to have it downstairs, Bessie, thanks,' said Leonora.

'Very well, ma'am. But Miss Rose said----'

'Yes, but I will have it downstairs. In three-quarters of an hour, say.'

'Very well, ma'am. Now is there anything I can do for you, ma'am?'

While dressing, very placidly and deliberately, and while thinking upon all the multitudinous
things that seemed to have happened in her world during her long slumber, Leonora dwelt too
upon the extraordinary loving kindness of this hireling, who got twenty pounds a year, half-a-day
a week, and a day a month. On the first of every month Leonora handed to Bessie one paltry
sovereign, thirteen shillings, and the odd fourpence in coppers. She wondered fancifully if
she would have the effrontery to requite the girl in coin on the next pay-day; and she was
filled with a sense of the goodness of humanity. And then there crossed her mind the recollection
that she had caught John in a wicked act on the previous night. Yes; he had not imposed on
her for a moment; and she perceived clearly now that murder had been in his heart. She was
not appalled nor desolated. She thought: 'So that is murder, that little thing, that thing
over in a minute!' It appeared to her that murder in the concrete was less dreadful than murder
in the abstract, far less horrible than the strident sound of the word on the lips of a newsboy,
or the look of it in the 'Signal.' She felt dimly that she ought to be shocked, unnerved, terrified,
at the prospect of living, eating, and sleeping with a man who had meant to kill. But she could
not summon these sensations. She merely experienced a kind of pity for John. She put the episode
away from her, as being closed, accidental, and unimportant. Uncle Meshach was alive.

A few minutes before four o'clock, she went quietly into the sick-room. Bessie, sitting upright
between the beds, put her finger to her lips. Uncle Meshach was asleep on Ethel's bed, and
on the other bed lay Rose, also asleep, stretched in a negligent attitude, but fully dressed
and wearing an old black frock that was too tight for her. The fire burned brightly.

'Tea is ready in the drawing-room, ma'am,' Bessie whispered, 'and Mr. Twemlow has just called.
He's waiting to see you.'

       *       *       *       *       *

'So you know what has happened to us?'

'Yes,' he said, 'I met your husband on St. Luke's Square. But I heard something before that.
At one o'clock, a man told me at Knype Station that Mr. Myatt had cut his throat on your doorstep.
I didn't believe it. So I called up Twemlow & Stanway over the 'phone and got on to the facts.'

'What things people say!' she exclaimed.

'I guess you've stood it very well,' he remarked, gazing at her, as with quick, sure movements
of her gracile hands she poured out the tea.

'Ah!' she murmured, flushing, 'they sent me to bed. I have only just got up.'

'I know exactly when you went to bed,' he smiled.

His tone filled her with satisfaction. She had hoped and expected that he would behave naturally,
that he would not adopt the desolating attitude of gloom prescribed by convention for sympathisers
with the bereaved; and she was not disappointed. He spoke with an easy and cheerful sincerity,
and she was exquisitely conscious of the flattery implied in that simple, direct candour which
seemed to say to her, 'You and I have no need of convention--we understand each other.' Perhaps
never in her life, not even in the wonderful felicities of girlhood, had Leonora been more
peacefully content than during those moments of calm succeeding stress, as she met Arthur's
eyes in the intimacy of a fraternal confidence. The large room was so tranquil, the curtains
so white, and the sunlight so benignant in the caress of its amber horizontal rays. Rose lay
asleep upstairs, Ethel and Millicent were at Oldcastle, John would not return for two hours;
and she and Arthur were alone together in the middle of the long quiet chamber, talking quietly.
She was happy. She had no fear, neither for herself nor for him. As innocent as Rose, and more
innocent than Ethel, she now regarded the feverish experience of the dance as accidental, a
thing to be forgotten, an episode of which the repetition was merely to be avoided; Death and
the fear of Death had come suddenly and written over its record in the page of existence. Her
present sanity and calmness and mild bliss and self-control--these were to last, these were
the real symptoms of her condition, and of Arthur's condition. No! The memory of the ball did
not trouble her; it had not troubled her since she awoke after the sedative. She had entered
the drawing-room without a qualm, and the instant of their meeting, anticipated on the previous
night as much in terror as in joy, had passed equably and serenely. Relying on his strength,
and exulting in her own, she had given him her hand, and he had taken it, and that was all.
She knew her native force. She knew that she had the precious and rare gift of common sense,
and she was perfectly convinced that this common sense, which had never long deserted her in
the past, could never permanently desert her in the future. She imagined that nothing was stronger
than common sense; she had small suspicion that in their noblest hours men and women have invariably
despised common sense, and trampled it underfoot as the most contemptible of human attributes.
Therefore she was content and unalarmed. And she found pleasure even in trifles, as, for example,
that the maid had set two cups-and-saucers and two only; the duality struck her as delicious.
She looked close at Arthur's sagacious, shrewd, and kindly face, with the heavy, clipped moustache,
and the bluish chin, and those grey hairs at the sides of the forehead. 'We belong to the same
generation, he and I,' she thought, eating bread and butter with relish, 'and we are not so
very old, after all!' Aunt Hannah was incomparably older, ripe for death. Who could be profoundly
moved by that unimportant, that trivial, demise? She felt very sorry for Uncle Meshach, but
no more than that. Such sentiments may have the appearance of callousness, but they were the
authentic sentiments of Leonora, and Leonora was not callous. The financial aspect of Aunt
Hannah's death, as it affected John and herself and the girls and their home, did not disturb
her. She was removed far above finance, far above any preoccupation about the latter years,
as she sat talking quietly and blissfully with Arthur in the drawing-room.

'Yes,' she was telling him, 'it was just opposite the Clayton-Vernons' that I met them.'

'Where the elm-trees spread over the road?' he questioned.

She nodded, pleased by his minute interest in her narrative and by his knowledge of the neighbourhood.
'I saw them both a long way off, walking quickly, under a gas-lamp. And it's very curious,
but although I was so anxious to know what had happened, I couldn't go on to meet them--I was
obliged to wait until they came up. And they didn't notice me at first, and then Ethel shrieked
out: "Oh, it's mother!" And Milly said: "Aunt Hannah's dead, mother. Is Uncle Meshach dead?"
You can't understand how queer I felt. I felt as if Milly would go on asking and asking: "Is
father dead? Is Bessie dead? Is Bran dead? Are you dead?"'

'I know,' he said reflectively.

She guessed that he envied her the strange nocturnal adventure. And her secret pride in the
adventure, which hitherto she had endeavoured to suppress, suddenly became open and legitimate.
She allowed her face to disclose the thought: 'You see that I too have lived through crises,
and that I can appreciate how wonderful they are.' And she proceeded to give him all the details
of Aunt Hannah's death, as she had learnt them from Ethel and Milly during the walk home through
sleeping Hillport: how the servant had grown alarmed, and had called a neighbour by breaking
a bedroom window with a broomstick, leaning from Aunt Hannah's window, and how the neighbour's
eldest boy had run for Dr. Adams and had caught him in the street just as he was returning
home, and how Aunt Hannah was gone before the boy came back with Dr. Adams, and how no one
could guess what had happened to Uncle Meshach, and no one could suggest what to do, until
Ethel and Milly knocked at the door.

'Isn't it all strange? Don't you think it's strange?' Leonora demanded.

'No,' he said. 'It seems strange, but it isn't really. Such things are always happening.'

'Are they?' She spoke naïvely, with a girlish inflection and a girlish gesture.

'Well, of course!' He smiled gravely, and yet humorously. And his eyes said: 'What a charming
simple thing you are!' And she liked to think of his superiority over her in experience, knowledge,
imperturbability, breadth of view, and all those kindred qualities which women give to the
men they admire.

They could not talk further on the subject.

'By the by, how's your foot?' he inquired.

'My foot?'

'Yes. You hurt it last night, didn't you, after I'd gone?'

She had completely forgotten the trifling fiction, until it thus rather startlingly reappeared
on his lips. She might easily have let it die naturally, had she chosen; but she could not
choose. She had a whim to kill it violently, romantically.

'No,' she said, 'I didn't hurt it.'

'It was your husband was telling me.'

She went on joyously and fearfully: 'Some one asked me to dance, after--after the Blue Danube.
And I didn't want to; I couldn't. And so I said I had hurt my foot. It was just one of those
things that one says, you know!'

He was embarrassed; he had no remark ready. But to preserve appearances he lowered the corners
of his lips and glanced at the copper tea-kettle through half-closed eyes, feigning to suppress
a private amusement. She was quite aware, however, that she had embarrassed him. And just as,
a minute earlier, she had liked him for his lordly, masculine, philosophic superiority, so
now she liked him for that youthful embarrassment. She felt that all men were equally child-like
to women, and that the most adorable were the most child-like. 'How little you understand,
after all!' she thought. 'Poor boy, I unlatched the door, and you dared not push it open! You
were afraid of committing an indiscretion. But I will guide and protect you, and protect us both.'

This was the woman who, half an hour ago, had been exulting in the adequacy of her common sense.
Innocent and enchanting creature, with the rashness of innocence!

'I guess I couldn't dance again after the Blue Danube, either,' he said at length, boldly.

She made no answer; perhaps she was a little intimidated; but she looked at him with eyes and
lips full of latent vivacity.

'That was why I left,' he finished firmly. There was in his tone a hint of that engaging and
piquant antagonism which springs up between lovers and dies away; he had the air of telling
her that since she had invited a confession she was welcome to it.

She retreated, still admiring, and said evenly that the ball had been a great success.

Soon afterwards Ethel and Milly unexpectedly entered the room. They had put on the formal aspect
of dejection which they deemed proper for them, but on perceiving that their elders were talking
quite naturally, they at once abandoned constraint and became natural too. From the sight of
their unaffected pleasure in seeing Arthur Twemlow again, Leonora drew further sustenance for
her mood of serene content.

'Just fancy, Mr. Twemlow,' Millicent burst out. 'We walked all the way to Oldcastle, and we
never thought, and no one reminded us. It's father's fault, really.'

'What is father's fault, really?'

'It's Thursday afternoon and the shops were all shut. We shall have to go to-morrow morning.'

'Ah!' he said. 'The stores don't shut on Thursday afternoon in New York.'

'Mother will be able to come with us to-morrow morning,' said Ethel, and approaching Leonora
she asked: 'Are you all right, mother?'

This simple, familiar conversation, and the free movements of the girls, and the graver suavity
of Arthur and herself, seemed to Leonora to constitute a picture, a scene, of mysterious and
profound charm.

Arthur rose to depart. The girls wished him to stay, but Leonora did not support them. In a
house where an aged relative lay ill, and that relative so pathetically bereaved, it was not
meet that a visitor should remain too long. Immediately he had gone she began to anticipate
their next meeting. The eagerness of that anticipation surprised her. And, moreover, the environment
of her life closed quickly round her; she could not ignore it. She demanded of herself what
was Arthur's excuse for calling, and how it was that she should be so happy in the midst of
woe and death. Her joyous confidence was shaken. Feeling that on such a day she ought to have
been something other than a delicate châtelaine idly dispensing tea in a drawing-room, she
went upstairs, determined to find some useful activity.

The light was failing in the sick-room, and the fire shone brighter. Bessie had disappeared,
and Rose sat in her place. Uncle Meshach still slept.

'Have you had a good rest, my dear?' she whispered, kissing Rose fondly. 'You had better go
downstairs. I've had some tea, and I'll take charge here now.'

'Very well,' the girl assented, yawning. 'Who's that just gone?'

'Mr. Twemlow.'

'Oh, mother!' Rose exclaimed in angry disappointment. 'Why didn't some one tell me he was here?'

       *       *       *       *       *

'The cortège will move at 2.15,' said the mourning invitation cards, and on Saturday at two
o'clock Uncle Meshach, dressed in deep black, sat on a cane-chair against the wall in the bedroom
of his late sister. He had not been able to conceive Hannah's funeral without himself as chief
mourner, and therefore he had accomplished his own recovery in the amazing period of fifty
hours; and in addition to accomplishing his recovery he had given an uninterrupted series of
the most minute commands concerning the arrangements for the obsequies. Protests had been utterly
useless. 'It will kill him,' said Leonora to the doctor as Meshach, risen straight out of bed,
was getting into a cab at Hillport that morning to drive to Church Street. 'It may,' old Hawley
answered. 'But what can one do?' Smiling, first at Meshach, and then at Leonora, the doctor
had joined his aged patient in the cab and they had gone off together.

Next to the cane-chair was Hannah's mahogany bed, which had been stripped. On the bed lay a
massive oaken coffin, and, accurately fitted into the coffin, lay the withered remains of Meshach's
slave. The prim and spotless bedroom, with its chest of drawers, its small glass, its three-cornered
wardrobe, its narrow washstand, its odd bonnet-boxes, its trunk, its skirts hung inside-out
behind the door, its Bible with the spectacle-case on it, its texts, its miniature portraits,
its samplers, framed in maple, and its engraving of the infant John Wesley being saved from
the fire at Epworth Vicarage, framed in gold, was eloquent of the habits of the woman who had
used it, without ambition, without repining, and without hope, save an everlasting hope, for
more than fifty years.

Into this room, obedient to the rigid etiquette of an old-fashioned Five Towns funeral, every
person asked to the burial was bound to come, in order to take a last look at the departed,
and to offer a few words of sympathy to the chief mourner. As they entered--Stanway, David
Dain, Fred Ryley, Dr. Hawley, Leonora, the servant, and lastly Arthur Twemlow--unwillingly
desecrating the almost sæcular modesty of the chamber, Meshach received them one by one with
calmness, with detachment, with the air of the curator of the museum. 'Here she is,' his mien
indicated. 'That is to say, what's left. Gaze your fill.' Beyond a monotonous 'Thank ye, thank
ye,' in response to expressions of sympathy for him, and of appreciation of Hannah's manifold
excellences, he made no remarks to any one except Leonora and Arthur Twemlow.

'Has that ginger wine come?' he asked Leonora anxiously. The feast after the sepulture was
as important, and as strictly controlled by etiquette, as the lying-in-state. Leonora, who
had charge of the meal, was able to give him an affirmative.

'I'm glad as you've come,' he said to Twemlow. 'I had a fancy for you to see her again as soon
as they told me you was back. Her makes a good corpse, eh?'

Twemlow agreed. 'To die suddenly, that's the best,' he murmured awkwardly; he did not know
what to say.

'Her was a good sister, a good sister!' Meshach pronounced with an emotion which was doubtless
genuine and profound, but which superficially resembled that of an examiner awarding pass-marks
to a pupil. 'By the way, Twemlow,' he added as Arthur was leaving the room, 'didst ever thrash
that business out wi' our John? I've been thinking over a lot of things while I was fast abed
up yon'.'

Arthur stared at him.

'Thou knowst what I mean?' continued Meshach, putting his thin tremulous hand on the edge of
the coffin in order to rise from the chair.

'Yes,' Arthur replied, 'I know. I haven't settled it yet, I haven't had time.'

'I should ha' thought thou'dst had time enough, lad,' said Meshach.

Then the undertaker's men adjusted the lid of the coffin, hiding Aunt Hannah's face, and screwed
in the eight brass screws, and clumped down the dark stairs with their burden, and so across
the pavement between two rows of sluttish sightseers, to the hearse. Uncle Meshach, with the
aid only of his stick, entered the first coach; John Stanway and Fred Ryley--the rules of precedence
were thus inflexible!--occupied the second; and Arthur Twemlow, with the family lawyer and
the family doctor, took the third. Leonora remained in the house with the servant to spread
the feast.

The church was barely four hundred yards away, and in less than half an hour they were all
in the house again; all save Aunt Hannah, who had already, in the vault of the Myatts, passed
the first five minutes of the tedium of waiting for the Day of Judgment. And now, as they gathered
round the fish, the fowl, the ham, the cake, the preserves, the tea, the wines and the spirits,
etiquette demanded that they should be cheerful, should show a resignation to the will of heaven,
and should eat heartily. And although the rapid-ticking clock on the mantelpiece in the parlour
pointed only to a little better than three o'clock they were obliged to eat heartily, for fear
of giving pain to Uncle Meshach; to drink much was not essential, but nothing could have excused
abstention from the solid fare. The repast, actively conducted by the mourning host, was not
finished until nearly half-past four. Then Twemlow and the doctor said that they must leave.

'Nay, nay,' Meshach complained. 'There's the will to be read. It's right and proper as all
the guests should hear the will, and it'll take nobbut a few minutes.'

The enfeebled old man talked more and more the dialect which his father and mother had talked
over his cradle.

'Better without us, old friend!' the doctor said jauntily. 'Besides, my patients!' And by dint
of blithe obstinacy he managed to get away, and also to cover the retreat of Twemlow.

'I shall call in a day or two,' said Arthur to Uncle Meshach as they shook hands.

'Ay! call and see th' old ruin!' Meshach replied, and dropping back into his chair, 'Now, Dain!'
he ordered.

David Dain drew a long white envelope from his breast pocket.

'"This is the last will and testament of me, Hannah Margaret Myatt,"' the lawyer began to read
quickly in his thick voice, '"of Church Street, Bursley, in the county of Stafford, spinster.
I commit my body to the grave and my soul to God in the sure hope of a blessed resurrection
through my Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ. I bequeath ten pounds each to my dear nephew John
Stanway, and to his wife Leonora, to purchase mourning at my decease, and five pounds each
for the same purpose to my dear great-nephew Frederick Wellington Ryley, and to my great-nieces
Ethel, Rosalys, and Millicent Stanway, and to any other children of the said John and Leonora
Stanway should they have such, and should such children survive me." This will is dated twelve
years ago,' the lawyer stopped to explain. He continued: '"I further bequeath to my great-nephew
Frederick Wellington Ryley the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds."'

'Something for you there, Frederick Wellington Ryley!' exclaimed Stanway in a frigid tone,
biting his thumb and looking up at the ceiling.

Ryley blushed. He had scarcely spoken during the meal, and he did not break his silence now.

With much verbiage the will proceeded to state that the testatrix left the residue of her private
savings to Meshach, 'to dispose of absolutely according to his own discretion,' in case he
should survive her; and that in case she should survive him she left her private savings and
the whole of the estate of which she and Meshach were joint tenants to John Stanway.

'There is a short codicil,' Dain added, 'which revokes the legacy of two hundred and fifty
pounds to Mr. Ryley in case Mr. Myatt should survive the testatrix. It is dated some six months
ago.'

'Kindly read it,' said Stanway coldly.

'With pleasure,' the lawyer agreed, and he read it.

'Then, as it turns out,' Stanway remarked, looking defiantly at his uncle, 'Ryley gets nothing
but five pounds under this will.'

'Under this will, nephew,' the old man assented.

'And may one inquire,' Stanway persisted, 'the nature of your intentions in regard to aunt's
savings which she leaves you to dispose of according to your discretion?'

'What dost mean, nephew?'

Leonora saw with anxiety that her husband, while intending to be calm, pompous, and superior,
was, in fact, losing control of himself.

'I mean,' said John, 'are you going to distribute them?'

'No, nephew. They're well enough where they lie. I shall none touch 'em.'

Stanway gave the sigh of a martyr who has sufficient spirit to be disdainful. Throwing his
serviette on the disordered table, he pushed back his chair and stood up. 'You'll excuse me
now, uncle,' he said, bitterly polite, 'I must be off to the works. Ryley, I shall want you.'
And without another word he left the room and the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leonora was the last to go. Meshach would not allow her to stay after the tea-things were washed
up. He declined firmly every offer of help or companionship, and since the middle-aged servant
made no objection to being alone with her convalescent master, Leonora could only submit to
his wishes.

When she was gone he lighted his pipe. At seven o'clock, the servant came into the parlour
and found him dozing in the dark; his pipe hung loosely from his teeth.

'Eh, mester,' she cried, lighting the gas. 'Hadn't ye better go to bed? Ye've had a worriting day.'

'Happen I'd better,' he answered deliberately, taking hold of the pipe and adjusting his spectacles.

'Can ye undress yeself?' she asked him.

'Ay,' he said, 'I can do that, wench. My candle!'

And he went carefully up to bed.

CHAPTER X

IN THE GARDEN

'Father's in a horrid temper. Did anything go wrong?' said Rose, when Leonora reached Hillport.

'No,' Leonora replied. 'Where is he?'

'In the drawing-room. He says he won't have any tea.'

'You must remember, my dear, that your father has been through a great deal this last day or two.'

'So have all of us, as far as that goes,' Rose stated ruthlessly. 'However----' She turned
away, shrugging her shoulders.

Leonora wondered by means of what sad experience Rose would ultimately discover that, whereas
men have the right to cry out when they are hurt, it is the whole business of a woman's life
to suffer in cheerful silence. She sat with the girls during tea, drinking a cup for the sake
of form, and giving them disconnected items of information about the funeral, which at their
own passionate request they had been excused from attending. The talk was carried on in low
tones, so that the rattle of a spoon in a saucer sounded loud and distinct. And in the drawing-room
John steadily perused the 'Signal,' column by column, from the announcement of 'Pink Dominoes'
at the Hanbridge Theatre Royal on the first page, to the bait of a sporting bookmaker in Holland
at the end of the last. The evening was desolating, but Leonora endured it with philosophy,
because she appreciated John's state of mind.

It was the disclosure of the legacy of two hundred and fifty pounds to Fred Ryley, and of the
recent conditional revocation of that legacy, which had galled her husband's sensibilities
by bringing home to him what he had lost through Aunt Hannah's sudden death and through the
senile whim of Uncle Meshach to alter his will. He could well have tolerated Meshach's refusal
to distribute Aunt Hannah's savings immediately (Leonora thought), had the old man's original
testament remained uncancelled. Once upon a time, Ryley, the despised poor relation, the offspring
of an outcast from the family, was to have been put off with two hundred and fifty pounds,
and the bulk of the Myatt joint fortune was to have passed in any case to John. The withdrawal
of the paltry legacy, as shown in the codicil, was the outward and irritating sign that Ryley
had been lifted from his humble position to the level of John himself. John, of course, had
known months ago that he and Ryley stood level in the hazard of gaining the inheritance, but
the history of the legacy, revealed after the funeral, aroused his disgusted imagination, as
it had not been roused before.

He was beaten; and, more important, he knew it now; he had the incensed, futile, malevolent,
devil-may-care feeling of being beaten. He bitterly invited Fate not to stop at half-measures
but to come on and do her worst. And Fate, with that mysterious responsiveness which often
distinguishes her movements, came on. 'Of course! I might have expected it!' John exclaimed
savagely, two days later, when he received a circular to the effect that a small and desperate
minority of shareholders were trying to put the famous brewery company into liquidation under
the supervision of the Court. The shares fell another five in twenty-four hours. The Bursley
Conservative Club knew positively the same night that John had 'got out' at a ruinous loss,
and this episode seemed to give vigorous life to certain rumours, hitherto faint, that John
and his uncle had violently quarrelled at his aunt's funeral, and that when Meshach died Fred
Ryley would be found to be the heir. Other rumours, that Ethel Stanway and Fred Ryley were
about to be secretly married, that Dain would have been the owner of Prince but for the difference
between guineas and pounds, and that the real object of Arthur Twemlow's presence in the Five
Towns was to buy up the concern of Twemlow & Stanway, were received with reserve, though not
entirely discredited. The town, however, was more titillated than perturbed, for every one
said that old Meshach, for the sake of the family's good name, would never under any circumstances
permit a catastrophe to occur. The town saw little of Meshach now--he had almost ceased to
figure in the streets; it knew, however, the Myatt pride in the Myatt respectability.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leonora sympathised with John, but her sympathy, weakened by his surliness, was also limited
by her ignorance of his real plight, and by the secret preoccupation of her own existence.
From the evening of the funeral the desire to see Arthur again, to study his features, to hear
his voice, definitely took the uppermost place in her mind. She thought of him always, and
she ceased to pretend to herself that this was not so. She continually expected him to call,
or to meet some one who had met him, or to receive a letter from him. She forced her memory
to reconstitute in detail his last visit to Hillport, and all the exacerbating scene of the
funeral feast, in order that she might dwell tenderly upon his gestures, his glances, his remarks,
the inflections of his voice. The eyes of her soul were ever beholding his form. Even at breakfast,
after the disappointment of the post, she would indulge in ridiculous hopes that he might be
abroad very early and would look in, and not until bedtime did she cease to listen for his
ring at the front door. No chance of a meeting was too remote for her wild fancy. But she dared
not breathe his name, dared not even adumbrate an inquiry; and her husband and daughters appeared
to have entered into a compact not to mention him. She did not take counsel with herself, examine
herself, demand from herself what was the significance of these symptoms; she could not; she
could only live from one moment to the next engrossed in an eternal expectancy which instead
of slackening became hourly more intense and painful. Towards the close of the afternoon of
the third day, in the drawing-room, she whispered that something decisive must happen soon,
soon.... The bell rang; her ears caught the distant sound for which they had so long waited.
Shuddering, she thanked heaven that she was alone. She could hear the opening and closing of
the front door. In three seconds Bessie would appear. She heard the knob of the drawing-room
door turn, and to hide her agitation she glanced aside at the clock. It was a quarter to six.
'He will stay the evening,' she thought.

'Mr. Dain,' Bessie proclaimed.

'Oh, how do you do, Mrs. Stanway? Stanway not come in yet, eh?' said the stout lawyer, approaching
her hurriedly with his fussy, awkward gait.

She could have laughed; but the visit was at any rate a distraction.

A few minutes later John arrived.

'Dain will stay for tea, Nora. Eh, Dain?' he said.

'Well--thanks,' was Dain's reply.

She asked herself, with sudden misgiving, what new thing was afoot.

After tea, the two men were left together at the table.

'Mother,' Ethel inquired eagerly, coming into the drawing-room, 'why are father and Mr. Dain
measuring the dining-room?'

'I don't know,' said Leonora. 'Are they?'

'Yes, Mr. Dain has got ever such a long tape.'

Leonora went into the kitchen and talked to the cook.

The next morning an idea occurred to her. Since the funeral, the girls had been down to see
Uncle Meshach each afternoon, and Leonora had called at Church Street in the forenoon, so that
the solitude of the old man might be broken at least twice a day. When she had suggested the
arrangement to her husband, John had answered stiffly, with an unimpeachable righteousness,
that everything possible must be done for his uncle. On this fourth day, Leonora sent Ethel
and Milly in the morning, with a message that she herself would come in the afternoon, by way
of change. The phrase that sang in her head was Arthur's promise to Meshach: 'I shall call
in a day or two.' She knew that he had not yet called. 'Don't wait tea, if I should be late,
dears,' she said smilingly to the girls; 'I may stay with uncle a while.' And she nearly ran
out of the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they had had tea, and when Leonora had performed the delicate feat of arranging Uncle
Meshach's domestic affairs without affronting his servant, she sat down opposite to him before
the fire in the parlour.

'You're for stopping a bit, eh?' he said, as if surprised.

'Well,' she laughed, 'wouldn't you like me to?'

'Oh, ay!' he admitted readily, 'I'st like it well enough. I don't know but what you aren't
all on ye very good--you and th' wenches, and Fred as calls in of nights. But it's all one
to me, I reckon. I take no pleasure i' life. Nay,' he went on, 'it isn't because of her. I've
felt as I was done for for months past. I mun just drag on.'

'Don't talk like that, uncle.' She tried conventionally to cheer him. 'You must rouse yourself.'

'What for?'

She sought a good answer to this conundrum. 'For all of us,' she said lamely, at length.

'Leonora, my lass,' he remarked drily, 'you're no better than the rest of 'em.'

And as she sat there in the age-worn parlour, and thought of the distant days of his energy,
when with his own hands he had pulled down a wall and replaced it by a glass partition, and
of the night when he lay like a corpse on Ethel's bed at the mercy of his nephew, and of Aunt
Hannah resting in the cold tomb just at the end of the street, her heart was filled for a moment
with an awful, ineffable, devastating sadness. It seemed to her that every grief, anxiety,
apprehension was joy itself compared to this supreme tragedy of natural decay.

'Shall I light the gas?' she suggested. The room was always obscure, and that evening happened
to be a sombre one.

'Ay!'

'There!' she said brightly, when the gas flared, 'that's better, isn't it? Aren't you going
to smoke?'

'Ay!'

In reaching a second spill from the spill-jar on the mantelpiece she noticed the clock. It
was only a quarter past five. 'He may call yet,' she dreamed, and then a more piquant thought:
'He may be at home when I get back.'

There was a perfunctory knock at the house-door. She started.

'It's the "Signal" lad,' Meshach explained. 'He keeps on bringing it, but I never look at it.'

She went into the lobby for the paper, and then read aloud to Uncle Meshach the items of local
news. The clock showed a quarter to six. Suddenly it struck her that Arthur Twemlow might have
called quite early in the afternoon and that Meshach might have forgotten to tell her. If he
had perchance called, and perchance informed Meshach that he was going on to Hillport, and
if he had walked up by the road while she came down by the fields! The idea was too dreadful.

'Has Mr. Twemlow been to see you yet?' she demanded, after a long silence, pretending to be
interested in the 'Signal.'

'No,' said Meshach; 'why dost ask?'

'I remembered he said he should.'

'He'll come, he'll come,' Meshach murmured confidently. 'Dain's been in,' he added, 'wi' papers
to sign, probate o' Hannah's will. Seemingly John's not satisfied, from what Dain hints.'

'Not satisfied with what?' Flushing a little, she dropped the paper; but she was still busily
employed in expecting Arthur to arrive.

'Eh, I canna' tell you, lass.' Meshach gave a grim sigh. 'You know as I altered my will?'

'Jack mentioned it.'

'Me and her, we thought it over. It was her as first said that Fred was getting a nice young
chap, and very respectable, and why should he be left out in the cold? And so I says to her,
I says, "Well, you can make your will i' favour o' Fred, if you've a mind." "Nay, Meshach,"
her says, "never ask me to cut out our John's name." "Well," I says to her, "if you won't,
I will. It'll give 'em both an even chance. Us'n die pretty near together, me and you, Hannah,
it'll be a toss-up," I says. Wasn't that fair?' Leonora made no reply. 'Wasn't that fair?'
he repeated.

She could not be sure, even then, whether Uncle Meshach had devised in perfect seriousness
this extraordinary arrangement for dealing justly between the surviving members of the Myatt
family, or whether he had always had a private humorous appreciation of the fantastic element
in it.

'I don't know,' she said.

'Well, lass,' he continued persuasively, sitting up in his chair, 'us ignored young Fred for
more till twenty year. And it wasna' right. Hannah said it wasna' right as Fred should suffer
for his mother and his grandfeyther. And then us give Fred and your John an equal chance, and
John's lost, and now John isna' satisfied, by all accounts.' She gazed at him with a gentle
smile. 'Why dostna' speak, lass?'

'What am I to say, uncle?'

'Wouldst like me to make a new will, and halve it between John and Fred? It wouldna' be fair
to Fred, not rightly fair, because he's run his risk for th' lot. But wouldst like it, lass?'

There was a trace of the old vitality in his shrivelled features, as he laid this offering
on the altar of her feminine charm.

'Oh, do, uncle!' she was about to say eagerly, but she thought in the same instant of John
standing over Meshach's body, with the ice-cold cloth in his hand, and something, some dim
instinct of a fundamental propriety, prevented her from uttering those words. 'I would like
you to do whatever you think right,' she answered with calmness.

Meshach was evidently disappointed.

'I shall see,' he ejaculated. And after a pause, 'John's i' smooth water again, isn't he? I
meant to ask Dain.'

'I think so,' said Leonora.

She had become restive. Soon afterwards she bade him good-night and departed. And all the way
up to Hillport she speculated upon the chances of finding Arthur in her drawing-room when she
got home.

       *       *       *       *       *

As she passed through the hall she knew at once that Arthur was not in the house and had not
been there; and the agitation of her heart subsided suddenly into the melancholy stillness
of defeated hope. She sadly admitted that she no longer knew herself, and that the Leonora
of old had been supplanted by a creature of incalculable moods, a feeble victim of strange
crises of secret folly. Through the open door of the drawing-room she could see Rose reading,
and Millicent searching among a pile of music on the piano. Bessie emerged from the dining-room
with a white cloth and the crumb-tray.

'Master's in there,' said Bessie; 'they didn't wait tea, ma'am.'

Leonora went into the dining-room, where John sat alone at the bare mahogany, smoking. With
her deep knowledge of him, she detected instantly that he had been annoyed by her absence from
tea. The condition of the sharp end of his cigar showed that he was perturbed, fretful, and
perhaps in a state of suspense. 'Well,' she thought with resignation, 'I may as well play the
wife,' and she sat down in a chair near him, put her purse on the table, and smiled generously.
Then she raised her veil, loosed the buttons of her new black coat, and began to draw off her
gloves.

'I've been waiting for you,' he said, and to her surprise his tone was extremely pacific.

'Have you?' she answered, intensifying all her alluring grace. 'I hurried home.'

'Yes, I wanted to ask you----' He stopped, ostensibly to put the cigar into his meerschaum holder.

She perceived that the desire to ingratiate fought within him against his vexation, and she
wondered, with a touch of cynicism, what new scheme had got possession of him, and how her
assistance was necessary to it.

'Would you like to go and live in the country, Nora?' He looked at her audaciously for a moment
and then his eyes shifted.

'For the summer, you mean?'

'Yes,' he said, 'for the summer and the winter too. Somewhere out Sneyd way.'

'And leave here?'

'Exactly.'

'But what about the house, Jack?'

'Sell it, if you like,' said John lightly.

'Oh, no! I shouldn't like that at all,' she replied, nervously but amiably. She wished to believe
that his suggestion about selling the house was merely an idle notion thrown out on the spur
of the moment, but she could not.

'You wouldn't?'

She shook her head. 'What has made you think of going to live in the country?' she asked him,
using a tone of gentle, mild curiosity. 'How should you get to the works in the morning?'

'There's a very good train service from Sneyd to Knype,' he said. 'But look here, Nora, why
wouldn't you care to sell the house?'

It was perfectly clear to her that, having mortgaged her house, he had now made up his mind
to sell it. He must therefore still be in financial difficulties, and she had unwittingly misled
Uncle Meshach.

'I don't know,' she answered coldly. 'I can't explain to you why. But I shouldn't.' And she
privately resolved that nothing should induce her to assent to this monstrous proposal. Her
heart hardened to steel. She felt prepared to suffer any unpleasantness, any indignity, rather
than give way.

'It isn't as if Hillport wasn't changing,' he went on, politely argumentative. 'It is changing.
In another ten years all the decent estates will have been broken up, and we shall be left
alone in the middle of streets of villas rented at nineteen guineas to escape the house duty.
You know the sort of thing.... And I've had a very fair offer for the place.'

'Whom from?'

'Well, Dain. I know he's wanted the house a long time. Of course, he's a hard nut to crack,
is Dain. But he went up to two thousand, and yesterday I got him to make it guineas. That's
a good price, Nora.'

'Is it?' she exclaimed absently.

'I should just imagine it was!' said John.

So it was expected of her that she should surrender her home, her domain, her kingdom, the
beautiful and mellow creation of her intelligence; and that she should surrender it to David
Dain, and to the impossible Mrs. Dain, and to their impossible niece. She remembered one of
Milly's wicked tales about Mrs. Dain and the niece. Milly had met Mrs. Dain in the street,
and in response to an inquiry about the health of the hypochondriacal niece, Mrs. Dain, gorgeously
attired, had replied: 'Her had but just rallied up off th' squab as I come out.' These were
the people who wanted to evict her from her house. And they would cover its walls with new
papers, and its floors with new carpets, in their own appalling taste; and they would crowd
the rooms with furniture as fat, clumsy, and disgusting as themselves. And Mrs. Dain would
hold sewing meetings in the drawing-room, and would stand chattering with tradesmen at the
front door, and would drive out to Sneyd to pay a call on Leonora and tell her how pleased
they all were with the place!

'Do you absolutely need the money, John?' She came to the point with a frank, blunt directness
which angered him.

'I don't absolutely need anything,' he retorted, controlling himself. 'But Dain made the offer----'

'Because if you do,' she proceeded, 'I dare say Uncle Meshach----'

'Look here, my girl,' he interrupted in turn, 'I've had exactly as much of Uncle Meshach as
I can stand. I know all about Uncle Meshach, what I wanted to know was whether you cared to
sell the house.' And then he added, after hesitating, and with a false graciousness, 'To oblige
me.'

There was a marked pause.

'I really shouldn't like to sell the house, John,' she answered quietly. 'It was aunt's, and----'

'Enough said! enough said!' he cried. 'That finishes it. I suppose you don't mind my having
asked you!'

He walked out of the room in a rage.

Tears came into her eyes, the tears of a wounded and proud heart. Was it conceivable that he
expected her to be willing to sell her house?... He must indeed be in serious straits. She
would consult Uncle Meshach.

The front door banged. And then Rose entered the room.

Leonora drove back the tears.

'Your father has been suggesting that we sell this house, and go and live at Sneyd,' she said
to the girl in a trembling voice. 'Aren't you surprised?' She seldom talked about John to her
daughters, but at that moment a desire for sympathy overwhelmed her.

'I should never be surprised at anything where father was concerned,' said Rose coldly, with
a slight hint of aloofness and of mental superiority. 'Not at anything.'

Leonora got up, and, leaving the room, went into the garden through the side door opposite
the stable. She could hear Millicent practising the Jewel Song from Gounod's Faust. As she
passed down the sombre garden the sound of the piano and of Milly's voice in the brilliant
ecstatic phrases of the song grew fainter. She shook violently, like a child who is recovering
from a fit of sobs, and without thinking she fastened her coat. 'What a shame it is that he
should want to sell my house! What a shame!' she murmured, full of an aggrieved resentment.
At the same time she was surprised to find herself so suddenly and so deeply disturbed.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the foot of the long garden was a low fence separating it from the meadow, and in the fence
a wicket from which ran a faint track to the main field-path. She leaned against the fence,
a few yards away from the wicket, at a spot where a clump of bushes screened the house. No
one could possibly have seen her from the house, even had the bushes not been there; but she
wished to isolate herself completely, and to find tranquillity in the isolation. The calm spring
night, chill but not too cold, cloudy but not too dark, favoured her intention. She gazed about
her at the obscure nocturnal forms of things, at the silent trees, and the mysterious clouds
gently rounded in their vast shape, and the sharp slant of the meadow. Far below could be seen
the red signal of the railway, and, mapped in points of light on the opposite slope, the streets
of Bursley. To the right the eternal conflagration of the Cauldon Bar furnaces illumined the
sky with wavering amber. And on the keen air came to her from the distance noises, soft but
impressive, of immense industrial activities.

She thought she could decipher a figure moving from the field-path across the gloom of the
meadow, and as she strained her eyes the figure became an indubitable fact. Presently she knew
that it was Arthur. 'At last!' her heart passionately exclaimed, and she was swept and drenched
with happiness as a ship by the ocean. She forgot everything in the tremendous shock of joy.
She felt as though she could have waited no more, and that now she might expire in a bliss
intense and fatal, in a sigh of supreme content. She could not stir nor speak, and he was striding
towards the wicket unconscious of her nearness! She coughed, a delicate feminine cough, and
then he turned aside from the direction of the wicket and approached the fence, peering.

'Is that you?' he asked.

'Yes.'

Across the fence they clasped hands. And in spite of her great wish not to do so she clutched
his hand tightly in her long fingers, and held it for a moment. And as she felt the returning
pressure of his large, powerful, protective grasp, she covered--but in imagination only--she
covered his face, which she could shadowily see, with brave and abandoned kisses; and she whispered
to him, but unheard: 'Admit that I am made for love.' She feared, in those beautiful and shameless
instants, neither John, nor Ethel and Milly, nor even Rose. She knew suddenly why men and women
leave all--honour, duty, and affection--and follow love. Then her arm dropped, and there was
silence.

'What are you doing here?' She was unable to speak in an ordinary tone, but she spoke. Her
voice exquisitely trembled, and its vibrations said everything that the words did not say.

'Why,' he answered, and his voice too bore strange messages, 'I called at Church Street and
Mr. Myatt said you had only been gone a few minutes, and so I came right away. I guessed I
should overtake you. I don't know what he would think.' Arthur laughed nervously.

She smiled at him, satisfied. And how well she knew that her smiling face, caught by him dimly
in the obscurity of the night, troubled him like an enchanting and enigmatic vision!

After they had looked at each other, speechless, for a while, the strong influence of convention
forced them again into unnecessary, irrelevant talk.

'What's this about you selling this place?' he inquired in a low, mild tone.

'Have you heard?'

'Yes,' he said, 'I did hear something.'

'Ah!' she murmured, wrinkling her forehead in a pretty make-believe of woe--the question of
the sale had ceased to be acute: 'I just came out here to think about it.'

'But you aren't really going to----'

'No, of course not.'

She had no desire to discuss the tedious affair, because she was infallibly certain of his
entire sympathy. Explanations on her side, and assurances on his, were equally superfluous.

'But won't you come into the house?' She invited him as a sort of afterthought.

'Why?' he demanded bluntly.

She hesitated before replying: 'It will look so queer, us staying here like this.' As soon
as she had uttered the words she suspected that she had said something decisive and irretrievable.

He put his hands into the pockets of his overcoat and walked several times to and fro a few
paces. Then he stopped in front of her.

'I guess we are bound to look queer, you and I, some day. So it may as well be now,' he said.

It was in this exchange of sentences that their mutual passion became at length articulate.
A single discreet word spoken quickly, and she might even yet perhaps have withdrawn from the
situation. But she did not speak; she could not speak; and soon she knew that her own silence
had bound her. She yielded herself with poignant and magnificent joy to the profound drama
which had been magically created by this apparently commonplace dialogue. The climax had been
achieved, and she was conscious of being lifted into a sublime exultation, and of being cut
off from all else in the world save him. She looked at him intently with a sadness that was
the cloak of celestial rapture. 'How courageous you are!' her soft eyes said. 'I should never
have dared. What a man!' It seemed to her that her heart would break under the strain of that
ecstasy. She had not imagined the possibility of such bliss.

'Listen!' he proceeded. 'I ought to be in New York--I oughtn't to be here. I must tell you.
Scarcely a fortnight ago, one afternoon while I was working in my office in Fourteenth Street,
I had a feeling I would be bound to come over. I said to myself the idea was preposterous.
But the next thing I knew I was arranging to come. I couldn't believe I was coming. Not even
when I had booked my berth and boarded the steamer, not even when the steamer was actually
passing Sandy Hook, could I believe that I was really coming. I said to myself I was mad. I
said to myself that no man in his senses could behave as I was behaving. And when I got to
Southampton I said I would go right back. And yet I couldn't help getting into the special
for London. And when I got to London I said I would act sensible and go back. But I met young
Burgess, and the next thing I knew I was at Euston. And here I am pretending that it's my new
London branch that brings me over, and doing business I don't want to do in Knype and Cauldon
and Bursley. And I'm killing myself--yes, I am; I tell you I couldn't stand much more--and
I wouldn't be sure I wasn't killing you. Some folks would say the whole thing was perfectly
dreadful, but I don't care so long as you--so long as you don't. I'm not conceited really,
but it looks like conceit--me talking like this and assuming that you're ready to stand and
listen. From the small armoury you pass, as I said before, into the drawing-room, a large, lofty,
and splendid salon, with antique ebony furniture and crimson silk hangings, cabinets, china,
and mirrors quantum suff, and some portraits; among the rest glorious
John Dryden, by Sir Peter Lely, with his gray hairs floating about
in a most picturesque style, eyes full of wildness, presenting the
old Bard, I take it, in one of those "tremulous moods," in which we
have it on record he appeared when interrupted in the midst of his
Alexander's Feast.

From this you pass into the largest of all the apartments, the library, which, I must say, is
really a noble room. It is an oblong of some fifty feet by thirty, with a projection in the centre,
opposite the fireplace, terminating in a grand bow window, fitted up with books also, and, in
fact, constituting a sort of chapel to the church.

The roof is of carved oak again--a very rich pattern--I believe chiefly
a la Roslin, and the bookcases, which are also of richly carved oak,
reach high up the walls all round.

The collection amounts, in this room, to some fifteen or twenty thousand
volumes, arranged according to their subjects: British history and
antiquities, filling the whole of the chief wall; English poetry and
drama, classics and miscellanies, one end: foreign literature, chiefly
French and German, the other.

The cases on the side opposite the fire are wired and locked, as containing articles very precious
and very portable. One consists entirely of books and MSS. relating to the insurrections of
1715 and 1745; and another (within the recess of the bow window),
of treatises de re magica, both of these being (I am told, and can
well believe), in their several ways, collections of the rarest curiosity.

My cicerone pointed out, in one corner, a magnificent set of Mountfaucon,
ten volumes folio, bound in the richest manner in scarlet, and stamped
with the royal arms, the gift of his present majesty.

There are few living authors of whose works presentation copies are
not to be found here.

My friend showed me inscriptions of that sort in, I believe, every European dialect extant.
The books are all in prime condition, and bindings that would satisfy
Mr. Dibdin.

The only picture is Sir Walter's eldest son, in hussar uniform, and
holding his horse, by Allan of Edinburgh, a noble portrait, over the
fireplace; and the only bust is that of Shakspeare, from the Avon
monument, in a small niche in the centre of the east side.

On a rich stand of porphyry, in one corner, reposes a tall silver
urn, filled with bones from the Piraeus, and bearing the inscription,
"Given by George Gordon, Lord Byron, to Sir Walter Scott, Bart."

It contained the letter which accompanied the gift till lately: it has disappeared; no one guesses
who took it, but whoever he was, as my guide observed, he must have
been a thief for thieving's sake truly, as he durst no more exhibit
his autograph than tip himself a bare bodkin.

Sad, infamous tourist, indeed! Although I saw abundance of comfortable-looking desks and arm
chairs, yet this room seemed rather too large and fine for work, and I found accordingly, after
passing a double pair of doors, that there was a sanctum within and beyond this library. And here
you may believe, was not to me the least interesting, though by no
means the most splendid, part of the suite.

You have been both at the Elisée Bourbon and Malmaison, and remember the library at one or other
of those places, I forget which; this gallery is much in the same style. There is only one window
pierced in a very thick wall, so that the place is rather sombre; the light tracery work of
the gallery overhead harmonizes with the books well

.
 Time itself had paused.

'Mother!' Millicent sang again, nearer, more strongly and purely in the night. 'We are waiting
for you to come in!' She varied a little the phrase from the Jewel Song. 'To come in!' The
long sustained notes seemed to become a beautiful warning, and then the sound expired.

Leonora withdrew her hand.

'I shall think it out, and write you to-morrow,' Arthur whispered, and was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day, after a futile morning of hesitations, Leonora decided in the afternoon that
she would go out for a walk and return in some definite state of mind. She loosed Bran, and
the dog, when he had finished his elephantine gambades, followed her close at heel, with all
stateliness, to the wide marsh on the brow of the hill. Here she began actively and seriously
to cogitate.

John was sulking; and it was seldom that he sulked. He had not spoken to her again, neither
on the previous evening nor at breakfast; he had said nothing whatever to any one, except to
tell Bessie that he should not be at home for dinner; on committee-meeting days, when he was
engaged at the Town Hall, John sometimes dined at the Tiger. His attitude produced small effect
on Leonora. She was far too completely absorbed in herself to be perturbed by the offensive
symptoms of her husband's wrath. She had neglected even to call on Uncle Meshach; and as she
strolled about the marsh she thought vaguely and perfunctorily that she must see Uncle Meshach
soon and acquaint him with John's difficulties.

Pride as much as joy and alarm filled her heart. She was proud of her perilous love; she would
have liked proudly to confide it to some friend, some mature and brilliant woman who knew the
world and understood things, and who would talk rationally; it seemed to her that this secret
idyll, at once tender and sincere and rather dashing, was worthy of pride. She knew that many
women, languishing in the greyness of an impeccable and frigid domesticity, would be capable
of envying her; she remembered that, in reading the newspapers, she had sometimes timidly envied
the heroines of the matrimonial court who had bought romance at the price of esteem and of
peace. Then suddenly the whole matter slipped into unreality, and she could not credit it.
Was it possible that she, a respectable matron, a known figure, the mother of adult daughters,
had fallen in love with a man not her husband, had had a secret interview with her lover, and
was anticipating, not a retreat, but an advance? And she thought, as every honest woman has
thought in like case: 'This may happen to others; one hears of it, one reads about it; but
surely it cannot have happened to me!' And when she had admitted that it had in fact happened
to her, and had perceived with a kind of shock that the heroines of the matrimonial court were
real persons, everyday creatures of flesh-and-blood, she thought, again like the rest: 'Ah!
But my affair is different from all the others. There is something in it, something indefinable
and precious, which makes it different.'

She said: 'Can one help falling in love? Can one be blamed for that?'

For John she had little compassion, and the gay and feverish existence of New York spread out
invitingly before her in a vision full of piquant contrasts with the death-in-life of the Five
Towns! But her beloved girls! They were an insuperable barrier. She could not leave them; she
could not forfeit the right to look them in the eyes without embarrassment ... And then the
next moment--somehow, she did not know how--the difficulty of the girls was arranged. And she
had departed. She had left the Five Towns for ever. And she was in the train, in the hotel,
on the steamer; she saw every detail of the escape. Oh! The rapture! The tremors! The long
sigh! The surrender! The intense living! Surely no price could be too great....

No! Common sense, the acquirement of forty years, supervened, and informed her wild heart,
with all the cold arrogance of sagacity, that these imaginings were vain. She felt that she
must write a brief and firm letter to Arthur and tell him to desist. She saw with extraordinary
clearness that this course was inevitable. And lest her resolution might slacken, she turned
instantly towards home and began to hurry. The dog glanced up questioningly, and hurried too.

'Why!' she reflected. 'People would say: "And her husband's aunt scarcely cold in her grave!"'
She laughed scornfully.

A carriage overtook her. It was Mrs. Dain's, coming from the direction of Oldcastle.

'Good afternoon to you,' Mrs. Dain shouted, without stopping, and then, when she caught sight
of Bran: 'Bless us! The dog hasn't brukken his leg after all!'

'Broken his leg!' Leonora repeated, astonished. The carriage was now in front of her.

'Our Polly come in this morning and sat hersen down on a chair and told us as your dog had
brukken his leg. What tales one hears!' Mrs. Dain had to twist her stout neck dangerously in
order to finish the sentence.

'I should think so!' was Leonora's private comment, her gaze fixed on the scarlet of Mrs. Dain's
nodding bonnet.

In the little room off the dining-room Leonora dipped pen in ink to write to Arthur. She wrote
the date, and she wrote the word 'Dear.' And she could not proceed. She knew that she could
not compose a letter which would be effective. She went to the window and looked out, biting
the pen. 'What am I to do?' she whispered, in terror. 'What am I to do?' Then she saw Ethel
running hard down the drive to the front door.

'Oh, mother!' The pale girl burst into the room. 'Father's done something to himself. Fred's
come up. They're bringing him.'

       *       *       *       *       *

John Stanway had called at the chemist's in the Market Place and had given a circumstantial
description of an accident to Bran. It appeared that while Carpenter was washing the waggonette,
Bran being loose in the stable-yard, the groom had suddenly slipped the lever of the carriage-jack
and the off hind wheel had caught Bran's hind leg and snapped it like a piece of wood. The
chemist had suggested prussic acid, and John had laughingly answered that perhaps the chemist
would be good enough to come up and show them how to administer prussic acid to a dog of Bran's
size in great pain. John explained that the animal was now fast by the collar, and he had demanded
a large dose of morphia, together with a hypodermic instrument. Having obtained these, and
precise instructions for their use, John had hurried away. It was not till three hours had
elapsed that a startling suspicion had disturbed the chemist's easy mind. By that time, his
preparations completed, John had dropped unconscious from the arm-chair in his office at the
works, and Bursley was provided with one of those morbid sensations which more than joy or
triumph electrify the stagnant pulses of a provincial town. Scores of persons followed the
cab which conveyed Stanway from the works to his house; and on the route most of the inhabitants
seemed to know in advance, by some strange intuition, that the vehicle was coming, and at their
windows or at their gates (according to social status) they stood ready to watch it pass. And
even after John had entered his home and had been carried upstairs, and the cab and the policeman
had gone, and the doctor had gone, and Fred Ryley and Mr. Mayer, the works manager, had gone,
a crowd still remained on the footpath, staring at the gravelled drive and at the front door,
silent, patient, implacable.

The doctor had tried hot coffee, artificial respiration, and other remedies, but without the
least success, and he had reluctantly departed, solemn for once, leaving four women to understand
that there was nothing to do save to wait for the final sigh. The inactivity was dreadful for
them. They could only look at each other and think, and move to and fro aimlessly in the large
bedroom, and light the gas at dusk, and examine from moment to moment those contracted pupils
and that damp white brow, and listen for the faint occasional breaths. They did not think the
thoughts which, could they have foreseen the situation, they might have expected to think.
It did not occur to them to search for the causes of the disaster, nor to speculate upon its
results in regard to themselves: they surrendered to the supreme fact. They were all incapable
of logical and ordered reflections, and in the hushed torpor of their secret hearts there wandered,
loosely, little disconnected ideas and sensations; as that the Stanway family was at length
getting its full share of vicissitude and misfortune, that John was after all more important
and more truly dominant and more intimately a part of their lives than they had imagined, that
this affair was a thousand miles removed from that of Uncle Meshach, that they were fully supplied
with mourning, and that suicide was mysteriously different from their previous notion of it.
The impressive thoughts, the obvious thoughts--that if their creeds were sound, a soul was
about to enter into eternal torment, and that their lives would be violently changed, and that
they would be branded before the world as the wife and the daughters of a defaulter and a self-murderer--did
not by any means absorb their minds in those first hours.

In the attitude of the girls towards Leonora there was a sort of religious deference, as of
priestesses to one soon to be sacrificed. 'She is the central figure of the tragedy,' they
had the air of saying to each other. 'We feel the affliction, but it cannot be demanded from
us that we should feel it as she feels it. We are only beginning to live; we have the future;
but she--she will have nothing. She will be the widow.' And the significance of that terrible
word--all that it implied of social diminishment, of feeding on memory, and of mere waiting
for death--seemed to cling about Leonora as she stood restlessly observant by the bed. And
when Rose urged her to drink some tea, she could not help drinking the tea humbly, from a sense
of the duty of doing what she was told. It was not Rose's fault that Rose was superior, and
that only twenty-four hours ago she had coldly informed her mother that no act of her father's
would surprise her. Leonora resigned herself to humility.

'Mamma,' said Millicent, creeping into the room after an absence, 'Uncle Meshach is here with
Mr. Twemlow, and he says he's coming in. Must he?'

'Of course, darling,' Leonora answered, without turning her head.

Uncle Meshach appeared, leaning on his stick and on Arthur's arm. He wore his overcoat and
even his hat, and a white knitted muffler encircled his shrivelled neck in loose folds. No
one spoke as the old and feeble man, with short uncertain steps, drew Arthur towards the bed
and gazed at his dying nephew. Meshach looked long, and sighed. Suddenly he demanded of Leonora
in a whisper:

'Is he unconscious?'

Leonora nodded.

Drawing a little nearer to the bed, Meshach signed to Millicent to approach, and gave her his
stick. Then he unbuttoned his overcoat, and his coat, and the flap-pocket of his trousers,
and after much searching found a box of matches. He shook out a match clumsily, and struck
it, and came still nearer to the bed. All wondered apprehensively what the old man was going
to do, but none dared interfere or protest because he was so old, and so precariously attached
to life, and because he was the head of the family. With his thin, veined, trembling hand,
he passed the lighted match close across John's eyeballs; not a muscle twitched. Then he extinguished
the match, put it in the box, returned the box to his pocket, and buttoned the pocket and his
coats.

'Ay!' he breathed. 'The lad's unconscious right enough. Let's be going.'

Taking his stick from Milly, he clutched Arthur's arm again, and very slowly left the room.

After a moment's hesitation Leonora followed and overtook them at the bottom of the stairs;
it was the first time she had forsaken the bedside. She was surprised to see Fred Ryley in
the hall, self-conscious but apparently determined to be quite at home. She remembered that
he said he should come up again as soon as he had arranged matters at the works.

'Just take Mr. Myatt to the cab, will you?' said Twemlow quietly to Fred. 'I'll follow.'

'Certainly,' Fred agreed, pulling his moustache nervously. 'Now, Mr. Myatt, let me help you.'

'Ay!' said Meshach. 'Thou shalt help me if thou'n a mind.' As he was feeling for the step with
his stick he stopped and looked round at Leonora. 'Lass!' he exclaimed, 'thou toldst me John
was i' smooth water.' Then he departed and they could hear his shuffling steps on the gravel.

Twemlow glanced inquiringly at Leonora.

'Come in here,' she said briefly, pointing to the drawing-room. They entered; it was dark.

'Your uncle made me drive up with him,' Arthur explained, as if in apology.

She ignored the remark. 'You must go back to New York--at once,' she told him, in a dry, curt
voice.

'Yes,' he assented, 'I suppose I'd better.'

'And don't write to me--until after I have written.'

'Oh, but----' he began.

She thought wildly: 'This man, with his reason and his judgment, has not the slightest notion
how I feel, not the slightest!'

'I must write,' he said in a persuasive tone.

'No!' she cried passionately and vehemently. 'You aren't to write, and you aren't to see me.
You must promise, absolutely.'

'For how long?' he asked.

She shook her head. 'I don't know, I can't tell.'

'But isn't that rather----'

'Will you promise?' she cried once more, quite loudly and almost fiercely. And her accents
were so full of entreaty, of command, and of despair, that Arthur feared a nervous crisis for her.

'If you wish it,' he said, forced to yield.

And even then she could not be content.

'You give me your word to do nothing at all until you hear from me?'

He paused, but he saw no alternative to submission. 'Yes.'

She thanked him, and without shaking hands or saying good-night she went upstairs and resumed
her place by the bedside. She could hear Uncle Meshach's cab drive away.

'How came Mr. Twemlow to be here, mother?' Rose demanded quietly.

'I don't know,' Leonora replied. 'He must have been at uncle's.'

When the doctor had been again and gone, and various neighbours and the 'Signal' reporter had
called to inquire for news, and the hour was growing late, Ethel said to her mother, 'Fred
thinks he had better stay all night.'

'But why?' Leonora asked.

'Well, mother,' said Milly, 'it's just as well to have a man in the house.'

'He can rest on the Chesterfield in the drawing-room,' Ethel added. 'Then if he's wanted----'

'Yes, yes,' Leonora agreed. 'And tell him he's very kind.'

At midnight, Fred was reading in the drawing-room, the man in the house, the ultimate fount
of security for seven women. Bessie, having refused positively to go to bed, slept in a chair
in the kitchen, her heels touching the scrap of hearthrug which lay like a little island on
the red tiles in front of the range. Rose and Millicent had retired to bed till three o'clock.
Ethel, as the eldest, stayed with her mother. When the hall-clock sounded one, meaning half
past twelve, Leonora glanced at her daughter, who reclined on the sofa at the foot of the beds;
the girl had fallen into a doze.

John's condition was unchanged; the doctor had said that he might possibly survive for many
hours. He lay on his back, with open eyes, and damp face and hair; his arms rested inert on
the sheet; and underneath that thin covering his chest rose and fell from time to time, with
a scarcely perceptible movement. It seemed to Leonora that she could realise now what had happened
and what was to happen. In the nocturnal solemnity of the house filled with sleeping and quiescent
youth, she who was so mature and so satiate had the sensation of being alone with her mate.
Images of Arthur Twemlow did not distract her. With the full strength of her mind she had shut
an iron door on the episode in the garden; it was as though it had never existed. And she gazed
at John with calm and sad compassion. 'I would not sell my home,' she reflected, 'and here
is the consequence of refusal.' She wished she had yielded--and she could perceive how unimportant,
comparatively, bricks-and-mortar might be--but she did not blame herself for not having yielded.
She merely regretted her sensitive obstinacy as a misfortune for both of them. She had a vision
of humanity in a hurried procession, driven along by some force unseen and ruthless, a procession
in which the grotesque and the pitiable were always occurring. She thought of John standing
over Meshach with the cold towel, and of Meshach passing the flame across John's dying eyes,
and these juxtapositions appeared to her intolerably mournful in their ridiculous grimness.

Impelled by a physical curiosity, she lifted the sheet and scrutinised John's breast, so pallid
against the dark red of his neck, and bent down to catch the last tired efforts of the heart
within. And the idea of her extraordinary intimacy with this man, of the incessant familiarity
of more than twenty years, struck her and overwhelmed her. She saw that nothing is so subtly
influential as constant uninterrupted familiarity, nothing so binding, and perhaps nothing
so sacred. It was a trifle that they had not loved. They had lived. Ah! she knew him so profoundly
that words could not describe her knowledge. He kept his own secrets, hundreds of them; and
he had, in a way, astounded and shocked her by his suicide. Yet, in another way, this miserable
termination did not at all surprise her; and his secrets were petty, factual things of no essential
import, which left her mystic omniscience of him unimpaired.

She looked at his eyes, and thought pitifully: 'These eyes cannot see that I uncover him.'
Then she looked again at his breast, which heaved in shallow respirations. And at the moment
he exhaled a sigh, so softly delicate and gentle that it might have been the sigh of an infant
sinking to sleep. She put her ear quickly to the still breast, as to a sea-shell, and listened
intently, and caught no rumour of life there. Startled, she glanced at the jaw, which had dropped,
and then at Ethel dozing on the sofa.

The room was filled for her with the majestic sound of trumpets, loud, sustained, and thrilling,
but heard only by the soul; a noble and triumphant fanfare announcing the awful advent of those
forces which are beyond the earthly sense. John's body lay suddenly deserted and residual;
that deceitful brain, and that lying tongue, and that murderous hand had already begun to decay;
and the informing fragment of eternal and universal energy was gone to its next manifestation
and its next task, unconscious, irresponsible, and unchanged. The ineptitude of human judgments
had been once more emphasised, and the great excellence of charity.

'Ethel,' said Leonora timorously, waking with a touch the young and beautiful girl whose flushed
cheek was pressed against the cushion of the sofa. 'He's gone.... Call Fred.'

CHAPTER XI

THE REFUSAL

Fifteen months after John's death, and the inquest on his body, and the clandestine funeral,
Leonora sat alone one evening in the garden of the house at Hillport. She wore a black dress
trimmed with jet; a narrow band of white muslin clasped her neck, and from her shoulders hung
a long thin antique gold chain, once the ornament of Aunt Hannah. Her head was uncovered, and
the mild breeze which stirred the new leaves of the poplars moved also the stray locks of her
hair. Her calm and mature beauty was unchanged; it was a common remark in the town that during
the past year she had looked handsomer than ever, more content, radiant, and serene. 'And it's
not surprising, either!' people added. The homestead appeared to be as of old. Carpenter was
feeding Prince in the stable; Bran lay huge and benign at the feet of his mistress; the borders
of the lawn were vivid with bloom; and within the house Bessie still ruled the kitchen. No
luxury was abated, and no custom altered. Time apparently had nothing to show there, save an
engagement ring on Bessie's finger. Many things, however, had occurred; but they had seemed
to occur so placidly, and the days had been so even, that the term of her widowhood was to
Leonora more like three months than fifteen, and she often reminded herself: 'It was last spring,
not this, that he died.'

'The business is right enough!' Fred Ryley had said positively, with an emphasis on the word
'business,' when he met Leonora and Uncle Meshach in family council, during the first week
of the disaster; and Meshach had replied: 'Thou shalt prove it, lad!' The next morning Mr.
Mayer, the manager, and everybody on the bank, learned that Fred, with old Myatt at his back,
was in sole control of the works at Shawport; creditors breathed with relief; and the whole
of Bursley remembered that it had always prophesied that Fred's sterling qualities were bound
to succeed. Meshach lent several thousands of pounds to Fred at five per cent., and Fred was
to pay half the net profits of the business to Leonora as long as she lived. The youth did
not change his lodgings, nor his tailor, nor his modest manners; but he became nevertheless
suddenly important, and none appreciated this fact better than Mr. Mayer, whose sandy hair
was getting grey, and who, having six children but no rich great-uncle, could never hope to
earn more than three pounds a week. Fred was now an official member of the Myatt clan, and,
in the town, men of position, pompous individuals who used to ignore him, greeted the sole
principal of Twemlow & Stanway's with a certain cordiality. After an interval his engagement
to Ethel was announced. Every evening he came up to Hillport. The couple were ardently and
openly in love; they expected always to have the dining-room at their private disposal, and
they had it. Ethel simply adored him, and he was immeasurably proud of her. Even in presence
of the family they would sit hand in hand, making no attempt to conceal their bliss. For the
rest Fred's attitude to Leonora was very affectionate and deferential; it touched her, though
she knew he worshipped her ignorantly. Rose and Millicent wondered 'what Ethel could see in
him'; he was neither amusing nor smart nor clever, nor even vivacious; he had little acquaintance
with games, music, novels, or the feminist movement; he was indeed rather dull; but they liked
him because he was fundamentally and invariably 'nice.' At the close of the year of Stanway's
death, Fred had paid to Leonora four hundred and fifty pounds as her share of the profits of
the firm for nine months. But long before that Leonora was rich. Uncle Meshach had died and
left her the Myatt fortune for life, with remainder to the three girls absolutely in equal
shares. Fred was the executor and trustee, and Fred's own share of the bounty was a total remission
of Meshach's loan to him. Thus it is that providence watches over the wealthy, the luxurious,
and the well-connected, and over the lilies of the field who toil not.

Aroused from lethargy by the dramatic circumstances of her father's death, Rose had resumed
her reading with a vigour that amounted almost to fury. In the following January she miraculously
passed the Matriculation examination of London University in the first division, and on returning
home she informed Leonora that she had decided to go back to London and study medicine at a
hospital for women.

But of the three girls, it was Millicent who had made the most history. Millicent was rapidly
developing the natural gift, so precious to the theatrical artist, of existing picturesquely
in the eye of the public. When the rehearsals of Princess Ida began for the annual performance
of the Operatic Society Milly confidently expected to receive the principal part, despite the
fact that Lucy Turner, who had the prescriptive right to it, was once more in a position to
sing; and Milly was not disappointed. As a heroine of comic opera she now accounted herself
an extremely serious person, and it soon became apparent that the conductor and his prima donna
would have to decide between them who was to control the rehearsals while Milly was on the
stage. One evening a difference of opinion as to the tempo of a song and chorus reached the
condition of being acute. Exasperated by the pretty and wayward child, the conductor laid down
his stick and lighted a cigarette, and those who knew him knew that the rehearsal would not
proceed until the duel had been fought to a finish. Milly thought hard and said: 'Mr. Corfe
says the Hanbridge people would jump at me!' 'My good girl,' the conductor replied, 'Mr. Corfe's
views on the acrobatic propensities of the Hanbridge people are just a shade off the point.'
Every one laughed, except Milly. She possessed little appreciation of wit, and she had scarcely
understood the remark; but she had an objection to the laughter, and a very strong objection
to being the conductor's good girl. The rest was like walnuts and wine, an agreeable aftertaste.

But
notwithstanding all this reading I can lay no claim to scholarship of any kind; for save life
I could never learn anything correctly. I am a student only of ball rooms, bar rooms, streets,
and alcoves. I have read very little; but all I read I can turn to account, and all I read
I remember. To read freely, extensively, has always been my ambition, and my utter inability
to study has always been to me a subject of grave inquietude,--study as contrasted with a general
and haphazard gathering of ideas taken in flight. But in me the impulse is so original to frequent
the haunts of men that it is irresistible, conversation is the breath of my nostrils, I watch
the movement of life, and my ideas spring from it uncalled for, as buds from branches. Contact
with the world is in me the generating force; without it what invention I have is thin and sterile,
and it grows thinner rapidly, until it dies away utterly, as it did in the composition of my
unfortunate "Roses of Midnight."

Men and women, oh the strength of the living faces! conversation,
oh the magic of it!

It is a fabulous river of gold where the precious metal is washed up without stint for all
to take, to take as much as he can carry. Two old ladies discussing the peerage? Much may be learned,
it is gold; poets and wits, then it is fountains whose spray solidifies into jewels, and every
herb and plant is begemmed with the sparkle of the diamond and the glow of the ruby.

I did not go to either Oxford or Cambridge, but I went to the "Nouvelle Athènes." What is the
"Nouvelle Athènes"? He who would know anything of my life must know something of the academy
of the fine arts. Not the official stupidity you read of in the daily papers, but the real
French academy, the café. The "Nouvelle Athènes" is a café on the Place Pigale. Ah! the morning
idlenesses and the long evenings when life was but a summer illusion, the grey moonlights on
the Place where we used to stand on the pavements, the shutters clanging up behind us, loath
to separate, thinking of what we had left said, and how much better we might have enforced our
arguments. Dead and scattered are all those who used to assemble there, and those years and
our home, for it was our home, live only in a few pictures and a few pages of prose. The same
old story, the vanquished only are victorious; and though unacknowledged, though unknown,
the influence of the "Nouvelle Athènes" is inveterate in the artistic thought of the nineteenth
century.

How magnetic, intense, and vivid are these memories of youth.

       With what strange, almost unnatural clearness do I see and hear,--see
the white face of that café, the white nose of that block of houses,
stretching up to the Place, between two streets.

I can see down the incline of those two streets, and I know what shops are there; I can hear the
glass-door of the café grate on the sand as I open it. I can recall the smell of every hour.
In the morning that of eggs frizzling in butter, the pungent cigarette, coffee and bad cognac;
at five o'clock the fragrant odour of absinthe; and soon after the steaming soup ascends from the
kitchen; and as the evening advances, the mingled smells of cigarettes, coffee, and weak beer. A
partition, rising a few feet or more over the hats, separates the glass front from the main
body of the café. The usual marble tables are there, and it is there we sat and aestheticised
till two o'clock in the morning. But who is that man? he whose prominent eyes flash with excitement.
That is Villiers de l'Isle-Adam. The last or the supposed last of the great family. He is
telling that girl a story--that fair girl with heavy eyelids, stupid and sensual. She is, however,
genuinely astonished and interested, and he is striving to play upon her ignorance. Listen to
him. "Spain--the night is fragrant with the sea and the perfume of the orange trees, you know--a
midnight of stars and dreams. Now and then the silence is broken by the sentries challenging--that
is all. But not in Spanish but in French are the challenges given; the town is in the hands of the
French; it is under martial law. But now an officer passes down a certain garden, a Spaniard
disguised as a French officer; from the balcony the family--one of
the most noble and oldest families Spain can boast of, a thousand
years, long before the conquest of the Moors--watches him. She had to watch over her girls, and especially over Rose and Milly. And
as she sat in the garden with Bran at her feet, in the solitude which foreshadowed the more
poignant solitude to come, she said to herself with passionate maternity: 'I shall watch over
them. If anything occurs I shall always be ready.' And this blissful and transforming thought,
this vehement purpose, allayed somewhat the misgivings which she had long had about Millicent,
and which her recent glimpses into the factitious and erratic world of the theatre had only
served to increase.

It was Milly's affair which had at length brought Leonora to the point of communicating with
Arthur Twemlow. In the first weeks of widowhood, the most terrible of her life, she could not
dream of writing to him. Then the sacrifice had dimly shaped itself in her mind, and while
actually engaged in fighting against it she hesitated to send any message whatever. And when
she realised that the sacrifice was inevitable for her, when she inwardly knew that Arthur
and the splendid rushing life of New York must be renounced in obedience to the double instinct
of maternity and of repentance, she could not write. She felt timorous; she was unable to frame
the sentences. And she procrastinated, ruled by her characteristic quality of supineness. Once
she heard that he had been over to London and gone back; she drew a deep breath as though a
peril had been escaped, and procrastinated further. Then came the overtures from Lionel Belmont,
or at least from his agents, to Milly. Belmont was a New Yorker, and the notion suddenly struck
her of writing to Arthur for information about Belmont. It was a capricious notion, but it
provided an extrinsic excuse for a letter which might be followed by another of more definite
import. In the end she was obliged to yield to it. She wrote, as she had performed every act
of her relationship with Arthur, unwillingly, in spite of her reason, governed by a strange
and arbitrary impulse. No sooner was the letter in the pillar-box than she began to wonder
what Arthur would say in his response, and how she should answer that response. She grew impatient
and restless, and called at the chief Post Office in Bursley for information about the American
mails. On this evening, as Leonora sat in the garden, Milly was reciting at a concert at Knype,
and Ethel and Fred had accompanied her. Leonora, resisting some pressure, had declined to go
with them. Assuming that Arthur wrote on the day he received her missive, his reply, she had
ascertained, ought to be delivered in Hillport the next morning, but there was just a chance
that it might be delivered that night. Hence she had stayed at home, expectant, and--with all
her serenity--a little nervous and excited.

Carpenter emerged from the region of the stable and began to water some flower-beds in the
vicinity of her seat.

'Terrible dry month we've had, ma'am,' he murmured in his quiet pastoral voice, waving the
can to and fro.

She agreed perfunctorily. Her mind was divided between suspense concerning the postman, contemplation
of the placid vista of the remainder of her career, and pleasure in the languorous charm of
the May evening.

Bran moved his head, and rising ponderously walked round the seat towards the house. Then Carpenter,
following the dog with his eyes, smiled and touched his cap. Leonora turned sharply. Arthur
Twemlow himself stood on the step of the drawing-room window, and Bessie's white apron was
just disappearing within.

In the first glance Leonora noticed that Arthur was considerably thinner. She was overcome
by a violent emotion that contained both fear and joy. And as he approached her, agitated and
unsmiling, the joy said: 'How heavenly it is to see him again!' But the fear asked: 'Why is
he so worn? What have you been doing to him all these months, Leonora?' She met him in the
middle of the lawn, and they shook hands timidly, clumsily, embarrassed. Carpenter, with that
inborn delicacy of tact which is the mark of a simple soul, walked away out of sight, and Bran,
receiving no attention, followed him.

'Were you surprised to see me?' Arthur lamely questioned.

In their hearts a thousand sensations struggled, some for expression, others for concealment;
and speech, pathetically unequal to the swift crisis, was disconcerted by it almost to the
verge of impotence.

'Yes,' she said. 'Very.'

'You ought not to have been,' he replied.

His tone alarmed her. 'Why?' she said. 'When did you get my letter?'

'Just after one o'clock to-day.'

'To-day?'

'I was in London. It was sent on to me from New York.'

She was relieved. When she saw him first at the window, she had a lightning vision of him tearing
open her letter in New York, jumping instantly into a cab, and boarding the English steamer.
This had frightened her. It was, if not exactly reassuring, at any rate less terrifying, to
learn that he had flown to her only from London.

'Well,' he exclaimed, 'how's everybody? And where are the girls?'

She gave the news, and then they walked together to the seat and sat down, in silence.

'You don't look too well,' she ventured. 'You've been working too hard.'

He passed his hand across his forehead and moved on the seat so as to meet her eyes directly.

'Quite the reverse,' he said. 'I haven't been working half hard enough.'

'Not half hard enough?' she repeated mechanically.

As his eyes caught hers and held them she was conscious of an exquisite but mortal tremor;
her spine seemed to give way. The old desire for youth and love, for that brilliant and tender
existence in which were united virtue and the flavour of sin, dalliance and high endeavour,
eternal appetite and eternal satisfaction, rushed wondrously over her. The life which she had
mapped out for herself suddenly appeared miserable, inadequate, even contemptible. Was she,
with her rich blood, her perfect health, her proud carriage, her indestructible beauty, and
her passionate soul, to wither solitary in the cold shadow? She felt intensely, as every human
heart feels sometimes, that the satisfactions of duty were chimerical, and that the only authentic
bliss was to be found in a wild and utter abandonment to instinct. No matter what the cost
of rapture, in self-respect or in remorse, it was worth the cost. Why did not mankind rise
up and put an end to this endless crucifixion of instinct which saddened the whole earth, and
say gloriously, 'Let us live'? And in a moment dalliance without endeavour, and the flavour
of sin without virtue, were beautiful ideals for her. She could have put her arms round Arthur's
neck and drawn him to her, and blotted out all the past and sullied all the future with one
kiss. She wondered what recondite force dissuaded her from doing so. 'I have but to lift my
arms and smile,' she thought.

'You've been very cruel,' said Arthur. 'I wouldn't have believed you could have been so cruel.
I guess you didn't know how cruel you were. Why didn't you write before?'

'I couldn't,' she answered submissively. 'Didn't you understand?' The question was not quite
ingenuous, but she meant it well.

'I understood at first,' he said. 'I knew you would want to wait. I knew how upset you'd be--I--I
think I knew all you'd feel.... But it will soon be eighteen months ago.' His voice was full
of emotion. Then he smiled, gravely and charmingly.' However, it's finished now, and I'm here.'

His indictment was very kind, very mild; but she could see how he had suffered, and that his
wrath against her had been none the less genuine because it was the wrath of love. She grew
more and more humble before his gaze so adoring and so reproachful. She knew that she had been
selfish, and that she had ransomed her conscience as much at his expense as at her own. She
perceived the vital inferiority of women to men--that quality of callousness which allows them
to commit all cruelties in the name of self-sacrifice, and that lack of imagination by which
they are blinded to the wounds they deal. Women have brief moods in which they judge themselves
as men judge them, in which they escape from their sex and know the truth. Such a mood came
then to Leonora. And she wished ardently to compensate Arthur for the martyrdom which she had
inflicted on him. They were close to one another. The atmosphere between them was electric.
And the darkness of a calm and delicious night was falling. Could she not obey her instinct,
and in one bright word, one word laden with the invitation and acquiescence of femininity,
atone for her sin against him? Could she not shatter the images of Rose and Milly, who loved
her after their hard fashion, but who would never thank her for her watchful affection--would
even resent it? Vain hope!

'Oh!' she exclaimed grievously, trying uselessly to keep the dream of joyous indulgence from
fading away. 'I must tell you--I cannot leave them!'

'Leave whom?'

'The girls--Rose and Milly. I daren't. You don't know what I went through after John's death--and
I can't desert them. I should have told you in my next letter.'

Her tones moved not only him but herself. He was obliged at once to receive what she said with
the utmost seriousness, as something fully weighed and considered.

'Do you mean,' he demanded, 'that you won't marry me and come to New York?'

'I can't, I can't,' she replied.

He got up and walked along the garden towards the meadow, so far that in the twilight her eyes
could scarcely distinguish his figure against the bushes. Then he returned.

'Just let me hear all about the girls.' He stood in front of her.

'You see,' she said entreatingly, when she had hurried through her recital, 'I couldn't leave
them, could I?'

But instead of answering, he questioned her further about Milly's projects, and made suggestions,
and they seemed to have been discussing the complex subject for an hour before she found a
chance to reassert, plaintively: 'I couldn't leave them.'

'You're entirely wrong,' he said firmly and authoritatively. 'You've just got an idea fixed
in your head, and it's all wrong, all wrong.'

'It isn't as if they were going to be married,' she obstinately pursued the sequence of her
argument. 'Ethel now----'

'Married!' he cried, roused. 'Are we to wait patiently, you and I, until Rose and Milly choose
to get married?' He was bitterly scornful. 'Is that our rôle? I fancy I know something about
Rose and Milly, and allow me to tell you they never will get married, neither of them. They
aren't the marrying sort. Not but what that's beside the point!... Yes,' he continued, 'and
if there ever were two girls in this world able to look after themselves without parental assistance
Rose and Milly are those two.'

'You don't understand women; you don't know, you don't understand,' she murmured. She was shocked
and hurt by this candid and hostile expression of opinion concerning Rose and Milly, whom hitherto
he had always appeared to like.

'No,' he retorted with solemn resentment. 'And no other man either!... Before, when they needed
your protection perhaps, when your husband was alive, you would have left Rose and Milly then,
wouldn't you?... Wouldn't you?'

'Oh!' the exclamation escaped her unawares. She burst into a sob. She had not meant to cry,
but she was crying.

He sat down close to her, and put his hand on her shoulder, and leaned over her. 'My dearest
girl,' he whispered in a new voice of infinite softness, 'you've forgotten that you have a
duty to yourself, and to me, as well as to Rose and Milly. Our lives want looking after, too.
We're human creatures, you know, you and I. This row that we're having now has occurred thousands
of times before, but this time it's going to be settled with common sense, isn't it?' And he
kissed her with a kiss as soft as his voice.

She sighed. Still perplexed and unconvinced, she was nevertheless in those minutes acutely
happy. The mysterious and profound affinity of the flesh had made a truce between the warring
principles of the male and of the female; a truce only. To the left of the house, over the
Marsh, the last silver relics of day hung in the distant sky. She looked at the dying light,
so provocative of melancholy in its reluctance to depart, and at the timidly-appearing stars
and the sombre trees, and her thought was: 'World, how beautiful and sad you are!'

Bran emerged forlorn from the gloom, and rested his great chin confidingly on her knees.

'Bran!' she condoled with him through her tears, stroking the dog's head tenderly, 'Ah! Bran!'

Arthur stood up, resolute, victorious, but prudent and magnanimous too. He put one foot on
the seat beside her, and leaned forward on the raised knee, tapping his stick. 'I've hired
a flat over there,' he said low in her ear, 'such as can't be gotten outside of New York. And
in my thoughts I've made a space for you in New York, where it's life and no mistake, and where
I'm known, and where my interests are. And if you didn't come I don't know what I should do.
I tell you fair I don't know what I should do. And wouldn't your life be spoilt? Wouldn't it?
But it isn't the flat I've got, and it isn't the space I've sort of cleared, and it isn't the
ruin and smash for you and me--it isn't so much these things that make me feel wicked when
I think of the mere possibility of you refusing to come, as the fundamental injustice of the
thing to both of us. My dear girl, no one ever understood you as I do. I can see it all as
well as if I'd been here all the time. You took fright after--after his death. Women are always
more frightened after the danger's over than at the time, especially when they're brave. And
you thought, "I must do something very good because it was on the cards I might have been very
wicked." And so it's Rose and Milly that mustn't be left ... I'm not much of an intellect,
outside crocks, you know, but there's one thing I can do, I can see clear?... Can't I see clear?'

Their hands met in the dog's fur. She was still crying, but she smiled up at him admiringly
and appreciatively.

'If Rose and Milly want a change any time,' he continued, 'let 'em come over. And we can come
to Europe just as often as you feel that way ... Eh?'

'Why,' she meditated, 'cannot this last for ever?' She felt so feminine and illogical, and
the masculine, masterful rationality of his appeal touched her so intimately, that she had
discovered in the woe and the indecision of her situation a kind of happiness. And she wished
to keep what she had got. At length a certain courage and resolution visited her, and summoning
all her sweetness she said to him: 'Don't press me, please, please! In a fortnight I shall
be in London with Milly.... Will you wait a fortnight? Will you wait that long? I know that
what you say is--You will wait that long, won't you? You'll be in London then to meet us?'

'God!' he exclaimed, deeply moved by the fainting, beseeching poignancy of her voice, 'I will
wait forty fortnights. And I guess I shall be in London.'

She sank back on the reprieve as on a pillow.

'Of course I'll wait,' he repeated lightly, and his tone said: 'I understand. Life isn't all
logic, and allowances must be made. Women are women--that's what makes them so adorable--and
I'm not in a hurry.'

They did not speak further.

A moving patch of white on the path indicated Bessie.

'If you please, ma'am, shall I set supper for five?' she asked vivaciously in the summer darkness.

There was a silence.

'I'm not staying, Bessie,' said Twemlow.

'Thank you, sir. Come along, Bran, come kennel.'

The great beast slouched off, and left them together.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Guess who's been!' Leonora demanded of her girls and Fred, with feverish gaiety, when they
returned from the concert. The dining-room was very cheerful, and brightly lit; outside lay
the dark garden and Bran reflective in his kennel. No one could guess Arthur, and so Leonora
had to tell. They were surprised; and they were interested, but not for long. Millicent was
preoccupied with her successful performance at the concert; and Ethel and Fred had had a brilliant
idea. This couple were to commence married life modestly in Uncle Meshach's house; but the
place was being repaired and redecorated, and there seemed to be an annoying probability that
it would not be finished for immediate occupation after the short honeymoon--Fred could only
spare 'two week-ends' from the works. Why should they not return on the very day when Leonora
and Milly were to go to London and keep house at Hillport during Leonora's absence? Such was
the brilliant idea, one of those domestic ideas whose manifold excellences call for interminable
explanation and discussion. The name of Arthur Twemlow was not again mentioned.

CHAPTER XII

IN LONDON

The last day of the dramatic portion of Leonora's life was that on which she went to London
with Milly. They were up early, in order to catch the morning express, and, before leaving,
Leonora arranged with the excited Bessie all details for the reception of Ethel and Fred, who
were to arrive in the afternoon from their honeymoon. 'I will drive,' she said to Carpenter
when the cart was brought round, and Carpenter had to sit behind among the trunks. Bessie in
her morning print and her engagement ring stood at the front door, and sped them beneficently
away while clinging hard to Bran.

As the train rushed smoothly across the vast and rich plain of Middle England, Leonora's thoughts
dwelt on the house at Hillport, on her skilled and sympathetic servants, on Prince and Bran,
and on the calm and the orderliness and the high decency of everything. And she pictured the
homecoming of Ethel and Fred from Wales--Fred stiff and nervous, and Ethel flushed, beautiful,
and utterly bewitching in the self-consciousness of the bride. 'May I call her Mrs. Fred, ma'am?'
Bessie had asked, recoiling from the formality of 'Mrs. Ryley,' and aware that 'Miss Ethel'
was no longer possible. Leonora saw them in the dining-room consuming the tea which Bessie
had determined should be the final word of teas; and she saw Bessie, in that perfect black
of hers and that miraculous muslin, waiting at table with a superlative and cold primness that
covered a desire to take Ethel in her arms and kiss her. And she saw the pair afterwards, dallying
on the lawn with Bran at dusk, simple, unambitious, unassuming, content; and, still later,
Fred meticulously locking up the great house, so much too large and complicated for one timid
couple, and Ethel standing at the top of the stairs as he extinguished the hall-gas. These
visions of them made her feel sad--sad because Ethel could never again be that which she had
been, and because she was so young, inexperienced, confiding, and beautiful, and would gradually
grow old and lose the ineffable grace of her years and situation; and because they were both
so innocent of the meaning of life. Leonora yearned for some magic to stay the destructive
hand of time and keep them ever thus, young, naïve, trustful, and unspoilt. And knowing that
this could not be, she wanted intensely to shield, and teach, and advise them. She whispered,
thinking of Ethel: 'Ah! I must always be near, within reach, within call, lest she should need me.'

'Mother, shall you go with me to see Mr. Louis Lewis to-morrow?' Milly demanded suddenly when
the train halted at Rugby.

'Yes, of course, dear. Don't you wish me to?'

'Oh! I don't mind,' said Milly grandly.

Two well-dressed, middle-aged men entered the compartment, which, till then, Leonora and Milly
had had to themselves; and while duly admiring Leonora, they could not refrain from looking
continually at Millicent; they talked to one another gravely, and they made a pretence of reading
newspapers, but their eyes always returned furtively to Milly's corner. The girl was not by
any means confused by the involuntary homage, which merely heightened her restless vitality.
She chattered to her mother; she was pert; she looked out of the window; she tapped the floor
with her brown shoes. In the unconscious process of displaying her individuality for admiration,
she was never still. The fair, pretty face under the straw hat responded to each appreciative
glance, and beneath her fine blue coat and skirt the muscles of the immature body and limbs
played perpetually in graceful and free movement. She was adorable; she knew it, Leonora knew
it, the two middle-aged men knew it. Humanity be hanged! Self, and after self a friend; the rest may go to the
devil; and be sure that when any man is more stupidly vain and outrageously egotistic than
his fellows, he will hide his hideousness in humanitarianism. Victor Hugo was hideous with self,
and the innermost stench of the humanitarianism he vented about him is unbearable to any stomach,
not excepting even Mr. Swinburne's, who occasionally holds his nose with one hand while he
waves the censer with the other. Humanity be hanged! Men of inferior genius, Victor Hugo and
Mr. Gladstone, take refuge in it.

Humanity is a pigsty, where liars, hypocrites, and the obscene in spirit congregate; it has
been so since the great Jew conceived it, and it will be so till the end. Far better the blithe
modern pagan in his white tie and evening clothes, and his facile philosophy. He says, "I don't
care how the poor live; my only regret is that they live at all;"
and he gives the beggar a shilling.

We all want notoriety; our desires on this point, as upon others, are not noble, but the human
is very despicable vermin and only tolerable when it tends to the
brute, and away from the evangelical.

I will tell you an anecdote which is in itself an admirable illustration of my craving for notoriety;
and my anecdote will serve a double purpose,--it will bring me some
of the notoriety of which I am so desirous, for you, dear, exquisitely
hypocritical reader, will at once cry, "Shame!

Could a man be so wicked as to attempt to force on a duel, so that he might make himself known
through the medium of a legal murder?"

You will tell your friends of this horribly unprincipled young man, and they will, of course,
instantly want to know more about him.

It was a gala night in Curzon Street, the lords were driving up in hansoms; shouts and oaths;
some seated on the roofs with their legs swinging inside; the comics had arrived from the halls;
there were ladies, many ladies; choruses were going merrily in the
drawing-room; one man was attempting to kick the chandelier, another
stood on his head on the sofa.

There was a beautiful young lord there, that sort of figure that no woman can resist. There
was a delightful chappie who seemed inclined to empty the mustard-pot down my neck; him I could
keep in order, but the beautiful lord I saw was attempting to make a butt of me. With his impertinences
I did not for a moment intend to put up; I did not know him, he was not then, as he is now,
if he will allow me to say so, a friend. About three or half-past the ladies retired, and the
festivities continued with unabated vigour.

We had passed through various stages, not of intoxication, no one was drunk, but of jubilation;
we had been jocose and rowdy, we had told stories of all kinds.

The young lord and I did not "pull well together," but nothing decidedly
unpleasant occurred until someone proposed to drink to the downfall
of Gladstone.

The beautiful lord got on his legs and began a speech. Politically it was sound enough, but much
of it was plainly intended to turn me into ridicule. I answered sharply, working gradually up crescendo,
until at last, to bring matters to a head, I said,

"I don't agree with you; the Land Act of '81 was a necessity."

"Anyone who thinks so must be a fool."

"Very possibly, but I don't allow people to address such language to me, and you must be aware
that to call anyone a fool, sitting with you at table in the house of a friend, is the act of a cad."

There
was a lull, then a moment after he said,

"I only meant politically."

"And I only meant socially."

He advanced a step or two and struck
me across the face with his finger tips; I took up a champagne bottle,
and struck him across the head and shoulders. Different parties of
revellers kept us apart, and we walked up and down on either side
of the table swearing at each other. Although I was very wrath, I
had had a certain consciousness from the first that if I played my
cards well I might come very well out of the quarrel; and as I walked
down the street I determined to make every effort to force on a meeting.
 'Tell him
I wish to see him first.'

'Oh, mother!' the girl cried, pouting.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the New Female and Maternity Hospital in Lamb's Conduit Street Leonora was shown to a bench
in the central hall and requested to sit down. The clock over the first landing of the double
staircase indicated three minutes to four. During the drive she had begun by expecting to meet
Arthur on his way to the hotel, and even in Piccadilly, where delays of traffic had forced
upon her attention the glittering opulence and afternoon splendour of the London season, she
had still thought of him and of the interview which was to pass between them. But here she
was obsessed by her immediate environment. The approach to the hospital, through sombre squalid
streets, past narrow courts in which innumerable children tumbled and yelled, disturbed and
desolated her. It appeared that she had entered the secret breeding-quarter of the immense
city, the obscene district where misery teemed and generated, and where the revolting fecundity
of nature was proved amid surroundings of horror and despair. And the hospital itself was the
very centre, the innermost temple of all this ceaseless parturition. In a corner of the hall,
near a door, waited a small crowd of embossed women, young and middle-aged, sad, weary, unkempt,
lightly dressed in shabby shapeless clothes, and sweltering in the summer heat; a few had babies
in their arms. In the doorway two neatly attired youngish women, either doctors or students,
held an animated and interminable conversation, staring absent-mindedly at the attendant crowd.
A pale nurse came hurrying from the back of the hall and vanished through the doorway, squeezing
herself between the doctors or students, who soon afterwards followed her, still talking; and
then one by one the embossed women began to vanish through the doorway also. The clock gently
struck four, and Leonora, sighing, watched the hand creep to five minutes and to ten beyond
the hour. She gazed up the well of the staircases, and in imagination saw ward after ward,
floor above floor of beds, on which lay repulsive and piteous creatures in fear, in pain, in
exhaustion. And she thought with dismay how many more poor immortal souls went out of that
building than ever went into it. 'Rose is somewhere up there,' she reflected. At a quarter
past four a stout white-haired lady briskly descended the stairs, and, after being accosted
twice by officials, spoke to Leonora.

'You are Mrs. Stanway? My name is Smithson. I dare say your daughter has mentioned it in her
letters.' The famous dean of the hospital smiled, and paused while Leonora responded. 'Just
at the moment,' Miss Smithson continued, 'dear Rosalys is engaged, but I hope she will be down
directly. We are very, very busy. Are you making a long stay in London, Mrs. Stanway? The season
is now in full swing, is it not?'

Leonora could find little to say to this experienced spinster, whom she unwillingly admired
but with whom she was not in accord. Miss Smithson uttered amiable banalities with an evident
intention to do nothing more; her demeanour was preoccupied, and she made no further reference
to Rose. Soon a nurse respectfully called her; she hastened away full of apologies, leaving
Leonora to meditate upon her own shortcomings as a serious person, and upon the futility of
her existence of forty-one years.

Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and then Rose ran impetuously down the stone steps.

'Mother, I'm so glad to see you! Where's Milly?' she exclaimed eagerly, and they kissed twice.

As she answered the greeting Leonora noticed the lines of fatigue in Rose's face, the brilliancy
of her eyes, the emaciation of the body beneath her grey alpaca dress, and that air of false
serenity masking hysteric excitement which she seemed to have noticed too in all the other
officials--the doctors or students, the nurses, and even the dean.

'Are you ready now, dear?' she asked.

'Oh, I can't possibly come to-day, mother. Didn't Miss Smithson tell you? I'm awfully sorry
I can't. But there's a very important case on. I can only stay a minute.'

'But, my child, we have arranged to take you to the theatre,' Leonora was on the point of expostulating.
She checked herself, and placidly replied: 'I'm sorry, too. When shall you be free?'

'Might be able to get off to-morrow. I'll slip out in the morning and send you a telegram.'

'I should like you to try and be free to-morrow, my dear. You seem as if you needed a rest.
Do you take any exercise?'

'As much as I can.'

'But you know, Rose----'

'That's all right, mater,' Rose interrupted confidently, patting her mother's arm. 'We can
look after ourselves here, don't you worry. Have you seen Mr. Twemlow yet?'

'Not yet. Why?'

'Nothing. But he called to see me yesterday. We're great friends. I must run back now.'

Leonora departed with the girl's hasty kiss on her lips, realising that she had fallen to the
level of a mere episodic interest in Rose's life. The impassioned student of obstetrics had
disappeared up the staircase before Leonora could reach the double-doors of the entrance. The
mother was dashed, stricken, a little humiliated. But as she arranged the folds of her beautiful
dress in the hansom which was carrying her away from Lamb's Conduit Street towards South Kensington,
she said to herself firmly, 'I am not a ninny, after all, and I know that Rose will be ill
soon. And there are things in that hospital that I could manage better.'

'Mr. Twemlow came to see you just after you left,' said Harry when he restored Milly to her
mother at half-past five. 'I asked him to join us at dinner, but he said he couldn't. However,
he's coming to the theatre, to our box.'

'You must excuse us from dining with you to-night, Harry,' was Leonora's reply. 'We'll meet
you at the theatre.'

'Yes, Harry,' said Millicent coldly. 'We really can't come to-day.'

'The hand of the Lord is heavy upon me,' Harry murmured. And he repeated the phrase on leaving
the hotel.

Neither he nor Millicent had shown much interest in Rose's defection. The dandy seemed to be
relieved, and Millicent said, 'How stupid of her!' Milly had returned from the visit to Mr.
Louis Lewis in a state of high self-satisfaction. Leonora was told that Mr. Lewis was simply
the most delightful and polite man that Milly had ever met; he would be charmed to see Mrs.
Stanway, and would make an appointment. Meanwhile Milly gave her mother to understand that
the affair was practically settled. She knew the date when the tour of Princess Puck started,
and the various towns which it would include; and Mr. Lewis had provided her with a box for
the next afternoon at the Queen's Theatre, where the piece had been most successfully produced
a month ago; the music she would receive by post; and the first rehearsal of the No. I. Company
would occur within a week or so. Millicent walked in flowery paths. She saw herself covered
with jewels and compliments, flattered, adored, worshipped, and leading always a life of superb
luxury. And this prophetic dream was not the conception of a credulous fancy, but the product
of the hard and calculating shrewdness which she possessed. She was aware of the importance
of Mr. Louis Lewis, who, on behalf of Lionel Belmont, absolutely controlled three West End
theatres; and she was also aware of the effect which she had had upon him. She knew that in
her personality there was a mysterious something which intoxicated, not all the men with whom
she came in contact, but most of them, and men of utterly different sorts. She did not trouble
to attempt any analysis of that quality; she accepted it as a natural phenomenon; and she meant
to use it ruthlessly, for she was almost incapable of pity or gratitude. It was, for instance,
her intention to drop Harry; she had no further use for him now. She was learning to forget
her childish awe of Leonora: a very little time, and she would implacably force her mother
to recognise that even the semblance of parental control must cease.

'And I am to have my photograph taken, mamma!' she exclaimed triumphantly. 'Mr. Lewis says
that Antonios in Regent Street will be only too glad to take it for nothing. He's going to
send them a line.'

Leonora was silent. Deep in her heart she made a gesture of appeal to each of her daughters--to
Ethel who was immersed in love, to Rose who was absorbed by a vocation, and to this seductive
minx whose venal lips would only smile to gain an end--and each seemed to throw her a glance
indifferent or preoccupied, and to say, 'Presently, presently. When I can spare a moment.'
And she thought bitterly how Rose had been content to receive her mother in the public hall
of the hospital.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were late in arriving at the theatre because the cab could not get through Piccadilly,
and Harry was impatiently expecting them in the foyer. His brow smoothed at once when he caught
sight of them, and he admired their dresses, and escorted them up the celebrated marble stairs
with youthful pride.

'I thought no one was going to supervene,' he smiled. 'I was afraid you'd all been murdered
in patent asphyxiating hansoms. I don't know what's happened to Twemlow. I must leave word
with the people here which box he's to come to.'

'Perhaps he won't come,' thought Leonora. 'Perhaps I shall not see him till to-morrow.'

Harry's box was exactly in the middle of the semi-circle of boxes which surround the balcony
of the Regency Theatre. They were ushered into it with the precautions of silence, for the
three hundred and fifty-fifth performance of The Dolmenico Doll, the unique musical comedy
from New York, had already commenced. Leonora and Milly sat in front, and Harry drew up a chair
so that he might whisper in their ears; he was very talkative. Leonora could see nothing clearly
at first. Then gradually the crowded auditorium arranged itself in her mind. "'Spose now, Miss
Lucy,' said I, holding her by the finger of her Limerick glove; 'spose now, that I had invited
you to take an outside seat on the Hampstead Flying Phoenix with me, to go out to a rural junketing,
on May day in the afternoon. Very well--there we find ourselves alive and kicking, forty couple
footing it on the green, and choosing, according to our tastes, reels, jigs, minuets, or bumpkins.
'Spose then, that I have handed you down to the bottom of five-and-twenty couple at a country-dance,
to the tune of Sir Roger de Coverley, Morgiana in Ireland, Petronella, or the Triumph; and,
notwithstanding our having sucked a couple of oranges a-piece, we are both quite in a broth
of perspiration. Very good--so says I to you, making a genteel bow, 'Do you please to walk aside,
and cool yourself in them there green arbours, and I will be with you as quick as directly,
with a glass of lemonade or cherry brandy?' So says you to me, dropping a curtsey a la mode,
'With ineffable pleasure, sir;' and away you trip into the shade like a sunbeam.

"'Now, Lucy, my love, take a good look of that picture. That is you, 'spose, seated on the
turf, a leetle behind the pillar dedicated to Apollar; and you, blooming
like a daffodilly in April, are waiting with great thirst, and not
a little impatience, for my promised appearance, from the sign of
the Hen and Chickens, with the cordials, and a few biscuits on a salver--when,
lo! an old bald-pated, oily-faced, red-nosed Cameronian ranter, whom
by your elegant negligee capering you have fairly danced out of his
dotard senses, comes pawing up to you like Polito's polar bear, drops
on his knees, and before you can avert your nose from a love-speech,
embalmed in the fumes of tobacco and purl, the hoary villain has beslobbered
your lily-white fingers, and is protesting unalterable affection,
at the rate of twelve miles an hour, inclusive of stoppages.

Now, Lucy, love, did you ever,--say upon your honour,--did you ever witness such a spectacle
of humanity? Tell me now?

"'Very well. Now, love, take a peep down the avenue, and yon is me, yon tight, handsome little
figure, with the Spanish cap and cloak, attended by a trusty servant in the same costume,
to whom I am pointing where he is to bring the cherry-brandy; when, lo! we perceive the hideous
apparition!--and straightway rushing forward, like two tigers on a jackass, we seize the wigless
dotard, and, calling for a blanket, the whole respectable company of forty couples and upwards,
come crowding to the spot, and lend a willing hand in rotation, four by four, in tossing Malachi,
the last of the lovers, till the breath of life is scarcely left
in his vile body.

"'Now Lucy,' says I, in conclusion, 'don't you see the confounded
absurdity of ever wasting a thought on a broken-down, bandy-legged,
beggarly dragoon?

Just look at him, with an old taffeta whigmaleerie tied to his back, like Paddy from Cork,
with his coat buttoned behind! Isn't he a pretty figure, now, to go a-courting? You would never
forsake the like of me--would you now?

A spruce, natty little body of a creature--to be the trollop of a
spindle-shanked veteran, who, besides having one foot in the grave,
and a nose fit for three, might be your great-grandfather?'

"It was
a sight, sir, that would have melted the heart of a wheel-barrow.



'You've missed all the first act, and everyone says it's the best,' Milly remarked, leaning
towards Arthur with an air of intimacy. And Harry expressed agreement.

'But you must remember I saw it in New York two years ago,' Leonora heard him whisper in reply.

She liked his avuncular, slightly quizzical attitude to them. He reinforced the elder generation
in the box, reducing by his mere presence the two young and callow creatures to their proper
position in the scheme of things.

And now the question of her future relations with Arthur, which hitherto she had in a manner
shunned, at once became peremptory for Leonora. She was conscious of a passionate tenderness
for him; he seemed to her to have qualities, indefinable and exquisite touches of character,
which she had never observed in any other human being. But she was in control of her heart.
She had chosen, and she knew that she could abide by her choice. She was uplifted by the force
of one of those tremendous and invincible resolutions which women alone, with their instinctive
bent towards martyrdom, are capable of making. And the resolution was not the fruit of the
day, the result of all that she had recently seen and thought. It was a resolution independent
of particular circumstances, a simple admission of the naked fact that she could not desert
her daughters. If Ethel had been shrewd and worldly, and Rose temperate in her altruism, and
Milly modest and sage, the resolution would not have been modified. She dared not abandon her
daughters: the blood in her veins, the stern traits inherited from her irreproachable ancestors,
forbade it. She might be convinced in argument--and she vividly remembered everything that
Arthur had said--she might admit that she was wrong, that her sacrifice would be futile, and
that she was about to be guilty of a terrible injustice to Arthur and to herself. No matter!
She would not leave the girls. And if in thus obstinately remaining at their service she committed
a sin, she could only ask pardon for that sin. She could only beg Arthur to forgive her, and
assure him that he would forget, and submit to his reproaches in silence and humility. Now
and then she gazed at him, but his eyes were always fixed on the stage, and the corners of
his mouth turned down into a slightly ironic smile. She wondered if he expected to be able
to persuade her, and whether an opportunity to convince him and so end the crisis would occur
that evening, or whether she would be compelled to wait through another night.

At last the adventures of the Dolmenico Doll were concluded, the naughty kisses regularised,
the old men finally befooled, the glory extinguished, the music hushed. The audience stood
up and began to chatter, and the women curved their long arms backward to receive white cloaks
from the men. Arthur led the way out with Milly, and as the party slowly proceeded through
the crush into the foyer, Leonora could hear the impetuous and excited child delivering to
him her professional views on the acting and the singing.

'Well, Burgess,' Arthur said, in the portico, 'I guess we'll see these ladies home, eh?' And
he called to a commissionaire: 'Say, two hansoms.'

In a minute Leonora and Arthur were driving together along the scintillating nocturnal thoroughfare;
he had put Harry and Millicent into the other hansom like school children. And in the sudden
privacy of the vehicle Leonora thought: 'Now!' She looked up at him furtively from beneath
her eyelashes. He caught the glance and shook his head sadly.

'Why do you shake your head?' she timidly began.

His kind shrewd eyes caressed her. 'You mustn't look at me so,' he said.

'Why?'

'I can't stand it,' he replied. 'It's too much for me. You don't know--you don't know. You
think I'm calm enough, but I tell you the top of my head has nearly come off to-day.'

'But I----'

'Listen here,' he ran on. 'Let me finish up. What I said a fortnight ago was quite right. It
was absolutely unanswerable. But there was something about your letter that upset me. I can't
tell you what it was--only it made my heart beat. And then yesterday I happened to go and worry
out Rose at that awful hospital. And then Milly to-night! I know how you feel. I've got it
to the eighth of an inch. And I've thought: "Suppose I do get her to New York, and she isn't
happy?" Well, it's right here: I've settled to sell my business over there, and fix up in London.
What do I care for New York, anyway? I don't care for anything so long as we can be happy.
I've been a bachelor too long. And if I can be alone with you in this London, lost in it, just
you and me! Oh, well! I want a woman to think about--one woman all mine. I'm simply mad for
it. And we can only live once. We shan't be short of money. Now don't look at me any more like
you did. Say yes, and let's begin right away and be happy.'

'Do you really mean----?' She was obliged thus, in weak unfinished phrases, to gain time in
order to recover from the shock.

'I'm going to cable to-morrow morning,' he said, joyously. 'Not that there's so much hurry
as all that, but I shall feel better after I've cabled. I'm silly, and I want to be silly....
I wouldn't live in New York for a million now. And don't you think we can keep an eye on Rose
and Millicent, between us?'

'Oh, Arthur!'

She breathed a long, deep sigh, shutting her eyes for an instant; and then the beautiful creature,
with all her elegance and her appearance of impassive and fastidious calm, permitted herself
to move infinitesimally, but perceptibly, closer to him in the hansom; and her spirit performed
the supreme feminine act of acquiescence and surrender. She thought passionately: 'He has yielded
to me--I will be his slave.'

'I shall call you Leo,' he murmured fondly. 'It occurred to me last night.'

She smiled, as if to say: 'How charmingly boyish you are!'

'And I must tell you--but see here, we shall be at your hotel too soon.' He pushed at the trap-door.
'Say, driver, go up Park Lane and along Oxford Street a bit.'

Then he explained to her how he had refused Harry's invitation to dinner, and had arrived late
at the theatre, solely that he might not have to talk to her until they could talk in solitude.

As, later, the cab rolled swiftly southwards through the mysterious dark avenues of Hyde Park,
Leonora had the sensation of being really alone with him in the very heart of that luxurious,
voluptuous, and decadent civilisation for which she had always yearned, and in which she was
now to participate. The feeling of the beauty of the world, and of its catholicity and many-sidedness,
returned to her. She gave play to her instincts. And, revelling in the self-confidence and
the masterful ascendency which underlay Arthur's usual reticent demeanour, she resumed with
exquisite relief her natural supineness. She began to depend on him. And she foresaw how he
would reason diplomatically with Rose, and watch between Milly and Mr. Louis Lewis, and perhaps
assist Fred Ryley, and do in the best way everything that ought to be done; and how she would
reward him with the consolations of her grace and charm, her feminine arts, and her sweet acquiescence.

'So you've come,' exclaimed Milly, rather desolate in the drawing-room of the hotel.

'Yes, Miss Muffet,' said Arthur, 'we've come. Where is the youth?'

'Harry? I made him go home.'

Leonora smiled indulgently at Millicent with her pretty pouting face and her adorable artificiality,
lounging on one of the sofas in the vast garish chamber. And her thoughts flew to Ethel, and
existence in Bursley. The Myatt family had risen, flourished, and declined. As the hearth and home
grew all-powerful it became impossible for the husband to tell his wife that he was going to the
tavern; everyone can go to the tavern, and no place in England where everyone can go is considered
respectable.


