Blackwood went on board the Victory about six. He found Nelson in good spirits, but very calm;
not in that exhilaration which he had felt upon entering into battle at Aboukir and Copenhagen;
he knew that his own life would be particularly aimed at, and seems to have looked for death
with almost as sure an expectation as for victory. His whole attention was fixed upon the enemy.
They tacked to the northward, and formed their line on the larboard tack; thus bringing the
shoals of Trafalgar and St. Pedro under the lee of the British, and keeping the port of Cadiz
open for themselves. This was judiciously done: and Nelson, aware of all the advantages which
it gave them, made signal to prepare to anchor.

Villeneuve was a skilful seaman; worthy of serving a better master and a better cause. His
plan of defence was as well conceived, and as original, as the plan of attack. He formed the
fleet in a double line, every alternate ship being about a cable's length to windward of her
second ahead and astern.

Nelson, certain of a triumphant issue to the day, asked Blackwood what he should consider as
a victory. That officer answered, that, considering the handsome way in which battle was offered
by the enemy, their apparent determination for a fair trial of strength, and the situation
of the land, he thought it would be a glorious result if fourteen were captured. He replied:
"I shall not be satisfied with less than twenty."

Soon afterwards he asked him if he did not think there was a signal wanting. Captain Blackwood
made answer that he thought the whole fleet seemed very clearly to understand what they were
about. These words were scarcely spoken before that signal was made, which will be remembered
as long as the language, or even the memory, of England shall endure--Nelson's last signal:--

  "England expects every man to do his duty!"

It was received throughout the fleet with a shout of answering acclamation, made sublime by
the spirit which it breathed and the feeling which it expressed. "Now," said Lord Nelson, "I
can do no more. We must trust to the Great Disposer of all events, and the justice of our cause.
I thank God for this great opportunity of doing my duty."

He wore that day, as usual, his admiral's frock coat, bearing on the left breast four stars
of the different orders with which he was invested. Ornaments which rendered him so conspicuous
a mark for the enemy, were beheld with ominous apprehensions by his officers. It was known
that there were riflemen on board the French ships, and it could not be doubted but that his
life would be particularly aimed at. They communicated their fears to each other; and the surgeon,
Mr. Beatty, spoke to the chaplain, Dr. Scott, and to Mr. Scott, the public secretary, desiring
that some person would entreat him to change his dress, or cover the stars: but they knew that
such a request would highly displease him. "In honour I gained them," he had said when such
a thing had been hinted to him formerly, "and in honour I will die with them." Mr. Beatty,
however, would not have been deterred by any fear of exciting his displeasure, from speaking
to him himself upon a subject in which the weal of England as well as the life of Nelson was
concerned, but he was ordered from the deck before he could find an opportunity.

This was a point upon which Nelson's officers knew that it was hopeless to remonstrate or reason
with him; but both Blackwood, and his own captain, Hardy, represented to him how advantageous
to the fleet it would be for him to keep out of action as long as possible; and he consented
at last to let the Leviathan and the Temeraire, which were sailing abreast of the Victory,
be ordered to pass ahead. Yet even here the last infirmity of this noble mind was indulged;
for these ships could not pass ahead if the Victory continued to carry all her sail; and so
far was Nelson from shortening sail, that it was evident he took pleasure in pressing on, and
rendering it impossible for them to obey his own orders.

A long swell was setting into the Bay of Cadiz: our ships, crowding all sail, moved majestically
before it, with light winds from the southwest. The sun shone on the sails of the enemy; and
their well-formed line, with their numerous three-deckers, made an appearance which any other
assailants would have thought formidable; but the British sailors only admired the beauty and
the splendour of the spectacle; and, in full confidence of winning what they saw, remarked
to each other, what a fine sight yonder ships would make at Spithead!

The French admiral, from the Bucentaure, beheld the new manner in which his enemy was advancing,
Nelson and Collingwood each leading his line; and, pointing them out to his officers, he is
said to have exclaimed, that such conduct could not fail to be successful. Yet Villeneuve had
made his own dispositions with the utmost skill, and the fleets under his command waited for
the attack with perfect coolness.

Ten minutes before twelve they opened their fire. Eight or nine of the ships immediately ahead
of the Victory, and across her bows, fired single guns at her, to ascertain whether she was
yet within their range. As soon as Nelson perceived that their shot passed over him, he desired
Blackwood, and Captain Prowse, of the Sirius, to repair to their respective frigates; and,
on their way, to tell all the captains of the line of battle ships that he depended on their
exertions; and that, if by the prescribed mode of attack they found it impracticable to get
into action immediately, they might adopt whatever they thought best, provided it led them
quickly and closely alongside an enemy.

As they were standing on the front of the poop, Blackwood took him by the hand, saying, he
hoped soon to return and find him in possession of twenty prizes. He replied: "God bless you,
Blackwood! I shall never see you again."

Nelson's column was steered about two points more to the north than Collingwood's, in order
to cut off the enemy's escape into Cadiz: the lee-line, therefore, was first engaged.

"See," cried Nelson, pointing to the Royal Sovereign, as she steered right for the centre of
the enemy's line, cut through it astern of the Santa Anna, three-decker, and engaged her at
the muzzle of her guns on the starboard side: "see how that noble fellow, Collingwood, carries
his ship into action!"

Collingwood, delighted at being first in the heat of the fire, and knowing the feelings of
his commander and old friend, turned to his captain, and exclaimed, "Rotherham, what would
Nelson give to be here!"

Both these brave officers, perhaps, at this moment thought of Nelson with gratitude, for a
circumstance which had occurred on the preceding day. Admiral Collingwood, with some of the
captains, having gone on board the Victory to receive instructions, Nelson inquired of him
where his captain was and was told, in reply, that they were not upon good terms with each
other. "Terms!" said Nelson;--"good terms with each other!" Immediately he sent a boat for
Captain Rotherham; led him, as soon as he arrived, to Collingwood, and said, "Look, yonder
are the enemy! Shake hands like Englishmen."

The enemy continued to fire a gun at a time at the Victory, till they saw that a shot had passed
through her main-topgallant-sail; then they opened their broadsiders, aiming chiefly at her
rigging, in the hope of disabling her before she could close with them.

Nelson, as usual, had hoisted several flags, lest one should be shot away. The enemy showed
no colors till late in the action, when they began to feel the necessity of having them to
strike. For this reason, the Santissima Trinidad, Nelson's old acquaintance, as he used to
call her, was distinguishable only by her four decks; and to the bow of this opponent he ordered
the Victory to be steered.

Meantime an incessant raking fire was kept up upon the Victory. The admiral's secretary was
one of the first who fell: he was killed by a cannon-shot, while conversing with Hardy. Captain
Adair, of the marines, with the help of a sailor, endeavoured to remove the body from Nelson's
sight, who had a great regard for Mr. Scott; but he anxiously asked, "Is that poor Scott that's
gone?" and being informed that it was indeed so, exclaimed, "Poor fellow!"

Presently a double-headed shot struck a party of marines, who were drawn up on the poop, and
killed eight of them: upon which Nelson immediately desired Captain Adair to disperse his men
round the ship, that they might not suffer so much from being together.

A few minutes afterwards a shot struck the fore brace bits on the quarter-deck, and passed
between Nelson and Hardy, a splinter from the bit tearing off Hardy's buckle and bruising his
foot. Both stopped, and looked anxiously at each other, each supposing the other to be wounded.
Nelson then smiled, and said, "This is too warm work, Hardy, to last long."

The Victory had not yet returned a single gun: fifty of her men had been by this time killed
or wounded, and her main-topmast, with all her studding sails and their booms, shot away. Nelson
declared that, in all his battles, he had seen nothing which surpassed the cool courage of
his crew on this occasion.

At four minutes after twelve she opened her fire from both sides of her deck. It was not possible
to break the enemy's line without running on board one of their ships: Hardy informed him of
this, and asked which he would prefer.

Nelson replied: "Take your choice, Hardy, it does not signify much."

The master was then ordered to put the helm to port, and the Victory ran on board the Redoubtable,
just as her tiller ropes were shot away. The French ship received her with a broadside; then
instantly let down her lower-deck ports, for fear of being boarded through them, and never
afterwards fired a great gun during the action. Her tops, like those of all the enemy's ships,
were filled with riflemen. Nelson never placed musketry in his tops; he had a strong dislike
to the practice, not merely because it endangers setting fire to the sails, but also because
it is a murderous sort of warfare, by which individuals may suffer, and a commander, now and
then, be picked off, but which never can decide the fate of a general engagement.

Captain Harvey, in the Temeraire, fell on board the Redoubtable on the other side. Another
enemy was in like manner on board the Temeraire; so that these four ships formed as compact
a tier as if they had been moored together, their heads lying all the same way. The lieutenants
of the Victory, seeing this, depressed their guns of the middle and lower decks, and fired
with a diminished charge, lest the shot should pass through, and injure the Temeraire. And
because there was danger that the Redoubtable might take fire from the lower-deck guns, the
muzzles of which touched her side when they were run out, the fireman of each gun stood ready
with a bucket of water, which, as soon as the gun was discharged, he dashed into the hole made
by the shot. An incessant fire was kept up from the Victory from both sides; her larboard guns
playing upon the Bucentaure and the huge Santissima Trinidad.

It had been part of Nelson's prayer that the British fleet might be distinguished by humanity
in the victory which he expected. Setting an example himself, he twice gave orders to cease
firing upon the Redoubtable, supposing that she had struck, because her great guns were silent;
for, as she carried no flag, there was no means of instantly ascertaining the fact.

From this ship, which he had thus twice spared, he received his death. A ball fired from her
mizzen-top, which, in the then situation of the two vessels, was not more than fifteen yards
from that part of the deck where he was standing, struck the epaulette on his left shoulder,--about
a quarter after one, just in the heat of the action. He fell upon his face, on the spot which
was covered with his poor secretary's blood. Hardy, who was a few steps from him, turning round,
saw three men raising him up.

"They have done for me at last, Hardy," said he.

"I hope not!" cried Hardy.

"Yes," he replied; "my backbone is shot through."

Yet even now, not for a moment losing his presence of mind, he observed, as they were carrying
him down the ladder, that the tiller ropes, which had been shot away, were not yet replaced,
and ordered that new ones should be rove immediately:--then, that he might not be seen by the
crew, he took out his handkerchief, and covered his face and his stars.--Had he but concealed
these badges of honour from the enemy, England, perhaps, would not have had cause to receive
with sorrow the news of the battle of Trafalgar.

The cockpit was crowded with wounded and dying men, over whose bodies he was with some difficulty
conveyed, and laid upon a pallet in the midshipmen's berth. It was soon perceived, upon examination,
that the wound was mortal. This, however, was concealed from all, except Captain Hardy, the
chaplain, and the medical attendants. He himself being certain, from the sensation in his back,
and the gush of blood which he felt momently within his breast, that no human care could avail
him, insisted that the surgeon should leave him, and attend to those to whom he might be useful:
"For," said he, "you can do nothing for me."

All that could be done was to fan him with paper, and frequently to give him lemonade, to alleviate
his intense thirst. He was in great pain, and expressed much anxiety for the event of the action,
which now began to declare itself. As often as a ship struck, the crew of the Victory hurrahed,
and at every hurrah a visible expression of joy gleamed in the eyes, and marked the countenance
of the dying hero. But he became impatient to see Captain Hardy; and as that officer, though
often sent for, could not leave the deck, Nelson feared that some fatal cause prevented him,
and repeatedly cried: "Will no one bring Hardy to me? He must be killed! He surely is dead!"

An hour and ten minutes elapsed, from the time when Nelson received his wound, before Hardy
could come to him. They shook hands in silence: Hardy in vain struggling to suppress the feelings
of that most painful, and yet sublimest moment.

"Well, Hardy," said Nelson, "how goes the day with us?"

"Very well," replied Hardy. "Ten ships have struck, but five of their van have tacked, and
show an intention of bearing down upon the Victory. I have called two or three of our fresh
ships round, and have no doubt of giving them a drubbing."

"I hope," said Nelson, "none of our ships struck."

Hardy answered, "There was no fear of that."

Then and not till then, Nelson spoke of himself.

"I am a dead man, Hardy," he said; "I am going fast; it will be all over with me soon. Come
nearer to me. My back is shot through. Beatty will tell you so."

Captain Hardy then once more shook hands with him; and, with a heart almost bursting, hastened
upon deck. By this time all feeling below the breast was gone, and Nelson, having made the
surgeon ascertain this, said: "You know I am gone. I know it. I feel something rising in my
breast"--putting his hand to his left side--"which tells me so." And upon Beatty's inquiring
whether his pain was very great, he replied, "So great that I wish I was dead. Yet," said he,
in a lower voice, "one would like to live a little longer, too!"

Captain Hardy, some fifty minutes after he had left the cockpit, returned; and, again taking
the hand of his dying friend and commander, congratulated him upon having gained a complete
victory. How many of the enemy were taken he did not know, as it was impossible to perceive
them distinctly--but fourteen or fifteen of them at least.

"That's well," cried Nelson; "but I bargained for twenty." And then, in a stronger voice, he
said, "Anchor, Hardy; anchor."

Hardy upon this, hinted that Admiral Collingwood would take upon himself the direction of affairs.

"Not while I live, Hardy!" said the dying Nelson, ineffectually endeavouring to raise himself
from the bed; "do you anchor."

His previous order for preparing to anchor had shown how clearly he foresaw the necessity of
this. Presently, calling Hardy back, he said to him in a low voice, "Don't throw me overboard";
and he desired that he might be buried by his parents, unless it should please the king to
order otherwise.

Then, reverting to his private feelings: "Kiss me, Hardy," said he. Hardy knelt down and kissed
his cheek: and Nelson said, "Now I am satisfied. Thank God, I have done my duty."

Hardy stood over him in silence for a minute or two; then knelt again, and kissed his forehead.

"Who is that?" said Nelson; and being informed, he replied, "God bless you, Hardy." And Hardy
then left him forever.

Nelson now desired to be turned on his right side, and said: "I wish I had not left the deck;
for I shall soon be gone."

Death was, indeed, rapidly approaching. He said to his chaplain: "Doctor, I have not been a
great sinner." His articulation now became difficult; but he was distinctly heard to say, "Thank
God, I have done my duty!" These words he had repeatedly pronounced; and they were the last
words he uttered. He expired at thirty minutes after four,--three hours and a quarter after
he had received his wound.

Within a quarter of an hour after Nelson was wounded, above fifty of the Victory's men fell
by the enemy's musketry. They, however, on their part, were not idle; and it was not long before
there were only two Frenchmen left alive in the mizzen-top of the Redoubtable. One of them
was the man who had given the fatal wound: he did not live to boast of what he had done. An
old quartermaster had seen him fire; and easily recognized him, because he wore a glazed cocked
hat and a white frock. This quartermaster, and two midshipmen, Mr. Collingwood and Mr. Pollard,
were the only persons left on the Victory's poop; the two midshipmen kept firing at the top,
and he supplied them with cartridges. One of the Frenchmen, attempting to make his escape down
the rigging, was shot by Mr. Pollard, and fell on the poop. But the old quartermaster, as he
cried out, "That's he, that's he," and pointed at the other, who was coming forward to fire
again, received a shot in his mouth, and fell dead. Both the midshipmen then fired, at the
same time, and the fellow dropped in the top. When they took possession of the prize, they
went into the mizzen-top, and found him dead; with one ball through his head, and another through
his breast.

The Redoubtable struck within twenty minutes after the fatal shot had been fired from her.
During that time she had been twice on fire,--in her fore-chains and in her forecastle. The
French, as they had done in other battles, made use, in this, of fireballs and other combustibles--implements
of destruction which other nations, from a sense of honour and humanity, have laid aside--which
add to the sufferings of the wounded, without determining the issue of the combat--which none
but the cruel would employ, and which never can be successful against the brave.

Once they succeeded in setting fire, from the Redoubtable, to some ropes and canvas on the
Victory's booms. The cry ran through the ship, and reached the cockpit; but even this dreadful
cry produced no confusion: the men displayed that perfect self-possession in danger by which
English seamen are characterized; they extinguished the flames on board their own ship, and
then hastened to extinguish them in the enemy, by throwing buckets of water from the gangway.
When the Redoubtable had struck, it was not practicable to board her from the Victory; for,
though the two ships touched, the upper works of both fell in so much, that there was a great
space between their gangways; and she could not be boarded from the lower or middle decks,
because her ports were down. Some of our men went to Lieutenant Quilliam, and offered to swim
under her bows and get up there; but it was thought unfit to hazard brave lives in this manner.

What our men would have done from gallantry, some of the crew of the Santissima Trinidad did
to save themselves. Unable to stand the tremendous fire of the Victory, whose larboard guns
played against this great four-decker, and not knowing how else to escape them, nor where else
to betake themselves for protection, many of them leapt overboard, and swam to the Victory;
and were actually helped up her sides by the English during the action.

The Spaniards began the battle with less vivacity than their unworthy allies, but they continued
it with greater firmness. The Argonauta and Bahama were defended till they had each lost about
four hundred men; the San Juan Nepomuceno lost three hundred and fifty. Often as the superiority
of British courage has been proved against France upon the sea, it was never more conspicuous
than in this decisive conflict. Five of our ships were engaged muzzle to muzzle with five of
the French. In all five Frenchmen lowered their lower-deck ports, and deserted their guns;
while our men continued deliberately to load and fire, till they had made the victory secure.

Once, amid his sufferings, Nelson had expressed a wish that he were dead; but immediately the
spirit subdued the pains of death, and he wished to live a little longer; doubtless that he
might hear the completion of the victory which he had seen so gloriously begun. That consolation--that
joy--that triumph was afforded him. He lived to know that the victory was decisive; and the
last guns which were fired at the flying enemy were heard a minute or two before he expired.

The total British loss in the battle of Trafalgar amounted to 1,587. Twenty of the enemy struck,--unhappily
the fleet did not anchor, as Nelson, almost with his dying breath, had enjoined,--a gale came
on from the southwest; some of the prizes went down, some went on shore; one effected its escape
into Cadiz; others were destroyed; four only were saved, and those by the greatest exertions.
The wounded Spaniards were sent ashore, an assurance being given that they should not serve
till regularly exchanged; and the Spaniards, with a generous feeling, which would not, perhaps,
have been found in any other people, offered the use of their hospitals for our wounded, pledging
the honour of Spain that they should be carefully attended there. When the storm after the
action drove some of the prizes upon the coast, they declared that the English, who were thus
thrown into their hands, should not be considered as prisoners of war; and the Spanish soldiers
gave up their own beds to their shipwrecked enemies.

It is almost superfluous to add that all the honors which a grateful country could bestow were
heaped upon the memory of Nelson. A public funeral was decreed, and a public monument. Statues
and monuments also were voted by most of our principal cities. The leaden coffin, in which
he was brought home, was cut in pieces, which were distributed as relics of Saint Nelson,--so
the gunner of the Victory called them,--and when, at his interment, his flag was about to be
lowered into the grave, the sailors who had assisted at the ceremony, with one accord rent
it in pieces, that each might preserve a fragment while he lived.

The death of Nelson was felt in England as something more than a public calamity: men started
at the intelligence, and turned pale, as if they had heard of the loss of a dear friend. An
object of our admiration and affection, of our pride and of our hopes, was suddenly taken from
us; and it seemed as if we had never, till then, known how deeply we loved and reverenced him.
What the country had lost in its great naval hero--the greatest of our own, and of all former
times--was scarcely taken into the account of grief. So perfectly, indeed, had he performed
his part, that the maritime war, after the Battle of Trafalgar, was considered at an end; the
fleets of the enemy were not merely defeated, but destroyed; new navies must be built, and
a new race of seamen reared for them, before the possibility of their invading our shores could
again be contemplated.

CASABIANCA

By FELICIA HEMANS

     NOTE.--Young Casabianca, a boy about thirteen years old, son of the
     Admiral of the Orient, remained at his post (in the Battle of the
     Nile) after the ship had taken fire and all the guns had been
     abandoned, and perished in the explosion of the vessel, when the
     flames had reached the powder.

    Yet beautiful and bright he stood,
      As born to rule the storm;
    A creature of heroic blood.
      A proud though childlike form.

THE ROMANCE OF THE SWAN'S NEST

By ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

    Little Ellie sits alone
      'Mid the beeches of a meadow,
        By a stream-side on the grass,
    And the trees are showering down
      Doubles of their leaves in shadow,
        On her shining hair and face.

    She has thrown her bonnet by,
      And her feet she has been dipping
        In the shallow water's flow;
    Now she holds them nakedly
      In her hands, all sleek and dripping,
        While she rocketh to and fro.

    Little Ellie sits alone,
      And the smile she softly uses
        Fills the silence like a speech,
    While she thinks what shall be done,
      And the sweetest pleasure chooses
        For her future within reach.

    Little Ellie in her smile
      Chooses, "I will have a lover,
        Riding on a steed of steeds:
    He shall love me without guile,
      And to him I will discover
        The swan's nest among the reeds.

    "And the steed shall be red roan,
      And the lover shall be noble,
        With an eye that takes the breath.
    And the lute[316-1] he plays upon
      Shall strike ladies into trouble,
        As his sword strikes men to death.

    "And the steed it shall be shod
      All in silver, housed in azure;[316-2]
        And the mane shall swim the wind;
    And the hoofs along the sod
      Shall flash onward, and keep measure,
        Till the shepherds look behind.

    "But my lover will not prize
      All the glory that he rides in,
        When he gazes in my face.
    He will say, 'O Love, thine eyes
      Build the shrine my soul abides in,
        And I kneel here for thy grace!'

    "Then, aye, then shall he kneel low,
      With the red-roan steed anear him,
        Which shall seem to understand,
    Till I answer, 'Rise and go!
      For the world must love and fear him
        Whom I gift with heart and hand.'

    "Then he will arise so pale,
      I shall feel my own lips tremble
        With a yes I must not say:
    Nathless[317-3] maiden-brave, 'Farewell,'
      I will utter, and dissemble--
        'Light to-morrow with to-day!'

    "Then he'll ride among the hills
      To the wide world past the river,
        There to put away all wrong,
    To make straight distorted wills,
      And to empty the broad quiver
        Which the wicked bear along.

    "Three times shall a young foot page
      Swim the stream, and climb the mountain,
        And kneel down beside my feet:
    'Lo! my master sends this gage,[317-4]
      Lady, for thy pity's counting.
        What wilt thou exchange for it?'

    "And the first time I will send
      A white rosebud for a guerdon--[317-5]
        And the second time, a glove;
    But the third time--I may bend
      From my pride, and answer--'Pardon,
        If he comes to take my love.'

    "Then the young foot page will run--
      Then my lover will ride faster,
        Till he kneeleth at my knee:
    'I am a duke's eldest son!
      Thousand serfs do call me master,--
        But, O Love, I love but thee!'"...

    Little Ellie, with her smile
      Not yet ended, rose up gayly,
        Tied the bonnet, donned the shoe,
    And went homeward, round a mile,
      Just to see, as she did daily,
        What more eggs were with the two.

    Pushing through the elm-tree copse,
      Winding up the stream, light-hearted,
        Where the osier pathway leads,
    Past the boughs she stoops, and stops.
      Lo! the wild swan had deserted,
        And a rat had gnawed the reeds!

    Ellie went home sad and slow.
      If she found the lover ever,
        With his red-roan steed of steeds,
    Sooth I know not; but I know
      She could never show him--never,
        That swan's nest among the reeds.

     Mrs. Browning tells us very little of Ellie directly, yet she
     leaves us with a charming picture of an innocent, imaginative,
     romantic child. Ellie has been reading or listening to tales of
     knight-errantry, and her mind is full of them, so that the
     "sweetest pleasure ... for her future" is a lover riding straight
     out of one of the romances. That she is only a child, with a
     child's ideas, we may see from the fact that she can think, in her
     simplicity, of no greater reward for her noble lover than a sight
     of the swan's nest among the reeds, of which she alone knows.

     Mrs. Browning's purpose in writing this little story in verse was
     to show us how suddenly and how rudely unpleasant facts can break
     in upon our dreams. Ellie could never show her lover the swan's
     nest, as she had planned; and we are left with the feeling that she
     never found the lover of whom she dreamed--that all of her dream
     proved as false as the beautiful thought about the swan's nest.

FOOTNOTES:

[316-1] It would seem strange to us now if a soldier rode about playing upon a lute; but in
the old days of chivalry about which little Ellie had been reading, it was looked upon as almost
necessary for a knight to be able to play and sing sweet songs to his lady.

[316-2] The saddle-cloth or housing of the medieval knights was sometimes very large and gorgeous.

[317-3] Nathless is an old word meaning nevertheless. Mrs. Browning uses an occasional old
word, in order to give the atmosphere of the tales of chivalry.

[317-4] The gage was a cap or glove, or some other symbol to show that he had performed the
deeds which Ellie had demanded of him.

[317-5] Guerdon means reward.

THE COTTER'S SATURDAY NIGHT

By ROBERT BURNS

     NOTE.--There are many homes we like to visit in imagination, even
     if we cannot really go into them. It does not matter so much if
     they are not the homes of people in our own country who live as we
     do. For instance, Robert Burns described so well for us once the
     simple little home of a poor Scotch farmer that we read his words
     again and again with pleasure. It is such a poor little place,
     low-walled, thatched-roofed, part stable, that it would be
     unpleasant to us if we did not see it full of the spirit that makes
     true homes everywhere. The hard-working old farmer, his faithful
     wife, their industrious children, the oldest girl Jenny and her
     lover, all seem to us like very real people, whose joys and griefs
     are ours as much as theirs. We should like to sit with them at
     their humble table, to join in the good old hymns, and finally to
     kneel among them while the gentle old man said the evening prayer.
     We would not notice their homely clothes, coarse hands and simple,
     unscholarly language, for their real manliness and womanliness
     would win our esteem and love.

     On the pages that follow we have printed the poem as Burns wrote
     it, except for some few stanzas it has seemed best to omit. The
     first nine stanzas contain many Scottish words and expressions, but
     after the ninth stanza, Burns uses plain English. It was a habit he
     had of writing sometimes in Scotch dialect and sometimes in fine
     English. People who have studied his work say that when he speaks
     right from his heart and because he really cannot help writing, he
     uses the dialect, but when he tries to teach a lesson, to advise
     any one, or to moralize, he always uses the English phraseology.

    III

      Belyve,[321-9] the elder bairns come drappin' in.

FOOTNOTES:

[320-1] Sugh means a hollow, roaring sound. It is our word sough.

[320-2] Frae is the Scotch word meaning from.

[320-3] Pleugh means plow.

[320-4] Moil is a Scotch word meaning drudgery.

[320-5] A mattock is a two-bladed instrument for digging.

[320-6] Stacher is the Scotch form of stagger.

[320-7] Flichtering means fluttering.

[320-8] Carking is trying.

[321-9] Belyve means soon.

[321-10] Ca' means drive.

[321-11] Tentie means carefully.

[321-12] Cannie means here prudent, or trusty.

[321-13] Braw is fine, gay.

[322-14] Sair-won is hard-earned.

[322-15] Spiérs means enquires.

[322-16] The uncos is the news.

[322-17] This line means Makes old clothes look almost as new ones.

[322-18] The younkers are the youngsters.

[322-19] Eydent is diligent.

[322-20] To jauk is to trifle.

[323-21] Hame is the Scotch form of our word home.

[323-22] E'e is a contraction for eye.

[323-23] Hafflins means partly.

[323-24] Nae means no.

[323-25] Ben means into the room.

[323-26] That is, the visit is not unwelcome.

[323-27] Cracks is a Scotch word meaning chats.

[323-28] Kye are cattle.

[323-29] Blate means modest.

[323-30] Laithfu' is bashful.

[323-31] Sae is the Scotch form of so.

[323-32] The lave is the others: that is, the neighbors' girls.

[324-33] The halesome parritch is the wholesome porridge of oatmeal.

[324-34] Sowpe here means a little quantity of milk.

[324-35] Hawkie is a white-faced cow.

[324-36] That is, beyond the partition.

[324-37] Chows her cood means chews her cud.

[324-38] Weel-hain'd means carefully preserved.

[324-39] Kebbuck is cheese.

[324-40] This line, in English, would read And often he is urged (to take more) and often he
calls it good.

[324-41] A towmond is a twelvemonth, a year.

[324-42] Since flax was in blossom.

[324-43] The ha'-Bible is the family Bible, which is kept in the hall, or the best room.

[324-44] Ance is the Scotch form of once.

[324-45] That is, his hat.

[324-46] Lyart means gray.

[324-47] Haffets means temples.

[325-48] Wales means chooses.

CHARLES AND MARY LAMB

One of the most tragic, and at the same time one of the most heroic, of true stories is that
of Charles and Mary Lamb, the brother and sister who are known to millions of young people
as the writers of Tales from Shakespeare.

Charles Lamb was rather a short man, with a spare body and legs so small and thin that Thomas
Hood once spoke of them as "immaterial legs." His head, however, was large, and his brow fine;
his nose, large and hooked, was in a face which early showed lines of care and trouble; his
eyes were large and expressive, twinkling with humor but full of piercing inquiry, and searching
with keen interest everything about him; his mouth was large and firm, but around it there
flitted a smile that showed the genial, humorous soul of the big-hearted boy.

Lamb's habits were peculiar, there is no denying that, and his habits of dress made him even
more noticeable. Almost always he wore a black coat, knickerbockers and black gaiters. The
old-fashioned cut of his clothes and their worn appearance showed the narrowness of his means,
which, however, never caused him to neglect either clothing or person, for he was remarkably
neat in his ways.

Although a poor boy, he was educated in the famous old Christ's Hospital School in London,
but when he was ready for college he found himself barred by his stammering, stuttering tongue.
Giving up his hope of further schooling, he was glad to take a small clerkship in a government
office, where he remained for thirty-three years, a long period with little or no advancement.

It was in 1792, when Charles was about seventeen years of age, that he was given his clerkship,
and for nearly four years he lived happily, supporting his parents and his sister in their
humble home. Mary was eleven years older than Charles, a quiet gentle creature whom everybody
loved, though in some respects she was peculiar. There were things, too, that troubled the
family and made them reserved and inclined to be oversensitive. Not only were they very poor,
but there had been insanity on the mother's side, and Charles, himself, had at one time been
in brief confinement for irrational actions. Mary, too, had occasionally shown signs of madness,
but no one anticipated the dreadful event which took place in 1796.

It came upon them like a stroke of lightning out of a clear sky. All were gathered together
for their noon meal when Mary leaped to her feet and ran wildly about the room, shrieking in
the terrifying tones of the insane. She caught the forks and spoons from the table, threw them
about the room, and then, seizing a case knife, plunged it into the heart of her mother. Although
one of the flying forks had struck her aged father in the head and wounded him severely, Mary
sprang upon him and would certainly have killed the feeble old man then and there had not Charles
caught her and in a terrible struggle overpowered her and wrested the knife from her grasp.
Friends and neighbors came in, and the poor woman was taken to an asylum, where in a short
time she recovered her reason and learned of the awful consequences of her madness. In those
days hospitals for the insane were much more poorly managed than they are at present, and Charles
could not be contented to think of his sister confined within their walls. Accordingly he went
to the authorities, and after much persuasion they released her, under the condition that she
should be constantly under care.

Then began the long career of brotherly devotion which can scarcely be matched, and which never
fails to excite our sympathy and admiration. We may well think it a terrible penance, for Mary's
attacks recurred again and again, and more than once Charles had to take her back to the hospital
for a brief time while her violence remained too great for him to control. There were long
lucid intervals, however, and after a while both learned to recognize the symptoms which preceded
an attack, and the two would wend their way to the asylum, where she could take refuge. They
carried a straight-jacket with them for use in case she should suddenly become violent, for
never could either escape from the nightmare of that first awful catastrophe.

For forty years this companionship, this sublime devotion continued, even to the time of Charles
Lamb's death in 1834. Both made many friends, and when the brother was laid away these friends
came forward and took up the burden of Mary's care until she, too, died, nearly thirteen years
later. The last years of Lamb's life were full of further trouble, that, combined with his
crushing anxiety for Mary, broke his genial spirit and left him sad and melancholy.

One of the greatest blows he suffered in his later life was the death of his life-long friend,
Samuel Taylor Coleridge. I seem to love the house he died at more passionately than when he
lived.... What was his mansion is consecrated to me a chapel."

It is said that when his sister was first stricken Lamb was engaged to be married to Ann Simmons,
a sweet woman, whom he loved passionately. So awful was the blow and so heavy the responsibility
he assumed that the match was broken off, and the gentle man resigned his hope of home and
family. We shall see, however, that he never quite forgot his love.

Sad as their life certainly was, there were many pleasant days for both brother and sister.
Between her spells of violence Mary was a charming companion, a helpful adviser and a writer
of great ability, as loyal to her brother as he was to her. When Lamb was engaged to write
the Tales from Shakespeare, she took up the pen with him and wrote the stories of the great
poet's comedies while Charles wrote the tragedies.

How strong his affection and respect for her really were we may see from his own words: "I
am a fool bereft of her co-operation. I am used to look up at her in the worst and biggest
perplexities. To say all that I find her would be more than I think anybody could possibly
understand.

A more lovable character than Lamb's is hard to find. Full of fun he was when with his friends,
punning, quibbling and joking in quaint and original ways that made him welcome wherever he
went. "The best acid is assiduity" was one of his favorite puns, and "No work is worse than
over-work" is one of his wise and witty remarks.

The stuttering which in some persons might have seemed an annoyance only served to add a certain
spiciness to his good-natured quips. It is said that a certain gushing lady once went into
a long description of her children and her own passionate love for them. Suddenly interrupting
herself she said to Lamb, "And how do you like babies, Mr. Lamb?" With a sober face, but unable
to conceal the humorous twinkle in his sharp eyes, Charles replied, "Bub-bub-boiled, Madam!"

Lamb's friendship for Coleridge was fully returned, as we may see from many things the latter
wrote. At one time he said: "Lamb's character is a sacred one with me. No associations that
he may form can hurt the purity of his mind.... Nothing ever left a stain on that gentle creature's
mind."

In 1825 Lamb's health became so poor that he was compelled to give up his clerkship, and thereafter
he lived most of his time at Edmonton. The British government gave him an annual pension of
£441, which sufficed for the simple wants of himself and his sister.

The immediate cause of his death was a slight accident that befell him a few months after the
burial of Coleridge. Unconsciousness came before he had been long ill and before any of his
intimate friends could reach him, yet it was their names that were last on his lips. They buried
him in the churchyard at Edmonton, as he wished, where on his tombstone may be read:

    "Farewell, dear friend--that smile, that harmless mirth,
    No more shall gladden our domestic hearth;
    That rising tear, with pain forbid to flow--
    Better than words--no more assuage our woe.
    That hand outstretch'd from small but well-earned store
    Yield succor to the destitute no more.
    Yet art thou not all lost. Through many an age,
    With sterling sense and humour, shall thy page
    Win many an English bosom, pleased to see
    That old and happier vein revived in thee.
    This for our earth: and if with friends we share
    Our joys in heaven we hope to meet thee there."

Besides the Tales from Shakespeare, Charles Lamb wrote many beautiful sketches which are known
as the Essays of Elia. Elia was the name of one of the clerks in the South Sea House, where
Lamb worked at one time.

A reader can easily form some idea of a writer's character from his work, but Lamb was always
so wholly himself, and he threw himself so freely into his essays, that you can tell just what
manner of man he was as you read. A large part of the pleasure of reading him comes from this
trait. We seem to be sitting with a charming friend whenever we hold one of his books, and
to feel that the friend is pouring out his whole heart for our delight and inspiration. Naturally
a person must keep alert when he is reading from Charles Lamb, for no one can predict what
course the brilliant mind will take. When once a reader has learned to understand his oddities,
delicate sentiment, bright wit and loving faithfulness, every word becomes a living thing,
and every reading a new delight, a higher inspiration. In none of his essays is he seen to
greater advantage than in Dream Children, which follows this brief sketch. The only people
young or old who do not love this beautiful essay are those who have not read it or who have
read it without really understanding it. You may need to read it once just to see what it is
about; again with the aid of the notes and comments we make upon it; a third time to let it
cast its spell upon you. If you do that you will not forget it, but will return to it often
as years go on and the hard world buffets you with those stern experiences which make you men
and women. Every time you read it you will find new graces, more touching sentiment.

Will you read it now for the first time, paying only so much attention to the footnotes as
may be necessary for you to understand the language?

DREAM CHILDREN: A REVERY

By CHARLES LAMB

Children love to listen to stories about their elders when they were children; to stretch their
imagination to the conception of a traditionary great-uncle, or grandame, whom they never saw.

It was in this spirit that my little ones crept about me the other evening to hear about their
great-grandmother Field,[335-1] who lived in a great house in Norfolk (a hundred times bigger
than that in which they and papa lived) which had been the scene--so at least it was generally
believed in that part of the country--of the tragic incidents which they had lately become
familiar with from the ballad of the Children in the Wood.[335-2]

Certain it is that the whole story of the children and their cruel uncle was to be seen fairly
carved out in wood upon the chimney-piece of the great hall,[335-3] the whole story down to
the Robin Redbreast; till a foolish person pulled it down to set up a marble one of modern
invention in its stead, with no story upon it.

Here Alice put out one of her dear mother's looks, too tender to be called upbraiding.

Then I went on to say, how religious and how good their great-grandmother Field was, how beloved
and respected by everybody, though she was not indeed the mistress of this great house, but
had only the charge of it (and yet in some respects she might be said to be the mistress of
it too) committed to her by the owner, who preferred living in a newer and more fashionable
mansion which he had purchased somewhere in the adjoining county; but still she lived in it
in a manner as if it had been her own, and kept up the dignity of the great house in a sort
while she lived. Afterwards it came to decay, and was nearly pulled down, and all its old ornaments
stripped and carried away to the owner's other house, where they were set up, and looked as
awkward as if someone were to carry away the old tombs they had lately seen at the Abbey,[336-4]
and stick them up in Lady C.'s[336-5] tawdry gilt drawing-room. Here John smiled, as much as
to say, "that would be foolish indeed."

And then I told how, when she came to die, her funeral was attended by a concourse of all the
poor, and some of the gentry, too, of the neighborhood for many miles around, to show their
respect for her memory, because she had been such a good and religious woman; so good indeed
that she knew all the Psaltery[336-7] by heart, ay, and a great part of the Testament[336-8]
besides.

Here little Alice spread her hands.

Then I told what a tall, upright, gracious person their great-grandmother Field once was; and
how in her youth she was esteemed the best dancer,--here Alice's little right foot played an
involuntary movement, till, upon my looking grave, it desisted,--the best dancer, I was saying,
in the country, till a cruel disease, called a cancer, came, and bowed her down with pain,
but it could never bend her good spirits, or make them stoop, but they were still upright,
because she was so good and religious.

Then I told how she used to sleep by herself in a lone chamber of the great lone house; and
how she believed that an apparition of two infants was to be seen at midnight gliding up and
down the great staircase near where she slept, but she said "those innocents would do her no
harm;" and how frightened I used to be, though in those days I had my maid to sleep with me,
because I was never half so good or religious as she,--and yet I never saw the infants.

Here John expanded all his eyebrows and tried to look courageous.

Then I told how good she was to all her grandchildren, having us to the great house in the
holidays, where I in particular used to spend many hours by myself, in gazing upon the old
busts of the twelve Caesars, that had been Emperors of Rome, till the old marble heads would
seem to live again, or I to be turned into marble with them; how I never could be tired with
roaming about that huge mansion, with its vast empty rooms, with their worn-out hangings, fluttering
tapestry, and carved oaken panels, with the gilding almost rubbed out,--sometimes in the spacious
old-fashioned gardens, which I had almost to myself, unless when now and then a solitary gardening
man would cross me,--and how the nectarines and peaches hung upon the walls,[338-9] without
my ever offering to pluck them, because they were forbidden fruit, unless now and then,--and
because I had more pleasure in strolling about among the old melancholy-looking yew-trees,[338-10]
or the firs, and picking up the red berries, and the fir apples, which were good for nothing
but to look at,--or in lying about upon the fresh grass with all the fine garden smells around
me,--or basking in the orangery,[338-11] till I could almost fancy myself ripening too along
with the oranges and the limes in that grateful warmth,--or in watching the dace[338-12] that
darted to and fro in the fish-pond, at the bottom of the garden, with here and there a great
sulky pike hanging midway down the water in silent state, as if it mocked at their impertinent
friskings,--I had more pleasure in these busy-idle diversions than in all the sweet flavors
of peaches, nectarines, oranges, and such-like common baits of children.

Here John slyly deposited back upon the plate a bunch of grapes, which, not unobserved by Alice
he had meditated dividing with her, and both seemed willing to relinquish them for the present
as irrelevant.

Then, in somewhat a more heightened tone, I told how, though their great-grandmother Field
loved all her grandchildren, yet in an especial manner she might be said to love their uncle,
John L----,[340-13] because he was so handsome and spirited a youth, and a king to the rest
of us; and, instead of moping about in solitary corners, like some of us, he would mount the
most mettlesome horse he could get, when but an imp no bigger than themselves, and make it
carry him half over the county in a morning, and join the hunters when there were any out,--and
yet he loved the old great house and gardens too, but had too much spirit to be always pent
up within their boundaries;--and how their uncle grew up to man's estate as brave as he was
handsome, to the admiration of everybody, but of their great-grandmother Field most especially;
and how he used to carry me upon his back when I was a lame-footed[340-14] boy--for he was
a good bit older than I--many a mile when I could not walk for pain; and how in after life
he became lame-footed too, and I did not always (I fear) make allowances enough for him when
he was impatient and in pain, nor remember sufficiently how considerate he had been to me when
I was lame-footed;--and how when he died,[340-15] though he had not been dead an hour, it seemed
as if he had died a great while ago, such a distance there is betwixt life and death; and how
I bore his death as I thought pretty well at first, but afterwards it haunted and haunted me;
and though I did not cry or take it to heart as some do, and as I think he would have done
if I had died, yet I missed him all day long, and knew not till then how much I had loved him.
I missed his kindness, and I missed his crossness, and wished him to be alive again, to be
quarreling with him (for we quarreled sometimes), rather than not to have him again, and was
as uneasy without him, as he their poor uncle must have been when the doctor took off his limb.

Here the children fell a-crying, and asked if their little mourning which they had on was not
for Uncle John, and they looked up, and prayed me not to go on about their uncle, but to tell
them some stories about their pretty dead mother.

Then I told how, for seven long years, in hope sometimes, sometimes in despair, yet persisting
ever, I courted the fair Alice W----n;[342-16] and, as much as children could understand, I
explained to them what coyness, and difficulty, and denial meant in maidens.

When suddenly turning to Alice, the soul of the first Alice looked out at her eyes with such
a reality of representment, that I became in doubt which of them stood before me, or whose
that bright hair was; and while I stood gazing, both the children gradually grew fainter to
my view, receding, and still receding, till nothing at last but two mournful features were
seen in the uttermost distance, which, without speech, strangely impressed upon me the effects
of speech:

"We are not of Alice, nor of thee, nor are we children at all. The children of Alice call Bartram
father. We are nothing; less than nothing, and dreams. We are only what might have been, and
must wait upon the tedious shores of Lethe[342-17] millions of ages before we have existence,
and a name."

And immediately awaking, I found myself quietly seated in my bachelor armchair, where I had
fallen asleep, with the faithful Bridget[342-18] unchanged by my side,--but John L. (or James
Elia) was gone forever.

     You know Lamb's pathetic history, and you can see how Dream
     Children came right out of his own sad heart, and how it teems
     with affectionate recollection. The children, too,--do they not
     seem like living beings? Can you believe that Alice and John never
     lived? Let us go back to the essay and see how little it is that he
     really says about them. Here it is:

     ALICE

          JOHN

     1. Here Alice put out one of her dear mother's looks, too tender
     to be upbraiding.

     She thought it very sad that any one should pull down the beautiful
     mantelpiece in the great hall, but she would not find fault with
     him--she was too gentle, too tender for that!

          1. Here John smiled as much as to say, "that would be foolish
          indeed."

          John is quite the boy--wise enough to see how ridiculous it was
          to put a fine, rich old carved chimney among a lot of gilt
          gimcracks--and rather anxious to show his wisdom.

     2. Here little Alice spread her hands.

     Don't you think she knew her Psaltery by heart, and a great part of
     the Testament besides? "Of course it is very wonderful that
     grandma knew so much--but then, I know it too."

          2. Here John expanded all his eyebrows and tried to look
          courageous.

          The tale of the ghostly infants has frightened John a little, but
          he does not like to admit any timidity there with his father and
          sister, so he straightens up, expands his eyebrows and looks very
          brave and manly.

     3.

     The mere suggestion of a dance sets the little foot in motion, and
     you and I know that Alice is a lively girl who would be as proud of
     being the best dancer in the country as she was of knowing as much
     Scripture as her grandmother knew. But how quickly she stops when
     her father looks grave! We do not think that he objects to Alice
     dancing, but he knows that he is going to tell her the sad part of
     the story, and that the dancing accompaniment of Alice's little
     right foot would be very much out of place.

     Later, Alice joined with John in wishing for the grapes, but she
     was equally willing to give them up when it seemed childish to take
     them.

          3.

          While the father has been telling of his glorious childhood
          among the rich fruit on the great estate, John has quietly
          picked up a bunch of grapes, and his quick-witted father,
          seeing the act, sneers a little at such-like common baits of
          children. John, wishing to be manly, puts the grapes back
          without a word, though evidently he will be glad enough to
          return to them at the proper time.

          Not a selfish child at all was John, for he meditated dividing
          the grapes with Alice, and they would have been so sweet and
          cooling while the children stood there listening to the story.

     4.

     How tender-hearted they both are, and yet until now they had hardly
     realized that it was for Uncle John that they were wearing their
     fresh mourning. This was a new grief too sad to them, but it turned
     their gentle sympathies to their pretty dead mother, of whom they
     were always glad to hear. The father has scarcely begun to speak
     when he sees in Alice so much resemblance to his dead wife that he
     almost thinks it is the mother who stands beside him. So violent is
     his emotion that he gradually comes out of his reverie, and as he
     does so the children fade away and recede into the distance,
     saying, "We are nothing; less than nothing, and dreams."

     Is it not a wonderful thing that with so few words a writer can put
     his heart so much into yours that you believe almost as much as he
     does in the reality of the vision?

     In the sketch of Lamb we said that his character was very strongly
     reflected in his writings, and this essay shows the fact
     wonderfully well. Imagine the man, lonely, heartbroken, weary from
     the awful task he had set himself, sitting in his bachelor armchair
     by the fire, dreaming his evening away. Who are the people that
     come to him in his dreams and what are the incidents? First his
     grandmother Field, with whom he had spent a great deal of his
     childhood; then his sweetheart Alice, now married to another, with
     children of her own; then his brother, by no means a pleasing
     character, but a lazy and selfish man who, however, in the rich,
     loving heart of his brother stands out as handsome, affectionate,
     noble and brave. How keenly he feels the bitter loss which comes to
     him with tenfold severity when he awakens, and which he makes the
     closing thought in the essay! Lastly, the faithful Mary, unchanged,
     appears at his side,--his waking companion, his greatest burden and
     his greatest joy. In his busy-idle
     amusements at the great house he shows the innocence and simplicity
     of his pleasures, and in the delicate way in which he reproves
     Alice and John, his genial, sympathetic disposition as well as his
     abundant good humor. How much finer it was to say, "and such-like
     common baits of children" than to have said, "John, put the grapes
     back on the plate."

FOOTNOTES:

[335-1] Lamb's grandmother, Mary Field, was for a long time housekeeper in one of the great
English country houses, but not in the county alluded to in the text.

[335-2] This means that the incidents had but lately become familiar to the children. The story
is the old one of the Babes in the Wood, as it is sometimes called.

[335-3] One of Lamb's fancies; the chimney-carving in the real house represented stag and boar
hunts.

[336-4] Westminster Abbey.

[336-5] An imaginary person with a cheap, showy drawing-room.

[336-7] The Book of Psalms, or such a portion of it as is used in the services of the English
Church.

[336-8] New Testament.

[338-9] The trees were planted on the south side of the walls, which protected them from the
north wind and ripened them by reflected warmth.

[338-10] The foliage of the yews is very dark, and because these trees are so often planted
about cemeteries they give a hint of sadness to every one.

[338-11] The glass house which protected the trees in the winter and hastened the ripening
of the fruit in summer.

[338-12] A small fish resembling our chub--usually seen in schools in still waters.

[340-13] Lamb's brother John--twelve years his senior. John was rather a lazy, selfish fellow--at
least he never gave up his own pleasures and comforts to assist his family, even in their greatest
need.

[340-14] This probably alludes to some temporary affliction, for Charles Lamb was not lame.

[340-15] John Lamb died just before this essay was written.

[342-16] It is not known positively whether Alice Warren was a real or an imaginary character.

[342-17] Lethe was among the ancient Greeks the name given to the river of oblivion, of whose
waters spirits drank to gain forgetfulness.

[342-18] Bridget Elia is his sister, Mary Lamb.

READING SHAKESPEARE

The greatest author the world has known is William Shakespeare, and his writings will afford
more pleasure, instruction and information than those of any other author. They may be read
again and again, for so charged are they with living knowledge and so full of literary charm,
that no one can exhaust them in a single reading. Not every reader of Shakespeare loves him,
but that is because not every reader appreciates him. He wrote in the English of his times,
and used many words and expressions that have since dropped out of the language, changed their
meaning, or become unfamiliar in common speech. Then again, his knowledge of life is so profound
and his insight into human nature so keen and penetrating, that the casual reader is liable
not to follow his thought. In other words, Shakespeare must be studied to be appreciated; but
if he is studied and appreciated, he gives a pleasure and exerts an influence that cannot be
equaled.

Young people are liable to think that study is laborious and uninteresting, a nuisance and
a bore. Nothing of that sort is true of the study of Shakespeare, because for every effort
there is a present reward, there is no waiting to see results. Of course there are right ways
and wrong ways to study, just as there are right ways and wrong ways of doing anything. Sometimes
teachers fail entirely to interest their classes in Shakespeare, and parents say they cannot
make their children like Shakespeare. None of this is the fault of the poet or of the children;
the fault lies in the methods used to create an interest. If a person begins properly and proceeds
as he should, there will never be a lack of interest. Teachers are not needed, and parents
may leave their children to learn to be happy in reading by themselves, if the books are prepared
properly for them.

In the first place, one of the wonders of Shakespeare is the great variety of his plays. In
fact, they cover the whole range of human activities, and introduce characters from almost
every walk in life. The stories they tell run from the light and gay to those of more somber
hue, from comedy to deepest tragedy. Wit and humor, pathos and sublimity may sometimes be found
in the same play, and smiles and tears may be drawn from the same page. What play to select
for a beginner becomes then a question of some moment. The Tempest is one of the best, for
it is not difficult to read, is an interesting story, has amusing characters, and carries good
food for thought.

Will you then, our young readers, go hand in hand with us into the reading of Shakespeare?
Do as we say this one time, and read as we ask you to, even if it does take some time from
your play. If, while you are doing it, you do not enjoy yourselves, or if at the end you do
not feel repaid, then take your own course in your reading thereafter. It will be a better
course for having studied one great play carefully.

However, before we begin the play, let us read the charming tale written by Charles and Mary
Lamb. It will give us briefly the story of The Tempest, though a wealth of incidents is omitted.

THE TEMPEST

By WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Having read Lamb's version of the story, we are ready for the play as Shakespeare wrote it.
To begin with, we will read it through from beginning to end with as little hesitation and
delay as possible. We shall not expect to understand it all, and will pass over the more difficult
passages without attempting to master them. If at times we are unable to go on intelligently,
we will look at the notes at the bottom of the pages and get the help we need. This reading,
however, is intended merely to give us a general idea of the play. We are spying out the land
as a general might do it, trying to see what kind of a country we are invading, and to locate
the places where we are liable to meet with resistance. We will stop a moment now and then
to shudder at Caliban, to admire Prospero, to love the sweet Miranda or to laugh at the nonsense
of the jester and the drunken butler, but we will hasten on to the end nevertheless, knowing
that we will become better acquainted with the people at another time.

Having finished the play, we will return to the beginning for a second, a slower, more careful
reading. Now many things that at first seemed obscure will have cleared themselves by our greater
knowledge of the play. This time, however, we must read every sentence carefully and try to
understand the meaning of all. The footnotes should all be read, because it often happens that
when we think we understand what a sentence signifies, we give the wrong meaning to a word
or phrase, and hence change the whole sense.

When this second reading has been completed, we will have a good understanding of the play,
a more intimate acquaintance with the characters, and be ready for the more interesting studies
which follow the play.

THE PERSONS

  ALONSO, King of Naples.

  SEBASTIAN, his Brother.

  PROSPERO, the rightful Duke of Milan.

  ANTONIO, his Brother, the usurping Duke of Milan.

  FERDINAND, Son to the King of Naples.

  GONZALO, an honest old Counsellor of Naples.

  ADRIAN,    }
  FRANCISCO, } Lords.

  CALIBAN, a savage and deformed Slave.

  TRINCULO, a Jester.

  STEPHANO, a drunken Butler.

  Master of a Ship, Boatswain, and Mariners.

  MIRANDA, Daughter to Prospero.

  ARIEL, an airy Spirit.

  Other Spirits attending on Prospero.

  IRIS,    }
  CERES,   }
  JUNO,    } presented by
  Nymphs,  } Spirits.
  Reapers, }

SCENE, a Ship at Sea; afterwards an uninhabited Island.

ACT I

SCENE I.--On a Ship at sea. A Storm, with Thunder and Lightning.

Enter Master and Boatswain severally.

MASTER speaks.

Boatswain!

Boats. Here, master: what cheer?

Mast. Good,[366-1] speak to the mariners: fall to't yarely,[366-2] or we run ourselves a-ground:
bestir, bestir.                     [Exit.

Enter Mariners.

Boats. Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare, yare! Take in the top-sail. Tend
to the master's whistle. [Exeunt Mariners.]--Blow till thou burst thy wind,[366-3] if room
enough![366-4]

Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, FERDINAND, GONZALO, and Others.

Alon. Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master? Play the men.[366-5]

Boats. I pray now, keep below.

Anto. Where is the master, boatswain?

Boats. Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.

Gonza. Nay, good, be patient.

Boats. When the sea is. Hence! What care these roarers for the name of king? To cabin: silence!
trouble us not.

Gonza. Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

Boats. None that I more love than myself. You are a counsellor: if you can command these elements
to silence, and work the peace of the present,[367-6] we will not hand a rope more; use your
authority: if you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make yourself ready in your
cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.[367-7]--Cheerly, good hearts!--Out of our
way, I say.                           [Exit.

Gonza. I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he hath no drowning-mark upon him; his
complexion[367-8] is perfect gallows.--Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging! make the rope
of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage! If he be not born to be hang'd,
our case is miserable.                                           [Exeunt.

Re-enter Boatswain.

Boats. Down with the top-mast! yare; lower, lower! Bring her to try wi' th' main-course.[367-9]
[A cry within.] A plague upon this howling! they are louder than the weather or our office,[367-10]--

Re-enter SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, and GONZALO.

Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er, and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

Sebas. A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!

Boats. Work you, then.

Anto. Hang, cur, hang! you insolent noisemaker, we are less afraid to be drown'd than thou art.

Gonza. I'll warrant him for drowning,[368-11] though the ship were no stronger than a nut-shell.

Boats. Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses![368-12] off to sea again: lay her off!

Re-enter Mariners, wet.

Mariners. All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!      [Exeunt.

Boats. What, must our mouths be cold?

Gonza. The King and Prince at prayers! let us assist them,
    For our case is as theirs.

Sebas.                       I'm out of patience.

Anto. We're merely[368-13] cheated out of our lives by drunkards.
    This wide-chopp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning,
    The washing of ten tides!

Gonza.                       He'll be hang'd yet,
    Though every drop of water swear against it,
    And gape at widest to glut[368-14] him.

(A confused noise within.) Mercy on us! We split, we split!--Farewell,
my wife and children!--Farewell, brother!--We split, we split, we split!
                                                     [Exit Boatswain.

Anto. Let's all sink wi' th' King.                           [Exit.

Sebas. Let's take leave of him.                              [Exit.

Gonza. Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of
barren ground; ling, heath, broom, furze,[369-15] anything. The
wills[369-16] above be done! but I would fain die a dry death.
                                                               [Exit.

SCENE II.--The Island: before the Cell of PROSPERO.

Enter PROSPERO and MIRANDA.

Mira. If by your art, my dearest father, you have
    Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
    The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
    But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,[369-1]
    Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffer'd
    With those that I saw suffer! a brave[369-2] vessel,
    Who had no doubt some noble creatures in her,
    Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
    Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perish'd!
    Had I been any god of power, I would
    Have sunk the sea within the earth, or e'er[369-3]
    It should the good ship so have swallow'd, and
    The fraughting[370-4] souls within her.

Pros.                                      Be collected;
    No more amazement:[370-5] tell your piteous heart
    There's no harm done.

Mira.                   O, woe the day!

Pros.                                   No harm.
    I have done nothing but in care of thee,--
    Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter,--who
    Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
    Of whence I am; nor that I am more better[370-6]
    Than Prospero, master of a full-poor cell,
    And thy no greater father.

Mira.                          More to know
    Did never meddle[370-7] with my thoughts.

Pros.                                       'Tis time
    I should inform thee further. Lend thy hand,
    And pluck my magic garment from me.--So:
                                                 [Lays down his robe.
    Lie there, my art.[370-8]--Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
    The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
    The very virtue of compassion in thee,
    I have with such prevision in mine art
    So safely order'd, that there is no soul[370-9]--
    No, not so much perdition as an hair
    Betid to any creature in the vessel
    Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down;
    For thou must now know further.

Mira.                              You have often
    Begun to tell me what I am; but stopp'd
    And left me to a bootless inquisition,[372-10]
    Concluding, Stay, not yet.

Pros.                           The hour's now come;
    The very minute bids thee ope thine ear:
    Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember
    A time before we came unto this cell?
    I do not think thou canst; for then thou wast not
    Out[372-11] three years old.

Mira.                           Certainly, sir, I can.

Pros. By what? by any other house or person?
    Of any thing the image tell me that
    Hath kept with thy remembrance.

Mira.                              'Tis far off,
    And rather like a dream than an assurance
    That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
    Four or five women once that tended me?

Pros. Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
    That this lives in thy mind? What see'st thou else
    In the dark backward and abysm of time?
    If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
    How thou camest here, thou mayst.[372-12]

Mira.                                But that I do not.

Pros. Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
    Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and
    A prince of power.

Mira.                 Sir, are you not my father?

Pros. Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
    She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
    Was Duke of Milan; thou his only heir,
    A princess--no worse issued.

Mira.                           O the Heavens!
    What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
    Or blessèd was't we did?

Pros.                       Both, both, my girl:
    By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence;
    But blessedly holp[373-13] hither.

Mira.                                 O, my heart bleeds
    To think o' the teen[373-14] that I have turn'd you to,
    Which is from my remembrance! Please you, further.[373-15]

Pros. My brother, and thy uncle, call'd Antonio,--
    I pray thee, mark me;--that a brother should
    Be so perfidious!--he whom, next thyself,
    Of all the world I loved, and to him put
    The manage[373-16] of my State; as, at that time,
    Through all the signiories[373-17] it was the first,
    And Prospero the prime[373-18] Duke; being so reputed
    In dignity, and for the liberal arts
    Without a parallel: those being all my study,
    The government I cast upon my brother,
    And to my State grew stranger, being transported
    And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle,--
    Dost thou attend me?

Mira.                   Sir, most heedfully.

Pros.--Being once perfected how to grant suits,
    How to deny them; who[374-19] t' advance, and who
    To trash[374-20] for over-topping[374-21]--new-created
    The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
    Or else new-form'd 'em; having both the key[374-22]
    Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the State
    To what tune pleased his ear; that[374-23] now he was
    The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
    And suck'd the verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.

Mira. O good sir, I do.

Pros.                    I pray thee, mark me.
    I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
    To closeness,[374-24] and the bettering of my mind
    With that which, but[374-25] by being so retired,
    O'er-prized all popular rate,[374-26] in my false brother
    Awaked an evil nature; and my trust,
    Like a good parent, did beget of him
    A falsehood, in its contrary as great
    As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
    A confidence sans[375-27] bound. He being thus lorded,
    Not only with what my revenue yielded,
    But what my power might else exact,--like one
    Who having unto truth, by falsing of it,[375-28]
    Made such a sinner of his memory
    To[375-29] credit his own lie,--he did believe
    He was indeed the Duke; out o' the substitution,[375-30]
    And executing the outward face of royalty,
    With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing,--
    Dost thou hear?[375-31]

Mira. Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

Pros. To have no screen between this part he play'd
    And them he play'd it for, he needs will be
    Absolute Milan.[375-32] Me,[375-33] poor man, my library
    Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
    He thinks me now incapable; confederates--
    So dry he was for sway[376-34]--wi' th' King of Naples
    To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
    Subject his coronet to his crown, and bend
    The dukedom, yet unbow'd,--alas, poor Milan![376-35]--
    To most ignoble stooping.[376-36]

Mira.                                O the Heavens!

Pros. This King of Naples, being an enemy
    To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
    Which was, that he, in lieu[376-37] o' the premises,--
    Of homage, and I know not how much tribute,--
    Should presently[376-38] extirpate me and mine
    Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan,
    With all the honours, on my brother: whereon,
    A treacherous army levied, one midnight
    Fated to th' practice[376-39] did Antonio open
    The gates of Milan; and, i' the dead of darkness,
    The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence
    Me and thy crying self.[376-40]

Mira.                               Alack, for pity!
    I, not remembering how I cried on't then,
    Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint[377-41]
    That wrings mine eyes to't.

Pros.                Hear a little further,
    And then I'll bring thee to the present business
    Which now's upon's;[377-42] without the which this story
    Were most impertinent.[377-43]

Mira.                              Wherefore did they not
    That hour destroy us?

Pros.                     Well demanded, wench:[377-44]
    My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not--
    So dear the love my people bore me--set
    A mark so bloody on the business; but
    With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
    In few,[377-45] they hurried us aboard a bark,
    Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
    A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
    Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
    Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist[377-46] us,
    To cry to th' sea that roar'd to us; to sigh
    To th' winds, whose pity, sighing back again,
    Did us but loving wrong.

Mira.                       Alack, what trouble
    Was I then to you!

Pros.                 O, a cherubim
    Thou wast that did preserve me! Thou didst smile,
    Infusèd with a fortitude from Heaven,
    When I have degg'd[378-47] the sea with drops full salt,
    Under my burden groan'd; which raised in me
    An undergoing stomach,[378-48] to bear up
    Against what should ensue.

Mira.                         How came we ashore?

Pros. By Providence divine.
    Some food we had, and some fresh water, that
    A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
    Out of his charity,--being then appointed
    Master of this design,--did give us; with
    Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,
    Which since have steaded[378-49] much; so, of his gentleness,
    Knowing I loved my books, he furnish'd me,
    From mine own library, with volumes that
    I prize above my dukedom.

Mira.                       Would I might
    But ever see that man!

Pros.                     Now I arise:[378-50]
    Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
    Here in this island we arrived; and here
    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit[378-51]
    Than other princesses can, that have more time
    For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful.

Mira. Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir,--
    For still 'tis beating in my mind,--your reason
    For raising this sea-storm?

Pros.                         Know thus far forth:
    By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune--
    Now my dear lady--hath mine enemies
    Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
    I find my zenith[379-52] doth depend upon
    A most auspicious star, whose influence
    If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes
    Will ever after droop.[379-53] Here cease more questions:
    Thou art inclined to sleep; 'tis a good dulness,
    And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.[379-54]
                                                     [MIRANDA sleeps.
    Come away, servant, come! I'm ready now:
    Approach, my Ariel; come!

Enter ARIEL.

Ari. All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
    To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
    To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
    On the curl'd clouds: to thy strong bidding task
    Ariel and all his quality.[379-55]

Pros.                         Hast thou, spirit,
    Perform'd to point[379-56] the tempest that I bade thee?

Ari. To every article.
    I boarded the King's ship; now on the beak,[379-57]
    Now in the waist,[380-58] the deck, in every cabin,
    I flamed amazement: sometime I'd divide,
    And burn in many places; on the top-mast,
    The yards, and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly,[380-59]
    Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
    O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary[380-60]
    And sight-outrunning were not: the fire, and cracks
    Of sulphurous roaring, the most mighty Neptune
    Seem'd to besiege, and make his bold waves tremble.
    Yea, his dread trident shake.

Pros.                            My brave spirit!
    Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil[380-61]
    Would not infect his reason?

Ari.                             Not a soul
    But felt a fever of the mad,[380-62] and play'd
    Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
    Plunged in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel.
    Then all a-fire with me: The King's son, Ferdinand,
    With hair up-staring,[380-63]--then like reeds, not hair,--
    Was the first man that leap'd; cried, Hell is empty,
    And all the devils are here.

Pros.                            Why, that's my spirit!
    But was not this nigh shore?

Ari.                             Close by, my master.

Pros. But are they, Ariel, safe?

Ari.                             Not a hair perish'd;
    On their unstaining[381-64] garments not a blemish,
    But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
    In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
    The King's son have I landed by himself;
    Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
    In an odd angle[381-65] of the isle, and sitting,
    His arms in this sad knot.[381-66]

Pros.                         Of the King's ship
    The mariners, say, how hast thou disposed,
    And all the rest o' the fleet?[381-67]

Ari.                             Safely in harbour
    Is the King's ship; in the deep nook, where once
    Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
    From the still-vex'd Bermoothes,[381-68] there she's hid:
    The mariners all under hatches stow'd;
    Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
    I've left asleep:[381-69] and, for the rest o' the fleet
    Which I dispersed, they all have met again,
    And are upon the Mediterranean flote,[382-70]
    Bound sadly home for Naples;
    Supposing that they saw the King's ship wreck'd,
    And his great person perish.

Pros.                           Ariel, thy charge
    Exactly is performed: but there's more work.
    What is the time o' the day?

Ari.                            Past the mid season,
    At least two glasses.[382-71]

Pros.                    The time 'twixt six and now
    Must by us both be spent most preciously.

Ari. Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
    Let me remember[382-72] thee what thou hast promised,
    Which is not yet perform'd[382-73] me.

Pros.                                     How now! moody?
    What is't thou canst demand?

Ari.                            My liberty.

Pros. Before the time be out? no more![382-74]

Ari.                                   I pr'ythee,
    Remember I have done thee worthy service;
    Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, served
    Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
    To bate me a full year.[382-75]

Pros.                      Dost thou forget
    From what a torment I did free thee?

Ari.                                    No.

Pros. Thou dost; and think'st it much to tread the ooze
    Of the salt deep; to run upon the sharp
    Wind of the North; to do me business in
    The veins o' the earth when it is baked with frost.[383-76]

Ari. I do not, sir.

Pros. Thou liest, malignant thing![383-77] Hast thou forgot
    The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy[383-78]
    Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?

Ari. No, sir.

Pros.         Thou hast: where was she born? speak; tell me.

Ari. Sir, in Argier.[383-79]

Pros.               O, was she so? I must
    Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
    Which thou forgett'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
    For mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible
    To enter human hearing, from Argier,
    Thou know'st, was banish'd. Is not this true?

Ari. Ay, sir.

Pros. This blue-eyed hag[383-80] was hither brought,
    And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave,
    As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
    And, for[383-81] thou wast a spirit too delicate
    To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
    Refusing her grand hests,[384-82] she did confine thee,
    By help of her more potent ministers,
    And in her most unmitigable rage,
    Into[384-83] a cloven pine; within which rift
    Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
    A dozen years; within which space she died,
    And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans
    As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
    Save for the son that she did litter here,[384-84]
    A freckled whelp, hag-born--not honour'd with
    A human shape.

Ari.             Yes, Caliban her son.

Pros. Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban,
    Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
    What torment I did find thee in: thy groans
    Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
    Of ever-angry bears. It was a torment
    To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
    Could not again undo: it was mine art,
    When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
    The pine, and let thee out.

Ari.                           I thank thee, master.

Pros. If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak,
    And peg thee in his knotty entrails, till
    Thou'st howl'd away twelve Winters.

Ari.                                   Pardon, master:
    I will be correspondent[384-85] to command,
    And do my spriting gently.

Pros.                Do so; and after two days
    I will discharge thee.

Ari.                       That's my noble master!
    What shall I do? say what; what shall I do?

Pros. Go make thyself like to a nymph o' the sea:
    Be subject to no sight but mine; invisible
    To every eyeball else. Go take this shape,
    And hither come in't: hence, with diligence!--
                                                       [Exit ARIEL.
    Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well;
    Awake!

Mira. [Waking.] The strangeness of your story put
    Heaviness in me.

Pros.               Shake it off. Come on;
    We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never
    Yields us kind answer.

Mira.                     'Tis a villain, sir,
    I do not love to look on.

Pros.                         But, as 'tis,
    We cannot miss him:[385-86] he does make our fire,
    Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices
    That profit us.--What, ho! slave! Caliban!
    Thou earth, thou! speak.

Cal. [Within.] There's wood enough within.

Pros. Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
    Come forth, thou tortoise! when![385-87]--

Re-enter ARIEL, like a Water-nymph.

    Fine apparition! My quaint[386-88] Ariel,
    Hark in thine ear.

Ari.                 My lord, it shall be done.            [Exit.

Pros. Thou poisonous slave, come forth!

Enter CALIBAN.

Cal. As wicked[386-89] dew as e'er my mother brush'd
    With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
    Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye,
    And blister you all o'er![386-90]

Pros. For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
    Side-stitches[386-91] that shall pen thy breath up; urchins[386-92]
    Shall, for that vast[386-93] of night that they may work,
    All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
    As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
    Than bees that made 'em.

Cal.                       I must eat my dinner
    This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother.
    Which thou takest from me. When thou camest here first,
    Thou strokedst me, and madest much of me; wouldst give me
    Water with berries in't[386-94] and teach me how
    To name the bigger light, and how the less,
    That burn by day and night: and then I loved thee,
    And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
    The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place, and fertile.
    Cursèd be that I did so! All the charms
    Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
    For I am all the subjects that you have,
    Which first was mine own king: and here you sty[387-95] me
    In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
    The rest o' the island.

Pros.                      Abhorrèd slave,
    Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
    Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
    Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
    One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
    Know thine own meaning,[387-96] but wouldst gabble like
    A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
    With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
    Though thou didst learn, had that in't which good natures
    Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
    Deservedly confined into this rock,
    Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

Cal. You taught me language; and my profit on't
    Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid[387-97] you
    For learning me your language!

Pros.                             Hag-seed, hence!
    Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou'rt best,
    To answer other business. Shrugg'st thou, malice?
    If thou neglect'st, or dost unwillingly
    What I command, I'll rack thee with old[388-98] cramps,
    Fill all thy bones with achès, make thee roar,
    That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

Cal.                                    No, pray thee.--
    [Aside.] I must obey: his art is of such power,
    It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
    And make a vassal of him.

Pros.                        So, slave; hence!
                                                       [Exit CALIBAN.

Re-enter ARIEL, invisible, playing and singing; FERDINAND following.

ARIEL'S SONG

          Come unto these yellow sands,
            And then take hands:
          Curtsied when you have, and kiss'd
            The wild waves whist,[388-99]
            Foot it featly here and there;
          And, sweet sprites, the burden bear.
        Hark, hark!          { Burden dispersedly.
      The watch-dogs bark:   {        Bow-wow.
      Hark, hark! I hear;    {        Bow-wow.
    The strain of strutting  {
      chanticleer.           {   Cock-a-diddle-dow.

Ferd. Where should this music be? i' the air, or th' earth?
    It sounds no more: and, sure, it waits upon
    Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
    Weeping again the King my father's wreck,
    This music crept by me upon the waters,
    Allaying both their fury and my passion[389-100]
    With its sweet air: thence I have follow'd it,
    Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
    No, it begins again.

ARIEL sings.
      Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:

        Burden.            Ding-Dong.

      Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-Dong, bell.

Ferd. The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
    This is no mortal business, nor no sound
    That the earth owes.[389-102] I hear it now above me.

Pros. The fringèd curtains of thine eyes advance,[389-103]
    And say what thou see'st yond.

Mira.                         What is't? A spirit?
    Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
    It carries a brave[389-104] form. But 'tis a spirit.

Pros. No, wench: it eats and sleeps, and hath such senses
    As we have, such. This gallant which thou see'st
    Was in the wreck; and, but he's something stain'd
    With grief, that's beauty's canker,[390-105] thou mightst call him
    A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows,
    And strays about to find 'em.

Mira.                            I might call him
    A thing divine; for nothing natural
    I ever saw so noble.[390-106]

Pros. [Aside.]        It goes on,[390-107] I see,
    As my soul prompts it.--Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee
    Within two days for this.

Ferd.                        Most sure, the goddess
    On whom these airs attend!--Vouchsafe my prayer
    May know if you remain upon this island;
    And that you will some good instruction give
    How I may bear me here: my prime request,
    Which I do last pronounce, is,--O you wonder!--
    If you be maid or no?[390-108]

Mira.                    No wonder,[390-109] sir;
    But certainly a maid.

Ferd.                    My language![390-110] Heavens!--
    I am the best of them that speak this speech,
    Were I but where 'tis spoken.

Pros.                            How! the best?
    What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

Ferd. A single thing,[391-111] as I am now, that wonders
    To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
    And that he does I weep: myself am Naples;[391-112]
    Who with mine eyes, ne'er since at ebb, beheld
    The King my father wreck'd.

Mira.                         Alack, for mercy!

Ferd. Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
    And his brave son[391-113] being twain.

Pros. [Aside.]                     The Duke of Milan
    And his more braver daughter could control thee,[391-114]
    If now t'were fit to do't. At the first sight
    They have changed eyes.--Delicate Ariel,
    I'll set thee free for this![391-115]--A word, good sir;
    I fear you've done yourself some wrong:[391-116] a word.

Mira.            Why speaks my father so ungently? This
    Is the third man that e'er I saw; the first
    That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
    To be inclined my way!

Ferd.                      O, if a virgin,
    And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
    The Queen of Naples.

Pros.                  Soft, sir! one word more.--
    [Aside.] They're both in either's powers: but this swift business
    I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
    Make the prize light.[392-117]--One word more; I charge thee
    That thou attend me: Thou dost here usurp
    The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
    Upon this island as a spy, to win it
    From me, the lord on't.

Ferd.                        No, as I'm a man.

Mira. There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
    If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
    Good things will strive to dwell with't.

Pros. [To FERD.]                        Follow me--
    Speak not you for him; he's a traitor.--Come;
    I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
    Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
    The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots, and husks
    Wherein the acorn cradled: follow.

Ferd.                                    No;
    I will resist such entertainment, till
    Mine enemy has more power.
                               [He draws, and is charmed from moving.

Mira.                          O dear father,
    Make not too rash a trial of him, for
    He's gentle, and not fearful.[392-118]

Pros.                            What, I say,
    My fool my tutor!--Put thy sword up, traitor;
    Who makest a show, but darest not strike, thy conscience
    Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward;[393-119]
    For I can here disarm thee with this stick,
    And make thy weapon drop.

Mira.                      Beseech you, father!--

Pros. Hence! hang not on my garments.

Mira.                                  Sir, have pity;
    I'll be his surety.

Pros.                    Silence! one word more
    Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
    An advocate for an impostor? hush!
    Thou think'st there are no more such shapes as he,
    Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
    To th' most of men this is a Caliban,
    And they to him are angels.

Mira.                           My affections
    Are, then, most humble; I have no ambition
    To see a goodlier man.

Pros. [To FERD.] Come on; obey:
    Thy nerves[393-120] are in their infancy again,
    And have no vigour in them.

Ferd.                           So they are:
    My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
    My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
    The wreck of all my friends, and this man's threats
    To whom I am subdued, are light to me,
    Might I but through my prison once a day
    Behold this maid: all corners else o' the Earth
    Let liberty make use of; space enough
    Have I in such a prison.

Pros. [Aside.] It works.--[To FERD.] Come on.--
    Thou hast done well, fine Ariel!--Follow me.--
    [To ARIEL.] Hark, what thou else shalt do me.

Mira.                              Be of comfort;
    My father's of a better nature, sir,
    Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
    Which now came from him.

Pros. [To ARIEL.] Thou shalt be as free
    As mountain winds: but then exactly do
    All points of my command.

Ari.                        To th' syllable.

Pros. Come, follow.--Speak not for him.                    [Exeunt.

ACT II

SCENE I.--Another part of the Island.

Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and Others.

GONZALO speaks.

    Beseech you, sir, be merry: you have cause--
    So have we all--of joy; for our escape
    Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
    Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
    The master of some merchant,[394-1] and the merchant,
    Have just our theme of woe: but for the miracle--
    I mean our preservation--few in millions
    Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
    Our sorrow with our comfort.

Alon.                  Pr'ythee, peace.

Sebas. He receives comfort like cold porridge.

Anto. The visitor[395-2] will not give him o'er so.

Sebas. Look, he's winding up the watch of his wit; by-and-by it will strike.

Gonza. Sir,--

Sebas. One:--tell.[395-3]

Gonza.--When every grief is entertained that's offer'd,
    Comes to the entertainer--

Sebas. A dollar.

Gonza. Dolour[395-4] comes to him, indeed; you have spoken truer than you purposed.

Sebas. You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

Gonza. Therefore, my lord,--

Anto. Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

Alon. I pr'ythee, spare me.

Gonza. Well, I have done: but yet--

Sebas. He will be talking.

Anto. Which, of he or Adrian,[395-5] for a good wager, first begins to crow?

Sebas. The old cock.[395-6]

Anto. The cockerel.

Sebas. Done! The wager?

Anto. A laughter.

Sebas. A match![395-7]

Adri. Though this island seem to be desert,--

Sebas. Ha, ha, ha!--So, you're paid.[396-8]

Adri.--uninhabitable, and almost inaccessible,--

Sebas. Yet--

Adri.--yet--

Anto. He could not miss't.

Adri.--it must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.[396-9]

Anto. Temperance was a delicate wench.[396-10]

Sebas. Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

Adri. The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

Sebas. As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.

Anto. Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

Gonza. Here is everything advantageous to life.

Anto. True; save means to live.

Sebas. Of that there's none, or little.

Gonza. How lush[396-11] and lusty the grass looks! how green!

Anto. The ground, indeed, is tawny.

Sebas. With an eye[396-12] of green in't.

Anto. He misses not much.

Sebas. No: he doth but mistake the truth totally.

Gonza. But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost beyond credit,--

Sebas. As many vouch'd rarities are.

Gonza.--that our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, are now as fresh as when
we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the King's fair daughter Claribel to the
King of Tunis.

Sebas. 'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

Adri. Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to[397-13] their Queen.

Gonza. Not since widow Dido's time.[397-14]

Anto. Widow? a pox o' that! How came that widow in? Widow Dido!

Sebas. What if he had said widower Æneas too? Good Lord, how you take it!

Adri. Widow Dido, said you? you make me study of that: she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

Gonza. This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

Adri. Carthage!

Gonza. I assure you, Carthage.

Anto. His word is more than the miraculous harp.[397-15]

Sebas. He hath raised the wall and houses too.

Anto. What impossible matter will he make easy next?

Sebas. I think he will carry this island home in his pocket, and give it his son for an apple.

Anto. And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.

Alon. Ah!

Anto. Why, in good time.

Gonza. Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at
the marriage of your daughter, who is now Queen.

Anto. And the rarest that e'er came there.

Sebas. Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

Anto. O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.

Gonza. Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it, at your daughter's marriage?

Alon. You cram these words into mine ears against
    The stomach of my sense.[398-16] Would I had never
    Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
    My son is lost; and, in my rate,[398-17] she too,
    Who is so far from Italy removed,
    I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
    Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
    Hath made his meal on thee?

Fran.                          Sir, he may live:
    I saw him beat the surges under him,
    And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
    Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
    The surge most swoln that met him: his bold head
    'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
    Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
    To th' shore, that o'er his[398-18] wave-worn basis bow'd,
    As[398-19] stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
    He came alive to land.

Alon.                     No, no; he's gone.

Sebas. Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
    That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
    But rather lose her to an African;
    Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
    Who[399-20] hath cause to wet the grief on't.

Alon.                                      Pr'ythee, peace.

Sebas. You were kneel'd to, and importuned otherwise,
    By all of us; and the fair soul herself
    Weigh'd, between loathness and obedience, at
    Which end the beam should bow.[399-21] We've lost your son,
    I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
    More widows in them of this business' making
    Than we bring men to comfort them: the fault's
    Your own.

Alon. So is the dear'st[399-22] o' the loss.

Gonza.                              My lord Sebastian,
    The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness,
    And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
    When you should bring the plaster.

Sebas.                                Very well.

Auto. And most chirurgeonly.[399-23]

Gonza. It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
    When you are cloudy.[400-24]

Sebas.                    Foul weather!

Anto.                               Very foul.

Gonza. Had I plantation[400-25] of this isle, my lord,--

Anto. He'd sow't with nettle-seed.

Sebas.                      Or docks, or mallows.

Gonza.--And were the King on't, what would I do?

Sebas. 'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

Gonza. I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
    Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
    Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
    Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
    And use of service, none; contract, succession,[400-26]
    Bourn,[400-27] bound of land, tilth,[400-28] vineyard, none;
    No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
    No occupation; all men idle, all,
    And women too, but innocent and pure;
    No sovereignty:--

Sebas.               Yet he would be king on't.

Anto. The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.

Gonza. All things in common Nature should produce
    Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
    Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,[401-29]
    Would I not have; but Nature should bring forth,
    Of its own kind, all foison,[401-30] all abundance,
    To feed my innocent people.

Sebas. No marrying 'mong his subjects?

Anto. None, man; all idle.

Gonza. I would with such perfection govern, sir,
    T' excel the golden age.[401-31]

Sebas.                       God save his Majesty!

Anto. Long live Gonzalo!

Gonza.           And--do you mark me, sir?--

Alon. Pr'ythee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

Gonza. I do well believe your Highness; and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible[401-32] and nimble lungs, that they always use to laugh at nothing.

Anto. 'Twas you we laugh'd at.

Gonza. Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you:[401-33] so you may continue, and
laugh at nothing still.

Anto. What a blow was there given!

Sebas. An it had not fallen flat-long.[401-34]

Gonza. You are gentlemen of brave mettle; you would lift the Moon out of her sphere, if she
would[402-35] continue in it five weeks without changing.

Enter ARIEL, invisible, playing solemn music.

Sebas. We would so, and then go a-bat-fowling.[402-36]

Anto. Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

Gonza. No, I warrant you; I will not adventure[402-37] my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep? for I am very heavy.

Anto. Go sleep, and hear us not.

                      [All sleep[402-38] but ALON., SEBAS., and ANTO.

Alon. What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
    Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
    They are inclined to do so.

Sebas.                         Please you, sir,
    Do not omit[402-39] the heavy offer of it:
    It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
    It is a comforter.

Anto.                  We two, my lord,
    Will guard your person while you take your rest,
    And watch your safety.

Alon.   Thank you.--Wondrous heavy.[403-40]
                                          [ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL.

Sebas. What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

Anto. It is the quality o' the climate.

Sebas.                                   Why
    Doth it not, then, our eyelids sink? I find not
    Myself disposed to sleep.

Anto.                       Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
    They[404-41] fell together all, as by consent;
    They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
    Worthy Sebastian, O, what might![404-42] No more:
    And yet methinks I see it in thy face,
    What thou shouldst be: th' occasion speaks thee;[404-43] and
    My strong imagination sees a crown
    Dropping upon thy head.

Sebas.                     What, art thou waking?

Anto. Do you not hear me speak?

Sebas.                      I do: and surely
    It is a sleepy language, and thou speak'st
    Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
    This is a strange repose, to be asleep
    With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
    And yet so fast asleep.

Anto.                       Noble Sebastian,
    Thou lett'st thy fortune sleep,--die rather; wink'st
    Whiles thou art waking.[404-44]

Sebas.                    Thou dost snore distinctly;
    There's meaning in thy snores.

Anto. I am more serious than my custom: you
    Must be so too, if heed[404-45] me; which to do
    Trebles thee o'er.[404-46]

Sebas. We had grown up together, had lost our folks within a few years of
each other and had been fond of each other the way kids are apt to be.

Then the change came: It seemed I loved her, and she was still just
"fond" of me.

During our early college days I sort of let things
    ride, but once we went on to graduate school, I began to crowd her.

    
    The next thing I knew, she had signed up with a
    student tour destined for Central Europe, and told me she
    would give me my answer when she returned.
    I had to be content with that, but couldn't help worrying.

Maria was a strange girl--withdrawn, dreamy and
    soft-hearted. Knowing the section she was going
    to, I was inclined to be uneasy, since it is the
    realm of gypsies, fortune tellers and the like.

It is also the birthplace of many strange legends,
    and Maria claimed to be strongly psychic. As a matter
    of fact, she had foretold one or two things
    which were probably coincidental, like the death of our
    parents, and which even made an impression
    on me--and you'd hardly call me a "believer."
    
    This so-called talent of hers led her into trouble on more than one
occasion.

I remember in her senior year at college she fell
    under the spell of a short, fat, greasy spook-reader with a strictly
phony accent and all but gave her eye teeth away, until I realized
something was amiss, got to the bottom of it, and dispatched friend
spook-reader pronto.

If she should meet some unscrupulous person now,
    with no one around to get her out of the scrape--but
    I didn't want to think of that. I was
    sure this time everything would be all right.

When
    she didn't write at first, I let it go that she was busy.
    Finally, six weeks' silent treatment aroused my curiosity.

It also aroused my nasty temper, and the next thing I knew I was
on a plane bound for the Continent.

Within two hours after landing, I found her at
    a little inn in Transylvania, a quaint little place that looked as
if it were made of gingerbread, and was surrounded by the huge, craggy
Transylvania Mountain range.

I also found Tod Hunter.

    "What's wrong, Maria? Why didn't you write?" I asked.
    
    Her usually gay, shining brown eyes flashed angrily.
    "Why couldn't you leave me alone? I told you
    not to come after me. I came here so I could think this
    out. For God's sake, Bill, can't you see
    I wanted to think? To be by myself?"
    

"But you promised to write," I persisted, wondering
    at this change in her, this impatience. Wondered,
    too, at her wraithlike slimness. She'd always
    been curved in the right places.

    
    "Maria has been studying much too diligently," Tod
    said slowly. "She's always tired lately. She
    hasn't been too well, either. Her throat bothers her."

*
    * * * *
    
    I wanted to punch his head
    in. For some reason I didn't like him.
    Not because I sensed his rivalry; I was above that. God knows
    I wanted her to be happy, above everything.
    It was just something about him that irritated me.

An attitude.

Not supercilious; I could have coped with that.
    Rather, it was a calm imperturbability that seemed to speak his faith
in his eventual success, regardless of any effort on my part.

    

I don't know how to fight that sort of strategy.
    I look like I am: blunt and obvious. Suddenly
    I didn't care if he was there.
    

"Maria. Ria, darling.

This guy's no good for you, can't you see that? What do you know
    about him?"
    
    She looked at me, her eyes surprised and a little hurt. Then
    she looked at him, seemed to be looking through him
    and into herself, if you know what I mean.
    A slow flush spread from the base of her throat,
    that thin, almost transparent throat.
    
    "All I have to know," she said softly. "I love him."

She
    looked out the window. "I'm going up into Konigstein
    Mountain, to a small sanitarium for my health shortly;
    the doctor has told me I must go away, and Tod has
    suggested this place. There Tod and I shall
    be married."

I knew then how it felt to be on the receiving end of a monkey-punch.
That she had come to this decision because of my objections, I had
not the slightest doubt.                    Thy case, dear friend,
    Shall be my precedent; as thou gott'st Milan,
    I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one stroke
    Shall free thee from the tribute which thou pay'st;
    And I the King shall love thee.

Anto.                              Draw together;[408-73]
    And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
    To fall it on Gonzalo.

Sebas.                     O, but one word.
                                                [They converse apart.

Music. Re-enter ARIEL, invisible.

Ari. My master through his art foresees the danger
    That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth--
    For else his project dies--to keep thee living.

                                             [Sings in GONZALO'S ear.

      While you here do snoring lie,
      Open-eyed conspiracy
        His time doth take.
      If of life you keep a care,
      Shake off slumber, and beware:
        Awake! Awake!

Anto. Then let us both be sudden.

Gonza. [Waking.]           Now, good angels
    Preserve the King!--[To SEBAS. and ANTO.] Why, how now!--[To
      ALON.] Ho, awake!--
    [To SEBAS. and ANTO.] Why are you drawn?[409-74] wherefore this
      ghastly looking?[409-75]

Alon. [Waking.]      What's the matter?

Sebas. Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
    Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
    Like bulls, or rather lions: did't not wake you?
    It struck mine ear most terribly.

Alon.                                I heard nothing.

Anto. O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
    To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
    Of a whole herd of lions.

Alon.                       Heard you this, Gonzalo?

Gonza. Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
    And that a strange one too, which did awake me:
    I shaked you, sir, and cried: as mine eyes open'd,
    I saw their weapons drawn: there was a noise,
    That's verity. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
    Or that we quit this place: let's draw our weapons.

Alon. Lead off this ground; and let's make further search
    For my poor son.

Gonza. Heavens keep him from these beasts!
    For he is, sure, i' the island.

Alon.                              Lead away.
                                               [Exit with the others.

Ari. Prospero my lord shall know what I have done:--
    So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.                    [Exit.

SCENE II.--Another part of the Island.

Enter CALIBAN, with a burden of wood. A noise of Thunder heard.

Cal. All the infections that the Sun sucks up
    From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall, and make him
    By inch-meal[410-1] a disease! His spirits hear me,
    And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
    Fright me with urchin-shows,[410-2] pitch me i' the mire,
    Nor lead me, like a fire-brand,[410-3] in the dark
    Out of my way, unless he bid 'em: but
    For every trifle are they set upon me;
    Sometime[410-4] like apes, that mow[410-5] and chatter at me
    And after bite me; then like hedgehogs, which
    Lie tumbling in my barefoot way, and mount
    Their pricks[411-6] at my foot-fall; sometime am I
    All wound with adders, who with cloven tongues
    Do hiss me into madness. Lo, now, lo!
    Here comes a spirit of his; and to torment me
    For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat:
    Perchance he will not mind me.[411-7]

Enter TRINCULO.

Trin. Here's neither bush nor shrub, to bear off[411-8] any weather at all, and another storm
brewing; I hear it sing i' the wind: yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul
bombard[411-9] that would shed his liquor. If it should thunder as it did before, I know not
where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls.--What have we here?
a man or a fish? Dead or alive? A fish: he smells like a fish; a very ancient and fish-like
smell; a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john.[411-10] A strange fish! Were I in England now,
as once I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a piece
of silver: there would this monster make a man; any strange beast there makes a man:[411-11]
when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead
Indian. Legg'd like a man! and his fins like arms! Warm, o' my troth! I do now let loose my
opinion; hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander, that hath lately suffered by
a thunder-bolt. [Thunder.] Alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to creep under his
gaberdine;[412-12] there is no other shelter hereabout: misery acquaints a man with strange
bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.

                                     [Creeps under CALIBAN'S garment.

Enter STEPHANO, singing; a bottle in his hand.

    Steph. I shall no more to sea, to sea,
      Here shall I die ashore;--

This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral: well, here's my comfort.           
[Drinks.

[Sings.] The master, the swabber,[412-13] the boatswain, and I,
        The gunner, and his mate,
    Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,
        But none of us cared for Kate;
      For she had a tongue with a tang,[412-14]
      Would cry to a sailor, Go hang!
She loved not the savour of tar nor of pitch:
      Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!

This is a scurvy tune too: but here's my comfort.            [Drinks.

Cal. Do not torment me:--O!

Steph. What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon's with savages and men
of Inde,[413-15] ha? I have not 'scaped drowning, to be afeared now of your four legs; for
it hath been said, As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground; and
it shall be said so again, while Stephano breathes at's nostrils.

Cal. The spirit torments me:--O!

Steph. This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who hath got, as I take it, an ague.
Where the Devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief, if it be but for
that. If I can recover him, and keep him tame, and get to Naples with him, he's a present for
any emperor that ever trod on neat's-leather.[413-16]

Cal. Do not torment me, pr'ythee:
    I'll bring my wood home faster.

Steph. He's in his fit now, and does not talk after the wisest. He shall taste of my bottle:
if he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. If I can recover him,
and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him;[413-17] he shall pay for him that hath
him, and that soundly.

Cal. Thou dost me yet but little hurt;
    Thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling:
    Now Prosper works upon thee.

Steph. Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is that which will give a language to you,
cat:[413-18] open your mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly:
[Gives him drink.] you cannot tell who's your friend; open your chops again. [Gives him more drink.

Trin. I should know that voice: it should be--but he is drown'd; and these are devils:--O,
defend me!

Steph. Four legs, and two voices--a most delicate monster? His forward voice now is to speak
well of his friend; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract. If all the
wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague: [Gives him drink.]--Come,--Amen![414-19]
I will pour some in thy other mouth.

Trin. Stephano!

Steph. Doth thy other mouth call me?--Mercy, mercy! This is a devil and no monster: I will
leave him; I have no long spoon.[414-20]

Trin. Stephano!--If thou be'st Stephano, touch me, and speak to me; for I am Trinculo,--be
not afeared,--thy good friend Trinculo.

Steph. If thou be'st Trinculo, come forth: I'll pull thee by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's
legs, these are they. [Pulls TRINCULO out.] Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How earnest thou
to be the siege[414-21] of this moon-calf?[414-22]

Trin. I took him to be kill'd with a thunder-stroke. But art thou not drown'd, Stephano? I
hope, now, thou art not drown'd?[415-23] Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the dead moon-calf's
gaberdine for fear of the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans
'scaped!

Steph. Pr'ythee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not constant.[415-24]

Cal. [Aside.] These be fine things, an if[415-25] they be not sprites.
    That's a brave god, and bears celestial liquor:
    I will kneel to him.

Steph. How didst thou 'scape? How camest thou hither? swear, by this bottle, how thou camest
hither. I escaped upon a butt of sack,[415-26] which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this
bottle! which I made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands, since I was cast ashore.

Cal. I'll swear, upon that bottle, to be thy
    True subject; for the liquor is not earthly.

Steph. Here; swear, man, how thou escapedst.

Trin. Swam ashore, man, like a duck: I can swim like a duck, I'll be sworn.

Steph. Here kiss the book. [Gives him drink.] Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art
made like a goose.

Trin. O Stephano, hast any more of this?

Steph. The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the sea-side, where my wine is hid.--How
now, moon-calf! how does thine ague?

Cal. Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven?

Steph. Out o' the Moon, I do assure thee: I was the Man-i'-the-moon when time was.

Cal. I've seen thee in her, and I do adore thee:
    My mistress show'd me thee, and thy dog, and thy bush.[416-27]

Steph. Come, swear to that; kiss the book: I will furnish it anon with new contents: swear.
[Gives CALIBAN drink.

Trin. By this good light, this is a very shallow monster!--I afeared of him!--a very weak monster!--The
Man-i'-the-moon!--a most poor credulous monster!--Well drawn,[416-28] monster, in good sooth.

Cal. I'll show thee every fertile inch o' the island;
    And I will kiss thy foot: I pr'ythee, be my god.

Trin. By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster! when his god's asleep, he'll rob
his bottle.

Cal. I'll kiss thy foot; I'll swear myself thy subject.

Steph. Come on then; down, and swear.

Trin. I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster. A most scurvy monster! I
could find in my heart to beat him,--

Steph. Come, kiss.                            [Gives CALIBAN drink.

Trin.--but that the poor monster's in drink: an abominable monster!

Cal.
    A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
    I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
    Thou wondrous man.

Trin. A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard!

Cal. I pr'ythee, let me bring thee where crabs grow;
    And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts;[417-29]
    Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
    To snare the nimble marmozet; I'll bring thee
    To clustering filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
    Young staniels[417-30] from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?

Steph. I pr'ythee now, lead the way without any more talking. Trinculo, the King and all our
company else being drown'd, we will inherit here. Here, bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, we'll
fill him by-and-by again.

Cal. [Sings drunkenly.] Farewell, master; farewell, farewell.

Trin. A howling monster; a drunken monster!

Cal.  No more dams I'll make for fish;
          Nor fetch in firing at requiring;
        Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish:
          'Ban, 'Ban, Ca--Caliban
          Has a new master; get a new man.
        Freedom, hey-day, hey-day, freedom! freedom, hey-day, freedom!

Steph. O brave monster! lead the way.

                                                             [Exeunt.

ACT III

SCENE I.--Before PROSPERO'S Cell.

Enter FERDINAND, bearing a log.

    There be some sports are painful, and their labour
    Delight in them sets off:[418-1] some kinds of baseness[418-2]
    Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters
    Point to rich ends. This my mean task would be
    As heavy to me as 'tis odious, but
    The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead,
    And makes my labours pleasures:[418-3] O, she is
    Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
    And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
    Some thousands of these logs, and pile them up,
    Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress
    Weeps when she sees me work; and says such baseness
    Had never like executor. I forget:
    But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labour;
    Most busy when I do it least.[419-4]

Enter MIRANDA; and PROSPERO behind.

Mira.             Alas, now, pray you,
    Work not so hard: I would the lightning had
    Burnt up those logs that you're enjoin'd to pile!
    Pray, set it down, and rest you: when this burns,
    'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
    Is hard at study; pray now, rest yourself:
    He's safe for these three hours.

Ferd.                          O most dear mistress,
    The Sun will set before I shall discharge
    What I must strive to do.

Mira.                        If you'll sit down,
    I'll bear your logs the while: pray, give me that;
    I'll carry't to the pile.

Ferd.                        No, precious creature;
    I'd rather crack my sinews, break my back,
    Than you should such dishonour undergo,
    While I sit lazy by.

Mira.                   It would become me
    As well as it does you: and I should do it
    With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
    And yours it is against.

Pros. [Aside.] Poor worm, thou art infected!
    This visitation shows it.

Mira.                        You look wearily.

Ferd. No, noble mistress; 'tis fresh morning with me
    When you are by at night. I do beseech you,--
    Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,--
    What is your name?

Mira.                 Miranda--O my father,
    I've broke your best to say so!

Ferd.                              Admired Miranda!
    Indeed the top of admiration; worth
    What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
    I've eyed with best regard; and many a time
    The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
    Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues
    Have I liked several women; never any
    With so full soul, but some defect in her
    Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
    And put it to the foil:[420-5] but you, O you,
    So perfect and so peerless, are created
    Of every creature's best!

Mira.                         I do not know
    One of my sex; no woman's face remember,
    Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
    More that I may call men, than you, good friend,
    And my dear father: how features are abroad,
    I'm skilless of; but, by my modesty,--
    The jewel in my dower,--I would not wish
    Any companion in the world but you;
    Nor can imagination form a shape,
    Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
    Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
    I therein do forget.

Ferd.                  I am, in my condition,
    A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king,--
    I would not so![420-6]--and would no more endure
    This wooden slavery than to suffer
    The flesh-fly blow[422-7] my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
    The very instant that I saw you, did
    My heart fly to your service; there resides,
    To make me slave to it; and for your sake
    Am I this patient log-man.

Mira.                          Do you love me?

Ferd. O Heaven, O Earth, bear witness to this sound,
    And crown what I profess with kind event,
    If I speak true! if hollowly,[422-8] invert
    What best is boded me to mischief! I,
    Beyond all limit of what else[422-9] i' the world,
    Do love, prize, honour you.

Mira.                            I am a fool
    To weep at what I'm glad of.

Pros. [Aside.]                Fair encounter
    Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace
    On that which breeds between them!

Ferd.                         Wherefore weep you?

Mira. At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
    What I desire to give; and much less take
    What I shall die to want.[422-10] But this is trifling;
    And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
    The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
    And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
    I am your wife, if you will marry me;
    If not, I'll die your maid: to be your fellow[423-11]
    You may deny me; but I'll be your servant,
    Whether you will or no.

Ferd.                       My mistress, dearest,
    And I thus humble ever.

Mira.                       My husband, then?

Ferd. Ay, with a heart as willing
    As bondage[423-12] e'er of freedom: here's my hand.

Mira. And mine, with my heart in't: and now farewell
    Till half an hour hence.

Ferd.                       A thousand thousand![423-13]

                                       [Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA.

Pros. So glad of this as they, I cannot be,
    Who am surprised withal;[423-14] but my rejoicing
    At nothing can be more. I'll to my book;
    For yet, ere supper-time, must I perform
    Much business appertaining.                                [Exit.

SCENE II.--Another part of the Island.

Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO, with a bottle.

Steph. Tell not me: when the butt is out, we will drink water; not a drop before: therefore
bear up, and board 'em.[423-1] Servant-monster, drink to me.

Trin. Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They say there's but five upon this isle:
we are three of them; if th' other two be brain'd like us, the State totters.

Steph. Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee: thy eyes are almost set[424-2] in thy head.

                                                     [CALIBAN drinks.

Trin. Where should they be set else? he were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.

Steph. My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in sack: for my part, the sea cannot drown me;
I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five-and-thirty leagues, off and on, by this light.--Thou
shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.[424-3]

Trin. Your lieutenant, if you list: he's no standard.[424-4]

Steph. We'll not run, Monsieur Monster.

Trin. Nor go neither: but you'll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.

Steph. Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou be'st a good moon-calf.

Cal. How does thy Honour? Let me lick thy shoe. I'll not serve him, he is not valiant.

Trin. Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case to justle a constable.[424-5] Why, thou
debosh'd[424-6] fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I to-day?
Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?

Cal. Boo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, my lord?

Trin. Lord, quoth he. That a monster should be such a natural![425-7]

Cal. Lo, lo, again! bite him to death, I pr'ythee.

Steph. Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: if you prove a mutineer,--the next tree.[425-8]
The poor monster's my subject, and he shall not suffer indignity.

Cal. I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased
    To hearken once again the suit I made thee?

Steph. Marry, will I: kneel, and repeat it; I will stand, and so shall Trinculo.

Enter ARIEL, invisible.

Cal. As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant; a sorcerer, that by his cunning hath
cheated me of the island.

Ari. Thou liest.[425-9]

Cal. Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou:
    I would my valiant master would destroy thee!
    I do not lie.

Steph. Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale, by this hand, I will supplant some
of your teeth.

Trin. Why, I said nothing.

Steph. Mum, then, and no more.--
                                    [To CAL.] Proceed.

Cal. I say, by sorcery he got this isle;
    From me he got it. If thy Greatness will
    Revenge it on him,--for, I know, thou darest,
    But this thing[425-10] dare not,--

Steph.                               That's most certain.

Cal. Thou shalt be lord of it, and I will serve thee.

Steph. How now shall this be compass'd?
    Canst thou bring me to the party?

Cal. Yea, yea, my lord; I'll yield him thee asleep,
    Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.

Ari. Thou liest; thou canst not.

Cal. What a pied ninny's[426-11] this!--Thou scurvy patch![426-12]--
    I do beseech thy Greatness, give him blows,
    And take his bottle from him: when that's gone,
    He shall drink nought but brine; for I'll not show him
    Where the quick freshes[426-13] are.

Steph. Trinculo, run into no further danger: interrupt the monster one word further, and, by
this hand, I'll turn my mercy out of doors, and make a stock-fish[426-14] of thee.

Trin. Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go further off.

Steph. Didst thou not say he lied?

Ari. Thou liest.

Steph. Do I so? take thou that. [Strikes him.] As you like this, give me the lie another time.

Trin. I did not give thee the lie. Out o' your wits and hearing too? A pox o' your bottle!
this can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the Devil take your fingers!

Cal. Ha, ha, ha!

Steph. Now, forward with your tale.--Pr'ythee stand further off.[427-15]

Cal. Beat him enough: after a little time, I'll beat him too.

Steph. Stand further.--Come, proceed.

Cal. Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
    I' the afternoon to sleep; then thou mayst brain him,
    Having first seized his books; or with a log
    Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
    Or cut his weazand[427-16] with thy knife. Remember
    First to possess his books; for without them
    He's but a sot,[427-17] as I am, nor hath not
    One spirit to command: they all do hate him
    As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
    He has brave[427-18] utensils,--for so he calls them,--
    Which, when he has a house, he'll deck't withal:
    And that most deeply to consider is
    The beauty of his daughter; he himself
    Calls her a nonpareil: I ne'er saw woman,
    But only Sycorax my dam and she;
    But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
    As great'st does least.

Steph.                     Is it so brave a lass?

Cal. Ay, lord.

Steph. Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I will be king and queen,--save our
Graces!--and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys.--Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?

Trin. Excellent.

Steph. Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee; but, while thou livest, keep a good tongue
in thy head.

Cal. Within this half-hour will he be asleep:
    Wilt thou destroy him then?

Steph. Ay, on mine honour.

Ari. This will I tell my master.[428-19]

Cal. Thou makest me merry; I am full of pleasure:
    Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch[428-20]
    You taught me but while-ere?[428-21]

Steph. At thy request, monster, I will do reason,[428-22] any
reason.--Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.
                                                              [Sings.
   Flout 'em and scout 'em, and scout 'em and flout 'em;
    Thought is free.

Cal. That's not the tune.

                           [ARIEL plays the tune on a tabor and pipe.

Steph. What is this same?[428-23]

Trin. This is the tune of our catch, play'd by the picture of Nobody.[428-24]

Steph. If thou be'st a man, show thyself in thy likeness: if thou be'st a devil--take't as
thou list.[429-25]

Trin. O, forgive me my sins!

Steph. He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee.--Mercy upon us!

Cal. Art thou afeard?

Steph. No, monster, not I.

Cal. Be not afeard; the isle is full of noises,
    Sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.
    Sometime[429-26] a thousand twangling instruments
    Will hum about mine ears; and sometimes voices,
    That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
    Will make me sleep again: and then, in dreaming,
    The clouds methought would open, and show riches
    Ready to drop upon me; that, when I waked,
    I cried to dream again.

Steph. This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.

Cal. When Prospero is destroy'd.

Steph. That shall be by-and-by: I remember the story.

Cal. The sound is going away; let's follow it.
    And after do our work.

Steph. Lead, monster; we'll follow.--I would I could see this taborer! he lays it on.--Wilt come?

Trin. I'll follow, Stephano.                               [Exeunt.

Gonza. By'r lakin,[430-1] I can go no further, sir;
    My old bones ache: here's a maze trod, indeed,
    Through forth-rights[430-2] and meanders![430-3] by your patience,
    I needs must rest me.

Alon.                 Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
    Who am myself attach'd with[430-4] weariness,
    To th' dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.
    Even here I will put off my hope, and keep it
    No longer for my flatterer: he is drown'd
    Whom thus we stray to find; and the sea mocks
    Our frustrate[430-5] search on land. Well, let him go.

Anto. [Aside to SEBAS.] I am right glad that he's so out of hope.
    Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
    That you resolved t' effect.

Sebas. [Aside to ANTO.] The next advantage
    Will we take throughly.[430-6]

Anto. [Aside to SEBAS.] Let it be to-night.
    For, now they are oppress'd with travel, they
    Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance
    As when they're fresh.

Sebas. [Aside to ANTO.] I say, to-night: no more.
                                           [Solemn and strange music.

Alon. What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!

Gonza. Marvellous sweet music!

Enter PROSPERO above, invisible. Enter, below, several strange
     Shapes, bringing in a Banquet: they dance about it with gentle
     actions of salutation; and, inviting the KING, &c., to eat, they
     depart.

Alon. Give us kind keepers, Heavens!--
    What were these?

Sebas. A living drollery.[431-7] Now I will believe
    That there are unicorns; that in Arabia
    There is one tree, the phoenix throne;[431-8] one phoenix
    At this hour reigning there.

Anto.                            I'll believe both;
    And what does else want credit, come to me,
    And I'll be sworn 'tis true; travellers ne'er did lie,
    Though fools at home condemn 'em.

Gonza.                              If in Naples
    I should report this now, would they believe me?
    If I should say I saw such islanders,--
    For, certes,[431-9] these are people of the island,--
    Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,
    Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
    Our human generation you shall find
    Many, nay, almost any.

Pros. [Aside.]         Honest lord,
    Thou hast said well; for some of you there present
    Are worse than devils.

Alon.                    I cannot too much muse[432-10]
    Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing--
    Although they want the use of tongue--a kind
    Of excellent dumb discourse.

Pros. [Aside.]               Praise in departing.[432-11]

Fran. They vanish'd strangely.

Sebas.                       No matter, since
    They've left their viands behind; for we have stomachs.--
    Will't please you taste of what is here?

Alon.                                       Not I.

Gonza. Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,
    Who would believe that there were mountaineers
    Dew-lapp'd like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
    Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
    Whose heads stood in their breasts?[432-12] which now we find,
    Each putter-out of one for five[432-13] will bring us
    Good warrant of.

Alon.       I will stand to, and feed,
    Although my last: no matter, since I feel
    The best is past.--Brother, my lord the Duke,
    Stand to, and do as we.

Thunder and lightning. Enter ARIEL, like a harpy; claps his wings
     upon the table; and by a quaint device, the banquet vanishes.

Ari. You are three men of sin, whom Destiny--
    That hath to instrument[433-14] this lower world
    And what is in't--the never-surfeited sea
    Hath caused to belch up; yea, and on this island
    Where man doth not inhabit; you 'mongst men
    Being most unfit to live. I've made you mad;
    And even with such like valour men hang and drown
    Their proper selves.
                       [Seeing ALON., SEBAS., &c., draw their swords.
                         You fools! I and my fellows
    Are ministers of Fate: the elements,
    Of whom your swords are temper'd, may as well
    Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs
    Kill the still-closing[433-15] waters, as diminish
    One dowle[434-16] that's in my plume: my fellow-ministers
    Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,
    Your swords are now too massy for your strengths,
    And will not be uplifted. But remember,--
    For that's my business to you,--that you three
    From Milan did supplant good Prospero;
    Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit[434-17] it,
    Him and his innocent child: for which foul deed
    The powers, delaying, not forgetting, have
    Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,
    Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,
    They have bereft; and do pronounce, by me,
    Lingering perdition--worse than any death
    Can be at once--shall step by step attend
    You and your ways; whose[434-18] wraths to guard you from,--
    Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
    Upon your heads,--is nothing, but heart-sorrow
    And a clear life ensuing.

He vanishes in thunder; then, to soft music, enter the Shapes again,
     and dance with mocks and mowes, and carry out the table.

Pros. [Aside.] Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou
    Perform'd, my Ariel; a grace it had, devouring:
    Of my instruction hast thou nothing 'bated
    In what thou hadst to say: so, with good life,
    And observation strange, my meaner ministers
    Their several kinds have done.[435-19] My high charms work,
    And these mine enemies are all knit up
    In their distractions: they now are in my power;
    And in these fits I leave them, while I visit
    Young Ferdinand,--who they suppose is drown'd,--
    And his and my loved darling.                   [Exit from above.

Gonza. I' the name of something holy, sir, why stand you
    In this strange stare?

Alon.                  O, it is monstrous, monstrous!
    Methought the billows spoke, and told me of it;[435-20]
    The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
    That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced
    The name of Prosper: it did bass my trespass.[435-21]
    Therefore my son i' the ooze is bedded;[435-22] and
    I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded,
    And with him there lie mudded.[435-23]                     [Exit.

Sebas.                      But one fiend at a time,
    I'll fight their legions o'er.

Anto.                             I'll be thy second.

                                       [Exeunt SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO.

Gonza. All three of them are desperate: their great guilt,
    Like poison given to work a long time after,[436-24]
    Now 'gins to bite the spirits.--I do beseech you,
    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly,
    And hinder them from what this ecstasy[436-25]
    May now provoke them to.

Adri.                       Follow, I pray you.            [Exeunt.

ACT IV

SCENE I.--Before PROSPERO'S Cell.

Enter PROSPERO, FERDINAND, AND MIRANDA. PROSPERO speaks.

    If I have too austerely punish'd you,
    Your compensation makes amends; for I
    Have given you here a thread of mine own life,
    Or that for which I live; who once again
    I tender to thy hand: all thy vexations
    Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
    Hast strangely stood the test: here, afore Heaven,
    I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand,
    Do not smile at me that I boast her off,
    For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
    And make it halt behind her.

Ferd.                           I do believe it
    Against an oracle.

Pros. Then, as my gift, and thine own acquisition
    Worthily purchased, take my daughter, thou.
    Sit, then, and talk with her; she is thine own.--
    What, Ariel! my industrious servant, Ariel!

Enter ARIEL.

Ari. What would my potent master? Here I am.

Pros. Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
    Did worthily perform; and I must use you
    In such another trick. Go bring the rabble,
    O'er whom I give thee power, here, to this place:
    Incite them to quick motion; for I must
    Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
    Some vanity[437-1] of mine art: it is my promise,
    And they expect it from me.

Ari.                           Presently?

Pros. Ay, with a twink.[437-2]

Ari. Before you can say Come and Go,
            And breathe twice, and cry So, so.
            Each one, tripping on his toe,
            Will be here with mop[437-3] and mow.[437-4]
            Do you love me, master?--no?                       [Exit.

Pros. Now come, my Ariel! bring a corollary,[437-5]
    Rather than want a spirit: appear, and pertly![437-6]
    No tongue; all eyes; be silent.

                                                         [Soft music.

Enter IRIS.[437-7]

Iris. Ceres,[437-8] most bounteous lady, thy rich leas
    Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas;
    Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
    And flat meads thatch'd with stover,[438-9] them to keep;
    Thy banks with peonéd[438-10] and twillèd[438-11] brims,
    Which spongy[438-12] April at thy best betrims,
    To make cold nymphs chaste crowns;[438-13] and thy brown groves,
    Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves,
    Being lass-lorn;[438-14] thy pole-clipt vineyard;[438-15]
    And thy sea-marge, steril, and rocky-hard,
    Where thou thyself dost air;--the Queen o' the Sky,[438-16]
    Whose watery arch[438-17] and messenger am I,
    Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign Grace,
    Here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
    To come and sport. Her peacocks[438-18] fly amain:
    Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.

Enter CERES.

Cer. Hail, many-color'd messenger, that ne'er
    Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;[438-19]
    Who, with thy saffron wings, upon my flowers
    Diffusest honey-drops, refreshing showers;
    And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown
    My bosky[440-20] acres and my unshrubb'd down,[440-21]
    Rich scarf to my proud Earth;--why hath thy Queen
    Summon'd me hither, to this short-grass'd green?

Iris. A contract of true love to celebrate;
    And some donation freely to estate
    On the bless'd lovers.

Cer.                      Tell me, heavenly Bow,
    If Venus[440-22] or her son, as thou dost know,
    Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot
    The means that dusky Dis[440-23] my daughter got,[440-24]
    Her and her blind boy's[440-25] scandal'd company
    I have forsworn.

Iris.               Of her society
    Be not afraid: I met her deity
    Cutting the clouds towards Paphos,[440-26] and her son
    Dove-drawn with her.

Cer.                Here, Queen of highest state,
    Great Juno comes; I know her by her gait.[440-27]

Enter JUNO.[440-28]

Juno. How does my bounteous sister? Go with me
    To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be,
    And honour'd in their issue.

SONG.

    Juno. Honour, riches, marriage-blessing,
          Long continuance, and increasing,
          Hourly joys be still upon you!
          Juno sings her blessings on you.

    Cer. Earth's increase, and foison plenty,[441-29]
          Barns and garners never empty;
          Vines with clustering bunches growing;
          Plants with goodly burden bowing;
          Spring come to you at the farthest
          In the very end of harvest![441-30]
          Scarcity and want shall shun you;
          Ceres' blessing so is on you.

Ferd. This is a most majestic vision, and
    Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold
    To think these spirits?[441-31]

Pros.                    Spirits, which by mine art
    I have from their confines call'd to enact
    My present fancies.

Ferd.         Let me live here ever;
    So rare a wonder'd[442-32] father and a wife
    Make this place Paradise.               [JUNO and CERES whisper,
                                            and send IRIS on employment.

Pros.                        Sweet, now, silence!
    Juno and Ceres whisper seriously;
    There's something else to do: hush, and be mute,
    Or else our spell is marr'd.

Iris. You nymphs, call'd Naiads, of the winding brooks,
    With your sedge crowns and ever-harmless looks,
    Leave your crisp[442-33] channels, and on this green land
    Answer our summons; Juno does command:
    Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
    A contract of true love; be not too late.--

Enter certain Nymphs.

    You sun-burn'd sicklemen,[442-34] of August weary,
    Come hither from the furrow, and be merry:
    Make holiday; your rye-straw hats put on,
    And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
    In country footing.

Enter certain Reapers, properly habited: they join with the Nymphs
     in a graceful dance; towards the end whereof PROSPERO starts
     suddenly, and speaks; after which, to a strange, hollow, and
     confused noise, they heavily vanish.

Pros. [Aside.] I had forgot that foul conspiracy
    Of the beast Caliban and his confederates
    Against my life: the minute of their plot
    Is almost come.--[To the Spirits.] Well done; avoid;[443-35] no more!

Ferd. This is most strange: your father's in some passion
    That works him strongly.

Mira.                      Never till this day
    Saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd.

Pros. You do, my son, look in a moved sort,
    As if you were dismay'd: be cheerful, sir.
    Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
    As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
    Are melted into air, into thin air:
    And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
    The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
    And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
    Leave not a rack[443-36] behind. We are such stuff
    As dreams are made on,[443-37] and our little life
    Is rounded[443-38] with a sleep. Sir, I am vex'd;
    Bear with my weakness; my old brain is troubled:
    Be not disturb'd with my infirmity:
    If you be pleased, retire into my cell,
    And there repose: a turn or two I'll walk,
    To still my beating mind.

Ferd. } Mira. }      We wish you peace.

Pros. [To ARIEL.] Come with a thought!--
    I thank ye.[444-39] [Exeunt FERD. and MIRA.]--Ariel, come!

Re-enter ARIEL.

Ari. Thy thoughts I cleave to: what's thy pleasure?

Pros.                                                Spirit,
    We must prepare to meet with[444-40] Caliban.

Ari. Ay, my commander: when I presented Ceres,
    I thought t' have told thee of it; but I fear'd
    Lest I might anger thee.

Pros. Well, say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?

Ari. I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking;
    So full of valour, that they smote the air
    For breathing[444-41] in their faces; beat the ground
    For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
    Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor;
    At which, like unback'd[444-42] colts, they prick'd their ears,
    Advanced[444-43] their eyelids, lifted up their noses
    As they smelt music: so I charm'd their ears,
    That, calf-like, they my lowing follow'd through
    Tooth'd briers, sharp furzes, pricking goss, and thorns,
    Which enter'd their frail shins: at last I left them
    I' the filthy-mantled[445-44] pool beyond your cell,
    There dancing up to th' chins, that[445-45] the foul lake
    O'erstunk their feet.

Pros.                   This was well done, my bird.
    Thy shape invisible retain thou still:
    The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither,
    For stale[445-46] to catch these thieves.

Ari.                                        I go, I go.      [Exit.

Pros. A devil, a born-devil,[445-47] on whose nature
    Nurture can never stick;[445-48] on whom my pains,
    Humanely taken, all are lost, quite lost;
    And as with age his body uglier grows,
    So his mind cankers.[445-49] I will plague them all,
    Even to roaring.--

Re-enter ARIEL loaden with glistering apparel, &c.

                       Come, hang them on this line.[445-50]

PROSPERO and ARIEL remain invisible. Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and
     TRINCULO, all wet.

Cal. Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
    Hear a foot fall: we now are near his cell.

Steph. Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy, has done little better than
play'd the Jack with us.[446-51]

Trin. Monster, I do smell all horse-stale; at which my nose is in great indignation.

Steph. So is mine.--Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you,--

Trin. Thou wert but a lost monster.

Cal. Nay, good my lord, give me thy favour still.
    Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
    Shall hoodwink this mischance:[446-52] therefore speak softly;
    All's hush'd as midnight yet.

Trin. Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool,--

Steph. There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that, monster, but an infinite loss.

Trin. That's more to me than my wetting: yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.

Steph. I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labour.

Cal. Pr'ythee, my King, be quiet. See'st thou here?
    This is the mouth o' the cell: no noise, and enter.
    Do that good mischief which may make this island
    Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban,
    For aye thy foot-licker.

Steph. Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.

Trin. O King Stephano! O peer![446-53] O worthy Stephano! look what a wardrobe here is for thee!

Cal. Let it alone, thou fool; it is but trash.

Trin. O, ho, monster! we know what belongs to a frippery.[447-54]--O King Stephano!

Steph. Put off that gown, Trinculo; by this hand, I'll have that gown.

Trin. Thy Grace shall have it.

Cal. The dropsy drown this fool!--what do you mean,
    To dote thus on such luggage? Let's along,
    And do the murder first: if he awake,
    From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches;
    Make us strange stuff.

Steph. Be you quiet, monster.--Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under
the line:[447-55] now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair, and prove a bald jerkin.

Trin. Do, do; we steal by line and level,[447-56] an't like your Grace.

Steph. I thank thee for that jest; here's a garment for't: wit shall not go unrewarded while
I am king of this country. Steal by line and level is an excellent pass of pate;[448-57] there's
another garment for't.

Trin. Monster, come, put some lime[448-58] upon your fingers, and away with the rest.

Cal. I will have none on't: we shall lose our time,
    And all be turn'd to barnacles,[448-59] or to apes
    With foreheads villainous low.

Steph. Monster, lay-to your fingers: help to bear this away, where my hogshead of wine is,
or I'll turn you out of my kingdom: go to, carry this.

Trin. And this.

Steph. Ay, and this.

A noise of hunters heard. Enter divers Spirits in shape of hounds,
     and hunt them about; PROSPERO and ARIEL setting them on.

Pros. Hey, Mountain, hey!

Ari. Silver! there it goes, Silver!

Pros. Fury, Fury! there, Tyrant, there! hark! hark!--
                              [CAL., STEPH. and TRIN. are driven out.
    Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints
    With dry convulsions; shorten up their sinews
    With aged cramps; and more pinch-spotted make them
    Than pard or cat-o'-mountain.[449-60]

Ari.                            Hark, they roar!

Pros. Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
    Lie at my mercy all mine enemies:
    Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
    Shalt have the air at freedom: for a little
    Follow, and do me service.                               [Exeunt.

ACT V

SCENE I.--Before the Cell of PROSPERO.

Enter PROSPERO in his magic robes, and ARIEL. PROSPERO speaks:

    Now does my project gather to a head:
    My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and Time
    Goes upright with his carriage.[450-1] How's the day?

Ari. On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord,
    You said our work should cease.

Pros.                              I did say so,
    When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit,
    How fares the King and's followers?

Ari.                             Confined together
    In the same fashion as you gave in charge:
    Just as you left them; all are prisoners, sir,
    In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell;[450-2]
    They cannot budge till your release.[450-3] The King,
    His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted;
    And the remainder mourning over them,
    Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly
    He that you term'd The good old lord, Gonzalo:
    His tears run down his beard, like winter-drops
    From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em,
    That, if you now beheld them, your affections
    Would become tender.

Pros.                  Dost thou think so, spirit?

Ari. Mine would, sir, were I human.

Pros.                        And mine shall.
    Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
    Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
    One of their kind, that relish all as sharply
    Passion as they,[451-4] be kindlier moved than thou art?
    Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick,
    Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
    Do I take part: the rarer action is
    In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent,
    The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
    Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel:
    My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
    And they shall be themselves.

Ari.                    I'll fetch them, sir.                [Exit.

Pros. Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves;
    And ye that on the sands with printless foot
    Do chase the ebbing Neptune,[451-5] and do fly him
    When he comes back; you demi-puppets that
    By moonshine do the green-sour ringlets[451-6] make,
    Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime
    Is to make midnight mushrooms;[452-7] that rejoice
    To hear the solemn curfew;[452-8] by whose aid--
    Weak masters[452-9] though ye be--I have be-dimm'd
    The noon-tide Sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
    And twixt the green sea and the azure vault
    Set roaring war: to the dread-rattling thunder
    Have I given fire, and rifted Jove's[452-10] stout oak
    With his own bolt: the strong-based promontory
    Have I made shake, and by the spurs[452-11] pluck'd up
    The pine and cedar: graves at my command
    Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth
    By my so potent art. But this rough magic
    I here abjure; and, when I have required
    Some heavenly music,--which even now I do,--
    To work mine end upon their senses that
    This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff,
    Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
    And deeper than did ever plummet sound
    I'll drown my book.                                [Solemn music.

Re-enter ARIEL: after him, ALONSO, with a frantic gesture, attended
     by GONZALO; SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO in like manner, attended by
     ADRIAN and FRANCISCO: they all enter the circle which PROSPERO has
     made, and there stand charmed; which PROSPERO observing, speaks.

    A solemn air, as the best comforter
    To an unsettled fancy, cure the brains,
    Now useless, boil'd[453-12] within the skull!--There stand,
    For you are spell-stopp'd.--
    Holy Gonzalo, honourable man,
    Mine eyes, even sociable to[453-13] the show of thine,
    Fall fellowly drops.[453-14]--The charm dissolves apace;
    And as the morning steals upon the night,
    Melting the darkness, so their rising senses[453-15]
    Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle[453-16]
    Their clearer reason.--O thou good Gonzalo,
    My true preserver, and a loyal sir
    To him thou follow'st! I will pay thy graces
    Home[453-17] both in word and deed.--Most cruelly
    Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter:
    Thy brother was a furtherer in the act:--
    Thou'rt pinch'd for't now, Sebastian.--Flesh and blood,
    You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition
    Expell'd remorse[453-18] and nature;[453-19] who, with Sebastian,--
    Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,--
    Would here have kill'd your King; I do forgive thee,
    Unnatural though thou art,--Their understanding
    Begins to swell; and the approaching tide
    Will shortly fill the reasonable shore,[454-20]
    That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
    That yet looks on me, or would know me.--Ariel,
    Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell:--
                                                         [Exit ARIEL.
    I will discase me,[454-21] and myself present
    As I was sometime Milan:[454-22]--quickly, spirit;
    Thou shalt ere long be free.

ARIEL re-enters, singing, and helps to attire PROSPERO.

Ari.

Pros. Why, that's my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee;
    But yet thou shalt have freedom:--so, so, so.
    To the King's ship, invisible as thou art:
    There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
    Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain
    Being awaked, enforce them to this place,
    And presently, I pr'ythee.

Ari. I drink the air before me,[456-24] and return
    Or e'er your pulse twice beat.                       [Exit ARIEL.

Gonza. All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
    Inhabit here: some heavenly power guide us
    Out of this fearful country!

Pros.                         Behold, sir King,
    The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero:
    For more assurance that a living prince
    Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body;
    And to thee and thy company I bid
    A hearty welcome.

Alon.               Whêr[456-25] thou be'st he or no,
    Or some enchanted trifle[456-26] to abuse me,
    As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse
    Beats, as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee,
    Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which,
    I fear, a madness held me: this must crave--
    An if this be at all[456-27]--a most strange story.
    Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat
    Thou pardon me my wrongs.[456-28] But how should Prospero
    Be living and be here?

Pros.                      First, noble friend,[456-29]
    Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot
    Be measured or confined.

Gonza.                     Whether this be
    Or be not, I'll not swear.

Pros.                        You do yet taste
    Some subtilties[457-30] o' the isle, that will not let you
    Believe things certain.--Welcome, my friends all:--
    [Aside to SEBAS. and ANTO.] But you, my brace of lords, were I so
      minded,
    I here could pluck his Highness' frown upon you,
    And justify you traitors:[457-31] at this time
    I'll tell no tales.

Sebas. [Aside to ANTO.] The Devil speaks in him.

Pros.                                             Now,
    For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
    Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
    Thy rankest fault; all of them; and require
    My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,
    Thou must restore.

Alon.                 If thou be'st Prospero,
    Give us particulars of thy preservation;
    How thou hast met us here, who three hours since
    Were wreck'd upon this shore; where I have lost--
    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!--
    My dear son Ferdinand.

Pros.                     I'm woe[457-32] for't, sir.

Alon. Irreparable is the loss; and patience
    Says it is past her cure.

Pros.                        I rather think
    You have not sought her help; of whose soft grace,
    For the like loss I have her sovereign aid,
    And rest myself content.

Alon.                       You the like loss!

Pros. As great to me, as late;[458-33] and, portable
    To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
    Than you may call to comfort you; for I
    Have lost my daughter.

Alon.                      A daughter!
    O Heavens, that they were living both in Naples,
    The King and Queen there! that they were, I wish
    Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
    Where my son lies. When did you lose your daughter?

Pros. In this last tempest. I perceive, these lords
    At this encounter do so much admire,[458-34]
    That they devour their reason, and scarce think
    Their eyes do offices of truth, these words
    Are natural breath:[458-35] but, howsoe'er you have
    Been justled from your senses, know for certain
    That I am Prospero, and that very Duke
    Which was thrust forth of Milan; who most strangely
    Upon this shore, where you were wreck'd, was landed
    To be the lord on't. No more yet[458-36] of this;
    For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,[458-37]
    Not a relation for a breakfast, nor
    Befitting this first meeting. Welcome, sir;
    This cell's my Court: here have I few attendants,
    And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in.
    My dukedom since you've given me again,
    I will requite you with as good a thing;
    At least bring forth a wonder to content ye
    As much as me my dukedom.

The entrance of the Cell opens, and discovers FERDINAND and MIRANDA
     playing at chess.

Mira. Sweet lord, you play me false.[459-38]

Ferd.                      No, my dear'st love,
    I would not for the world.

Mira. Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,[459-39]
    And I would call it fair play.

Alon.                             If this prove
    A vision of the island, one dear son
    Shall I twice lose.[459-40]

Sebas.                  A most high miracle!

Ferd. Though the seas threaten, they are merciful!
    I've cursed them without cause.                  [Kneels to ALON.

Alon.                           Now all the blessings
    Of the glad father compass thee about!
    Arise, and say how thou earnest here.

Mira.                                   O, wonder!
    How many goodly creatures are there here!
    How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
    That has such people in't!

Pros.                        'Tis new to thee.

Alon. What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
    Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours:
    Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
    And brought us thus together?

Ferd.                            Sir, she's mortal;
    But by immortal Providence she's mine:
    I chose her when I could not ask my father
    For his advice, nor thought I had one. She
    Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
    Of whom so often I have heard renown,
    But never saw before; of whom I have
    Received a second life; and second father
    This lady makes him to me.[460-41]

Alon.                         I am hers:
    But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
    Must ask my child forgiveness!

Pros.                            There, sir, stop:
    Let us not burden our remembrance with
    A heaviness that's gone.

Gonza.                      I've inly wept,
    Or should have spoke ere this.--Look down, you gods,
    And on this couple drop a blessed crown!
    For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
    Which brought us hither.

Alon.                     I say, Amen, Gonzalo!

Gonza. Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
    Should become Kings of Naples! O, rejoice
    Beyond a common joy! and set it down
    With gold on lasting pillars: In one voyage
    Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis;
    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
    Where he himself was lost; Prospero, his dukedom,
    In a poor isle; and all of us, ourselves,
    When no man was his own.[462-42]

Alon. [To FERD. and MIRA.] Give me your hands:
    Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
    That doth not wish you joy!

Gonza.               Be't so! Amen!--

Re-enter ARIEL, with the Master and Boatswain amazedly following.

    O, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us:
    I prophesied, if a gallows were on land,
    This fellow could not drown.[462-43]--Now, blasphemy,
    That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?[462-44]
    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?

Boats. The best news is, that we have safely found
    Our King and company; the next, our ship--
    Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split--
    Is tight, and yare, and bravely rigg'd, as when
    We first put out to sea.

Ari. [Aside to PROS.] Sir, all this service
    Have I done since I went.

Pros. [Aside to ARIEL.] My tricksy[463-45] spirit!

Alon. These are not natural events; they strengthen
    From strange to stranger.--Say, how came you hither?

Boats. The new number of the Archæological Journal
    is a very interesting one. That portion if it,
    more particularly, which relates the Proceedings
    of the Meetings of the Archæological Institute, contains
    a great mass of curious and valuable information;
    made the more available and instructive by
    means of the admirable woodcuts by which
    it is illustrated.
    
    We have received several curious communications on the subject
    of Parish Registers, with reference to the
    article on "Early Statistics," and the "Registers of Chart, Kent,"
to which we shall endeavour to give early insertion.

We have also received a copy of A Letter addressed to R. Monckton
Milnes, Esq.

M.P., on the Condition and unsafe State of Ancient
    Parochial Registers in England and the Colonies, to which we beg
to direct the attention of such of our friends as take an interest
in this important subject.

    
    Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of 191. Piccadilly,
    will sell on Monday, the 29th instant, and three following days,
a selection from the valuable library of the Rev. Dr. Maitland.

Although only a selection from the library of
    the learned historian of the Dark Ages, the Catalogue
    exhibits, in addition to numerous Polyglot and other important
    editions of the Scriptures, and the great collections of
    Baronius, Mabillon, Dupin, Martene, and Durand,
    &c., a vast number of works of the highest value in the departments
    of Theology and Ecclesiastical History.
    
    We have received the following Catalogues:--Part III. for
    1850 of J. Russell Smith's (4. Old Compton
    Street) Catalogue of Books and Autographs, chiefly Old and Curious.

Part II. for 1850 of a Catalogue of Choice, Useful, and Interesting
Books, in fine condition, on sale by Waller and Son (188.

Fleet Street). Power, Strand.

SIR PETER PETT'S DISCOURSE OF THE GROWTH OF ENGLAND, &c. (being the
2nd edition of the "Happy Future of England.")

MONK'S LETTERS RELATING
TO THE RESTORATION, published by Toland, 1714-15.

    
    LADY RUSSELL'S LETTERS, edited by Miss Berry.

    
    DU QUESNE'S ACCOUNT OF BOURBON, published in Holland about 1689.

Paris, 1716.
    

SOUTH AFRICAN QUARTERLY JOURNAL, 8vo. Cape Town, 1830
    (all that is published).
    
    Odd Volumes
    
    HUMBOLDT'S COSMOS, Nos. forming Vol. I. of Longman's
    1st edition, 1847-48.
    
    PERUSSAC'S BULLETIN DES SCIENCES NATURELLES,
    Vols.

XIX. to XXVII., Paris, 1829-31.

SOUTHEY'S POETICAL WORKS, Vols.

IX. and X.

LANGARD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 12mo. edition of 1839.
Vols. V. to IX. (both inclusive).

PENNY CYCLOPÆDIA. Monthly Parts
82, 84 to 90 (both inclusive), 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 99 to 113 (both
inclusive).

Adolphus' History of England. "INDACATOR" is informed
that the continuation of this work is proceeding with, as fast as
Mr. L. Adolphus' professional duties will admit; and we are sure that
gentleman would at all times readily explain, to those entitled to
ask him what progress has been made in it. And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they
    Find this grand liquor that hath gilded[465-58] 'em?--
    How camest thou in this pickle?

Trin. I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last, that I fear me, will never out of
my bones: I shall not fear fly-blowing.[465-59]

Sebas. Why, how now, Stephano!

Steph. O, touch me not! I am not Stephano, but a cramp.

Pros. You'd be king o' the isle, sirrah?

Steph. I should have been a sore[465-60] one, then.

Alon. [Pointing to CAL.] This is as strange a thing as e'er I look'd on.

Pros. He is as disproportion'd in his manners
    As in his shape.--Go, sirrah, to my cell;
    Take with you your companions; as you look
    To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.

Cal. Ay, that I will; and I'll be wise hereafter,
    And seek for grace. What a thrice double ass
    Was I, to take this drunkard for a god,
    And worship this dull fool!

Pros.                         Go to; away!

Alon. Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.

Sebas. Or stole it, rather.

                                      [Exeunt CAL., STEPH., and TRIN.

Pros. Sir, I invite your Highness and your train
    To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest
    For this one night; which, part of it, I'll waste
    With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it
    Go quick away,--the story of my life,
    And the particular accidents gone by,
    Since I came to this isle: and in the morn
    I'll bring you to your ship, and so to Naples,
    Where I have hope to see the nuptial
    Of these our dear-beloved solemnized;
    And thence retire me[466-61] to my Milan, where
    Every third thought shall be my grave.[466-62]

Alon.                                     I long
    To hear the story of your life, which must
    Take the ear strangely.

Pros.                     I'll deliver all;
    And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales,
    And sail so expeditious, that shall catch
    Your royal fleet far off.--[Aside to ARI.] My Ariel, chick,
    That is thy charge: then to the elements
    Be free, and fare thou well!--Please you, draw near.     [Exeunt.

EPILOGUE[467-63]

SPOKEN BY PROSPERO

    Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
    And what strength I have's mine own,--[467-64]
    Which is most faint: now, 'tis true,
    I must be here confined by you,[467-65]
    Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
    Since I have my dukedom got,
    And pardon'd the deceiver, dwell
    In this bare island by your spell;
    But release me from my bands,
    With the help of your good hands.[467-66]
    Gentle breath of yours my sails
    Must fill, or else my project fails,
    Which was to please: now I want
    Spirits to enforce, art to enchant;
    And my ending is despair,
    Unless I be relieved by prayer;
    Which pierces so, that it assaults
    Mercy itself, and frees all faults.
    As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
    Let your indulgence set me free.

FOOTNOTES:

[366-1] Good was often used in Shakespeare's time as we use the word well, to introduce a sentence.

[366-2] Fall to't yarely means get to work briskly.

[366-3] Perhaps the line should read, "Blow till thou burst thee, wind."

[366-4] If there is sea-room enough. The boatswain is not alarmed if he can have room to handle
his ship.

[366-5] We still say "play the man" when we wish to encourage any one to be brave and manly.

[367-6] The word time may be understood after present. The boatswain infers that they cannot
make peaceful weather of the present storm.

[367-7] Hap means happen.

[367-8] The word complexion here means bent or inclination. Gonzalo says the boatswain is born
to be hung; he cannot be drowned.

[367-9] The boatswain finds he has not sea-room enough so he calls upon the sailors to take
down the topmast and to bring the ship as close into the wind as possible and hold her there
with the main sail.

[367-10] This sentence means they are noisier than the tempest and the commands of our officers.

[368-11] Gonzalo still thinks the boatswain was born to be hanged, and warrants that he will
not be drowned.

[368-12] The boatswain is still trying to bring her to the wind, so she may get out to sea.
The courses are the largest lower sails.

[368-13] Merely, here, means entirely or absolutely.

[368-14] Glut means swallow.

[369-15] These are all plants that grow in England, and were to Shakespeare the familiar signs
of barren ground.

[369-16] The wills above be done means the will of the Powers above be done. Gonzalo interests
us from the start by his rather humorous view of everything.

[369-1] Welkin means sky.

[369-2] Brave means fine.

[369-3] Or e'er means before or sooner than.

[370-4] Fraughting means freighting. The human souls were the freight of the ship.

[370-5] Amazement means anguish and deep distress rather than astonishment.

[370-6] In the time of Shakespeare it was not considered inelegant English to use two forms
of the comparative and superlative degrees. More better, most best are good examples.

[370-7] Meddle means mix. Miranda says she never thought of knowing more about herself or her
father.

[370-8] Prospero means that with his garment he lays his magic arts aside and becomes the loving,
human father.

[370-9] Prospero does not complete his sentence, but expresses the same thought in different form.

[372-10] Bootless inquisition means fruitless questioning. The father has before begun to tell
Miranda who she is, but has interrupted himself, and said, "Stay, not yet."

[372-11] Out means fully.

[372-12] Prospero says, in these two lines, "If you can remember anything that happened before
we came here, you may remember how we came here."

[373-13] Holp is an old form of helped.

[373-14] Teen is an old word that means trouble or anxiety.

[373-15] Please you, further, means Please you, tell me further.

[373-16] Manage means management.

[373-17] Signiories is a name for principalities.

[373-18] Prime means first or leading.

[374-19] Who is used for whom, as it was not considered ungrammatical in Shakespeare's day.

[374-20] Trash means check or set back.

[374-21] Over-topping means rising too high. Prospero means that his brother knew what persons
to check when they tried to rise too high, to gain too much power.

[374-22] The brother understood the key that kept officer and office in tune, and so set the
minds of all Prospero's subjects thinking as the usurper wished. That is, Antonio took Prospero's
friends away from him.

[374-23] We would say so that instead of merely that.

[374-24] To closeness means to privacy, to studies in his own home.

[374-25] But in this sense means except.

[374-26] This is a difficult clause to understand. What Prospero means is probably that his
studies would have exceeded all popular estimate in value, but that they (if they had not)
kept him so retired from public life. Prospero sees the mistake he made, but cannot give up
the idea that his studies were valuable.

[375-27] Sans is a French word that means without.

[375-28] By falsing it means by falsifying it or forging it.

[375-29] Shakespeare omits the word as before to. Antonio made so great a sinner of his memory
unto truth as to credit his own lie.

[375-30] Out of the substitution may be understood to mean because of his being my substitute.

[375-31] Prospero's tale is not clearly told. He is evidently thinking of other things, and
his sentences are often imperfect. His mind wanders to the things he intends doing, to the
storm, the strangers on the island and to his plans for the future. Miranda is not inattentive--she
is fascinated by the story--but her father attributes his own wandering thoughts to her.

[375-32] Tired of ruling behind a screen, for that is what Prospero really was. Antonio planned
to remove his brother and become absolute Duke of Milan.

[375-33] Shakespeare omits the word for before me.

[376-34] So dry he was for sway, might now be written as so thirsty he was for power.

[376-35] Prospero bewails the fate of his principality, Milan.

[376-36] The meaning of the last seven lines is that Antonio thought Prospero incapable of
ruling, offered to pay the King of Naples an annual tribute, to do him homage and to make Milan
subject to Naples.

[376-37] In lieu now means instead of, but Shakespeare uses it in the sense of in return for.

[376-38] Presently means immediately.

[376-39] Practice means plot or stratagem.

[376-40] The six lines mean that one midnight, suited to such a plot, a treacherous army having
been levied, Antonio opened the gates of Milan, and in the dead of darkness hurried away Prospero
and the crying Miranda.

[377-41] In this place hint means theme or subject.

[377-42] Upon's is upon us.

[377-43] Impertinent in this connection means out of place.

[377-44] Wench means girl, and at the time of Shakespeare was a term of affection, like dear girl.

[377-45] In few may be read as in a few words, that is, to make the story brief.

[377-46] Hoist us means hoisted us, that is left us.

[378-47] Degg'd means sprinkled.

[378-48] Shakespeare, as was the custom in those days, often used the word stomach for courage;
an undergoing stomach is a lasting courage.

[378-49] Steaded means aided. We might say, which have since stood us in good stead.

[378-50] Readers of Shakespeare dispute about the meaning of this sentence. We might imagine
Prospero to say half to himself "Now I arise;" that is, "My turn has come."

[378-51] Made thee more profit, that is, have made you to profit more, have taught you to better
advantage.

[379-52] The zenith is the highest point.

[379-53] Prospero means that if he acts now his fortunes will rise to their highest point,
but that if he waits, he will lose his opportunity.

[379-54] Prospero, by his magic, throws his daughter into a deep sleep so that he may carry
on his plans without her knowledge.

[379-55] This line may be understood to read, Ariel, and all spirits of his kind.

[379-56] Performed to point means performed in every respect.

[379-57] The beak of a ship is the prow, the projecting forward part.

[380-58] The waist of a ship is the middle portion.

[380-59] Distinctly means here separately. Ariel caused light globes of flame to appear for
a second in different parts of the rigging, and to move about and to join.

[380-60] Momentary means instantaneous.

[380-61] Coil means tumult or confusion.

[380-62] This clause means There was not a soul that did not feel such a fever as madmen feel.

[380-63] In this place upstaring means sticking up.

[381-64] For unstaining we would say unstained.

[381-65] Odd angle probably means out-of-the-way place.

[381-66] Probably Ferdinand sat with his arms folded loosely, his head hanging on his breast.

[381-67] This is a good example of the way Shakespeare sometimes changes the natural order
in which the parts of a sentence should be placed. Naturally the sentence would read: "Say,
how hast thou disposed of the mariners of the King's ship, and all the rest of the fleet?"

[381-68] Bermoothes is the old form of the word Bermudas. It was supposed that witches haunted
the Bermudas and filled the air with tempests, which kept the waters always stormy. Still-vexed
means always stormy. The present errands of the spirit Ariel are not the first he has executed
for Prospero. Dew from the Bermudas was probably wanted for some of his magical rites.

[381-69] To enjoy The Tempest, we must lay aside our reason to the extent of believing in charms
and in magic, in witchcraft and in Ariel's wonderful powers. Prospero's control of the magic
art is part of what he gained from his studies while Antonio was stealing his principality.

[382-70] Flote is flood, therefore wave or sea.

[382-71] This means that it was about two o'clock in the afternoon--past the mid-season by
about the time it would take the sand to run twice through the hour-glass.

[382-72] Remember here means remind.

[382-73] Perform'd me means performed for me.

[382-74] Say no more.

[382-75] "To release me a full year before my time is up," is what Ariel says Prospero has
promised.

[383-76] This speech shows how marvelous are some of the things Ariel has already done for
Prospero.

[383-77] Prospero is not speaking in earnest when he calls Ariel a "malignant thing." He intends
to release Ariel soon.

[383-78] To Shakespeare and other writers of his time, the word envy meant malice.

[383-79] Argier is an old name for Algiers.

[383-80] Blue-eyed means that the witch had dark blue circles around her eyes, not that she
had real blue eyes.

[383-81] For means because.

[384-82] Hests means behests or commands.

[384-83] The witch confined Ariel in a cloven pine tree.

[384-84] This line means save for the son that was born here.

[384-85] Correspondent means obedient.

[385-86] Miss means spare.

[385-87] When was often used as an exclamation of impatience.

[386-88] Old meanings for quaint are artful, ingenious.

[386-89] Wicked dew probably means poisonous dew.

[386-90] Caliban, in cursing his master, alludes to the common belief of that time that a southwest
wind was unwholesome.

[386-91] Side stitches are stitches or pains in the side.

[386-92] Urchins were troublesome sprites or fairies.

[386-93] Vast alludes to the middle hours of night when in the stillness and vacancy evil spirits
can do their work.

[386-94] Just what Caliban means here is uncertain.

[387-95] Sty here means confine, as in a sty.

[387-96] This clause means did'st not, savage, know the meaning of thine own words.

[387-97] Rid means destroy.

[388-98] Old here, as often in the writings of Shakespeare's time, is used merely to make stronger
the meaning of the word that follows it.

[388-99] Kiss'd the wild waves whist means soothed the wild waves into peace.

[389-100] Ferdinand was suffering, and Shakespeare used the word passion to express the idea
as we use it in speaking of the Passion of Christ.

[389-101] This line means without suffering a change from the effects of the sea.

[389-102] Owes here means possesses.

[389-103] Prospero speaking to Miranda says, "Lift up your eyelids and tell me what you see
yonder."

[389-104] In this connection brave means fine or noble.

[390-105] Canker means rust or tarnish. Prospero says, "Except for the fact that he's somewhat
stained with grief, which tarnishes beauty, you might call him a goodly person."

[390-106] Miranda, it must be remembered, has never seen any other man than her father.

[390-107] Prospero sees his plan going on well and gives Ariel credit for it. Just what the
plan is will soon become apparent.

[390-108] Ferdinand speaks somewhat aside when he sees the beautiful Miranda, and then directly
addresses her. He is embarrassed, calls her a goddess, asks her how he shall behave, calls
her a wonder, but above all, wishes to know if she is mortal or not.

[390-109] The word Miranda means wonderful

[390-110] "She speaks my language!"

[391-111] A single thing means a weak and companionless thing.

[391-112] Myself am Naples means I am now the King of Naples.

[391-113] Notice that this is the only mention of a son to Antonio, the usurping Duke of Milan.

[391-114] Control means here confute, that is, tell you differently.

[391-115] Prospero notices the interest the two young people have taken in each other, and
as this furthers his plan he feels more grateful to Ariel.

[391-116] What Prospero says is, "I fear that in claiming to be the King of Naples you have
done some wrong to your character."

[392-117] Prospero wishes to test the love he sees in Ferdinand, and make him earn his prize.
So he charges the young man with deceit and threatens him.

[392-118] Fearful here means timid.

[393-119] Ward is his position of defense to ward off a blow.

[393-120] Nerves is here used for muscles and sinews.

[394-1] This word means a ship--the merchantman.

[395-2] A visitor in this sense is one who visits the sick to comfort them. Antonio and Sebastian
are ridiculing Gonzalo for his efforts to cheer and console them.

[395-3] Tell means keep tally. Sebastian means that the clock of Gonzalo's wit has struck one.

[395-4] Dolour means grief or sadness.

[395-5] Instead of of he or Adrian, we would say merely he or Adrian. Antonio offers to bet
a good sum on which will speak first, Gonzalo or Adrian.

[395-6] Gonzalo.

[395-7] A match means I take the bet.

[396-8] Sebastian has lost his bet, and he pays with a laugh.

[396-9] Adrian means temperature when he says temperance.

[396-10] People often named their girls Temperance, Prudence, Faith, etc. It is to this fact
that Antonio jokingly alludes.

[396-11] Lush means juicy.

[396-12] Eye here means tint or shade.

[397-13] We would now say for instead of to.

[397-14] Tunis is near the supposed site of Carthage. The story of Dido and Æneas is told in
Virgil's Æneid.

[397-15] One of the stories of the god Mercury is that he gave to Amphion, King of Thebes,
a magic harp upon which the king played and so charmed the stones that they sprang into place
to make the walls of his city.

[398-16] The meaning of stomach in this line is appetite or desire. Alonso says they crowd
their words into his ears when his feelings do not relish such nonsense.

[398-17] Rate means estimation.

[398-18] His is used for its and refers to shore.

[398-19] For as, read as if.

[399-20] Who is used for which. This is but another illustration of the changes that have taken
place in the use of words since Shakespeare's time.

[399-21] Sebastian tells the King that he alone is responsible for the loss. Even his daughter
weighed her wish to be obedient against her loathing of the match.

[399-22] Dearest here means the same as heaviest or worst.

[399-23] Chirurgeon is the old word for surgeon. Antonio says, "And in the most surgeon-like
manner."

[400-24] Gonzalo says, literally. "When you are sad, we all share your sorrow."

[400-25] "Had I the colonizing" is what Gonzalo means. Antonio makes it appear that Gonzalo
was speaking of planting the island.

[400-26] Succession means inheritance, as a son succeeds to his father's property.

[400-27] Bourn means brook, hence boundary, as of land.

[400-28] Tilth means tillage or cultivation, as of land.

[401-29] He probably means any engine of war.

[401-30] Foison means plenty of grain or fruits.

[401-31] The Golden Age is that period of the world's history when there was no sin, sorrow
or suffering, and when all mankind was so good that there was no need of government of any
sort. The Greeks, especially, but other peoples to some extent, have mythical tales of such a time.

[401-32] Sensible is here used for sensitive.

[401-33] Gonzalo admits that in witty talk he is nothing in comparison to Antonio and Sebastian.

[401-34] A blow with the flat of a sword is harmless: so is Gonzalo's wit.

[402-35] We would say should instead of would in this case.

[402-36] When they used to hunt birds in the night, they called it bat-fowling. Sometimes at
night they took a light into the woods, and while one of the hunters held a net in front of
the light, the others would beat the bushes round about. Some of the frightened birds would
fly directly at the light and become entangled in the net.

[402-37] Adventure here means put in peril.

[402-38] Ariel is at work again, and in carrying out the plans of Prospero, he causes some
to fall asleep that the others may plot.

[402-39] Omit here means neglect. Sebastian suggests that it will be better for Alonso to go
to sleep while he can. He has reasons for wishing the King asleep.

[403-40] Alonso grows more sleepy under Ariel's influence, and in these words alludes to what
Sebastian has just said--"It is a wondrous heavy offer of sleep."

[404-41] They refers to the other men.

[404-42] Probably we must understand Antonio to mean, "What might you be!" In this way Antonio
begins to tempt Sebastian, whom he finds ready to listen.

[404-43] Speaks means proclaims.

[404-44] Antonio says in effect, "You close your eyes when you are awake. You are blind to
your opportunity."

[404-45] "If you heed me."

[404-46] Antonio means, "Which if you do, you shall be three times as great as you are now."

[405-47] By I am standing water, Sebastian means that he is like the ocean standing between
tides, ready to ebb or flow. That is, he is ready to accept suggestions from Antonio.

[405-48] Antonio says in effect, "The more you ridicule the purpose I suggest, the more you
welcome it."

[405-49] Ebbing men, that is, men whose fortunes are at a low ebb.

[405-50] Matter means something of great importance.

[405-51] "It is difficult or painful for you to say what you think." While both have about
the same idea in their minds, neither is quite willing to speak of it openly. It is too cruel
and murderous a thought.

[405-52] Francisco.

[405-53] That is, "this lord who remembers little of the favors done him, and will be remembered
no better."

[405-54] Earth'd means buried.

[406-55] A wink here means the least distance.

[406-56] It is difficult to say just what But doubt discovery there means. Antonio says, "But
out of your certainty that Ferdinand is drowned, you have a great hope, a hope so high that
ambition cannot see anything greater."

[406-57] This means ten leagues farther away than a man can travel in his life.

[406-58] Can have no note means can receive no word.

[406-59] This clause means unless the sun carried the mail.

[406-60] Though some were cast up again.

[406-61] This sentence means, you and I can manage what is to come.

[407-62] "Measure us back," etc., means the same as Return to us.

[407-63] The word others may be understood after there be.

[407-64] A chough is a bird of the jackdaw kind.

[407-65] This clause means, I myself could breed a bird to talk as sensibly.

[407-66] This is difficult to understand. Perhaps it means. "And how does your present contentment
advance or care for your interest?"

[407-67] Feater means more fittingly or more becomingly.

[408-68] A kibe is a sore on the heel.

[408-69] Candied means here the same as crystallized.

[408-70] This means, while you, doing the same thing, might put Gonzalo to continuous sleep
forever.

[408-71] Suggestion here means temptation.

[408-72] They'll tell the clock to any business, etc., means they will speak any words we tell
them to.

[408-73] Draw together is let us draw our swords together.

[409-74] That is, Why are your swords drawn?

[409-75] This means, Why do you look so ghastly?

[410-1] Inch-meal means piece-meal.

[410-2] Urchin-shows are fairy-shows.

[410-3] Fire-brand refers to will o' the wisp, or dancing balls of light seen sometimes at
night in swampy places. People used to think these lights were tended by naughty sprites who
lured men into trouble.

[410-4] We would now say sometimes.

[410-5] Mow means make mouths or grin.

[411-6] Pricks, here, means their prickles or sharp quills.

[411-7] Caliban is a monster, part brute, part human, more fish-like than man-like, probably.
He works only when Prospero drives him to it, and he hates his master bitterly in spite of
all that the latter has done for him. Now Caliban is under punishment for his wickedness.

[411-8] To bear off means to keep off.

[411-9] A bombard is a black jar or jug to hold liquor.

[411-10] Poor-john is an old name for dried and salted hake, a kind of fish.

[411-11] Trinculo means that any strange beast could be exhibited and make a man's fortune.

[412-12] A gaberdine was a coarse outer garment or frock.

[412-13] A swabber is a man who scrubs the decks of a ship.

[412-14] Tang means sharp taste; here it means that Kate spoke sharply.

[413-15] Inde may mean India as we understand it, or West India, that is, America. Stephano
probably alludes to the sham wonders from America that were often exhibited by lying showmen.

[413-16] Neat's-leather is calfskin.

[413-17] Stephano means that he will take all he can get.

[413-18] He alludes to an old saying, "Good liquor will make a cat talk."

[414-19] This is probably the nearest to a prayer that Stephano can remember in his fright.

[414-20] This alludes to an old proverb, "He that would eat with the devil must use a long spoon."

[414-21] Siege here means seat.

[414-22] A moon-calf was any shapeless monster; supposed to be made so through the influence
of the moon.

[415-23] The superstitious Trinculo is still a little afraid that Stephano may be a ghost.

[415-24] Constant here means settled, from his recent experiences in the sea.

[415-25] The word an may be omitted from before if without altering the meaning. Caliban fears
the men may be evil spirits, but thinks Stephano must be a god.

[415-26] Sack is an old-fashioned intoxicating drink. A butt is a big cask holding about two
hogsheads.

[416-27] All these things the fanciful used to think they could see in the face of the moon.

[416-28] This probably means that Caliban had taken a long hearty draught at the bottle.

[417-29] Pig-nuts were probably ground-nuts, the small bulbous growths on the roots of certain
vines.

[417-30] A staniel is a kestril, a beautiful hawk.

[418-1] Ferdinand says, "Some sports are painful, and the delight we take in them offsets the
labor."

[418-2] Baseness here means lowliness, rather than anything base or evil.

[418-3] Prospero has set Ferdinand to carrying logs, a hard task and a lowly one, to test his
love for Miranda, to find out how manly he really is.

[419-4] The meaning of this line probably is that when he works the least he is really most
wearied because he does not have Miranda's sympathetic words to cheer him, or the sweet thought
that he is working for her.

[420-5] Put it to the foil, means put it on the defensive. Foil was a general name for swords.

[420-6] Ferdinand thinks his father has been drowned, but wishes it were not so, even though
he is thereby made King.

[422-7] The flesh-fly is the blow-fly, which lays its eggs in meat and helps its decay.

[422-8] Hollowly here means falsely.

[422-9] We would now say, "Whatsoever else."

[422-10] Instead of to want, we would say from wanting.

[423-11] Fellow here means equal.

[423-12] Bondman may be read for bondage. He accepts her as willingly as a slave ever accepted
freedom.

[423-13] "A thousand thousand farewells."

[423-14] Prospero desires Ferdinand to love and marry Miranda and has planned for it, but he
is surprised at the suddenness and strength of their love.

[423-1] As in a naval battle one ship runs alongside another, and the sailors leap aboard.

[424-2] Set means fixed and staring.

[424-3] Standard may be read standard-bearer.

[424-4] Trinculo means that Caliban is too drunk to stand.

[424-5] Trinculo is always jesting, even at his own expense. He means he is so drunk he would
pick a quarrel with a constable.

[424-6] Debosh'd means debauched.

[425-7] A natural is a fool or a simpleton.

[425-8] Stephano means "You shall be hanged on the next tree."

[425-9] As Ariel is invisible, each thinks another has spoken.

[425-10] "This thing" is Caliban himself.

[426-11] The court fools or jesters of that day wore clothes of many colors--were pied, that
is, dappled.

[426-12] Patch is another word referring to the parti-colored clothing of the jester.

[426-13] The quick freshes are the running springs of fresh water.

[426-14] Stock-fish is a word used in the writings of that period to mean some kind of a fixture,
which men struck with their fists or with cudgels in practicing boxing and fighting.

[427-15] Stephano speaks first to Caliban, then to Trinculo.

[427-16] The weazand is the windpipe or throat.

[427-17] Sot in this place means fool, not drunkard. Caliban thinks Prospero's books are the
source of his magic power over such spirits as Ariel and those he commands.

[427-18] Brave here means beautiful or showy.

[428-19] This speech of Ariel's is made aside, that is, out of hearing of the three conspirators.

[428-20] Troll the catch means sing the jolly song.

[428-21] While-ere means awhile since.

[428-22] "I will do anything reasonable," says Stephano.

[428-23] "What is this music I hear?"

[428-24] A common sign in those times was called the picture of Nobody. It consisted of a head
upon two legs, with arms.

[429-25] Stephano probably means, "Take a blow from my fist," and speaks to the invisible spirit
or devil that he now thinks to be near them, because of Ariel's curious interruptions.

[429-26] Sometime is again used for sometimes.

[430-1] By our lady! was a common exclamation. A diminutive form of this was by our ladykin
which was contracted into by our lakin.

[430-2] Forth-rights are straight lines.

[430-3] Meanders are crooked lines.

[430-4] Attach'd with means seized by.

[430-5] Frustrate means defeated or baffled.

[430-6] Throughly means the same as through. Sebastian means that the next time he will carry
his purpose through.

[431-7] A drollery was an amusing show of the Punch and Judy kind, where the characters were
puppets. In a living drollery, the characters would be alive instead of puppets.

[431-8] The phoenix was a fabled bird of antiquity which lived a hundred years and then died
in flames, only to rise young and strong again from its ashes. There was but one such bird
in the world, and somewhere in Arabia was a tree, different from any other in the world, in
which the phoenix built its nest.

[431-9] Certes means for a certainty.

[432-10] Muse here means wonder at.

[432-11] Probably Prospero alludes to an old saying which meant, "Do not praise your banquet
too soon; wait till it is over."

[432-12] Among the strange shapes that danced about the banquet were deformed men from whose
throats the flesh hung down in huge pockets, like goitres, and others whose heads grew from
their breasts without neck and shoulders.

[432-13] Sometimes in Shakespeare's days they practiced a curious kind of insurance. If a man
were going on a long journey, he put out in the hands of agents a sum of money, under the agreement
that if he returned he was to have a certain number of times the money he put out. If the journey
was perilous, the agreement might call for five times the sum; if a safer journey, perhaps
twice the amount. If the traveler did not return, the agents kept the sum put out. Gonzalo
uses the phrase "Each putter-out of one for five," to mean each man who goes on a perilous
journey. He means that every traveler returning vouches for, or gives good warrant for, the
wonders he has seen.

[433-14] Instead of That hath to instrument, we might read That has control of. The whole sentence
means: "You are three sinful men whom Destiny, that rules this lower world and what is in it,
has caused the never-surfeited sea to throw on shore; yes, and on this island which man does
not inhabit; you who are among men the most unfit to live."

[433-15] Water closes immediately over any cut made in it.

[434-16] Dowle means down, and the comparison means, as cut off a single thread of down from
my plumes.

[434-17] Requit means here revenged.

[434-18] Whose refers to the word powers six lines before. The meaning of the remainder of
Ariel's speech is as follows: "Nothing but repentance and a clear life hereafter can guard
you from the wrath that otherwise will fall upon your heads in this desolate isle."

[435-19] The meaning of the preceding clause is: "Thus with the skill of life and keen observance
of the ways of men, my humbler servants have done their work, each according to his nature
or kind."

[435-20] It refers to his sin against Prospero.

[435-21] That is: "It sang my misdeed in a terrible bass."

[435-22] This clause means: "My son sleeps in the ooze on the bottom of the ocean."

[435-23] Mudded means buried in mud. Alonso threatens to drown himself.

[436-24] There are said to be poisons which will not work until a long time after a person
takes them.

[436-25] For ecstasy, read fit of madness.

[437-1] Vanity probably means fine display.

[437-2] With a twink means in the twinkling of an eye.

[437-3] Mop means chattering.

[437-4] Mow means making faces. Mop and mow were words applied to such chattering and grinning
as a monkey makes.

[437-5] A corollary here means more than enough.

[437-6] Pertly means alertly.

[437-7] Iris was the fleet messenger of the Greek gods. She had beautiful golden wings, and
as she flew across the heavens, she left the many-colored rainbow as her trail.

[437-8] Ceres was the Greek goddess of the earth, who especially watched over the growth of
grain and fruits. She it is who brings rich harvests, or when her attention is called away,
permits drought to kill the vegetation. 

He presents not only the soldier's distaste for trenches and machine
guns, and his desire for the things of familiar life, but also, with
surprising vehemence, his hatred of generals who give blundering orders
from comfortable billets in the rear, or of munitioners in England
who keep optimistic in spite of bad news from the Front.

He does not pretend to be quite fair in his criticisms, for obviously
the higher command had to keep out of the firing-line and somebody
had to work--and hard too--to supply the torrent of munitions demanded.



[438-15] The poles in a vineyard are clipt or embraced by the vines.

[438-16] Juno was Queen of the sky and Iris was her special messenger.

[438-17] Rainbow.

[438-18] Peacocks were sacred to Juno and are represented as accompanying her.

[438-19] Jupiter was the chief god of the ancient Greeks, and Juno was his wife.

[440-20] Bosky means wooded.

[440-21] Unshrubbed downs are tracts of land on which no bushes grow.

[440-22] Venus was the Greek goddess of love and beauty.

[440-23] Dis is another name for Pluto, who according to the Greek mythology ruled in the dismal
lower world.

[440-24] By the aid of Venus, Pluto stole Proserpina, the daughter of Ceres and Jupiter, and
carried her away to be his queen in Hades.

[440-25] Her blind boy is Cupid, the mischievous little god of love.

[440-26] Paphos was a city in Cyprus, where Venus loved to live.

[440-27] Juno's walk was very stately and dignified.

[440-28] Juno was a large, noble, motherly-looking woman, who is represented in art as attended
by the nymphs and the hours, as well as by Iris. The goose and the cuckoo were as much Juno's
birds as the peacock. She was the protectress of young married people and infants, and so was
worshipped especially by women.

[441-29] Foison and plenty mean about the same thing. The phrase might be read, overflowing
plenty, a great plenty.

[441-30] This means, may a new spring come as soon as you have gathered the harvest of the
old one. May there be no winter in your lives.

[441-31] Ferdinand is still amazed, and inquires if they are really spirits that he sees.

[442-32] So rare a wonder'd father means, so rarely wonderful a father.

[442-33] Crisp means curled, alluding to the wavelets that the breezes make on the surface
of the water.

[442-34] The sicklemen are reapers called from the harvest fields to make merry.

[443-35] Avoid means begone.

[443-36] The thin fleecy clouds, highest in the sky, were called rack.

[443-37] On is here used for of.

[443-38] We would say rounded off or finished.

[444-39] I thank ye is spoken to Ferdinand and Miranda, and is Prospero's reply to their good
wishes.

[444-40] Meet with means oppose or counteract.

[444-41] For breathing means because it breathed. In the next line, for kissing means because
it kissed.

[444-42] Unback'd means unridden.

[444-43] Advanced means raised.

[445-44] The pool was mantled, or covered over, with filth.

[445-45] For that read so that or insomuch that.

[445-46] Stale means bait. It was a term used by hunters for a bait that would lure birds.

[445-47] Caliban.

[445-48] Nurture can never stick on his nature: that is, he can never be improved by culture
or education.

[445-49] Cankers means rusts, or here, eats into itself.

[445-50] It is not known whether line refers to a clothesline or to a line tree. Only Shakespeare
himself could tell us to a certainty.

[446-51] Play'd the Jack with us. "Led us astray as a Jack-o'-lantern might."

[446-52] To hoodwink this mischance means to make it forgotten or overlooked.

[446-53] In Hudson's Shakespeare this is explained as an allusion to the old ballad entitled
"Take thy old Cloak about thee." The following stanza is quoted:

    "King Stephen was a worthy peer,
    His breeches cost him but a crown:
    He held them sixpence all too dear.
    Therefore he called the tailor lown."

[447-54] A frippery was a shop where old clothes were sold. Trinculo has found the clothing
Ariel hung upon the line.

[447-55] Under the line. We can imagine that Stephano has pulled the leather jerkin or coat
from the line. When he says under the line, he thinks of that as an expression sailors use
when they are near the equinoctial line or equator, where the heat is intense, so strong as
to take the hair or fur off the coat and make it a bald jerkin.

[447-56] By line and level, that is, as architects build, by plumb line and level. Trinculo
picks up the word line and makes a new pun on it.

[448-57] A pass is a thrust; pate is head. Pass of pate is a thrust or sally of wit.

[448-58] Lime is a sticky substance used to catch birds.

[448-59] Barnacles here means barnacle-geese, a kind of geese supposed by the superstitious
to be produced when certain barnacles or shell-fish fell into the sea water.

[449-60] Pard is a contraction for leopard; cat-o'-mountain may be another name for wild-cat,
though wild-cats are not spotted. Probably the term is loosely used to mean any spotted animal
of the cat tribes.

[450-1] Goes upright with his carriage means, goes erectly under his burden, that is, there
is time enough to accomplish what Prospero wishes to do.

[450-2] That is, "In the grove of line-trees which protects your cell from the weather."

[450-3] Till your release means till you release them.

[451-4] In this place all has the sense of quite; relish means feel; passion has the sense
of suffering. The meaning of the clause is, that feel suffering quite as sharply as they.

[451-5] Neptune, the name of the god of the seas, is used for sea or ocean.

[451-6] "Fairy rings" are green circles in the grass. They were supposed to be caused by fairies
dancing in a circle, but are now known to be caused by mushrooms which grow in circles and
which enrich the ground as they decay. Because it contained some peculiar quality which Shakespeare
calls sourness, the sheep would not eat the grass of the rings.

[452-7] Because mushrooms and toadstools spring up so quickly in the night, they were supposed
to be the work of fairies.

[452-8] The curfew rings at night, and the fairies rejoice to hear it, for it is the signal
for them to begin their frolics.

[452-9] The fairies are weak masters, that is, they can accomplish little if left to themselves,
but under the direction of a human mind like Prospero's they could work such wonders as he
describes.

[452-10] The oak was sacred to Jove (Jupiter), and lightning and thunder-bolts were his chief
weapons.

[452-11] The spurs are the long roots of the pines and cedars.

[453-12] Boil'd is used for boiling or seething.

[453-13] Sociable to means sympathizing with.

[453-14] Fall fellowly drops means shed tears in sympathy.

[453-15] Rising senses means clearing mental faculties.

[453-16] Ignorant fumes that mantle alludes to the confusion that the charm has caused in their
ideas. The whole passage means simply that they are recovering their senses.

[453-17] This sentence means, I will reward thee to the utmost.

[453-18] Remorse here means pity.

[453-19] Nature here means brotherly love.

[454-20] The reasonable shore means the shore of reason. As the tide rises to the shore of
the sea, so their clearing thoughts fill their minds.

[454-21] Discase me means remove my disguise.

[454-22] As I was sometime Milan means as I was once, the Duke of Milan.

[454-23] The meaning of the three lines preceding has been much disputed. No one knows exactly
what the poet meant. Perhaps Ariel sings with this meaning: "When the owls cry and foretell
the approach of winter, I fly on the back of a bat in a merry search for summer."

[456-24] Ariel uses this fanciful way of saying that he will go as fast as human thought.

[456-25] Whêr is a contraction of whether.

[456-26] Trifle here means phantom or spirit.

[456-27] This clause means, if this be at all true.

[456-28] My wrongs means the wrongs I have done.

[456-29] He speaks to Gonzalo.

[457-30] Taste some subtilties means feel some deceptions.

[457-31] Justify you traitors means prove that you are traitors.

[457-32] Woe here means sorry.

[458-33] As late means as recent.

[458-34] In this place admire means wonder.

[458-35] Are natural breath means are the breath of a human being. The lords are still amazed;
they cannot reason, they can scarcely believe their eyes or that the words they hear come from
a living human being.

[458-36] In this connection yet means now or for the present.

[458-37] That is, it is a story to be told day after day.

[459-38] Miranda playfully accuses Ferdinand of cheating in the game.

[459-39] The exact meaning of wrangle has not been determined, and critics still disagree.
However, what Miranda says is, "you might cheat me for a score of kingdoms and yet I would
call it fair play."

[459-40] Alonzo means that if this sight of Ferdinand is one of the witcheries of the island,
he will feel that he has lost his son a second time.

[460-41] And this lady by becoming my wife makes him a second father to me.

[462-42] That is, "all of us have found our senses, when no man was in possession of his own."

[462-43] See Act I--Scene I.

[462-44] This sentence means, "Now you blasphemous man who swore so on board the ship that
we could be saved, have you not an oath to swear on shore?"

[463-45] Tricksy means clever.

[463-46] Capering to eye her means dancing with joy at seeing her.

[463-47] Moping here means bewildered.

[463-48] Conduct of is used for conductor or leader of.

[463-49] That is, "some wise man must make it clear to us."

[463-50] This sentence means "Do not trouble your mind by hammering away at the strangeness
of these happenings."

[464-51] At pick'd leisure is at a chosen time when we have the opportunity.

[464-52] Single I'll resolve means I will explain singly.

[464-53] Of every these happen'd accidents means how every one of these things happened.

[464-54] Stephano is still a little drunk and his tongue uncertain in its speech. He means,
Let us every man shift for himself.

[464-55] Coragio is used for courage!

[464-56] Trinculo means, "If my eyes do not deceive me."

[465-57] Without here means outside of or beyond. 

There was a "slip of a girl" in the early chapter of whom I had hopes,
but sterner business caused her to be too soon eliminated.

Skill and learning The Light Heart has in plenty, and an engaging suggestion of the early artistic
temperament in the character of Thormod, fighter and song-maker. But I fall back on my old complaint
of being left cold; and that I should suffer that way from the work
of Mr. HEWLETT gives you the measure of our loss.

* * * * *

In his last grim and terrible work, Realities of War (HEINEMANN), Sir PHILIP GIBBS has fairly
flung aside the restraint, enforced or self-imposed, that marked
his despatches from the fighting fronts, to present war, the horrible,
senseless nightmare, as it really appeared to him.

[467-63] The Epilogue is a part spoken by one of the actors after the play is over, and is
addressed to the audience. Here Prospero steps forward and speaks.

[467-64] He has dismissed Ariel and laid aside all his magic arts.

[467-65] The audience may hold him on the island or send him to Naples, for he is still under
a spell.

[467-66] He asks the audience to applaud, to clap their hands, for noise always breaks charms,
and will release him from the enchantment so that he may return to his dukedom.

STUDIES FOR "THE TEMPEST"

THE AUTHOR. Many times we have had occasion to say that an acquaintance with an author has
much to do with our liking for his works, and as we read the great plays of our greatest poet,
we wish we might know him more intimately. However, when we look for information concerning
him, we quickly find that comparatively little is known of the man beyond what we can draw
from his writings, and few authors have shown themselves less vividly. After doing our best,
we can find only a great, shadowy Author who must have had a broad knowledge, a rare invention,
a profound insight into human nature, a penetrating sympathy and a marvelous power of expression.
As seen through his works, he appears more than human, but when we look into our histories,
we wonder that so great a man could have lived and died, and left so light an impression on
his times. In fact, some wise men have felt that the William Shakespeare we know could never
have written the great plays that bear his name. That is a question, however, we need not discuss;
it is better to leave the credit where it has rested for centuries, and believe that the plays
are better evidence of Shakespeare's greatness than his own life is evidence of his ability
to write them.

William Shakespeare was born in Stratford-on-Avon, April 23, 1564. His father, John Shakespeare,
was a respectable citizen, a wool-dealer and a glover, who at one time possessed considerable
means, and was an alderman and a bailiff in the little town, but who later on lost most of
his property and ceased to be prominent in the affairs of the village. William's mother was
Mary Arden, a gentle, tender woman of Norman descent, who exerted a powerful influence over
the lives of her children.

Until William was about fourteen years old he attended the free school in Stratford, and though
there are many legends concerning his boyhood pranks and his gift for learning, we know practically
nothing for a certainty. In one of the desks at the school, they still show the initials he
is supposed to have cut during some idle moment. Of his youth we know still less, except that
at about eighteen he married Ann Hathaway, a farmer's daughter who lived in the village of
Shottery, a mile or two from Stratford. Ann was eight years older than William, but they seem
to have lived happily and to have loved the children that were born to them.

The next thing we can be really certain of is, that about the time William was twenty-three
he went to London and soon became connected with a company of actors. Here the genius of the
poet began to make itself felt. He wrote some plays, he recast others, and by the time he had
been five years in the city, he was prominent among the bright men of his time, and was recognized
as a rising man. Unlike most actors and writers of that period, Shakespeare was not a dissipated
man, but attended carefully to his duties, saved his money, and ten years after he left Stratford
was able to return to his native town and buy a fine estate, to which he added from time to
time. His money had not all come from his writings and his acting, however, for he owned a
large part of the stock in the two leading theaters in London.

About 1604 he ceased to be an actor, although he continued to write for the stage, and in fact
produced his greatest plays after that date. Seven years later he returned finally to Stratford,
and there lived a quiet and delightful home life until 1616, when on the anniversary of his
birth he died suddenly of a fever. He was buried in the little parish church at Stratford,
where his remains rest beside those of his wife. On the flat stone that covers his body is
inscribed this epitaph:

    "Good frend for Iesus sake forbeare,
    To digg the dvst encloased heare:
    Blesse be ye man yt spares thes stones,
    And Cvrst be he yt moves my bones."

Such are the principal facts that we know concerning the great man, and a simple biography
it certainly is. We must not, however, think that he was not popular among his fellows, or
that he was merely a successful business man. He counted among his friends the wisest and best
men of his time, and some of them have written their impressions of him.

THE PLAY. The Tempest was one of the last of the poet's dramas, though not the last, as some
writers have contended. It was not printed until 1623, after the poet's death, but it was written,
according to Hudson, between 1603 and 1613, and probably between 1610 and 1613.

The story seems to have been original with Shakespeare; at least no satisfactory evidence has
been given to show that he borrowed it. This is rather unusual, for Shakespeare showed a fine
contempt for originality, and borrowed the plots of his plays from a great variety of sources.
His own version of each story, however, was so masterly that no one regrets that he availed
himself of all the assistance he could get.

The scene of the play is laid on an island; what island we do not know. Probably it is as mythical
as the events that happened on it.

The Tempest is one of Shakespeare's most perfect plays. In form it is perfect, and follows,
more closely than was customary with him, the strict laws of the old Greek dramas, the laws
which critics still uphold as those governing the highest art. The three unities are here observed:
The events all occur in a single day; they happen in a single place; from beginning to end
there is one continuous line of thought. Only the last characteristic is still generally observed
by dramatic writers.

Beside perfection in form, The Tempest shows the greatest nicety in the way the natural and
supernatural move along together without a single interference. It is difficult to think of
the magic art of Prospero as more marvelous than the coarse plotting of Sebastian, or to consider
the delicate Ariel and the mis-shapen Caliban less human than the manly Ferdinand, or the honest
old Gonzalo. Only a great writer could accomplish this, and none but a genius could make of
his work a piece so fine that we delight in every line of it. It would be unfair too not to
mention the beautiful expressions that abound in it, the high sentiments that prevail, and
the great renunciation that Prospero makes when he has in his hands every means for swift and
terrible revenge.

CHARACTERS. In reading the drama we become acquainted with the characters, and begin to be
indifferent toward some, to have admiration for others and contempt for others. In real life
we must not be governed by our first impressions of people. We must study their appearance,
their speech, their actions, and make up our minds as to their characters before we decide
to make them our friends. It is very unwise to trust every agreeable person we meet, and especially
unwise to be suspicious of every person who at first impresses us unfavorably. The older we
grow, the keener becomes our power to read character, and the less liable we are to be deceived
if we try always to use our best judgment. One of the great benefits literature can offer us
is the opportunity to study character, and Shakespeare had such a remarkable insight into human
nature, and so great a power of drawing character that in his plays we can see before us almost
every type of human being, and from a study of them we can gain a knowledge of humanity that
will help us every day of our lives.

Accordingly, let us take up, one after another, the principal characters in The Tempest and
study them in such a way that we shall be able to read other plays with greater ease and quickened
intelligence.

1. Prospero. The hero of the drama is a man well advanced in years, grave, dignified and serene.
As Duke of Milan he was a prince of power, "without a parallel in dignity and knowledge." He
was popular with his subjects, for so dear was the love his people bore him, that the conspirators
did not dare to destroy him. Yet he was not inclined to rule his dukedom, for he grew a stranger
to his estate, so transported and wrapt was he in secret studies. He confesses that his library
was dukedom enough for him, and that he had volumes that he prized above his dukedom. This
was his weakness, and upon this his false brother preyed, until one night in the dead of darkness
the Duke and the crying Miranda were set adrift in the rotten carcass of a boat, which the
very rats instinctively had quit.

On the island, with the books Gonzalo had preserved for him, he continued his studies and played
the schoolmaster to his gentle child until she was better educated and more highly cultured
than other princesses that spend more time in vain enjoyments and have less careful tutors.
Prospero's love for his daughter is the strong, central trait in his character. He has raised
her judiciously, guarded her zealously, and now when he finds, brought to his very door, all
the actors in the tragedy of his life, his one great care is to provide for Miranda's happiness.
All his plans lead to that end, and when he has achieved it, the labors of his life are over.

The supernatural powers that Prospero has acquired seem natural to the studious, dignified
old gentleman, and amazing as they are, we can discredit none of them. He tells us he caused
the storm, and Miranda begs him to save the passengers on the doomed ship with perfect confidence
in his ability to do it. He causes sleep to fall on Miranda, and he summons the gentle Ariel,
who enters as naturally as a human being, and admits the marvelous acts that he has seen Prospero
perform. Caliban testifies to the power of Prospero so convincingly that we know the magician
has control of the destinies of every human being on the island, and can wreak a terrible vengeance
if he is determined to do it. When Ferdinand draws his sword, the magician by a word makes
him powerless as he stands. We see the magic banquet appear and disappear, and Iris, Ceres,
Juno, the nymphs and the reapers come and converse, as a proof positive of his more than mortal
power. How has he used this power and how will he continue to use it? When first he came upon
the island it was full of evil, and the powers of darkness ruled. That in the future he will
use his vast power only for good, we feel assured. Only Caliban hates and abuses him, but the
testimony of one so wicked rather proves the gentleness, wisdom and justice of the magician.

Prospero's passionate love for his daughter makes him cunning and wise. Before he will trust
his daughter to Ferdinand, he tests both the character and the love of the latter most severely.
He even feigns anger and appears to be cruel and unjust. That he is feigning, neither suspect,
but Miranda says: "Never till this day saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd," and "My
father's a better nature, sir, than he appears by speech." When he is assured of Ferdinand's
worthiness, of the sincerity of his love for Miranda and of her devotion to her young lover,
he is delighted, and becomes so interested in the entertainment he is giving them, that he
forgets the plot against his life, although the hour of his danger has arrived. It is true
the father stoops to listening, but his purpose is so worthy, no one is inclined to cavil at
his watchfulness, and, in any event, his exceeding care but justifies the feeling that his
love for Miranda is the mainspring of his every act.

On this small island Prospero is little less than a god, and controls affairs with almost supernatural
justice and wisdom. Caliban, the ungrateful, terribly wicked monster, is punished unsparingly
but with justice, for in the end with repentance he is forgiven, and the tortures cease. Ariel
and the other obedient spirits, though reproved at times, are rewarded by freedom and placed
beyond the reach of the evil powers of earth and air.

The sufferings Prospero has endured, the intensity of his studies, and the fierceness of his
struggles with the supernatural powers of evil, have given a tinge of sadness to his thought,
and have led him to feel that the result of all his labors may amount to little. The world
is to him but an insubstantial pageant that shall dissolve and fade, leaving not the trace
of the thinnest cloud behind. And as for ourselves,

                                  "We are such stuff
    As dreams are made on, and our little life
    Is rounded with a sleep."

Yet no sooner does he give way to this feeling than he sees how unkind it is to trouble the
young with such musings, and says pathetically to Ferdinand,

                                    "Sir, I am vex'd;
    Bear with my weakness; my old brain is troubled:
    Be not disturbed with my infirmity."

It is, however, at the end of the play, when all his plans have been carried out successfully,
and enemies and friends are alike at his mercy, that the character of Prospero shines out most
gloriously. Rejoicing at the fruition of his hopes, he asks from his enemies only a sincere
repentance, and then nobly resigning the great arts which have rendered the plotters powerless,
he forgives them one and all: his brother Antonio; the scheming Sebastian; Caliban, the evil
spirit; and the two weak but wicked ones, Stephano and Trinculo. Remembering to set Ariel free,
he lays aside his magic gown, breaks his staff, buries it fathoms deep in the earth, and drowns
his magic book deeper than did ever plummet sound. Thus he leaves us, only a man once more,
but a loving father, a wise and gentle ruler.

2. Miranda. We have seen that the master feeling in Prospero's soul is his love for his daughter.
Is she worthy of so great an affection? Let us draw our answers from the drama.

(a) She is beautiful.

Ferdinand says:

                "Most sure, the goddess
    On whom these airs attend!"

And:

          "O you wonder!
    If you be maid or no?"

Alonzo says:

    "Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
    And brought us thus together?"

(b) She is educated, cultured and refined.

Prospero says:

                                        "And here
    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
    Than other princesses can, that have more time
    For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful."

(c) She is tender-hearted, sympathetic and compassionate.

She says:

              "O, I have suffer'd
    With those that I saw suffer!"

And:

                "O, the cry did knock
    Against my very heart!"

Speaking of the trials which Prospero puts upon Ferdinand, she says:

    "Make not too rash a trial of him, for
    He's gentle and not fearful."

When she learns of her helplessness at the time they were set adrift, she says:

                "O, my heart bleeds
    To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to."

When Miranda hears how her father was treated by her false uncle, she exclaims:

                    "Alack, for pity!
    I, not remembering how I cried on't then,
    Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
    That wrings mine eyes to't."

(d) She is brave.

Prospero says of her childhood:

                                "O, a cherubim
    Thou wast that did preserve me! Thou didst smile,
    Infused with a fortitude from Heaven."

(e) She is innocent and unacquainted with mankind and hates the sight of evil.

When she first sees Ferdinand, she asks:

                      "What is't? A spirit?
    Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
    It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit."

And finally:

    "How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
    That has such people in't."

She says of Caliban:

              "'Tis a villain, sir,
    I do not love to look on."

(f) She is grateful.

When she is told of Gonzalo's services to her and her father, she exclaims:

                      "Would I might
    But ever see that man!"

(g) She is a loving, faithful woman:

While Ferdinand is at work she pleads:

                "Alas, now, pray you,
    Work not so hard,----
    Pray, set it down, and rest you: when this burns,
    'Twill weep for having wearied you."

Again:

                "If you'll sit down,
    I'll bear your logs the while."

Later Ferdinand asks, "Wherefore weep you?"

(h) Lover and father both bestow unqualified praise upon her. Ferdinand says:

                    "Admired Miranda!
    Indeed the top of admiration; worth
    What's dearest to the world!----
                            ----but you, O you,
    So perfect and so peerless, are created
    Of every creature's best!"

3. Ferdinand. The quotations we have made from the text seem to have answered our question
as to Miranda's worthiness. Upon what sort of a man has she set her affections? Will she find
in her husband the man she thinks she is to marry? Answer these questions for yourselves by
reading the text and setting down the proofs as we did while studying Miranda.

4. Ariel. Prospero's agent Ariel is an interesting study, for the poet has drawn him with lines
so clear and exact that he seems a veritable person. Will you not seek to know him, and in
doing so follow these suggestions?

(a) Ariel appears in the following scenes:

  ACT I    SCENE II   (three times)
  ACT II   SCENE I    (twice)
  ACT III  SCENE II   (once)
           SCENE III  (once)
  ACT IV   SCENE I    (once)
  ACT V    SCENE I    (five times)

How many scenes are there in the play? In how many does Ariel appear? In what scenes does he
make no appearance? What characters appear more times? What characters appear more prominently
in the play?

(b) Ariel does many different things. Make a list of the things Ariel does in this plays and
a second list of the things that it appears Ariel has done elsewhere.

