A College Girl

By Mrs George de Horne Vaizey

Here is a book about the young girl and her awakening to the world by this talented author.
Darsie, the heroine, is selected by an old aunt to come and spend a year or so as her companion.
The old woman tries to coach Darsie in matters of deportment and behaviour.  This would be
pretty odious if it were not for the presence locally of a young family of boys and girls of
Darsie's age, whom, being rich and living rather grandly, the aunt allows Darsie to know. 
The first half of the book describes the times they had.  The old aunt promises Darsie that
she will make available the funds needed for Darsie to go up to Cambridge as a student at Newnham,
a girls' college.

When the second half of the book begins the old aunt has just died, and Darsie feels glad that
the poor old lady will be relieved of all her pains.  The years of studentship are well described,
and the friends that  Darsie made come and go through the story.  Finally we reach the last
exams.  Darsie does quite well, but is not in the First Class.  She has a Second, which will
be enough for her to be able to go and teach at some less distinguished school.  But her friend
Dan, one of those whom we met in the first half of the book, has obtained a First Class Honours
degree, and the book ends with him asking her to marry him.  What he doesn't know, and I suppose
the author didn't either, is that young men going to teach at a top-rate boys' school are expected
to spend their spare time coaching sports, and not to be married.  In fact they would be better
to have achieved a "Blue" at Oxford or Cambridge than a good degree.

I have had to make a slightly strange and annoying change to the name of one of the girls in
the story.  I changed Vi Vernon to Vie Vernon.  The reason was that otherwise the speech generator
always read her name as "Six Vernon". On Monday, the 14th, at three o'clock, we took our pilot,
and at eight o'clock we anchored off Liverpool, and a dark-looking steamtug came off to us
for the mails, foreign ministers, and bearers of despatches.

As we came under the wing of one of the last-named class of favored individuals, we took our luggage,
and proceeded straight to the Adelphi Hotel.

I ought to say that James was the first to quit the ship and plant
his foot on Old England.

It was quite strange to see it so light at half past eight o'clock,
although it was a rainy evening.

I shall not soon forget the cheerful appearance of the Adelphi, which,
in all its provisions for comfort, both in the coffee-room and our
chambers, struck me more favorably than any hotel I had ever seen.

Although our state-room on board the Arctic was one of the extra
size and every thing that was nice, yet I long for the conveniences
of a bed-chamber and a warm bath.

I am quite disposed to join with the poor Irish woman who had made a steerage passage from New
York to Liverpool in a packet ship; and when landed at St. George's
pier, and seated on her trunk, a lady who had also landed, when getting
into her carriage, said, "Well, my good woman, I suppose you are very
glad to get out of the ship?"

Her reply was, "And indeed, my lady, every bone in my body cries out feathers!"

Yours truly,

WELD.

Letter 3.

LIVERPOOL.

DEAR CHARLEY:--

Well, we have fairly commenced our travel, and yet I can scarcely realize the fact that I am here
in Old England, and that, for some months at least, I shall be away from home and the occupations
of the school-room. The next day after landing we went to the custom-house to see our fellow-passengers
pass their effects, and really felt glad to think of our good fortune in landing every thing
at night and direct from the ship. It was an exciting scene, and I was not a little amused to
observe the anxiety of the gentlemen to save their cigars from the duty imposed, and which amounts
to nine shillings sterling per pound. All sorts of contrivances were in vogue, and the experiences
of men were various, the man with one hundred, perhaps, being brought
up, while his neighbor with five hundred passed off successfully,
and, as he cleared the building, seemed disposed to place his finger
on the prominent feature of his face.

I quite like the appearance of Liverpool. After walking through the
principal streets and making a general survey of the shops,--no one
speaks of store,--I think I can testify to the extraordinary cleanness
of the city, and the massiveness and grandeur of the public buildings.  Even
her family shared in this delusion, and set her up as the superlative in degree, so that "as
pretty as Darsie" had come to be regarded a climax of praise.  The glint of her chestnut hair,
the wide, bright eyes, the little oval face set on a long, slim throat smote the onlooker with
instant delight, and so blinded him that he had no sight left with which to behold the blemishes
which walked hand in hand.  Photographs valiantly strove to demonstrate the truth; pointed
out with cruel truth the stretching mouth, the small, inadequate nose, but even the testimony
of sunlight could not convince the blind.  They sniffed, and said: "What a travesty!  Never
again to that photographer!  Next time we'll try the man in C-- Street," and Darsie's beauty
lived on, an uncontroverted legend.

By a triumph of bad management, which the Garnett girls never ceased to deplore, their three
brothers came at the end instead of the beginning of the family.  Three grown-up brothers would
have been a grand asset; big boys who would have shown a manly tenderness towards the weaknesses
of little sisters; who would have helped and amused; big boys going to school, young men going
to college, coming home in the vacations, bringing their friends, acting as squires and escorts
to the girls at home.  Later on brothers at business, wealthy brothers, generous brothers;
brothers who understood how long quarter-day was in coming round, and how astonishingly quickly
a girl's allowance vanishes into space!  Clemence, Darsie, and Lavender had read of such brothers
in books, and would have gladly welcomed their good offices in the flesh, but three noisy,
quarrelsome, more or less grimy schoolboys, superbly indifferent to "those girls"--this was
another, and a very different tale!  Harry was twelve--a fair, blunt-featured lad with a yawning
cavity in the front of his mouth, the result of one of the many accidents which had punctuated
his life.  On the top story of the Garnett house there ran a narrow passage, halfway along
which, for want of a better site, a swing depended from two great iron hooks.  Harry, as champion
swinger, ever striving after fresh flights, had one day in a frenzy of enthusiasm swung the
rings free from their hold, and descended, swing and all, in a crash on the oil-clothed floor.
The crash, the shrieks of the victim and his attendant sprites, smote upon Mrs Garnett's ears
as she sat wrestling with the "stocking basket" in a room below, and as she credibly avowed,
took years from her life. Almost the first objects which met her eye, when, in one bound, as
it seemed, she reached the scene of the disaster, was a selection of small white teeth scattered
over the oil-clothed floor.  Henceforth for years Harry pursued his way minus front teeth,
and the nursery legend darkly hinted that so injured had been the gums by his fall that no
second supply could be expected.  Harry avowed a sincere aspiration that this should be the
case.  "I can eat as much without them," he declared, "and when I grow up I'll have them false,
and be an explorer, and scare savages like the man in Rider Haggard," so that teeth, or no
teeth, would appear to hold the secret of his destiny.

Russell had adenoids, and snored.  His peculiarities included a faculty for breaking his bones,
at frequent and inconvenient occasions, an insatiable curiosity about matters with which he
had no concern, and a most engaging and delusive silkiness of manner.  "Gentleman Russell,"
a title bestowed by his elders, had an irritating effect on an elder brother conscious of being
condemned by the contrast, and when quoted downstairs brought an unfailing echo of thumps in
the seclusion of the playroom.

Tim played on his privileges as "littlest," and his mother's barely concealed partiality, and
was as irritating to his elders as a small person can be, who is always present when he is
not wanted, absent when he is, in peace adopts the airs of a conqueror, and in warfare promptly
cries, and collapses into a curly-headed baby boy, whom the authorities declare it is "cr-uel"
to bully!

For the rest, the house was of the high and narrow order common to town terraces, inconveniently
crowded by its many inmates, and viewed from without, of a dark and grimy appearance.

Sandon Terrace had no boast to make either from an architectural or a luxurious point of view,
and was so obviously inferior to its neighbour, Napier Terrace, that it was lacerating to the
Garnett pride to feel that their sworn friends the Vernons were so much better domiciled than
themselves.  Napier Terrace had a strip of garden between itself and the rough outer world;
big gateways stood at either end, and what Vie Vernon grandiloquently spoke of as "a carriage
sweep" curved broadly between. Divided accurately among the houses in the terrace, the space
of ground apportioned to each was limited to a few square yards, but the Vernons were chronically
superior on the subject of "the grounds," and in springtime when three hawthorns, a lilac,
and one spindly laburnum-tree struggled into bloom, their airs were beyond endurance.

The Vernons had also a second claim to superiority over the Garnetts, inasmuch as they were
the proud possessors of an elder brother, a remote and learned person who gained scholarships,
and was going to be Prime Minister when he was grown up.  Dan at eighteen, coaching with a
tutor preparatory to going up to Cambridge, was removed by continents of superiority from day-school
juniors.  Occasionally in their disguise of the deadly jealousy which in truth consumed them,
the Garnett family endeavoured to make light of the personality of this envied person.  To
begin with, his name!  "Dan" was well enough.  "Dan" sounded a boy-like boy, a manly man; of
a "Dan" much might be expected in the way of sport and mischief, but--oh, my goodness--Daniel!
The Garnetts discussed the cognomen over the play-room fire.

"It must be so embarrassing to have a Bible name!"  Lavender opined. "Think of church!  When
they read about me I should be covered with confusion, and imagine that every one was staring
at our pew!"

Clemence stared thoughtfully into space.  "I, Clemence, take thee Daniel," she recited slowly,
and shuddered.  "No--really, I couldn't!"

"He wouldn't have you!" the three boys piped; even Tim, who plainly was talking of matters
he could not understand, added his note to the chorus, but Darsie cocked her little head, and
added eagerly--

"Couldn't you, really?  What could you, do you think?"

Clemence stared again, more rapt than ever.

"Lancelot, perhaps," she opined, "or Sigismund.  Everard's nice too, or Ronald or Guy--"

"Bah!  Sugary.  I couldn't!  Daniel is ugly," Darsie admitted, "but it's strong.  Dan Vernon
will fight lions like the Bible one; they'll roar about him, and his enemies will cast him
in, but they'll not manage to kill him.  He'll trample them under foot, and leave them behind,
like milestones on the road."  Darsie was nothing if not inaccurate, but in the bosom of one's
own family romantic flights are not allowed to atone for discrepancies, and the elder sister
was quick to correct.

"Daniel didn't fight the lions!  What's the use of being high falutin' and making similes that
aren't correct?"

"Dear Clemence, you are so literal!"  Darsie tilted her head with an air of superiority which
reduced the elder to silence, the while she cogitated painfully why such a charge should be
cast as a reproach.  To be literal was to be correct.  Daniel had not fought the lions! Darsie
had muddled up the fact in her usual scatterbrain fashion, and by good right should have deplored
her error.  Darsie, however, was seldom known to do anything so dull; she preferred by a nimble
change of front to put others in the wrong, and keep the honours to herself.  Now, after a
momentary pause, she skimmed lightly on to another phase of the subject.  "What should you
say was the character and life history of a woman who could call her eldest child `Daniel,'
the second `Viola Imogen,' and the third and fourth `Hannah' and `John'?"

Clemence had no inspiration on the subject.  She said: "Don't be silly!" sharply, and left
it to Lavender to supply the necessary stimulus.

"Tell us, Darsie, tell us!  You make it up--"

"My dear, it is evident to the meanest intellect.  She was the child of a simple country household,
who, on her marriage, went to live in a town; and when her first-born son was born, she pined
to have him christened by her father's name in the grey old church beneath the ivy tower; so
they travelled there, and the white-haired sire held the infant at the font, while the tears
furrowed his aged cheeks.  But--by slow degrees the insidious effects of the great capital
invaded the mind of the sweet young wife, and the simple tastes of her girlhood turned to vanity,
so that when the second babe was born, and her husband wished to call her Hannah after her
sainted grandmother, she wept, and made an awful fuss, and would not be consoled until he gave
in to Viola Imogen, and a christening cloak trimmed with plush.  And she was christened in
a city church, and the organ pealed, and the godmothers wore rich array, and the poor old father
stayed at home and had a slice of christening cake sent by the post.  But the years passed
on.  Saddened and sobered by the discipline of life, aged and worn, her thoughts turned once
more to her quiet youth, and when at last a third child--"

"There's only two years between them!"

Darsie frowned, but continued her narrative in a heightened voice--

"--Was laid in her arms, and her husband suggested `Ermyntrude'; she shuddered, and murmured
softly, `Hannah--plain Hannah!' and plain Hannah she has been ever since!"

A splutter of laughter greeted this denouement, for in truth Hannah Vernon was not distinguished
for her beauty, being one of the plainest, and at the same time the most good-natured of girls.

Lavender cried eagerly--

"Go on!  Make up some more," but Clemence from the dignity of seventeen years felt bound to
protest--

"I don't think you--ought!  It's not your business.  Mrs Vernon's a friend, and she wouldn't
be pleased.  To talk behind her back--"

"All right," agreed Darsie swiftly.  "Let's crack nuts!"

Positively she left one breathless!  One moment poised on imaginary flights, weaving stories
from the baldest materials, drawing allegories of the lives of her friends, the next--an irresponsible
wisp, with no thought in the world but the moment's frolic; but whatever might be the fancy
of the moment she drew her companions after her with the magnetism of a born leader.

In the twinkling of an eye the scene was changed, the Vernons with their peculiarities were
consigned to the limbo of forgotten things, while boys and girls squatted on the rug scrambling
for nuts out of a paper bag, and cracking them with their teeth with monkey-like agility.

"How many can you crack at a time?  Bet you I can crack more than you!" cried Darsie loudly.

CHAPTER TWO.

THE TELEGRAPH STATION.

The Garnetts' house stood at the corner of Sandon Terrace, and possessed at once the advantages
and drawbacks of its position.  The advantages were represented by three bay windows, belonging
severally to the drawing-room, mother's bedroom, and the play-room on the third floor. The
bay windows at either end of the Terrace bestowed an architectural finish to its flattened
length, and from within allowed of extended views up and down the street.  The drawback lay
in the position of the front door, which stood round the corner in a side street, on which
abutted the gardens of the houses of its more aristocratic neighbour, Napier Terrace.  Once,
in a moment of unbridled temper, Vie Vernon had alluded to the Garnett residence as being located
"at our back door," and though she had speedily repented, and apologised, even with tears,
the sting remained.

Apart from the point of inferiority, however, the position had its charm.  From the eerie of
the top landing window one could get a bird's- eye view of the Napier Terrace gardens with
their miniature grass plots, their smutty flower-beds, and the dividing walls with their clothing
of blackened ivy.  Some people were ambitious, and lavished unrequited affection on struggling
rose-trees in a centre bed, others contented themselves with a blaze of homely nasturtiums;
others, again, abandoned the effort after beauty, hoisted wooden poles, and on Monday mornings
floated the week's washing unashamed.  In Number Two the tenant kept pigeons; Number Four owned
a real Persian cat, who basked majestic on the top of the wall, scorning his tortoiseshell
neighbours.

When the lamps were lit, it was possible also to obtain glimpses into the dining-rooms of the
two end houses, if the maids were not in too great a hurry to draw down the blinds.  A newly
married couple had recently come to live in the corner house--a couple who wore evening clothes
every night, and dined in incredible splendour at half-past seven.  It was thrilling to behold
them seated at opposite sides of the gay little table, all a-sparkle with glass and silver,
to watch course after course being handed round, the final dallying over dessert.

On one never-to-be-forgotten occasion, suddenly and without the slightest warning, bride and
bridegroom had leaped from their seats and begun chasing each other wildly round the table.
She flew, he flew; he dodged, she screamed (one could see her scream!) dodged again, and flew
wildly in an opposite direction.  The chase continued for several breathless moments, then,
to the desolation of the beholders, swept out of sight into the fastnesses of the front hall.

Never--no, never--could the bitterness of that disappointment be outlived.  To have been shut
out from beholding the denouement--it was too piteous!  In vain Darsie expended herself on
flights of imagination, in vain rendered in detail the conversation which had led up to the
thrilling chase--the provocation, the threat, the defiance-- nothing but the reality could
have satisfied the thirst of curiosity of the beholders.  Would he kiss her?  Would he beat
her?  Would she triumph?  Would she cry?  Was it a frolic, or a fight?  Would the morrow find
them smiling and happy as of yore, or driving off in separate cabs to take refuge in the bosoms
of their separate families?  Darsie opined that all would seem the same on the surface, but
darkly hinted at the little rift within the lute, and somehow after that night the glamour
seemed to have departed from this honeymoon pair, and the fair seeming was regarded with suspicion.

As regards the matter of distance, it took an easy two minutes to cover the space between the
front doors of the two houses, and there seemed an endless number of reasons why the members
of the different families should fly round to consult each other a dozen times a day.  Darsie
and Lavender, Vie and plain Hannah attended the same High School; the Garnett boys and John
Vernon the same Royal Institute, but the fact that they walked to and from school together,
and spent the intervening hours in the same class-rooms, by no means mitigated the necessity
of meeting again during luncheon and tea hours.  In holiday times the necessity naturally increased,
and bells pealed incessantly in response to tugs from youthful hands.

Then came the time of the great servants' strike.  That bell was a perfect nuisance; ring,
ring, ring the whole day long.  Something else to do than run about to open the door for a
pack of children!

The two mistresses, thus coerced, issued a fiat.  Once a day, and no oftener!  All arrangements
for the afternoon to be made in the morning seance, the rendezvous to be outside, not inside
the house.

After this came on the age of signals; whistlings outside the windows, rattling of the railings,
comes through letter-boxes and ventilation grids, even--on occasions of special deafness--pebbles
thrown against the panes!  A broken window, and a succession of whoops making the air hideous
during the progress of an extra special tea party, evoked the displeasure of the mistresses
in turns, and a second verdict went forth against signals in all forms, whereupon the Garnetts
and Vernons in conclave deplored the hard-heartedness of grown-ups, and set their wits to work
to evolve a fresh means of communication.

"S'pose," said Russell, snoring thoughtfully, "s'pose we had a telegraph!"

"S'pose we had an airship!  One's just as easy as the other.  Don't be a juggins."

But Russell snored on unperturbed.

"I don't mean a real telegraph, only a sort--of pretend!  There's our side window, and your
back windows.  If we could run a line across."

"A line of what?"

"String.  Wire.  Anything we like."

"S'pose we did fix it, what then?"

"Send messages!"

"How?"

Russell pondered deeply.  He was the member of the family who had a natural aptitude for mechanism;
the one who mended toys, and on occasion was even consulted about mother's sewing-machine and
escapes of gas, therefore he filled the place of engineer-royal and was expected to take all
structural difficulties upon his own shoulders.  He pondered, blinking his pale blue eyes.

"Can't send messages in the usual way--too difficult.  If the cord were double, we might have
a bag and switch it across."

Ha! the audience pricked its ears and sat alert, seeing in imagination the tiny cord swung
high in space above the dividing ground, stretching from window to window, fastened securely
on the sills, "somehow," according to the girls, the boys critically debating the question
of ways and means, strong iron hoops, for choice, clamped into the framework of the windows.

"How would the messages be sent?"

"In a bag, of course.  Put the letter in the bag; then we'd pull and pull, and it would work
round and round, till it arrived at the opposite end."

A stealthy exchange of glances testified to the general realisation of the fact that it would
take a long time to pull, a much longer time, for instance, than to run round by the road,
and deposit the missive in the letter-box, a still unforbidden means of communication.  Every
one realised the fact, but every one scorned to put it into words.  What was a mere matter
of time, compared with the glory and eclat of owning a real live telegraph of one's own?

The first stage of the proceedings was to obtain the parental consent, and this was secured
with an ease and celerity which was positively disconcerting.  When mothers said, "Oh, yes,
dears, certainly--certainly you may try!" with a smile in their eyes, a twist on their lips,
and a barely concealed incredulity oozing out of every pore, it put the youngsters on their
mettle to succeed, or perish in the attempt. Our letters will, of course, be very different in
their character and interest, because you will bear in mind that out ages are different; and we
shall write you from a variety of points, some having a deeper interest
than others.

I trust that this series of letters will give you a general view
of our movements, and contribute to your gratification, if not to
your instruction.

The weather is delightful, and we are anticipating a fine day for leaving port. It is to all of
us a source of pain that we are deprived of your sunny smile; and while we are wandering far
away in other lands, we shall often, in fancy, listen to your merry laugh; and I assure you,
my dear fellow, that, wherever we rove, it will be amongst our pleasantest thoughts of home
when we anticipate the renewal of personal intercourse with one who
has secured so warm a place in our affections.

Yours truly,

J.O.C.

Letter 2.

ADELPHI HOTEL, LIVERPOOL, April 14.

DEAR CHARLEY:--
It is but twelve days since we parted, and yet we are actually in
the old world, and the things which we have so often talked over on
the rock-bound shore are really before me. Yes, we are on the soil
of Old England, and are soon to see its glories and greatness, and,
I fear, its miseries, for a bird's eye view has already satisfied
me that there is enough of poverty. You know we left New York in a
soaking rain, and the wind blowing fresh from the north-east. We all
felt disappointed, as we had hoped to pass down the bay, so celebrated
for its beauty, with the bright sunshine to cheer our way; but we
had to take comfort from the old proverb, that "a bad beginning makes
a good ending." James, George, and I had made up our minds to a regular
time of sea-sickness, and so we hastened to put our state room into
order and have all our conveniences fixed for the voyage.

These two great points arranged, nothing now remained but the erection of the line itself,
and two strong iron hoops having been fixed into the outer sills of the respective windows
a fine Saturday afternoon witnessed the first struggle with the cord.

Vie Vernon and plain Hannah unrolled one heavy skein, threaded it through their own hoop, and
lowered the two ends into the garden, where John stood at attention ready to throw them over
the wall.  Darsie and Lavender dropped their ends straight into the street, and then chased
madly downstairs to join the boys and witness the junction of the lines. Each line being long
enough in itself to accomplish the double journey, the plan was to pull the connected string
into the Garnett station, cut off the superfluous length, and tie the ends taut and firm. 
Nothing could have seemed easier in theory, but in practice unexpected difficulties presented
themselves.  The side street was as a rule singularly free from traffic, but with the usual
perversity of fate, every tradesman's cart in the neighbourhood seemed bent on exercising its
horse up and down its length this Saturday afternoon.  No sooner were lines knotted together
in the middle of the road than the greengrocer came prancing round the corner, and they must
needs be hastily untied; secured a second time, the milkman appeared on incredibly early rounds,
reined his steed on its haunches, and scowled fiercely around; before there was time to rally
from his attack a procession of coal-carts came trundling heavily past.  By this time also
the frantic efforts of the two families had attracted the attention of their enemies, a body
of boys, scathingly designated "the Cads," who inhabited the smaller streets around and waged
an incessant war against "the Softs," as they in return nicknamed their more luxurious neighbours.

The Cads rushed to the scene with hoots and howls of derision; white- capped heads peered over
bedroom blinds; even the tortoiseshell cats stalked over the dividing walls to discover the
cause of the unusual excitement.  Clemence, with the sensitiveness of seventeen years, hurried
round the corner, and walked hastily in an opposite direction, striving to look as if she had
no connection with the scrimmage in the side street.  Darsie read the Cads a lecture on nobility
of conduct, which they received with further hoots and sneers.  Plain Hannah planked herself
squarely before the scene of action with intent to act as a bulwark from the attack of the
enemy.  The three boys worked with feverish energy, dreading the appearance of their parents
and an edict to cease operations forthwith.

The first lull in the traffic was seized upon to secure the knots, when presto! the line began
to move, as Russell the nimble-minded hauled vigorously from the upstairs station, whence he
had been dispatched a few moments before.  The Cads yelled and booed as the first glimmering
knowledge of what was on foot penetrated their brains; they grouped together and consulted
as to means of frustration; but with every moment that passed yards of line were disappearing
from view, and the skeins in the streets were rapidly diminishing in size.  Presently there
was not a single coil left, and a cheer of delight burst from the onlookers as they watched
the cord rise slowly off the ground.  Now with good luck and the absence of vehicles for another
two minutes the deed would be done, and the Garnett-Vernon telegraph an accomplished fact;
but alas! at this all-important moment one line of string caught in an ivy stem at the top
of a garden wall, and refused to be dislodged by tuggings and pullings from below.  The Cads
raised a derisive cheer, and to add to the annoyances of the moment a cab rounded the corner,
the driver of which pulled up in scandalised amaze on finding the road barricaded by two stout
lines of string.

His strictures were strong and to the point, and though he finally consented to drive over
the hastily lowered line, he departed shaking his whip in an ominous manner, and murmuring
darkly concerning police.

"On to the wall, John.  Quick!  Climb up and ease it over.  If we don't get it up in a jiffy
we shall have the bobbies after us!" cried Harry frantically, whereupon John doubled back into
his own garden, and by perilous graspings of ivy trunks and projecting bricks scaled to the
top and eased the line from its grip.

"Right-ho!" he cried, lifting his face to the opposite window.  "Pull, Russell! pull for your
life!"

Russell pulled; a second time the double thread rose in the air.  Darsie jumped with excitement;
Lavender clasped her hands, all white and tense with suspense, plain Hannah ran to and fro,
emitting short, staccato croaks of delight; Harry stood in manly calm, arms akimbo, a beam
of satisfaction broadening his face.  That smile, alas! gave the last touch of exasperation
to the watching Cads.  To stand still and behold the line vanishing into space had been in
itself an ordeal, but Harry's lordly air, his strut, his smile--these were beyond their endurance!
With a rallying shout of battle they plunged forward, grabbed at the ascending cord, hung for
a dizzy moment suspended on its length, then with a final cheer felt it snap in twain and drag
limply along the ground.

Alas for Harry and for John--what could they do, two men alone, against a dozen?  The girls
screamed, declaimed, vowed shrill revenge, but in the matter of practical force were worse
than useless.  Even with Russell's aid the forces were hopelessly uneven.  Harry stood looking
on gloomily while the Cads, chortling with triumph, galloped down the road, trailing behind
them the long lengths of cord; then, like a true Englishman, being half-beaten, he set his
teeth and vowed to conquer, or to die.

"They think we're sold, but they'll find their mistake!  We'll get up at five on Monday morning
and have the thing in working trig before they have opened their silly eyes."

This programme being duly enacted, the telegraph stations remained for years as an outward
and visible sign of the only piece of work which Harry Garnett was ever known to accomplish
before the hour of his belated breakfast.

CHAPTER THREE.

AUNT MARIA.

Among the crowd of relations near and far most families possess one relation par excellence,
who stands out from all the rest by reason either of generosity, aggravatingness, or strength
of character. Sometimes this relation is an uncle; more often it is an aunt; almost invariably
he or she is unmarried or widowed, because the single state naturally allows more time and
energy for interests beyond the personal household. 

VIEW OF THE COLONNE DE JUILLET, 196

X. VINTAGE OF THE RHINE, 275

XI. VIEW OF A SWISS COTTAGE, 305

XII. NAPOLEON'S SARCOPHAGUS, 324

INTRODUCTION

One evening last winter a few private pupils were sitting in the study of their instructor,
when he stated his intention to pass the spring vacation in Europe, and his wish to have two or
three of his young friends as his travelling companions. An earnest and joyous desire was expressed
by each lad to enjoy the gratification, and in the course of a short period the arrangements were
made which afforded him the pleasure to assure three boys that they should accompany him. The
ages of the young travelers were twelve, fourteen, and sixteen. Their attention was immediately
directed to a course of reading adapted to prepare them for the beneficial
use of the proposed tour; and during its progress each boy kept a
journal, which was useful as a reference in the correspondence kept
up with friends and families at home.

A companion in study, left behind, and prevented by duty from joining the party, wished to have
constant advices of the movements of his friends; and the letters of the young travellers to
a lad of sixteen are, at the advice of many friends, now submitted
to the perusal of those at that age. No similar work is known to the
authors of these letters; and at the forthcoming gift season it is
hoped that the young of our country may be amused and gratified by
these reminiscences of other lands.

J.O. CHOULES.

NEWPORT, R.I.,
Nov. 25, 1851.

CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION.

LETTER I.

Arrival at New
York.

LETTER II.  This year the holiday promised to be even more blissful than usual, for
the Vernons had secured a second farmhouse, not ten minutes' walk from their own, and connected
with the sea by the same fascinating field-paths.  A farm and the sea!  Could there possibly
exist a more fascinating combination?  The young people sniffed in advance the two dear, distinctive
odours which, more than anything else, presented the scenes before them--the soft, cowy-milky
scent of the farm, the salt, sharp whiff of the brine.  From morn till night, at every available
moment, they discussed the day's programme--feeding animals, calling the cows, bathing, picnicking
on the sands, crab-hunting, mountain climbing. Excitement grew until it really seemed impossible
to exist through the intervening days, and then the bombshell fell!  A letter arrived by an
evening post, when Mr and Mrs Garnett were enjoying the one undisturbed hour of the day.  It
bore the Hayes crest, and was written in Aunt Maria's small, crabbed handwriting--

"My dear Emily,--

"I propose, all being well, to pay you a short visit from Tuesday to Thursday next, twelfth
to fifteenth instant.  Please let me have the same rooms as on my last visit.  I am at present
living on Benger's food, and must ask you to see that it is made freshly for each meal, in
a perfectly clean, enamelled saucepan.

"The chief object of my visit is to bring back one of your three daughters to stay with me
during the summer vacation.  I have been feeling somewhat lonely of late, and my doctor recommends
young society, so it has occurred to me that in obeying his instructions I might at the same
time afford pleasure and benefit to one of your family.  Should I become interested in the
child it might be to her advantage hereafter, but it must be understood that I can make no
promises on this point.

"The eighteen months which have elapsed since my last visit have somewhat dimmed my remembrance
of your girls, so that I must see them again before deciding as to which of the three I should
prefer as a companion.

"With love to William and yourself,--

"Believe me, my dear Emily,--

"Your affectionate Aunt,--

"Maria Hayes."

Mrs Garnett read this communication in silence, handed it to her husband, and watched him flush
and frown over the perusal.

"Does not even go through the form of asking our consent!"

"No!  That's Aunt Maria all over.  You could hardly imagine that she would.  Oh dear!  Oh dear!
I'm afraid, Will--I'm afraid she will have to go!"

"Poor little kiddie, yes!  How she will hate it!  Just at this moment when they are all wild
with joy at the thought of their holiday with the Vernons.  It seems positively brutal!"

"Oh, it does.  I am so sorry for her--whichever it may be--but one must sometimes be cruel
to be kind.  We can't afford--I am not mercenary, as you know--but with our means we can't
afford to refuse any possible advantage for our girls!  The sacrifice of a summer holiday ought
not to weigh against that."

"No, you're right, quite right.  So be it then.  Write and tell her to come, only I tell you
plainly my holiday's spoiled...  With Darsie gone--"

"Dear! she has not chosen yet."

"Dear! you know perfectly well--"

They looked at each other, smiling, rueful, half-ashamed.  It seemed like treason to the other
girls, this mutual acknowledgment that Darsie was the flower of the flock, the child of the
six to whom all strangers were attracted as by a magnet. Some of these are thoroughly accomplished
men, and, wherever they go, will reflect credit upon their country. In no country, perhaps, do young
men assume important trusts in commercial life at so early a period
as in America.



"There's one thing, Emily, you must tell her when it is settled! There'll be a tremendous scene.
I flatly refuse--"

"Very well, dear, very well; I'll do it.  But it's not decided yet, remember, and one can never
be sure.  I'd better break the idea to the girls before Aunt Maria comes, and let them get
over the first excitement.  To-night would be a good opportunity.  You will be out late, so
would be spared the scene!"

"Bless you, Emily!  I'm a coward, I know, but I should be grateful.  I can't answer for what
I should do if Darsie cried, and begged my protection.  Women have twice the pluck of men in
these affairs!"

Nevertheless it was with a quaking heart that Mrs Garnett broached the object of Aunt Maria's
proposition over the schoolroom tea that afternoon, and her nervousness was not decreased by
the smilingly unperturbed manner in which it was received.  Never, never for a moment did it
appear possible to the three girls that such a proposition could be seriously discussed.

"So likely!" sneered Clemence with a fine disdain.  "Give up all the fun and excitement of
the sea with the Vernons, to browse with Aunt Maria.  So likely, to be sure!"

"Poor dear old love!  She is deluded.  Thinks it would be a pleasure and benefit, does she.
I wouldn't take a thousand pounds--"

Thus Lavender.  Darsie went a step farther in tragic declamation.

"I'd drown myself first! LETTER V.

United States Minister in London.--His kind Attentions.--Crystal Palace.--London
of other Days.--Monument.--The Bridges.

LETTER VI.

Villages.--Camberwel.--Accidents
and Murders in England as common as in America.--Greenwich Fair.--Gypsies.
  Cows,
too!  I am sure there are cows--she used to keep a herd of Jerseys.  You could see them being
milked."

"Welsh cows are good enough for me.  I don't need Jerseys.  Or lawns! Give me the free, untrammelled
countryside!

