How hadst thou the heart to represent thine own individual self, with all thy motions, like
those of a great Dutch doll, depending on the pressure of certain springs, as duty, reflection,
and the like; without the impulse of which, thou wouldst doubtless have me believe thou wouldst
not budge an inch! But have I not seen Gravity out of his bed at midnight? and must I, in plain
terms, remind thee of certain mad pranks? Thou hadst ever, with the gravest sentiments in thy
mouth and the most starched reserve in thy manner, a kind of lumbering proclivity towards mischief,
although with more inclination to set it a-going than address to carry it through; and I cannot
but chuckle internally, when I think of having seen my most venerable monitor, the future president
of some high Scottish court, puffing, blowing, and floundering, like a clumsy cart-horse in
a bog where his efforts to extricate himself only plunged him deeper at every awkward struggle,
till some one--I myself, for example--took compassion on the moaning monster, and dragged him
out by mane and tail.

As for me, my portrait is, if possible, even more scandalously caricatured, I fail or quail
in spirit at the upcome! Where canst thou show me the least symptom of the recreant temper,
with which thou hast invested me (as I trust) merely to set off the solid and impassible dignity
of thine own stupid indifference? If you ever saw me tremble, be assured that my flesh, like
that of the old Spanish general, only quaked at the dangers into which my spirit was about
to lead it. Seriously, Alan, this imputed poverty of spirit is a shabby charge to bring against
your friend. I have examined myself as closely as I can, being, in very truth, a little hurt
at your having such hard thoughts of me, and on my life I can see no reason for them. I allow
you have, perhaps, some advantage of me in the steadiness and indifference of your temper;
but I should despise myself, if I were conscious of the deficiency in courage which you seem
willing enough to impute to me. However, I suppose, this ungracious hint proceeds from sincere
anxiety for my safety; and so viewing it, I swallow it as I would do medicine from a friendly
doctor, although I believed in my heart he had mistaken my complaint.

This offensive insinuation disposed of, I thank thee, Alan, for the rest of thy epistle. I
thought I heard your good father pronouncing the word Noble House, with a mixture of contempt
and displeasure, as if the very name of the poor little hamlet were odious to him, or as if
you had selected, out of all Scotland, the very place at which you had no call to dine. But
if he had had any particular aversion to that blameless village and very sorry inn, is it not
his own fault that I did not accept the invitation of the Laird of Glengallacher, to shoot
a buck in what he emphatically calls 'his country'? Truth is, I had a strong desire to have
complied with his lairdship's invitation. To shoot a buck! "It was curious to see," wrote Mrs.
Bronson, "how on each of his arrivals in Venice he took up his life precisely as he had left
it." Browning and his sister frequently went on Sundays to the Waldensian chapel, where in this
autumn there was a preacher of great eloquence. Every morning, after their early coffee, the
poet was off for a brisk walk, and after returning he busied himself with his letters and
newspapers, his mail always containing more or less letters from strangers and admirers, some
of whom solicited autographs, which, so far as possible, he always granted. Mrs. Bronson has somewhere
noted that when asked, viva voce, for an autograph, he would look puzzled, and say "I don't like to
always write the same verse, but I can only remember one," and he would then proceed to copy
"All that I know of a certain star," which, however it "dartles red and blue," he knew nothing
of save that it had "opened its soul" to him. Arthur Rogers, delivering the Bohlen lectures
for 1909, compared Browning with Isaiah, in his lecture on "Poetry and Prophecy," and he instanced
this "star" which "opened its soul" to the poet, as attesting that Browning, like Isaiah, could
do no more than search depths of life.

The Palazzo Giustiniani-Recanti was a fitting haunt for a poet. Casa Alvisi, adjoining, in which
Mrs. Bronson lived, looked out, as has been noted, on Santa Maria della Salute, which was on
the opposite side of the Grand Canal; but the Giustiniani palace, dating to the fifteenth century,
had its outlook through Gothic windows to the south, on a court and garden of romantic loveliness.
The perfect tact of their hostess left the poet and his sister entirely
free to come and go as they pleased, and at midday they took their
déjeuner together, ordering by preference Italian dishes, as rissotto,
macaroni, and fruits, especially figs and grapes. [Of Rob Roy we have had more than enough. Alan Cameron, commonly
called Sergeant Mhor, a freebooter of the same period, was equally remarkable for strength,
courage, and generosity.]

Now, from all I can understand, these ideas, as applied to the present state of the country,
are absolutely chimerical. The Pretender is no more remembered in the Highlands than if the
poor gentleman were gathered to his hundred and eight fathers, whose portraits adorn the ancient
walls of Holyrood; the broadswords have passed into other hands; the targets are used to cover
the butter churns; and the race has sunk, or is fast sinking, from ruffling bullies into tame
cheaters. Indeed, it was partly my conviction that there is little to be seen in the north,
which, arriving at your father's conclusions, though from different premisses, inclined my
course in this direction, where perhaps I shall see as little.

One thing, however, I HAVE seen; and it was with pleasure the more indescribable, that I was
debarred from treading the land which my eyes were permitted to gaze upon, like those of the
dying prophet from top of Mount Pisgah,--I have seen, in a word, the fruitful shores of merry
England; merry England! of which I boast myself a native, and on which I gaze, even while raging
floods and unstable quicksands divide us, with the filial affection of a dutiful son.

Thou canst not have forgotten, Alan--for when didst thou ever forget what was interesting to
thy friend?--that the same letter from my friend Griffiths, which doubled my income, and placed
my motions at my own free disposal, contained a prohibitory clause, by which, reason none assigned,
I was prohibited, as I respected my present safety and future fortunes, from visiting England;
every other part of the British dominions, and a tour, if I pleased, on the Continent, being
left to my own choice.--Where is the tale, Alan, of a covered dish in the midst of a royal
banquet, upon which the eyes of every guest were immediately fixed, neglecting all the dainties
with which the table was loaded? You'll remember where my little house is in De Vere Gardens'; and bidding
us a cordial good-bye, with a 'God bless you both,' he hastened away. We little thought, full
of life as he then was, that we should see him no more in this world."
 Thus, in seeking this extreme
boundary of the country which I am forbidden to tread, I resemble the poor tethered horse,
which, you may have observed, is always grazing on the very verge of the circle to which it
is limited by its halter.

Do not accuse me of romance for obeying this impulse towards the South; nor suppose that, to
satisfy the imaginary longing of an idle curiosity, I am in any danger of risking the solid
comforts of my present condition. Whoever has hitherto taken charge of my motions has shown
me, by convincing proofs more weighty than the assurances which they have witheld, that my
real advantage is their principal object. I should be, therefore, worse than a fool did I object
to their authority, even when it seems somewhat capriciously exercised; for assuredly, at my
age, I might--intrusted as I am with the care and management of myself in every other particular--expect
that the cause of excluding me from England should be frankly and fairly stated for my own
consideration and guidance. However, I will not grumble about the matter. I shall know the
whole story one day, I suppose; and perhaps, as you sometimes surmise, I shall not find there
is any mighty matter in it after all.

Yet one cannot help wondering--but plague on it, if I wonder any longer, my letter will be
as full of wonders as one of Katterfelto's advertisements. I have a month's mind, instead of
this damnable iteration of guesses and forebodings, to give thee the history of a little adventure
which befell me yesterday; though I am sure you will, as usual, turn the opposite side of the
spyglass on my poor narrative, and reduce, MORE TUO, to the most petty trivialities, the circumstance
to which thou accusest me of giving undue consequence. Hang thee, Alan, thou art as unfit a
confidant for a youthful gallant with some spice of imagination, as the old taciturn secretary
of Facardin of Trebizond. Nevertheless, we must each perform our separate destinies. I am doomed
to see, act, and tell; thou, like a Dutchman enclosed in the same diligence with a Gascon,
to hear, and shrug thy shoulders.

Of Dumfries, the capital town of this county, I have but little to say, and will not abuse
your patience by reminding you that it is built on the gallant river Nith, and that its churchyard,
the highest place of the old town, commands an extensive and fine prospect. Neither will I
take the traveller's privilege of inflicting upon you the whole history of Bruce poniarding
the Red Comyn in the Church of the Dominicans at this place, and becoming a king and patriot
because he had been a church-breaker and a murderer. The present Dumfriezers remember and justify
the deed, observing it was only a papist church--in evidence whereof, its walls have been so
completely demolished that no vestiges of them remain. They are a sturdy set of true-blue Presbyterians,
these burghers of Dumfries; men after your father's own heart, zealous for the Protestant succession--the
rather that many of the great families around are suspected to be of a different way of thinking,
and shared, a great many of them, in the insurrection of the Fifteen, and some in the more
recent business of the Forty-five. The town itself suffered in the latter era; for Lord Elcho,
with a large party of the rebels, levied a severe contribution upon Dumfries, on account of
the citizens having annoyed the rear of the Chevalier during his march into England.

Many of these particulars I learned from Provost C--, who, happening to see me in the market-place,
remembered that I was an intimate of your father's, and very kindly asked me to dinner. Pray
tell your father that the effects of his kindness to me follow me everywhere. I became tired,
however, of this pretty town in the course of twenty-four hours, and crept along the coast
eastwards, amusing myself with looking out for objects of antiquity, and sometimes making,
or attempting to make, use of my new angling-rod. There was a portrait of Browning painted when
a young man, with a troubadour cloak falling over his shoulders; and a most interesting portrait of
Milsand, painted by Barrett Browning, as a gift to his father.

There was also a picture of himself as a lad, the "Penini" of Siena days, mounted on his pony,
and painted by Hamilton Wild (a Boston artist), in that most picturesque of hill-towns, during
one of those summers that the Brownings and the Storys had passed in the haunts of Santa Caterina.

By
Mrs. Browning's little writing tablet was placed the last manuscript she had ever written;
and on a table lay a German translation of "Aurora Leigh," with an inscription of presentation
to Browning.

From one of these salons, looking out on the Grand Canal, is an alcove,
formerly used as the private chapel of the Rezzonico.

It was all white and gold, with a Venetian window draped in the palest green plush, while on either
side were placed tall vases encrusted with green.

On the first floor was the room in which the poet wrote when the guest of his son in the palace;
a sala empaneled with the most exquisite decorated alabaster, panels of which also formed the
doors, and opening from this was his sleeping-room, also beautifully decorated.

In one splendid sala, with rich mural decorations, and floor of black Italian marble, were many
choice works of art, rare souvenirs, pictures of special claim to interest, wonderful tapestries,
and almost, indeed, an embarras de richesse of beauty.

In 1906 Robert Barrett Browning sold the Rezzonico; and now, beside his casa and studios in Asolo,
he has one of the old Medici villas, near Florence,--"La Torre all' Antella," with a lofty tower,
from which the view is one of the most commanding and fascinating
in all Tuscany.

The panorama includes all Florence, with her domes and campanile and towers; and the Fiesolean
hills, with the old town picturesquely revealed among the trees and
against the background of sky, and with numerous other villages and
hamlets, and a mountain panorama of changing color always before the
eye. Mr. Browning is one of the choicest of spirits, with all that
culture and beauty of spiritual life that characterized his parents.
He is a great linguist, and is one of the most interesting of men.
No one knew his father, in that wonderful inner way, as did his son.
He was twelve years old at the time of his mother's death, and from
that period he was the almost constant companion of his father, until
Browning's death, twenty-eight years later. Apparently, he liked
fishing himself better than the trouble of instructing an awkward novice such as I; and in
hopes of exhausting my patience, and inducing me to resign the rod, as I had done the preceding
day, my friend contrived to keep me thrashing the water more than an hour with a pointless
hook. I detected this trick at last, by observing the rogue grinning with delight when he saw
a large trout rise and dash harmless away from the angle. I gave him a sound cuff, Alan; but
the next moment was sorry, and, to make amends, yielded possession of the fishing-rod for the
rest of the evening, he undertaking to bring me home a dish of trouts for my supper, in atonement
for his offences.

Having thus got honourably rid of the trouble of amusing myself in a way I cared not for, I
turned my steps towards the sea, or rather the Solway Firth which here separates the two sister
kingdoms, and which lay at about a mile's distance, by a pleasant walk over sandy knells, covered
with short herbage, which you call Links, and we English, Downs.

But the rest of my adventure would weary out my fingers, and must be deferred until to-morrow,
when you shall hear from me, by way of continuation; and, in the meanwhile, to prevent over-hasty
conclusions, I must just hint to you, we are but yet on the verge of the adventure which it
is my purpose to communicate.

LETTER IV

THE SAME TO THE SAME

SHEPHERD'S BUSH.

I mentioned in my last, that having abandoned my fishing-rod as an unprofitable implement,
I crossed over the open downs which divided me from the margin of the Solway. When I reached
the banks of the great estuary, which are here very bare and exposed, the waters had receded
from the large and level space of sand, through which a stream, now feeble and fordable, found
its way to the ocean. The whole was illuminated by the beams of the low and setting sun, who
showed his ruddy front, like a warrior prepared for defence, over a huge battlemented and turreted
wall of crimson and black clouds, which appeared like an immense Gothic fortress, into which
the lord of day was descending. His setting rays glimmered bright upon the wet surface of the
sands, and the numberless pools of water by which it was covered, where the inequality of the
ground had occasioned their being left by the tide.

The scene was animated by the exertions of a number of horsemen, who were actually employed
in hunting salmon. We were to be looked after first of all the passengers, and so got away early
enough to find things at home in excellent order.... I send a hasty line to try to express
the impossible,--how much I love you, and how deeply I feel all your
great kindness. The salmon,
to be sure, take the thing more quietly than the boars; but they are so swift in their own
element, that to pursue and strike them is the task of a good horseman, with a quick eye, a
determined hand, and full command both of his horse and weapon. The shouts of the fellows as
they galloped up and down in the animating exercise--their loud bursts of laughter when any
of their number caught a fall--and still louder acclamations when any of the party made a capital
stroke with his lance--gave so much animation to the whole scene, that I caught the enthusiasm
of the sport, and ventured forward a considerable space on the sands. The feats of one horseman,
in particular, called forth so repeatedly the clamorous applause of his companions, that the
very banks rang again with their shouts. He was a tall man, well mounted on a strong black
horse, which he caused to turn and wind like a bird in the air, carried a longer spear than
the others, and wore a sort of fur cap or bonnet, with a short feather in it, which gave him
on the whole rather a superior appearance to the other fishermen. He seemed to hold some sort
of authority among them, and occasionally directed their motions both by voice and hand: at
which times I thought his gestures were striking, and his voice uncommonly sonorous and commanding. 

On the first evening as I stepped outside our carriage for a moment, I caught sight of a well-known
face. 'Dr. Butler, surely.' You have heard of his marriage the other day to a learnedest of
young ladies, who beat all the men last year at Greek. The anxious thoughts which
haunt me began to muster in my bosom, and my feet slowly and insensibly approached the river
which divided me from the forbidden precincts, though without any formed intention, when my
steps were arrested by the sound of a horse galloping; and as I turned, the rider (the same
fisherman whom I had formerly distinguished) called out to me, in an abrupt manner, 'Soho,
brother! you are too late for Bowness to-night--the tide will make presently.'

I turned my head and looked at him without answering; for, to my thinking, his sudden appearance
(or rather, I should say, his unexpected approach) had, amidst the gathering shadows and lingering
light, something in it which was wild and ominous.

'Are you deaf?' he added--'or are you mad?--or have you a mind for the next world?'

'I am a stranger,' I answered,' and had no other purpose than looking on at the fishing--I
am about to return to the side I came from.'

'Best make haste then,' said he. 'He that dreams on the bed of the Solway, may wake in the
next world. "There had been that day a memorial meeting for Matthew Arnold, to
which Browning had been, and he spoke with reminiscent sadness of
Arnold's life.

"'I have been thinking all the way home of his hardships,' said Mr. Browning. 'He once told me,
when I asked why he had not recently written any poetry, that he
could not afford to, but that when he had saved enough, he intended
to give up all other work, and devote himself to poetry. I wonder
if he has turned to it now?' Browning added musingly."

These recollections grew more agitating, and, instead of walking deliberately, I began a race
as fast as I could, feeling, or thinking I felt, each pool of salt water through which I splashed,
grow deeper and deeper. At length the surface of the sand did seem considerably more intersected
with pools and channels full of water--either that the tide was really beginning to influence
the bed of the estuary, or, as I must own is equally probable, that I had, in the hurry and
confusion of my retreat, involved myself in difficulties which I had avoided in my more deliberate
advance. Either way, it was rather an unpromising state of affairs, for the sands at the same
time turned softer, and my footsteps, so soon as I had passed, were instantly filled with water.
I began to have odd recollections concerning the snugness of your father's parlour, and the
secure footing afforded by the pavement of Brown's Square and Scott's Close, when my better
genius, the tall fisherman, appeared once more close to my side, he and his sable horse looming
gigantic in the now darkening twilight. 

In response to an exclamation of surprise he said: "Oh, it's all in my head, but I shall write
it out presently." His hostess asked if he would not even say what inspired it, to which he returned:

"Well,
the birds twittering in the trees suggested it. You know I don't
like women to wear those things in their bonnets."

The poem in question proved to be "The Lady and the Painter."

Mr. Browning took the greatest enjoyment in the view from Mrs. Bronson's loggia.
 I was scarcely securely seated, ere he shook
the reins of his horse, who instantly sprang forward; but annoyed, doubtless, by the unusual
burden, treated us to two or three bounds, accompanied by as many flourishes of his hind heels.
The rider sat like a tower, notwithstanding that the unexpected plunging of the animal threw
me forward upon him. The horse was soon compelled to submit to the discipline of the spur and
bridle, and went off at a steady hand gallop; thus shortening the devious, for it was by no
means a direct path, by which the rider, avoiding the loose quicksands, made for the northern bank.

My friend, perhaps I may call him my preserver,--for, to a stranger, my situation was fraught
with real danger,--continued to press on at the same speedy pace, but in perfect silence, and
I was under too much anxiety of mind to disturb him with any questions. At length we arrived
at a part of the shore with which I was utterly unacquainted, when I alighted and began to
return in the best fashion I could my thanks for the important service which he had just rendered
me. 

Browning would often read aloud, and he loved to improvise on an old spinnet standing in a
dim recess in one of the salons. The great Venetian families were usually in villeggiatura
at the time when Browning was in Venice, so that he met comparatively
few of them; it was this freedom from social obligations that contributed
so much to the restful character of his sojourns, and enabled him
to give himself up to that ineffable enchantment of Venice.

He made a few friends, however, among Mrs. Bronson's brilliant circle, and one of the notable
figures among these was the old Russian noble and diplomat, Prince Gagarin, who, born in Rome,
had been educated in his own country, and had represented Russia
at the courts of Athens, Constantinople, and Turin.

 Once more the idea of thy father's fireside came across me; and I could
have been well contented to have swapped the romance of my situation, together with the glorious
independence of control which I possessed at the moment, for the comforts of that chimney-corner,
though I were obliged to keep my eyes chained to Erskine's LARGER INSTITUTES.

