At sea we had successes.  Frobin, with vessels more feeble than the four English ones of seventy
guns, which convoyed a fleet of eighteen ships loaded with provisions and articles of war,
took two of those vessels of war and the eighteen merchantmen, after four hours' fighting,
and set fire to one of the two others.  Three months after he took at the mouth of the Dwiria
seven richly-loaded Dutch merchant-ships, bound for Muscovy.  He took or sunk more than fifty
during this campaign. Afterwards he took three large English ships of war that he led to Brest,
and sank another of a hundred guns.  The English of New England and of New York were not more
successful in Acadia; they attacked our colony twelve days running, without success, and were
obliged to retire with much loss.

The maritime year finished by a terrible tempest upon the coast of Holland, which caused many
vessels to perish in the Texel, and submerged a large number of districts and villages.  France
had also its share of these catastrophes.  The Loire overflowed in a manner hitherto unheard
of, broke down the embankments, inundated and covered with sand many parts of the country,
carried away villages, drowned numbers of people and a quantity of cattle, and caused damage
to the amount of above eight millions.  This was another of our obligations to M. de la Feuillade--an
obligation which we have not yet escaped from.  Nature, wiser than man, had placed rocks in
the Loire above Roanne, which prevented navigation to that place, the principal in the duchy
of M. de la Feuillade.  His father, tempted by the profit of this navigation, wished to get
rid of the rocks.  Orleans, Blois, Tours, in one word, all the places on the Loire, opposed
this.  They represented the danger of inundations; they were listened to, and although the
M. de la Feuillade of that day was a favourite, and on good terms with M. Colbert, he was not
allowed to carry out his wishes with respect to these rocks.  His son, the M. de la Feuillade
whom we have seen figuring with so little distinction at the siege of Turin, had more credit.
Without listening to anybody, he blew up the rocks, and the navigation was rendered free in
his favour; the inundations that they used to prevent have overflowed since at immense loss
to the King and private individuals.  The cause was clearly seen afterwards, but then it was
too late.

The little effort made by the enemy in Flanders and Germany, had a cause, which began to be
perceived towards the middle of July.  We had been forced to abandon Italy.  By a shameful
treaty that was made, all our troops had retired from that country into Savoy.  We had given
up everything.  Prince Eugene, who had had the glory of driving us out of Italy, remained there
some time, and then entered the county of Nice.

Forty of the enemy's vessels arrived at Nice shortly afterwards, and landed artillery.  M.
de Savoie arrived there also, with six or seven thousand men.  It was now no longer hidden
that the siege of Toulon was determined on.  Every preparation was at once made to defend the
place. Tesse was in command.  The delay of a day on the part of the enemy saved Toulon, and
it may be said, France.  M. de Savoie had been promised money by the English.  They disputed
a whole day about the payment, and so retarded the departure of the fleet from Nice.  In the
end, seeing M. de Savoie firm, they paid him a million, which he received himself.  But in
the mean time twenty-one of our battalions had had time to arrive at Toulon.  They decided
the fortune of the siege.  After several unsuccessful attempts to take the place, the enemy
gave up the siege and retired in the night, between the 22nd and 23rd of August, in good order,
and without being disturbed.  Our troops could obtain no sort of assistance from the people
of Provence, so as to harass M. de Savoie in his passage of the Var.  They refused money, militia,
and provisions bluntly, saying that it was no matter to them who came, and that M. de Savoie
could not torment them more than they were tormented already.

The important news of a deliverance so desired arrived at Marly on Friday, the 26th of August,
and overwhelmed all the Court with joy.  A scandalous fuss arose, however, out of this event.
The first courier who brought the intelligence of it, had been despatched by the commander
of the fleet, and had been conducted to the King by Pontchartrain, who had the affairs of the
navy under his control.  The courier sent by Tesse, who commanded the land forces, did not
arrive until some hours after the other.  Chamillart, who received this second courier, was
piqued to excess that Pontchartrain had outstripped him with the news.  He declared that the
news did not belong to the navy, and consequently Pontchartrain had no right to carry it to
the King.  The public, strangely enough, sided with Chamillart, and on every side Pontchartrain
was treated as a greedy usurper.  Nobody had sufficient sense to reflect upon the anger which
a master would feel against a servant who, having the information by which that master could
be relieved from extreme anxiety, should yet withhold the information for six or eight hours,
on the ground that to tell it was the duty of another servant!

The strangest thing is, that the King, who was the most interested, had not the force to declare
himself on either side, but kept silent.  The torrent was so impetuous that Pontchartrain had
only to lower his head, keep silent, and let the waters pass.  Such was the weakness of the
King for his ministers.  I recollect that, in 1702, the Duc de Villeroy brought to Marly the
important news of the battle of Luzzara.  But, because Chamillart was not there, he hid himself,
left the King and the Court in the utmost anxiety, and did not announce his news until long
after, when Chamillart, hearing of his arrival, hastened to join him and present him to the
King.  The King was so far from being displeased, that he made the Duc de Villeroy Lieutenant-General
before dismissing him.

There is another odd thing that I must relate before quitting this affair.  Tesse, as I have
said, was charged with the defence of Toulon by land.  It was a charge of no slight importance.
He was in a country where nothing was prepared, and where everything was wanting; the fleet
of the enemy and their army were near at hand, commanded by two of the most skilful captains
of the day: if they succeeded, the kingdom itself was in danger, and the road open to the enemy
even to Paris.  A general thus situated would have been in no humour for jesting, it might
have been thought.  But this was not the case with Tesse.  He found time to write to Pontchartrain
all the details of the war and all that passed amongst our troops in the style of Don Quixote,
of whom he called himself the wretched squire and the Sancho; and everything he wrote he adapted
to the adventures of that romance.  Pontchartrain showed me these letters; they made him die
with laughing, he admired them so; and in truth they were very comical, and he imitated that
romance with more wit than I believed him to possess.  It appeared to me incredible, however,
that a man should write thus, at such a critical time, to curry, favour with a secretary of
state.  I could not have believed it had I not seen it.