 The Emperor desired
it also; and no one now holds a contrary opinion. All the works which I have read, written
by those persons best situated to learn the exact truth of these events, agree on this point.
It is known that his Majesty had dictated to the Duke of Bassano a letter in which he adhered
to the basis of the proposal for a new congress made at Frankfort by the allies.  It is also
known that the city of Mannheim was designated for the session of this new congress, to which
the Duke of Vicenza was to be sent.  The latter, in a note of the 2d of December, made known
again the adhesion of the Emperor to the original principles and summary to be submitted to
the Congress of Mannheim.  The Count de Metternich, on the 10th, replied to this communication
that the sovereigns would inform their allies of his Majesty's adhesion.  All these negotiations
were prolonged only on account of the allies, who finally declared at Frankfort that they would
not consent to lay down their arms.  On the 20th of December they openly announced their intention
to invade France by passing through Switzerland, whose neutrality had been solemnly recognized
by treaty.  At the period of which I speak, my position kept me, I must admit, in complete
ignorance of these affairs; but, on learning them since, they have awakened in me other remembrances
which have powerfully contributed to prove their truth.  Every one, I hope, will admit that
if the Emperor had really desired war, it is not before me he would have taken the trouble
to express his desire for the conclusion of peace, as I heard him do several times; and this
by no means falsifies what I have related of a reply given by his Majesty to the Prince of
Neuchatel, since in this reply he attributes the necessity of war to the bad faith of his enemies.
Neither the immense renown of the Emperor nor his glory needs any support from me, and I am
not deluding myself on this point; but I ask to be allowed like any other man to give my mite
of the truth.

I have said previously, that when passing through Mayence the Emperor had convened the Corps
Legislatif for the 2d of December; but by a new decree it was postponed until the 19th of that
month, and this annual solemnity was marked by the introduction of unaccustomed usages.  In
the first place, as I have said, to the Emperor alone was given the right of naming the president
without the presentation of a triple list, as was done in former times by the senate; moreover,
the senate and the council of state repaired in a body to the hall of the Corps Legislatif
to be present at the opening of the session.  I also remember that this ceremony was anticipated
with more than usual interest; since throughout Paris all were curious and eager to hear the
address of the Emperor, and what he would say on the situation of France.  Alas, we were far
from supposing that this annual ceremony would be the last.

The senate and the council of state, having taken the places indicated to them in the hall,
the Empress, arrived, and entered the reserved gallery, surrounded by her ladies and the officers
of her household.  At last the Emperor appeared, a quarter of an hour after the Empress, and
was introduced with the accustomed ceremonials.  When the new president, the Duke of Massa,
had taken the oath at the hands of the Emperor, his Majesty pronounced the following discourse:

     "Senators; Councilors of State; Deputies from the Departments to the
     Corps Legislatif:

     Brilliant victories have made the French arms illustrious in this
     campaign, but unexampled defections have rendered these victories
     useless.  Everything has turned against us.  Even France would be
     in danger were it not for the energy and union of the French people.

     Under these momentous circumstances my first thought was to summon
     you.  My heart felt the need of the presence and affection of my
     subjects.

     I have never been seduced by prosperity; adversity will find me
     above the reach of its attacks.  I have many times given peace to
     nations, even when they had lost all.  On a part of my conquests I
     have erected thrones for kings who have now abandoned me.

     I have conceived and executed great plans for the happiness of the
     world.  Both as a monarch and a father I feel that peace adds to the
     security of thrones and of families.  Negotiations have been entered
     into with the Confederated Powers.  I have adhered to the
     fundamental principles which they have presented.  I then hoped
     that, before the opening of this session, the Congress of Mannheim
     would have assembled; but renewed delays, which cannot be attributed
     to France, have deferred this moment, which the whole world so
     eagerly desires.

     I have ordered that all the original articles contained in the
     portfolio of Foreign Affairs should be submitted to you.  You will
     be informed of them through a committee.  The spokesmen of my
     Council will inform you of my wishes on this subject.

     Nothing has been interposed on my part to the re-establishment of
     peace; I know and share the sentiments of the French people.  I
     repeat, of the French people, since there are none among them who
     desire peace at the expense of honor.  It is with regret that I
     demand of this generous people new sacrifices, but they are
     necessary for their noblest and dearest interests.  I have been
     compelled to re-enforce my armies by numerous levies, for nations
     treat with security only when they display all their strength.  An
     increase of receipts has become indispensable.  The propositions
     which my minister of finance will submit to you are in conformity
     with the system of finance I have established.  We will meet all
     demands without borrowing, which uses up the resources of the
     future, and without paper money, which is the greatest enemy of
     social order.

     I am well satisfied with the sentiments manifested towards me under
     these circumstances by my people of Italy.

     Denmark, and Naples alone remain faithful to their alliance.  The
     Republic of the United States of America successfully continues its
     war with England.  I have recognized the neutrality of the nineteen
     Swiss cantons.

     Senators; Councillors of State; Deputies of the Departments in the
     Corps Legislatif:

     You are the natural organs of the throne.  It is your province to
     display an energy which will hold our country up to the admiration
     of all future generations.  Let it not be said of us: 'They
     sacrificed the first interests of their country; they submitted to
     the control which England has sought in vain for four centuries to
     impose on France.'

     "My people need not fear that the policy of their Emperor will ever
     betray the glory of the nation; and on my part I have the conviction
     that the French people will ever prove worthy of themselves and of
     me."

This address was received with unanimous shouts of "Vive l'Empereur;" and, when his Majesty
returned to the.  Tuileries, he had an air of intense satisfaction, although he had a slight
headache, which disappeared after half an hour's repose.  In the evening it was entirely gone,
and the Emperor questioned me on what I had heard people say.  I told, him truthfully that
the persons of my acquaintance unanimously agreed that the desire for peace was universal.
"Peace, peace!"  said the Emperor, "who can desire it more than I?  Go, my son, go."  I withdrew,
and his Majesty went to the Empress.

It was about this time, I do not remember the exact day, that the Emperor gave a decision on
a matter in which I had interested myself with him; and I affirm that it will be seen from
this decision what a profound respect his Majesty had for the rights of a legitimate marriage,
and his excessive antipathy to divorced persons.  But, in order to support this assertion,
I will give an anecdote which recurs to my memory at this moment.

During the Russian campaign General Dupont-Derval was slain on the battlefield, fighting valiantly.
His widow, after his Majesty's return to Paris, had often, but always in vain, endeavored to
present a petition to his Majesty describing her unfortunate condition.  At length some one
advised her to secure my services; and, touched by her unhappiness, I presented her demand
to the Emperor.  His Majesty but rarely refused my solicitations of this kind, as I conducted
them with the utmost discretion; and consequently I was fortunate enough to obtain for Madame
Dupont-Derval a very considerable pension.  I do not remember how the Emperor discovered that
General Dupont-Derval had been divorced, and had left a daughter by a former marriage, who,
as well as her mother, was still living.  He learned besides that General Dupont-Derval's second
wife was the widow of a general officer by whom she had two daughters. None of these circumstances,
as may be imagined, had been cited in the petition; but, when they came to the Emperor's knowledge,
he did not withdraw the pension, for which the order had not yet been given, but simply changed
its destination, and gave it to the first wife of--General Dupont-Derval, making it revertible
to her daughter, though she was sufficiently wealthy not to need it, and the other Madame Dupont-Derval
was in actual need.  Meanwhile, as one is always pleased to be the bearer of good tidings,
I had lost no time in informing my petitioner of the Emperor's favorable decision.  When she
learned what had taken place, of which I was still in entire ignorance, she returned to me,
and from what she said I imagined she was the victim of some mistake.  In this belief I took
the liberty of again speaking to his Majesty on the subject, and my astonishment may be imagined
when his Majesty himself condescended to relate to me the whole affair.  Then he added: "My
poor child, you have allowed yourself to be taken for a simpleton.  I promised a pension, and
I gave it to the wife of General Derval, that is to say, to his real wife, the mother of his
daughter."  The Emperor was not at all angry with me.  I know very well that the matter would
not have been permitted to continue thus without my interesting myself further in it; but events
followed each other in rapid succession until the abdication of his Majesty, and the affair
finally remained as thus settled.

CHAPTER XX.

It was not only by force of arms that the enemies of France endeavored at the end of 1813 to
overthrow the power of the Emperor.  In spite of our defeats the Emperor's name still inspired
a salutary terror; and it was apparent that although so numerous, the foreigners still despaired
of victory as long as there existed a common accord between the Emperor and the French people.
We have seen in the preceding chapter in what language he expressed himself to the great united
bodies of the state, and events have proved whether his Majesty concealed the truth from the
representatives of the nation as to the real condition of France.  To this discourse which
history has recorded, I may be allowed to oppose here another made at the same period.  This
is the famous declaration of Frankfort, copies of which the enemies of the Emperor caused to
be circulated in Paris; and I would not dare to wager that persons of his court, while performing
their duties near him, did not have a copy in their pockets.  If there still remains any doubt
as to which party was acting in good faith, the reading of what follows is sufficient to dispel
these; for there is no question here of political considerations, but simply the comparison
of solemn promises with the actions which succeeded.

     "The French government has just ordered a new levy of three hundred
     thousand men; the proclamations of the senate contain a challenge to
     the allied powers.  They find themselves called on again to
     promulgate to the world the views by which they are guided in this
     present war, the principles which form the basis of their conduct,
     their wishes, and their intentions.  The allied powers are not
     making war on France, but on the openly admitted preponderance
     which, to the great misfortune of Europe and France, the Emperor
     Napoleon has too long maintained outside the limits of his Empire.

     Victory has brought the allied armies to the Rhine.  The first use
     their imperial and royal Majesties have made of victory has been to
     offer peace to his Majesty the Emperor of the French.  A position
     reenforced by the accession of all the sovereigns and princes of
     Germany has had no influence on the conditions of this peace, for
     these conditions are founded on the independence of the other states
     of Europe.  The objects of these powers are just in their aims,
     generous and liberal in their application, reassuring to all, and
     honorable to each.

     The allied sovereigns desire that France should be great, strong,
     and happy, since its greatness and power is one of the foundations
     of the social edifice.  They desire that France should be happy,
     that French commerce should revive, that the arts, those blessings
     of peace, should flourish, because a great people are tranquil only
     when satisfied.  The powers confirm the French Empire in the
     possession of an extent of territory which France has never attained
     under her kings, since a generous nation should not be punished
     because it has experienced reverses in a bloody and well-contested
     struggle in which it has fought with its accustomed bravery.

     But the powers themselves also wish to be happy and peaceful.  They
     desire a condition of peace which, by a wise partition of force, by
     a just equilibrium, may hereafter preserve their people from the
     innumerable calamities which have for twenty years overwhelmed
     Europe.

     "The allied powers will not lay down their arms until they have
     obtained this grand and beneficent result, the worthy object of all
     their efforts.  They will not lay down their arms until the
     political condition of Europe is again secure; until immutable
     principles have regained their ascendency over new pretensions, and
     the sanctity of treaties has finally assured a genuine peace to
     Europe."

It needs only common sense to ascertain whether the allied powers were sincere in this declaration,
the object of which evidently was to alienate from the Emperor the affections of his people
by holding up his Majesty before them as an obstacle to peace, and separating his cause from
that of France; and on this point I am glad to support my own opinion by that of M. de Bourrienne,
whom surely no one will accuse of partiality for his Majesty.

Several passages of his Memoirs, above all those in which he blames the Emperor, have pained
me, I must confess; but on this occasion he does not hesitate to admit the insincerity of the
allies, which opinion is of much weight according to my poor judgment.

M. de Bourrienne was then at Paris under the special surveillance of the Duke of Rovigo.  I
frequently heard this minister mention him to the Emperor, and always favorably; but the enemies
of the former secretary of the First Consul must have been very powerful, or his Majesty's
prejudices very strong, for M. de Bourrienne never returned to favor. The Emperor, who, as
I have said, sometimes condescended to converse familiarly with me, never spoke to me of M.
de Bourrienne, whom I had not seen since the Emperor had ceased to receive him.  I saw him
again for the first time among the officers of the National Guard, the day these gentlemen
were received at the palace, as we shall see later, and I have never seen him since; but as
we were all much attached to him on account of his kind consideration for us, he was often
the subject of conversation, and, I may add, of our regrets.  Moreover, I was long ignorant
that at the period of which I am now speaking, his Majesty had offered him the mission to Switzerland,
as I learned this circumstance only from reading his Memoirs.  I would not conceal, however,
that I was painfully affected by reading this, so greatly would I have desired that Bourrienne
should overcome his resentment against his Majesty, who in the depths of his heart really loved
him.

Whatever was done, it is evident now to all that the object of the declaration of Frankfort
was to cause alienation between the Emperor and the French people, and subsequent events have
shown that this was fully understood by the Emperor, but unfortunately it was soon seen that
the enemy had partly obtained their object.  Not only in private society persons could be heard
expressing themselves freely in condemnation of the Emperor, but dissensions openly arose even
in the body of the Corps Legislatif.

After the opening session, the Emperor having rendered a decree that a commission should be
named composed of five senators and five members of the Corps Legislatif, these two bodies
consequently assembled.  This commission, as has been seen from his Majesty's address, had
for its object the consideration of articles submitted relative to pending negotiations between
France and the allied powers.  Count Regnault de Saint Jean d'Angely bore the decree to the
Corps Legislatif, and supported it with his usual persuasive eloquence, recalling the victories
of France and the glory of the Emperor; but the ballot elected as members of the commission
five deputies who had the reputation of being more devoted to the principles of liberty than
to the Emperor.  These were M. Raynouard, Laine, Gallois, Flaugergues, and Maine de Biran.
The Emperor from the first moment appeared much dissatisfied with this selection, not imagining,
however, that this commission would soon show itself so entirely hostile.  I remember well
that I heard his Majesty say in my presence to the Prince of Neuchatel, with some exasperation
though without anger, "They have appointed five lawyers."

Nevertheless, the Emperor did not allow the least symptoms of his dissatisfaction to be seen;
and as soon as he had officially received the list of commissioners, addressed to the President
of the Corps Legislatif the following letter bearing the date of the 23d of December:

     "MONSIEUR, Duke of Massa, President of the Legislative Corps:
     We address you the inclosed letter to make known to you our
     intention that you report to-morrow, the 24th instant, at the
     residence of our cousin the prince archchancellor of the Empire, in
     company with the commission appointed yesterday by the Legislative
     Corps in compliance with our decree of the 20th instant, and which
     is composed of the following gentlemen: Raynouard, Lain, Galiois,
     Flaugergues, and Maine de Biran, for the purpose of considering the
     articles relative to the negotiations, and also the declaration of
     the confederated powers, which will be communicated by Count
     Regnault minister of state, and Count d'Hauterive councilor of state
     attached to the department of foreign relations, who will be the
     bearer of the aforesaid articles and declaration.

     "Our intention also is that our cousin aforesaid should preside over
     this commission.  With this etc."

The members of the senate appointed on this commission were M. de Fontanel, M. the Prince of
Benevent, M. de Saint Marsan, M. de Barbe- Marbois, and M. de Beurnonville.

With the exception of one of these gentlemen, whose disgrace and consequent opposition were
publicly known, the others were thought to be sincerely attached to the Emperor; and whatever
may have been their opinions and their subsequent conduct they had done nothing then to deserve
the same distrust from the Emperor as the members of the committee from the Corps Legislatif.
No active opposition, no signs of discontent, had been shown by the conservative senate.

At this time the Duke of Rovigo came frequently, or I might rather say every day, to the Emperor.
His Majesty was much attached to him, and that alone suffices to prove that he was not afraid
to hear the truth; for since he had been minister, the Duke of Rovigo had never concealed it;
which fact I can affirm, having been frequently an eyewitness.  In Paris there was nevertheless
only unanimous opposition to this minister. I can, however, cite one anecdote that the Duke
of Rovigo has not included in his Memoirs, and of which I guarantee the authenticity; and it
will be seen from this incident whether or not the minister of police sought to increase the
number of persons who compromised themselves each day by their gratings against the Emperor.

Among the employees of the treasury was a former receiver of the finances who led a retired
and contented life in this modest employment.  He was a very enthusiastic man of much intelligence.
His devotion to the Emperor amounted to a passion, and he never mentioned him without a sort
of idolatry.  This employee was accustomed to pass his evenings with a circle of friends who
met in the Rue de Vivienne.  The regular attendants of this place, whom the police very naturally
had their eyes upon, did not all hold the same opinion as the person of whom I have just spoken,
and began openly to condemn the acts of government, the opposing party allowing their discontent
to be plainly manifest; and the faithful adorer of his Majesty became proportionately more
lavish of his expressions of admiration, as his antagonists showed themselves ready with reproaches.
The Duke of Rovigo was informed of these discussions, which each day became more eager and
animated; and one fine day our honest employee found on returning to his home a letter bearing
the seal of the general of police.  He could not believe his eyes.  He, a good, simple, modest
man living his retired life, what could the minister of general police desire of him?  He opens
the letter, and finds that the minister orders him to appear before him the next morning. 
He reports there as may be imagined with the utmost punctuality, and then a dialogue something
like this ensued between these gentlemen.  "It appears, Monsieur," said the Duke of Rovigo,
"that you are very devoted to the Emperor."--"Yes, I love him; I would give him my blood, my
life."--"You admire him greatly?"-- "Yes, I admire him!  The Emperor has never been so great,
his glory has never--"--"That is all very well, Monsieur; your sentiments do you honor, and
I share those sentiments with you; but I urge on you to reserve the expression of them for
yourself, for, though I should regret it very much, you may drive me to the necessity of having
you arrested."--"I, my Lord, have me arrested?  Ah!  but doubtless--why?"--"Do you not see
that you cause the expression of opinions that might remain concealed were it not for your
enthusiasm; and finally, you will force, many good men to compromise themselves to a certain
extent, who will return to us when things are in better condition.  Go, Monsieur, let us continue
to love, serve, and admire the Emperor; but at such a time as this let us not proclaim our
fine sentiments so loudly, for fear of rendering many guilty who are only a little misguided."
The employee of the treasury then left the minister, after thanking him for his advice and
promising to follow it.  I would not dare to assert that he kept his word scrupulously, but
I can affirm that all I have just said is the exact truth; and I am sure that if this passage
in my Memoirs falls under the eyes of the Duke of Rovigo it will remind him of an occurrence
which he may perhaps have forgotten, but which he will readily recall.

Meanwhile the commission, composed as I have said of five senators and five members of the
Corps Legislatif, devoted itself assiduously to the duty with which it was charged.  Each of
these two grand bodies of the state presented to his Majesty a separate address.  The senate
had received the report made by M. de Fontanes; and their address contained nothing which could
displease the Emperor, but was on the contrary expressed in most proper terms.  In it a peace
was indeed demanded, but a peace which his Majesty could obtain by an effort worthy of him
and of the French people.  "Let that hand so many times victorious," they said, "lay down its
arms after having assured the repose of the world."  The following passage was also noteworthy:
"No, the enemy shall not destroy this beautiful and noble France, which for fourteen hundred
years has borne itself gloriously through such diverse fortunes, and which for the interest
of the neighboring nations themselves should always bear considerable weight in the balance
of power in Europe.  We have as pledges of this your heroic constancy and the national honor."
Then again, "Fortune does not long fail nations which do not fail in their duty to themselves."

This language, worthy of true Frenchmen, and which the circumstances at least required, was
well pleasing to the Emperor, as is evident from the answer he made on the 29th of December
to the deputation from the senate with the prince archchancellor at its head:

"Senators," said his Majesty, "I am deeply sensible of the sentiments you express.  You have
seen by the articles which I have communicated to you what I am doing towards a peace.  The
sacrifices required by the preliminary basis which the enemy had proposed to me I have accepted;
and I shall make them without regret, since my life has only one object,--the happiness of
the French people.

"Meanwhile Bearn, Alsace, Franche-Comte, and Brabant have been entered, and the cries of that
part of my family rend my soul.  I call the French to the aid of the French!  I call the Frenchmen
of Paris, Brittany, Normandy, Champagne, Burgundy, and the other departments to the aid of
their brothers.  Will they abandon them in misfortune?  Peace and the deliverance of our territory
should be our rallying cry.  At the sight of this whole people in arms the foreigner will flee,
or will consent to peace on the terms I have proposed to him.  The question is no longer the
recovery of the conquests we have made."

It was necessary to be in a position to thoroughly know the character of the Emperor to understand
how much it must have cost him to utter these last words; but from a knowledge of his character
also resulted the certainty that it would have cost him less to do what he promised than to
say them.  It would seem that this was well understood in Paris; for the day on which the 'Moniteur'
published the reply of his Majesty to the senate, stocks increased in value more than two francs,
which the Emperor did not fail to remark with much satisfaction; for as is well known, the
rise and decline of stocks was with him the real thermometer of public opinion.

In regard to the conduct of the Corps Legislatif, I heard it condemned by a man of real merit
deeply imbued with republican principles.  He uttered one day in my presence these words which
struck me: "The Corps Legislatif did then what it should have done at all times, except under
these circumstances."  From the language used by the spokesman of the commission, it is only
too evident that the speaker believed in the false promises of the declaration of Frankfort.
According to him, or rather according to the commission of which he was after all only the
organ, the intention of the foreigners was not to humiliate France; they only wished to keep
us within our proper limits, and annul the effects of an ambitious activity which had been
so fatal for twenty years to all the nations of Europe.  "The propositions of the confederated
powers," said the commission, "seem to us honorable for the nation, since they prove that foreigners
both fear and respect us."  Finally the speaker, continuing his reading, having reached a passage
in which allusion was made to the Empire of the Lily, added in set phrase that the Rhine, the
Alps, the Pyrenees, and the two seas inclosed a vast territory, several provinces of which
had not belonged to ancient France, and that nevertheless the crown royal of France shone brilliantly
with glory and majesty among all other diadems.

At these words the Duke of Massa interrupted the speaker, exclaiming, "What you say is unconstitutional;"
to which the speaker vehemently replied, "I see nothing unconstitutional here except your presence,"
and continued to read his report.  The Emperor was each day informed of what took place in
the sitting of the Corps Legislatif; and I remember that the day on which their report was
read he, appeared much disturbed, and before retiring walked up and down the room in much agitation,
like one trying to make some important decision.  At last he decided not to allow the publication
of the address of the Corps Legislatif, which had been communicated to him according to custom.
Time pressed; the next day would have been too late, as the address would be circulated in
Paris, where the public mind was already much disturbed.  The order was consequently given
to the minister of general police to have the copy of the report and the address seized at
the printing establishment, and to break the forms already set up.  Besides this the order
was also given to close the doors of the Corps Legislatif, which was done, and the legislature
thus found itself adjourned.

I heard many persons at this time deeply regret that his Majesty had taken these measures,
and, above all, that having taken them he had not stopped there.  It was said that since the
Corps Legislatif was now adjourned by force, it was better, whatever might be the result, to
convoke another chamber, and that the Emperor should not recognize the members of the one he
had dismissed.  His Majesty thought otherwise, and gave the deputies a farewell audience. 
They came to the Tuileries; and there his only too just resentment found vent in these words:

