They are not good, the circumstances, to write an anodyne letter.   The hills and my house
at less than (boom) a minute's interval  quake with thunder; and though I cannot hear that
part of it,  shells are falling thick into the fort of Luatuanu'u (boom).  It is  my friends
of the CURACOA, the FALKE, and the BUSSARD bombarding  (after all these - boom - months) the
rebels of Atua.  (Boom-boom.)   It is most distracting in itself; and the thought of the poor
devils in their fort (boom) with their bits of rifles far from  pleasant.  (Boom-boom.)  You
can see how quick it goes, and I'll  say no more about Mr. Bow-wow, only you must understand
the  perpetual accompaniment of this discomfortable sound, and make  allowances for the value
of my copy.  It is odd, though, I can well  remember, when the Franco-Prussian war began, and
I was in Eilean  Earraid, far enough from the sound of the loudest cannonade, I  could HEAR
the shots fired, and I felt the pang in my breast of a  man struck.  It was sometimes so distressing,
so instant, that I  lay in the heather on the top of the island, with my face hid,  kicking
my heels for agony.  And now, when I can hear the actual  concussion of the air and hills,
when I KNOW personally the people  who stand exposed to it, I am able to go on TANT BIEN QUE
MAL with  a letter to James Payn!  The blessings of age, though mighty small,  are tangible.
I have heard a great deal of them since I came into  the world, and now that I begin to taste
of them - Well! With that word a much wider range was given to the act of 1815 on the reduction
which then took place than under the last act. The omission of it from the last act, together
with all the sanctions which were given by Congress to the construction
of the law in the reduction made under the former, could not fail
to dispel all doubt as to the extent of the power granted by the last
law and of the principles which ought to guide, and on which it was
thereby made the duty of the President to execute it.

  I see him instead jumping up in his  room
in Waterloo Place (where EX HYPOTHESI he is not), sitting on  the table, drawing out a very
black briar-root pipe, and beginning  to talk to a slim and ill-dressed visitor in a voice
that is good  to hear and with a smile that is pleasant to see.  (After a little  more than
half an hour, the voice that was ill to hear has ceased,  the cannonade is over.)  And I am
thinking how I can get an  answering smile wafted over so many leagues of land and water, and
can find no way.

I have always been a great visitor of the sick; and one of the sick  I visited was W. E. Henley,
which did not make very tedious visits,  so I'll not get off much purgatory for them.  That
was in the  Edinburgh Infirmary, the old one, the true one, with Georgius  Secundus standing
and pointing his toe in a niche of the facade;  and a mighty fine building it was!  And I remember
one winter's  afternoon, in that place of misery, that Henley and I chanced to  fall in talk
about James Payn himself.  I am wishing you could have  heard that talk!  I think that would
make you smile.  We had mixed  you up with John Payne, for one thing, and stood amazed at your
extraordinary, even painful, versatility; and for another, we found  ourselves each students
so well prepared for examinations on the  novels of the real Mackay.  Perhaps, after all, this
is worth  something in life - to have given so much pleasure to a pair so  different in every
way as were Henley and I, and to be talked of  with so much interest by two such (beg pardon)
clever lads!

