LETTERS ON DEMONOLOGY

AND WITCHCRAFT

BY

SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART.

With An Introduction By Henry Morley Ll.d., Professor Of English Literature At University College,
London

London George Routledge And Sons

Broadway, Ludgate Hill

New York: 9 Lafayette Place

1884

INTRODUCTION.

Sir Walter Scott's "Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft" were his contribution to a series
of books, published by John Murray, which appeared between the years 1829 and 1847, and formed
a collection of eighty volumes known as "Murray's Family Library." The series was planned to
secure a wide diffusion of good literature in cheap five-shilling volumes, and Scott's "Letters,"
written and published in 1830, formed one of the earlier books in the collection.

The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge had been founded in the autumn of 1826, and
Charles Knight, who had then conceived a plan of a National Library, was entrusted, in July,
1827, with the superintendence of its publications. Its first treatises appeared in sixpenny
numbers, once a fortnight. Its "British Almanac" and "Companion to the Almanac" first appeared
at the beginning of 1829. Charles Knight started also in that year his own "Library of Entertaining
Knowledge." John Murray's "Family Library" was then begun, and in the spring of 1832--the year
of the Reform Bill--the advance of civilization by the diffusion of good literature, through
cheap journals as well as cheap books, was sought by the establishment of "Chambers's Edinburgh
Journal" in the North, and in London of "The Penny Magazine."

In the autumn of that year, 1832, on the 21st of September, Sir Walter Scott died. The first
warning of death had come to him in February, 1830, with a stroke of apoplexy. He had been
visited by an old friend who brought him memoirs of her father, which he had promised to revise
for the press. He seemed for half an hour to be bending over the papers at his desk, and reading
them; then he rose, staggered into the drawing-room, and fell, remaining speechless until he
had been bled. Dieted for weeks on pulse and water, he so far recovered that to friends outside
his family but little change in him was visible. In that condition, in the month after his
seizure, he was writing these Letters, and also a fourth series of the "Tales of a Grandfather."
The slight softening of the brain found after death had then begun. But the old delight in
anecdote and skill in story-telling that, at the beginning of his career, had caused a critic
of his "Border Minstrelsy" to say that it contained the germs of a hundred romances, yet survived.
It gave to Scott's "Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft" what is for us now a pathetic charm.
Here and there some slight confusion of thought or style represents the flickering of a light
that flashes yet with its old brilliancy. There is not yet the manifest suggestion of the loss
of power that we find presently afterwards in "Count Robert of Paris" and "Castle Dangerous,"
published in 1831 as the Fourth Series of "Tales of My Landlord," with which he closed his
life's work at the age of sixty. Scott's life was a true poem, of which the music entered into
all he wrote. If in his earlier days the consciousness of an unlimited productive power tempted
him to make haste to be rich, that he might work out, as founder of a family, an ideal of life
touched by his own genius of romance, there was not in his desire for gain one touch of sordid
greed, and his ideal of life only brought him closer home to all its duties. Sir Walter Scott's
good sense, as Lord Cockburn said, was a more wonderful gift than his genius. When the mistake
of a trade connection with James Ballantyne brought ruin to him in 1826, he repudiated bankruptcy,
took on himself the burden of a debt of £130,000, and sacrificed his life to the successful
endeavour to pay off all. What was left unpaid at his death was cleared afterwards by the success
of his annotated edition of his novels. No tale of physical strife in the battlefield could
be as heroic as the story of the close of Scott's life, with five years of a death-struggle
against adversity, animated by the truest sense of honour. When the ruin was impending he wrote
in his diary, "If things go badly in London, the magic wand of the Unknown will be shivered
in his grasp. It was under pressure of calamity like this that Sir Walter Scott was compelled
to make himself known as the author of "Waverley." Closely upon this followed the death of
his wife, his thirty years' companion. Oh, my God!"

A few years yet of his own battle, while the shadows of night and death were gathering about
him, and they were re-united. In these "Letters upon Demonology and Witchcraft," addressed
to his son-in-law, written under the first grasp of death, the old kindliness and good sense,
joined to the old charm in story-telling, stand firm yet against every assault; and even in
the decay that followed, when the powers were broken of the mind that had breathed, and is
still breathing, its own health into the minds of tens of thousands of his countrymen, nothing
could break the fine spirit of love and honour that was in him.

Another volume of this Library may give occasion to recall Scott in the noontide of his strength,
companion of

"The blameless Muse who trains her sons
 For hope and calm enjoyment."

Here we remember only how from among dark clouds the last light of his genius shone on the
path of those who were endeavouring to make the daily bread of intellectual life--good books--common
to all.

                                              H.M.
February, 1884.

LETTERS

ON

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT

To J.G. LOCKHART, ESQ.

LETTER I.

    Origin of the general Opinions respecting Demonology among
    Mankind--The Belief in the Immortality of the Soul is the main
    inducement to credit its occasional re-appearance--The Philosophical
    Objections to the Apparition of an Abstract Spirit little understood
    by the Vulgar and Ignorant--The situations of excited Passion
    incident to Humanity, which teach Men to wish or apprehend
    Supernatural Apparitions--They are often presented by the Sleeping
    Sense--Story of Somnambulism--The Influence of Credulity contagious,
    so that Individuals will trust the Evidence of others in despite of
    their own Senses--Examples from the "Historia Verdadera" of Bernal
    Dias del Castillo, and from the Works of Patrick Walker--The
    apparent Evidence of Intercourse with the Supernatural World is
    sometimes owing to a depraved State of the bodily Organs--Difference
    between this Disorder and Insanity, in which the Organs retain their
    tone, though that of the Mind is lost--Rebellion of the Senses of a
    Lunatic against the current of his Reveries--Narratives of a
    contrary Nature, in which the Evidence of the Eyes overbore the
    Conviction of the Understanding--Example of a London Man of
    Pleasure--Of Nicolai, the German Bookseller and Philosopher--Of a
    Patient of Dr. Gregory--Of an Eminent Scottish Lawyer, deceased--Of
    this same fallacious Disorder are other instances, which have but
    sudden and momentary endurance--Apparition of Maupertuis--Of a late
    illustrious modern Poet--The Cases quoted chiefly relating to false
    Impressions on the Visual Nerve, those upon the Ear next
    considered--Delusions of the Touch chiefly experienced in
    Sleep--Delusions of the Taste--And of the Smelling--Sum of the
    Argument.

You have asked of me, my dear friend, that I should assist the "Family Library" with the history
of a dark chapter in human nature, which the increasing civilization of all well-instructed
countries has now almost blotted out, though the subject attracted no ordinary degree of consideration
in the older times of their history.

Among much reading of my earlier days, it is no doubt true that I travelled a good deal in
the twilight regions of superstitious disquisitions. Many hours have I lost--"I would their
debt were less!"--in examining old as well as more recent narratives of this character, and
even in looking into some of the criminal trials so frequent in early days, upon a subject
which our fathers considered as a matter of the last importance. And, of late years, the very
curious extracts published by Mr. Pitcairn, from the Criminal Records of Scotland, are, besides
their historical value, of a nature so much calculated to illustrate the credulity of our ancestors
on such subjects, that, by perusing them, I have been induced more recently to recall what
I had read and thought upon the subject at a former period.

As, however, my information is only miscellaneous, and I make no pretensions, either to combat
the systems of those by whom I am anticipated in consideration of the subject, or to erect
any new one of my own, my purpose is, after a general account of Demonology and Witchcraft,
to confine myself to narratives of remarkable cases, and to the observations which naturally
and easily arise out of them;--in the confidence that such a plan is, at the present time of
day, more likely to suit the pages of a popular miscellany, than an attempt to reduce the contents
of many hundred tomes, from the largest to the smallest size, into an abridgement, which, however
compressed, must remain greatly too large for the reader's powers of patience.

A few general remarks on the nature of Demonology, and the original cause of the almost universal
belief in communication betwixt mortals and beings of a power superior to themselves, and of
a nature not to be comprehended by human organs, are a necessary introduction to the subject.

The general, or, it may be termed, the universal belief of the inhabitants of the earth, in
the existence of spirits separated from the encumbrance and incapacities of the body, is grounded
on the consciousness of the divinity that speaks in our bosoms, and demonstrates to all men,
except the few who are hardened to the celestial voice, that there is within us a portion of
the divine substance, which is not subject to the law of death and dissolution, but which,
when the body is no longer fit for its abode, shall seek its own place, as a sentinel dismissed
from his post. Unaided by revelation, it cannot be hoped that mere earthly reason should be
able to form any rational or precise conjecture concerning the destination of the soul when
parted from the body; but the conviction that such an indestructible essence exists, the belief
expressed by the poet in a different sense, Non omnis moriar must infer the existence of many
millions of spirits who have not been annihilated, though they have become invisible to mortals
who still see, hear, and perceive, only by means of the imperfect organs of humanity. Probability
may lead some of the most reflecting to anticipate a state of future rewards and punishments;
as those experienced in the education of the deaf and dumb find that their pupils, even while
cut off from all instruction by ordinary means, have been able to form, out of their own unassisted
conjectures, some ideas of the existence of a Deity, and of the distinction between the soul
and body--a circumstance which proves how naturally these truths arise in the human mind. The
principle that they do so arise, being taught or communicated, leads to further conclusions.

These spirits, in a state of separate existence, being admitted to exist, are not, it may be
supposed, indifferent to the affairs of mortality, perhaps not incapable of influencing them.
It is true that, in a more advanced state of society, the philosopher may challenge the possibility
of a separate appearance of a disembodied spirit, unless in the case of a direct miracle, to
which, being a suspension of the laws of nature, directly wrought by the Maker of these laws,
for some express purpose, no bound or restraint can possibly be assigned. But under this necessary
limitation and exception, philosophers might plausibly argue that, when the soul is divorced
from the body, it loses all those qualities which made it, when clothed with a mortal shape,
obvious to the organs of its fellow-men. The abstract idea of a spirit certainly implies that
it has neither substance, form, shape, voice, or anything which can render its presence visible
or sensible to human faculties. But these sceptic doubts of philosophers on the possibility
of the appearance of such separated spirits, do not arise till a certain degree of information
has dawned upon a country, and even then only reach a very small proportion of reflecting and
better-informed members of society. To the multitude, the indubitable fact, that so many millions
of spirits exist around and even amongst us, seems sufficient to support the belief that they
are, in certain instances at least, by some means or other, able to communicate with the world
of humanity. The more numerous part of mankind cannot form in their mind the idea of the spirit
of the deceased existing, without possessing or having the power to assume the appearance which
their acquaintance bore during his life, and do not push their researches beyond this point.

Enthusiastic feelings of an impressive and solemn nature occur both in private and public life,
which seem to add ocular testimony to an intercourse betwixt earth and the world beyond it.
For example, the son who has been lately deprived of his father feels a sudden crisis approach,
in which he is anxious to have recourse to his sagacious advice--or a bereaved husband earnestly
desires again to behold the form of which the grave has deprived him for ever--or, to use a
darker yet very common instance, the wretched man who has dipped his hand in his fellow-creature's
blood, is haunted by the apprehension that the phantom of the slain stands by the bedside of
his murderer. In all or any of these cases, who shall doubt that imagination, favoured by circumstances,
has power to summon up to the organ of sight, spectres which only exist in the mind of those
by whom their apparition seems to be witnessed?

If we add, that such a vision may take place in the course of one of those lively dreams in
which the patient, except in respect to the single subject of one strong impression, is, or
seems, sensible of the real particulars of the scene around him, a state of slumber which often
occurs; if he is so far conscious, for example, as to know that he is lying on his own bed,
and surrounded by his own familiar furniture at the time when the supposed apparition is manifested,
it becomes almost in vain to argue with the visionary against the reality of his dream, since
the spectre, though itself purely fanciful, is inserted amidst so many circumstances which
he feels must be true beyond the reach of doubt or question. That which is undeniably certain
becomes, in a manner, a warrant for the reality of the appearance to which doubt would have
been otherwise attached. And if any event, such as the death of the person dreamt of, chances
to take place, so as to correspond with the nature and the time of the apparition, the coincidence,
though one which must be frequent, since our dreams usually refer to the accomplishment of
that which haunts our minds when awake, and often presage the most probable events, seems perfect,
and the chain of circumstances touching the evidence may not unreasonably be considered as
complete. Such a concatenation, we repeat, must frequently take place, when it is considered
of what stuff dreams are made--how naturally they turn upon those who occupy our mind while
awake, and, when a soldier is exposed to death in battle, when a sailor is incurring the dangers
of the sea, when a beloved wife or relative is attacked by disease, how readily our sleeping
imagination rushes to the very point of alarm, which when waking it had shuddered to anticipate.
The number of instances in which such lively dreams have been quoted, and both asserted and
received as spiritual communications, is very great at all periods; in ignorant times, where
the natural cause of dreaming is misapprehended and confused with an idea of mysticism, it
is much greater. Yet, perhaps, considering the many thousands of dreams which must, night after
night, pass through the imagination of individuals, the number of coincidences between the
vision and real event are fewer and less remarkable than a fair calculation of chances would
warrant us to expect. But in countries where such presaging dreams are subjects of attention,
the number of those which seemed to be coupled with the corresponding issue, is large enough
to spread a very general belief of a positive communication betwixt the living and the dead.

Somnambulism and other nocturnal deceptions frequently lend their aid to the formation of such
phantasmata as are formed in this middle state, betwixt sleeping and waking. A most respectable
person, whose active life had been spent as master and part owner of a large merchant vessel
in the Lisbon trade, gave the writer an account of such an instance which came under his observation.
He was lying in the Tagus, when he was put to great anxiety and alarm by the following incident
and its consequences. One of his crew was murdered by a Portuguese assassin, and a report arose
that the ghost of the slain man haunted the vessel. Sailors are generally superstitious, and
those of my friend's vessel became unwilling to remain on board the ship; and it was probable
they might desert rather then return to England with the ghost for a passenger. To prevent
so great a calamity, the captain determined to examine the story to the bottom. He soon found
that, though all pretended to have seen lights and heard noises, and so forth, the weight of
the evidence lay upon the statement of one of his own mates, an Irishman and a Catholic, which
might increase his tendency to superstition, but in other respects a veracious, honest, and
sensible person, whom Captain ----had no reason to suspect would wilfully deceive him. He affirmed
to Captain S---- with the deepest obtestations, that the spectre of the murdered man appeared
to him almost nightly, took him from his place in the vessel, and, according to his own expression,
worried his life out. He made these communications with a degree of horror which intimated
the reality of his distress and apprehensions. The captain, without any argument at the time,
privately resolved to watch the motions of the ghost-seer in the night; whether alone, or with
a witness, I have forgotten. As the ship bell struck twelve, the sleeper started up, with a
ghastly and disturbed countenance, and lighting a candle, proceeded to the galley or cook-room
of the vessel. He sate down with his eyes open, staring before him as on some terrible object
which he beheld with horror, yet from which he could not withhold his eyes. After a short space
he arose, took up a tin can or decanter, filled it with water, muttering to himself all the
while--mixed salt in the water, and sprinkled it about the galley. Finally, he sighed deeply,
like one relieved from a heavy burden, and, returning to his hammock, slept soundly. In the
next morning the haunted man told the usual precise story of his apparition, with the additional
circumstances, that the ghost had led him to the galley, but that he had fortunately, he knew
not how, obtained possession of some holy water, and succeeded in getting rid of his unwelcome
visitor. The visionary was then informed of the real transactions of the night, with so many
particulars as to satisfy him he had been the dupe of his imagination; he acquiesced in his
commander's reasoning, and the dream, as often happens in these cases, returned no more after
its imposture had been detected. In this case, we find the excited imagination acting upon
the half-waking senses, which were intelligent enough for the purpose of making him sensible
where he was, but not sufficiently so to judge truly of the objects before him.

But it is not only private life alone, or that tenor of thought which has been depressed into
melancholy by gloomy anticipations respecting the future, which disposes the mind to mid-day
fantasies, or to nightly apparitions--a state of eager anxiety, or excited exertion, is equally
favourable to the indulgence of such supernatural communications. The anticipation of a dubious
battle, with all the doubt and uncertainty of its event, and the conviction that it must involve
his own fate and that of his country, was powerful enough to conjure up to the anxious eye
of Brutus the spectre of his murdered friend Cæsar, respecting whose death he perhaps thought
himself less justified than at the Ides of March, since, instead of having achieved the freedom
of Rome, the event had only been the renewal of civil wars, and the issue might appear most
likely to conclude in the total subjection of liberty. It is not miraculous that the masculine
spirit of Marcus Brutus, surrounded by darkness and solitude, distracted probably by recollection
of the kindness and favour of the great individual whom he had put to death to avenge the wrongs
of his country, though by the slaughter of his own friend, should at length place before his
eyes in person the appearance which termed itself his evil genius, and promised again to meet
him at Philippi. Brutus' own intentions, and his knowledge of the military art, had probably
long since assured him that the decision of the civil war must take place at or near that place;
and, allowing that his own imagination supplied that part of his dialogue with the spectre,
there is nothing else which might not be fashioned in a vivid dream or a waking reverie, approaching,
in absorbing and engrossing character, the usual matter of which dreams consist. That Brutus,
well acquainted with the opinions of the Platonists, should be disposed to receive without
doubt the idea that he had seen a real apparition, and was not likely to scrutinize very minutely
the supposed vision, may be naturally conceived; and it is also natural to think, that although
no one saw the figure but himself, his contemporaries were little disposed to examine the testimony
of a man so eminent, by the strict rules of cross-examination and conflicting evidence, which
they might have thought applicable to another person, and a less dignified occasion.

Even in the field of death, and amid the mortal tug of combat itself, strong belief has wrought
the same wonder, which we have hitherto mentioned as occurring in solitude and amid darkness;
and those who were themselves on the verge of the world of spirits, or employed in dispatching
others to these gloomy regions, conceived they beheld the apparitions of those beings whom
their national mythology associated with such scenes. In such moments of undecided battle,
amid the violence, hurry, and confusion of ideas incident to the situation, the ancients supposed
that they saw their deities, Castor and Pollux, fighting in the van for their encouragement;
the heathen Scandinavian beheld the Choosers of the slain; and the Catholics were no less easily
led to recognize the warlike Saint George or Saint James in the very front of the strife, showing
them the way to conquest. Such apparitions being generally visible to a multitude, have in
all times been supported by the greatest strength of testimony. When the common feeling of
danger, and the animating burst of enthusiasm, act on the feelings of many men at once, their
minds hold a natural correspondence with each other, as it is said is the case with stringed
instruments tuned to the same pitch, of which, when one is played, the chords of the others
are supposed to vibrate in unison with the tones produced. If an artful or enthusiastic individual
exclaims, in the heat of action, that he perceives an apparition of the romantic kind which
has been intimated, his companions catch at the idea with emulation, and most are willing to
sacrifice the conviction of their own senses, rather than allow that they did not witness the
same favourable emblem, from which all draw confidence and hope. One warrior catches the idea
from another; all are alike eager to acknowledge the present miracle, and the battle is won
before the mistake is discovered. In such cases, the number of persons present, which would
otherwise lead to detection of the fallacy, becomes the means of strengthening it.

Of this disposition, to see as much of the supernatural as is seen by others around, or, in
other words, to trust to the eyes of others rather than to our own, we may take the liberty
to quote two remarkable instances.

The first is from the "Historia Verdadera" of Don Bernal Dias del Castillo, one of the companions
of the celebrated Cortez in his Mexican conquest. After having given an account of a great
victory over extreme odds, he mentions the report inserted in the contemporary Chronicle of
Gomara, that Saint Iago had appeared on a white horse in van of the combat, and led on his
beloved Spaniards to victory. It is very curious to observe the Castilian cavalier's internal
conviction that the rumour arose out of a mistake, the cause of which he explains from his
own observation; whilst, at the same time, he does not venture to disown the miracle. The honest
Conquestador owns that he himself did not see this animating vision; nay, that he beheld an
individual cavalier, named Francisco de Morla, mounted on a chestnut horse, and fighting strenuously
in the very place where Saint James is said to have appeared. But instead of proceeding to
draw the necessary inference, the devout Conquestador exclaims--"Sinner that I am, what am
I that I should have beheld the blessed apostle!"

The other instance of the infectious character of superstition occurs in a Scottish book, and
there can be little doubt that it refers, in its first origin, to some uncommon appearance
of the aurora borealis, or the northern lights, which do not appear to have been seen in Scotland
so frequently as to be accounted a common and familiar atmospherical phenomenon, until the
beginning of the eighteenth century. The passage is striking and curious, for the narrator,
Peter Walker, though an enthusiast, was a man of credit, and does not even affect to have seen
the wonders, the reality of which he unscrupulously adopts on the testimony of others, to whose
eyes he trusted rather than to his own. The conversion of the sceptical gentleman of whom he
speaks is highly illustrative of popular credulity carried away into enthusiasm, or into imposture,
by the evidence of those around, and at once shows the imperfection of such a general testimony,
and the ease with which it is procured, since the general excitement of the moment impels even
the more cold-blooded and judicious persons present to catch up the ideas and echo the exclamations
of the majority, who, from the first, had considered the heavenly phenomenon as a supernatural
weapon-schaw, held for the purpose of a sign and warning of civil wars to come.

"In the year 1686, in the months of June and July," says the honest chronicler, "many yet alive
can witness that about the Crossford Boat, two miles beneath Lanark, especially at the Mains,
on the water of Clyde, many people gathered together for several afternoons, where there were
showers of bonnets, hats, guns, and swords, which covered the trees and the ground; companies
of men in arms marching in order upon the waterside; companies meeting companies, going all
through other, and then all falling to the ground and disappearing; other companies immediately
appeared, marching the same way. I went there three afternoons together, and, as I observed,
there were two-thirds of the people that were together saw, and a third that saw not; and,
though I could see nothing, there was such a fright and trembling on those that did see, that
was discernible to all from those that saw not. There was a gentleman standing next to me who
spoke as too many gentlemen and others speak, who said, 'A pack of damned witches and warlocks
that have the second sight! the devil ha't do I see;' and immediately there was a discernible
change in his countenance. With as much fear and trembling as any woman I saw there, he called
out, 'All you that do not see, say nothing; for I persuade you it is matter of fact, and discernible
to all that is not stone-blind.' And those who did see told what works (i.e., locks) the guns
had, and their length and wideness, and what handles the swords had, whether small or three-barr'd,
or Highland guards, and the closing knots of the bonnets, black or blue; and those who did
see them there, whenever they went abroad, saw a bonnet and a sword drop in the way."[1]

[Footnote 1: Walker's "Lives," Edinburgh, 1827, vol. i. p. xxxvi. It is evident that honest
Peter believed in the apparition of this martial gear on the principle of Partridge's terror
for the ghost of Hamlet--not that he was afraid himself, but because Garrick showed such evident
marks of terror.]

This singular phenomenon, in which a multitude believed, although only two-thirds of them saw
what must, if real, have been equally obvious to all, may be compared with the exploit of the
humourist, who planted himself in an attitude of astonishment, with his eyes riveted on the
well-known bronze lion that graces the front of Northumberland House in the Strand, and having
attracted the attention of those who looked at him by muttering, "By heaven it wags! it wags
again!" contrived in a few minutes to blockade the whole street with an immense crowd, some
conceiving that they had absolutely seen the lion of Percy wag his tail, others expecting'
to witness the same phenomenon.

On such occasions as we have hitherto mentioned, we have supposed that the ghost-seer has been
in full possession of his ordinary powers of perception, unless in the case of dreamers, in
whom they may have been obscured by temporary slumber, and the possibility of correcting vagaries
of the imagination rendered more difficult by want of the ordinary appeal to the evidence of
the bodily senses. In other respects their blood beat temperately, they possessed the ordinary
capacity of ascertaining the truth or discerning the falsehood of external appearances by an
appeal to the organ of sight. Unfortunately, however, as is now universally known and admitted,
there certainly exists more than one disorder known to professional men of which one important
symptom is a disposition to see apparitions.

This frightful disorder is not properly insanity, although it is somewhat allied to that most
horrible of maladies, and may, in many constitutions, be the means of bringing it on, and although
such hallucinations are proper to both. The difference I conceive to be that, in cases of insanity,
the mind of the patient is principally affected, while the senses, or organic system, offer
in vain to the lunatic their decided testimony against the fantasy of a deranged imagination.
Perhaps the nature of this collision--between a disturbed imagination and organs of sense possessed
of their usual accuracy--cannot be better described than in the embarrassment expressed by
an insane patient confined in the Infirmary of Edinburgh. The poor man's malady had taken a
gay turn. The house, in his idea, was his own, and he contrived to account for all that seemed
inconsistent with his imaginary right of property--there were many patients in it, but that
was owing to the benevolence of his nature, which made him love to see the relief of distress.
He went little, or rather never abroad--but then his habits were of a domestic and rather sedentary
character. He did not see much company--but he daily received visits from the first characters
in the renowned medical school of this city, and he could not therefore be much in want of
society. With so many supposed comforts around him--with so many visions of wealth and splendour--one
thing alone disturbed the peace of the poor optimist, and would indeed have confounded most
bons vivants. "He was curious," he said, "in his table, choice in his selection of cooks, had
every day a dinner of three regular courses and a dessert; and yet, somehow or other, everything
he eat tasted of porridge." This dilemma could be no great wonder to the friend to whom the
poor patient communicated it, who knew the lunatic eat nothing but this simple aliment at any
of his meals. The case was obvious. The disease lay in the extreme vivacity of the patient's
imagination, deluded in other instances, yet not absolutely powerful enough to contend with
the honest evidence of his stomach and palate, which, like Lord Peter's brethren in "The Tale
of a Tub," were indignant at the attempt to impose boiled oatmeal upon them, instead of such
a banquet as Ude would have displayed when peers were to partake of it. Here, therefore, is
one instance of actual insanity, in which the sense of taste controlled and attempted to restrain
the ideal hypothesis adopted by a deranged imagination. But the disorder to which I previously
alluded is entirely of a bodily character, and consists principally in a disease of the visual
organs, which present to the patient a set of spectres or appearances which have no actual
existence. It is a disease of the same nature which renders many men incapable of distinguishing
colours; only the patients go a step further, and pervert the external form of objects. In
their case, therefore, contrary to that of the maniac, it is not the mind, or rather the imagination,
which imposes upon and overpowers the evidence of the senses, but the sense of seeing (or hearing)
which betrays its duty and conveys false ideas to a sane intellect.

More than one learned physician, who have given their attestations to the existence of this
most distressing complaint, have agreed that it actually occurs, and is occasioned by different
causes. The most frequent source of the malady is in the dissipated and intemperate habits
of those who, by a continued series of intoxication, become subject to what is popularly called
the Blue Devils, instances of which mental disorder may be known to most who have lived for
any period of their lives in society where hard drinking was a common vice. The joyous visions
suggested by intoxication when the habit is first acquired, in time disappear, and are supplied
by frightful impressions and scenes, which destroy the tranquillity of the unhappy debauchee.
Apparitions of the most unpleasant appearance are his companions in solitude, and intrude even
upon his hours of society: and when by an alteration of habits, the mind is cleared of these
frightful ideas, it requires but the slightest renewal of the association to bring back the
full tide of misery upon the repentant libertine.

Of this the following instance was told to the author by a gentleman connected with the sufferer.
A young man of fortune, who had led what is called so gay a life as considerably to injure
both his health and fortune, was at length obliged to consult the physician upon the means
of restoring, at least, the former. One of his principal complaints was the frequent presence
of a set of apparitions, resembling a band of figures dressed in green, who performed in his
drawing-room a singular dance, to which he was compelled to bear witness, though he knew, to
his great annoyance, that the whole corps de ballet existed only in his own imagination. His
physician immediately informed him that he had lived upon town too long and too fast not to
require an exchange to a more healthy and natural course of life. He therefore prescribed a
gentle course of medicine, but earnestly recommended to his patient to retire to his own house
in the country, observe a temperate diet and early hours, practising regular exercise, on the
same principle avoiding fatigue, and assured him that by doing so he might bid adieu to black
spirits and white, blue, green, and grey, with all their trumpery. The patient observed the
advice, and prospered. His physician, after the interval of a month, received a grateful letter
from him, acknowledging the success of his regimen. The greens goblins had disappeared, and
with them the unpleasant train of emotions to which their visits had given rise, and the patient
had ordered his town-house to be disfurnished and sold, while the furniture was to be sent
down to his residence in the country, where he was determined in future to spend his life,
without exposing himself to the temptations of town. One would have supposed this a well-devised
scheme for health. But, alas! no sooner had the furniture of the London drawing-room been placed
in order in the gallery of the old manor-house, than the former delusion returned in full force:
the green figurantés, whom the patient's depraved imagination had so long associated with these
moveables, came capering and frisking to accompany them, exclaiming with great glee, as if
the sufferer should have been rejoiced to see them, "Here we all are--here we all are!" The
visionary, if I recollect right, was so much shocked at their appearance, that he retired abroad,
in despair that any part of Britain could shelter him from the daily persecution of this domestic
ballet.

There is reason to believe that such cases are numerous, and that they may perhaps arise not
only from the debility of stomach brought on by excess in wine or spirits, which derangement
often sensibly affects the eyes and sense of sight, but also because the mind becomes habitually
predominated over by a train of fantastic visions, the consequence of frequent intoxication;
and is thus, like a dislocated joint, apt again to go wrong, even when a different cause occasions
the derangement.

It is easy to be supposed that habitual excitement by means of any other intoxicating drug,
as opium, or its various substitutes, must expose those who practise the dangerous custom to
the same inconvenience. Very frequent use of the nitrous oxide which affects the senses so
strongly, and produces a short but singular state of ecstasy, would probably be found to occasion
this species of disorder. But there are many other causes which medical men find attended with
the same symptom, of embodying before the eyes of a patient imaginary illusions which are visible
to no one else. This persecution of spectral deceptions is also found to exist when no excesses
of the patient can be alleged as the cause, owing, doubtless, to a deranged state of the blood
or nervous system.

