  William and Samuel Whitwell and their families were members of the
  Old South Church, and all were friends of the Winslows and Demings.
  William Whitwell was born September 3, 1714, died April 10, 1795.
  He was a prosperous merchant, an estimable and useful citizen, and
  church member. His first wife was Rebecca Keayne, his second
  Elizabeth Scott (or Swett), who died May 13, 1771; his third, the
  widow of Royal Tyler. The Mrs. Whitwell here referred to must have
  been Mrs. Samuel Whitwell, for William Whitwell just at that
  interval was a widower. Samuel Whitwell was born December 17, O.S.
  1717, died June 8, 1801. His first wife was Elizabeth Kelsey; his
  second, Sarah Wood; his third, Mary Smith.

  NOTE 8.

  Polly Deming was a niece of John Deming.

  NOTE 9.

  Miss Polly Glover was Mary Glover, born in Boston, October 12, 1758,
  baptized at the Old South Church, married to Deacon James Morrell,
  of the Old South, on April 23, 1778, and died April 3, 1842. She was
  the daughter of Nathaniel Glover (who was born May 16, 1704, in
  Dorchester; died December, 1773), and his wife, Anne Simpson. They
  were married in 1750. Nathaniel Glover was a graduate of Harvard,
  and a wealthy man; partner first of Thomas Hancock, and then of John
  Hancock.

  NOTE 10.

  Miss Bessy Winslow was Elizabeth, Anna's cousin, who was then about
  ten years old. See Note 5.

  NOTE 11.

  Miss Nancy or Anne Glover was Mary Glover's sister. See Note 9. She
  was born in Boston, March 28, 1753, baptized in the Old South
  Church, died in Roxbury, August, 1797. The Island was immediately surrounded
  by soldiers, who passed the night there, and threatened to fire the
  neighbouring cotts.

  As they were going away, one of them espied the skirt of the Duke's
coat, and seized him.

  The soldier no sooner knew him, than he burst into tears, and reproached
  himself for the unhappy discovery. The Duke when taken was quite exhausted
  with fatigue and hunger, having had no food since the battle but
  the peas which he had gathered in the field. The ash tree is still
  standing under which the Duke was apprehended, and is marked
  with the initials of many of his friends who afterwards visited
  the spot.
  
  "The family of the woman who betrayed him were ever after holden in
  the greatest detestation, and are said to have fallen into decay,
and to have never thriven afterwards. The letters speak so plainly of the formal honor and respect
  paid by all well-bred persons of the day to their elders, even
  though familiar kinsfolk, that I quote one, which contains much
  family news:--

  BOSTON, Feb. 17th, 1780.

  I thank you my dear Aunt for your kind Epistles of April 9th & Nov'r
  10th, the kind interestedness you yet continue to take in my concerns
  merits the warmest returns of Gratitude.

  The Particular circumstances you wish to know I shall with pleasure
  inform you of--Mr. Coverly is the youngest son of a Worthy Citizen
  late of this town but his Parents are now no more. His age is
  thirty-five. His Occupation a Shopkeeper who imports his own goods.
  And if you should wish to know who of your acquaintance he
  resembles, Madam, I would answer He has been taken for our Minister
  Mr Eckley, by whom we were married in my Aunt Demings sick chamber
  the 27th of Nov'r last twelve months since. He has two Brothers who
  both reside in town. I have been remarkably favor'd the last year as
  to my health & we are blest likewise with a fine little Daughter
  between 4 & 5 months old, very healthy, which we have named
  Elizabeth for its Grandmamas and an Aunt of each side. My Brother
  call'd today & inform'd me that M^r Powell intended setting out
  tomorrow for Quebeck & left a Letter for you which I shall send with
  this. He is almost if not quite as big as my uncle was last time I
  saw him--he was well & his family, he has three sons, the youngest
  about eleven months old, he has buried one.

  In your last you mention both my Uncle & yourself as not enjoying so
  great a share of health. I hope by this time you have each regain'd
  that blessing more perfectly. Be pleased with him My Dear Aunt to
  accept My Duty in which Mr Coverly joins me.

  My Sister was very well last week & her son John who is a fine child
  about 3 months old. Capt. Holland has purchas'd a house near fort
  hill which has remov'd her to a greater distance from me. She is now
  gone to the West-indies, she is connected in a family that are all
  very fond of her. We expect soon to remove. M^r Coverly has taken a
  lease of a house for some years belonging to M^r John Amory, you
  will please to direct your next for us in Cornhill N^o 10, I shall
  have the pleasure of your friend M^rs Whitwell for my next neighbor
  there. I had not the pleasure of seeing M^r Freeman whiles here
  altho' I expected it, as his brother promis'd to wait on him here.

  In one of your kind Epistles, Madam, you mention'd some of your
  Movables which you would wish me to take possession of which were at
  my Uncle Demings. The Memorandum you did not send me & my Uncle
  Deming has none nor knows of any thing but a great wheel.

  He is now maried to the Widow Sebry who is very much lik'd and
  appears to be a Gentlewoman, they were very well today. My Aunt
  Mason was to see me a few weeks since with M^rs Coburn M^rs Scolly &
  Miss Becky Scolly from Middleborough. M^rs Scolly has since married
  her youngest daughter to M^r Prentice, Minister of Medfield.

  Please to give my Love to Cousin Sally Deming if she is yet with you
  I hope she has regain'd her usual health. I should be very glad to
  be inform'd how her Mamma is & where & her family.

  Be pleased to continue your Indulgence, as your Epistles My Dear
  Aunt will at all times be most gratefully receiv'd by

  Y^r Oblidg'd Niece

  Sarah Coverly.

  NOTE 13.

  Josiah Waters, Jr., was the son of Josiah and Abigail Dawes Waters.
  The latter lived to be ninety-five years old. Josiah Sr. was a
  captain in the Artillery Company in 1769, and Josiah Jr. in 1791.
  The latter married, on March 14, 1771, Mary, daughter of William and
  Elizabeth Whitwell. See Note 7. Their child, Josiah Waters, tertius,
  born December 29, 1771, lived till August 4, 1818. He was a Latin
  School boy, and in the class with Josiah Quincy at Harvard.

  NOTE 14.

  The life of this slave-girl Lucinda was a fair example of the gentle
  form of slavery which existed till this century in our New England
  States. From an old paper written by a daughter of Gen. John
  Winslow, I quote her description of this girl:--

  "Lucinda was born in Africa and purchased by M^rs Deming when she
  was about seven years of age. She was cherished with care and
  affection by the family, and at Mrs. Demings death was 'given her
  freedom.' From that time she chose to make her home with 'Master
  John' (the late Gen. John Winslow, of Boston), a nephew of M^rs
  Demings--at his house she died after some years. The friends of the
  Winslow family attended her funeral; her pastor the Rev D^r Eckley
  of the Old South and Gen. W. walking next the hearse as chief
  mourners. A few articles belonging to her are preserved in the
  family as memorials of one who was a beloved member of the household
  in the olden time."

  Lucinda figures in Mrs. Deming's account of her escape from besieged
  Boston in 1775, and was treated with as much consideration as was
  Sally, the niece; for her mistress remained behind for a time at
  Wrentham; rather than to allow Lucinda to ride outside the coach in
  the rain.

  In a letter written by Sally Coverly, August 6, 1795, to Mrs. Joshua
  Winslow, at Quebec, she says: "You enquire about Lucinda, she is
  very much gratified by it. She has lived with my Brother this ten
  years and is very good help in their family."

  NOTE 15.

  The "Miss Sheafs" were Nancy and Mary Sheaffe, youngest daughters of
  William Sheaffe, who had recently died, leaving a family of four
  sons and six daughters. He had been deputy collector of customs
  under Joseph Harrison, the last royal collector of the port. He left
  his family penniless, and a small shop was stocked by friends for
  Mrs Sheaffe. I have often seen her advertisements in Boston
  newspapers.

  Mrs. Sheaffe was Susanna Child, daughter of Thomas Child, an
  Englishman, one of the founders of Trinity Church. She lived till
  1811. The ten children grew up to fill dignified positions in life.
  One son was Sir Roger Hale Sheaffe. Susanna, at the age of fifteen,
  made a most romantic runaway match with an English officer, Capt.
  Ponsonby Molesworth. Margaret married John R. Livingstone; she was a
  great beauty. Lafayette, on his return to France, sent her a satin
  cardinal lined with ermine, and an elegant gown. Helen married James
  Lovell. (See Note 52.) Nancy, or Anne Sheaffe, married, in
  September, 1786, John Erving, Jr., a nephew of Governor Shirley, and
  died young, leaving three children,--Maria, Frances, and Major John
  Erving. Mary married Benj. Cutler, high sheriff of Boston, and died
  December 8, 1784, leaving no children. These Sheaffes were nearly
  all buried in the Child tomb in Trinity Church.

  NOTE 16.

  Governor Matthew Griswold was born March 25, 1714, died April 28,
  1799. He married, on Nov. 10, 1743, his second cousin, Ursula
  Wolcott, daughter of Gov. Roger Wolcott. A very amusing story is
  told of their courtship. Governor Griswold in early life wished to
  marry a young lady in Durham, Conn. She was in love with a
  physician, whom she hoped would propose to her, and in the mean time
  was unwilling to give up her hold upon her assured lover. At last
  the governor, tired of being held in an uncertainty, pressed her for
  a definite answer. She pleaded that she wished for more time, when
  he rose with dignity and answered her, "I will give you a lifetime."
  This experience made him extremely shy, and when thrown with his
  cousin Ursula he made no advance towards love-making. At last when
  she was nineteen and he ten years older she began asking him on
  every occasion, "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and he would
  answer her quietly, "Nothing." At last she asked him impatiently,
  "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and when he answered again
  "Nothing," she replied sharply, "Well, it's time you did,"--and he
  did.

  Their daughter Ursula, the visitor at Mrs. Deming's, was born April
  13, 1754, and was a great beauty. She married, in November 22, 1777,
  her third cousin, Lynde McCurdy, of Norwich, Conn.

  NOTE 17.

  "Unkle Joshua" was Joshua Green, born in Boston, May 17, 1731,
  "Monday 1/2 past 9 oclock in the morn^g" and died in Wendell, Mass.,
  on September 2, 1811. He attended the Boston Latin School in 1738,
  and was in the class of 1749 at Harvard. He married, as did his
  brother and sister, a Storer--Hannah, daughter of Ebenezer and Mary
  Edwards Storer--on October 7, 1762. After his marriage he lived in
  Court Street, the third house south of Hanover Street. His wife
  Hannah was for many years before and after her marriage--as was her
  mother--the intimate friend and correspondent of Abigail Adams, wife
  of John Adams. Some of their letters may be found in the Account of
  Percival and Ellen Green and Some of their Descendants, written by
  Hon. Samuel Abbott Green, who is a great-grandson of Joshua and
  Hannah Green.

  NOTE 18.

  Madam Storer was Mary Edwards Storer, the widow of Ebenezer Storer,
  a Boston merchant. She was the mother of Anna's uncle Ebenezer
  Storer, of her aunt Hannah Storer Green, and of her aunt Mary Storer
  Green. See Notes 19, 32, 59.

  NOTE 19.

  Miss Caty Vans was the granddaughter of Hugh Vans, a merchant of
  Boston, who became a member of the Old South Church in 1728. He was
  born in Ayr, Scotland, in 1699. He married Mary Pemberton, daughter
  of Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton, and died in Boston in 1763. They had
  four sons, John, Ebenezer, Samuel, and William. One of the first
  three was the father of Caty Vans, who was born January 18, 1770.
  There are frequent references to her throughout the diary, but I
  know nothing of her life. William Vans married Mary Clarke, of
  Salem, and had one son, William, and one daughter, Rebecca, who
  married Captain Jonathan Carnes. The Vans family Bible is in the
  library of the Essex Institute.

  NOTE 20.

  In the cordial hatred of the Puritans for Christmas Anna heartily
  joined. It was not till this century that in New England cheerful
  merriment and the universal exchange of gifts marked the day as a
  real holiday.

  NOTE 21.

  "Aunt Sukey" was Susanna Green, born July 26, 1744, died November
  10, 1775. She married, on October 18, 1769, her cousin, Francis
  Green. The little child Charles, of whom Anna writes, proved to be a
  deaf-mute, and was drowned near Halifax in 1787. Francis Green had
  two deaf-mute children by a second wife, and became prominent
  afterwards in Massachusetts for his interest in and promotion of
  methods in instructing the deaf. In a letter of George Green's,
  dated Boston, July 23, 1770, we read: "Frank Green was married to
  Sukey in October last and they live next house to Mrs Storers." From
  another, dated December 5, 1770: "Frank keeps a ship going between
  here & London, but I believe understands little of the matter,
  having never been bred to business wch was one great objection with
  my father to his courting Sukey." I think he must have developed
  into a capable business man, for I have frequently seen his business
  advertisements in Boston newspapers of his day. Anna's mother
  bequeathed seven hundred and fifty dollars to Francis Green in her
  will. He was a man universally esteemed in the community.

  NOTE 22.

  Dr. Samuel Cooper was born March 28, 1725; died December 29, 1783.
  He graduated at Harvard in 1743, and became pastor of the Brattle
  Street Congregational Church, of Boston. He was a brilliant
  preacher, an ardent patriot, the intimate friend of John Adams and
  Benjamin Franklin, and a very handsome man.

  NOTE 23.

  Master Holbrook was Samuel Holbrook, Anna's writing-master, one of a
  highly honored family of Boston writing teachers. Perhaps the best
  known of this family was Abiah Holbrook. In the Boston Gazette of
  January 30, 1769, I find this notice:--

  "Last Friday morning died Mr Abiah Holbrook in the 51st year of his
  Age, Master of the South Writing School in this Town. He was looked
  upon by the Best Judges as the Greatest Master of the Pen we have
  ever had among us, of which he has left a most beautiful
  Demonstration. He was indefatigable in his labours, successful in
  his Instructions, an Honour to the Town and to crown all an Ornament
  to the Religion of Jesus. His Funeral is to be Attended Tomorrow
  Afternoon at Four Oclock."

  The "beautiful Demonstration" of his penmanship which he left behind
  him was a most intricate piece of what was known as "fine knotting"
  or "knot work." It was written in "all the known hands of Great
  Britain." This work occupied every moment of what Abiah Holbrook
  called his "spare time" for seven years. It was valued at £100. It
  was bequeathed to Harvard College, unless his wife should need the
  money which could be obtained from selling it. If this were so, she
  was to offer it first for purchase to John Hancock. Abiah was a
  stanch patriot.

  Samuel Holbrook was a brother of Abiah. He began teaching in 1745,
  when about eighteen years old. A petition of Abiah, dated March 10,
  1745-46, sets forth that his school had two hundred and twenty
  scholars (Well may his funeral notice say that he was indefatigable
  in his labors!), that finding it impossible to properly instruct
  such a great number, he had appointed his brother to teach part of
  them and had paid his board for seven months, else some of the
  scholars must have been turned off without any instruction. He
  therefore prayed the town to grant him assistance. Think of one
  master for such a great school! In 1750 Samuel Holbrook's salary as
  usher of the South Writing School was fifty pounds per annum.

  After serving as writing-master of the school in Queen Street, and
  also keeping a private school, he was chosen master of the South
  Writing School in March, 1769, to supply the place of his brother
  Abiah deceased. His salary was one hundred pounds. In 1776, and
  again in 1777, he received eighty pounds in addition to his salary.
  He also was a patriot. He was one of the "Sons of Liberty" who dined
  at the Liberty Tree, Dorchester, on August 14, 1769; and he was a
  member of Captain John Haskin's company in 1773. He was a member of
  the Old South Church, and he died July 24, 1784. In his later years
  he kept a school at West Street, where afterwards was Amos
  Lawrence's garden.

  Abiah and Samuel left behind them better demonstrations of their
  capacity than pieces of "knot-work"--in the handwriting of their
  scholars. They taught what Jonathan Snelling described as "Boston
  Style of Wri^ting," and loudly do the elegant letters and signatures
  of their scholars, Boston patriots, clergy, and statesmen, redound
  to the credit of the Masters Holbrook.

  Other Holbrooks taught in Boston. From the Selectmen's Minutes of
  that little town, we find that on November 10, 1773,--

  "Mr Holbrook, Master of the Writing School in the Common, and Mr
  Carter the Master Elect of the school in Queen St having recommended
  Mr Abiah Holbrook, a young man near of age, as a suitable person to
  be usher at Mr Carters school--the Selectmen sent for him, and upon
  discoursing with the young man thought proper to appoint him usher
  of said school."

  And from the Boston Gazette, of April 17, 1769, we learn that Mr.
  Joseph Ward "Opened an English Grammar School in King St where Mr
  Joseph Holbrook hath for many years kept a Writing School."

  These entries of Anna's relating to her attending Master Holbrook's
  school have an additional value in that they prove that both boys
  and girls attended these public writing schools,--a fact which has
  been disputed.

  NOTE 24.

  Dr. James Lloyd, born March 14, 1728, died March 14, 1810. He began
  his medical practice in 1752. He was appointed surgeon of the
  garrison at Boston, and was a close friend of Sir William Howe and
  Earl Percy, who for a time lived in his house. He was an
  Episcopalian, and one of the indignant protesters against the
  alteration of the liturgy at King's Chapel. Though a warm Tory and
  Loyalist, he was never molested by the American government. He was
  one of Boston's most skilful and popular physicians for many years.
  While other city doctors got but a shilling and sixpence for their
  regular fee, he charged and received the exorbitant sum of half a
  dollar a visit; and for "bringing little master to town," in which
  function he was a specialist, he charged a guinea.

  NOTE 25.

  A pincushion was for many years, and indeed is still, in some parts
  of New England, a highly conventional gift to a mother with a young
  babe. Mrs. Deming must have made many of these cushions. One of her
  manufacture still exists. It is about five inches long and three
  inches wide; one side is of white silk stuck around the edge with
  old-fashioned clumsy pins, with the words, "John Winslow March 1783.
  Welcome Little Stranger." The other side is of gray satin with green
  spots, with a cluster of pins in the centre, and other pins winding
  around in a vine and forming a row round the edge.

  NOTE 26.

  Though the exchange of Christmas gifts was rare in New England,
  a certain observance of New Year's Day by gifts seems to have
  obtained. And we find in Judge Sewall's diary that he was greeted on
  New Year's morn with a levet, or blast of trumpets, under his
  window; and he celebrated the opening of the eighteenth century with
  a very poor poem of his own composition, which he caused to be
  recited through Boston streets by the town-crier.

  NOTE 27.

  The word "pompedore" or Pompadour was in constant use in that day.
  We read of pompedore shoes, laces, capes, aprons, sacques,
  stockings, and head-dresses.

  NOTE 28.

  Aunt Storer was Mrs. Ebenezer Storer. Her maiden name was Elizabeth
  Green. She was a sister of Mrs. Joshua Winslow. She was born October
  12, 1734, died December 8, 1774; was married July 17, 1751, to
  Ebenezer Storer, who was born January 27, 1729-30, died January 6,
  1807. He was a Harvard graduate, and was for many years treasurer of
  that college. He was one of Boston's most intellectual and respected
  citizens. His library was large. His name constantly appears on the
  lists of subscribers to new books. After his death his astronomical
  instruments became the property of Harvard College, and as late as
  1843 his comet-finder was used there.

  As Anna Green Winslow spent so much of her time in her "Aunt
  Storers" home in Sudbury Street, it is interesting to know that a
  very correct picture of this elegant Boston home of colonial days
  has been preserved through the account given in the Memoir of Eliza
  Susan Morton Quincy,--though many persons still living remember the
  house:--

  "The mansion of Ebenezer Storer, an extensive edifice of wood three
  stories in height, was erected in 1700. It was situated on Sudbury
  Street between two trees of great size and antiquity. An old English
  elm of uncommon height and circumference grew in the sidewalk of the
  street before the mansion, and behind it was a sycamore tree of
  almost equal age and dimensions. It fronted to the south with one
  end toward the street. From the gate a broad walk of red sandstone
  separated it from a grass-plot which formed the courtyard, and
  passed the front door to the office of Mr. Storer. The vestibule of
  the house, from which a staircase ascended, opened on either side
  into the dining and drawing rooms. Both had windows towards the
  courtyard and also opened by glazed doors into a garden behind the
  house. They were long low apartments; the walls wainscoted and
  panelled; the furniture of carved mahogany. The ceilings were
  traversed through the length of the rooms by a large beam cased and
  finished like the walls; and from the centre of each depended a
  glass globe which reflected as in a convex mirror all surrounding
  objects. There was a rich Persian carpet in the drawing-room, the
  colors crimson and green. The curtains and the cushions of the
  window-seat were of green damask; and oval mirrors and girandoles
  and a teaset of rich china completed the furniture of that
  apartment. The wide chimney-place in the dining room was lined and
  ornamented with Dutch tiles; and on each side stood capacious
  armchairs cushioned and covered with green damask, for the master
  and mistress of the family. On the walls were portraits in crayon by
  Copley, and valuable engravings representing Franklin with his
  lightning rod, Washington, and other eminent men of the last
  century. Between the windows hung a long mirror in a mahogany frame;
  and opposite the fireplace was a buffet ornamented with porcelain
  statuettes and a set of rich china. A large apartment in the second
  story was devoted to a valuable library, a philosophical apparatus,
  a collection of engravings, a solar microscope, a camera, etc."

  As I read this description I seem to see the figure of our happy
  little diary-writer reflected in the great glass globes that hung
  from the summer-trees, while she danced on the Persian carpet, or
  sat curled up reading on the cushioned window-seat.

  NOTE 29.

  As this was in the time of depreciated currency, £45 was not so
  large a sum to spend for a young girl's outfit as would at first
  sight appear.

  NOTE 30.

  Dr. Charles Chauncey was born January 1, 1705; died February 10,
  1787. He graduated at Harvard in 1721, and soon became pastor of the
  First Church in Boston. He was an equally active opponent of
  Whitefield and of Episcopacy. He was an ardent and romantic patriot,
  yet so plain in his ways and views that he wished Paradise Lost
  might be turned into prose that he might understand it.

  NOTE 31.

  Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton was pastor of the New Brick Church. He had a
  congregation of stanch Whigs; but unluckily, the Tory Governor
  Hutchinson also attended his church. Dr. Pemberton was the other
  minister of the two who sprung the Governor's hated Thanksgiving
  proclamation of 1771 on their parishes a week ahead of time, as told
  in Note 3, and the astounded and disgusted New Brick hearers, more
  violent than the Old South attendants, walked out of meeting while
  it was being read. Dr. Pemberton's troubled and unhappy pastorate
  came to an end by the closing of his church in war times in 1775. He
  was of the 1721 class of Harvard College. He died September 9, 1777.

  NOTE 32.

  We find frequent references in the writings and newspapers of the
  times to this truly Puritanical dread of bishops. St. Giles's House, Nov.
  27. 1849.
  
  HISTORY OF MONMOUTH CLOSE.
  
  "The small inclosure which has been known by the name of MONMOUTH
  CLOSE ever since the capture of the Duke of Monmouth there, in July,
1685, is one of a cluster of small inclosures, five in number, which
stood in the middle of Shag's Heath, and were called 'The Island.'
They are in the parish of Woodlands.

  

  
  "The tradition of the neighbourhood is this: viz. That after the defeat
  of the Duke of Monmouth at Sedgemoor, near Bridgewater, he rode, accompanied
  by Lord Grey, to Woodyates, where they quitted their horses; and
  the Duke having changed clothes with a peasant, endeavoured to make
  his way across the country to Christchurch. I find advertised in the
  Boston Evening Post, as early as November, 1755: "Horse-hair
  Quilted Coats to wear with Negligees." A poem printed in New York in
  1756 has these lines:--

    "Put on her a Shepherdee
    A Short Sack or Negligee
    Ruffled high to keep her warm
    Eight or ten about an arm."

  NOTE 34.

  A pistareen was a Spanish coin worth about seventeen cents.

  NOTE 35.

  There exists in New England a tradition of "groaning cake," made and
  baked in honor of a mother and babe. These cakes which Anna bought
  of the nurse may have been "groaning cakes." It was always customary
  at that time to give "vails" to the nurse when visiting a new-born
  child; sometimes gifts of money, often of trinkets and articles of
  clothing.

  NOTE 36.

  Miss "Scolley" was Mary Scollay, youngest of the thirteen children
  of John Scollay (who was born in 1712, died October, 1799), and his
  wife Mary. Mary was born in 1759. She married Rev. Thomas Prentiss
  on February 9, 1798, had nine children, and lived to be eighty-two
  years old--dying in 1841. Her sister Mercy was engaged to be married
  to General Warren, but he fell at Bunker Hill: and his betrothed
  devoted herself afterwards to the care and education of his orphaned
  children whom he had by his first wife.

  NOTE 37.

  Miss Bella Coffin was probably Isabella, daughter of John Coffin and
  Isabella Child, who were married in 1750. She married Major
  MacMurde, and their sons were officers in India.

  NOTE 38.

  This Miss "Quinsey" was Ann Quincy, the daughter of Col. Josiah
  Quincy (who was born 1710, died 1784), and his third wife, Ann
  Marsh. Ann was born December 8, 1763, and thus would have been in
  her ninth year at the time of the little rout. She married the Rev.
  Asa Packard, of Marlborough, Mass., in 1790.

  NOTE 39.

  In the universal use of wines and strong liquors in New England at
  that date children took unrestrainedly their proportionate part. It
  seems strange to think of this girl assembly of little Bostonians
  drinking wine and hot or cold punch as part of their "treat," yet no
  doubt they were well accustomed to such fare. I know of a little
  girl of still tenderer years who was sent at that same time from the
  Barbadoes to her grandmother's house in Boston to be "finished" in
  Boston schools, as was Anna, and who left her relative's abode in
  high dudgeon because she was not permitted to have wine at her
  meals; and her parents upheld her, saying Missy must be treated like
  a lady and have all the wine she wished. Cobbett, who thought liquor
  drinking the national disease of America, said that "at all hours of
  the day little boys at or under twelve years of age go into stores
  and tip off their drams." Thus it does not seem strange for little
  maids also to drink at a party. The temperance awakening of this
  century came none too soon.

  NOTE 40.

  Paste ornaments were universally worn by both men and women, as well
  as by little girls, and formed the decoration of much of the
  headgear of fashionable dames. Many advertisements appear in New
  England newspapers, which show how large and varied was the
  importation of hair ornaments at that date. We find advertised in
  the Boston Evening Post, of 1768: "Double and single row knotted
  Paste Combs, Paste Hair Sprigs & Pins all prices. Marcasite and
  Pearl Hair Sprigs, Garnet & Pearl Hair Sprigs." In the Salem
  Gazette and various Boston papers I read of "black & coloured
  plumes & feathers." Other hair ornaments advertised in the Boston
  News Letter, of December, 1768, were "Long and small Tail Garnets,
  Mock Garland of all sorts and Ladies Poll Combs." Steel plumes,
  pompons, aigrettes, and rosettes all were worn on the head, and
  artificial flowers, wreaths of gauze, and silk ribbons.

  NOTE 41.

  Marcasite, spelled also marcassite, marchasite, marquesett, or
  marquaset, was a mineral, the crystallized form of iron pyrites. It
  was largely used in the eighteenth century for various ornamental
  purposes, chiefly in the decoration of the person. It took a good
  polish, and when cut in facets like a rose-diamond, formed a pretty
  material for shoe and knee-buckles, earrings, rings, pins, and hair
  ornaments. Scarce a single advertisement of wares of milliner or
  mantua maker can he found in eighteenth century newspapers that does
  not contain in some form of spelling the word marcasite, and scarce
  a rich gown or headdress was seen without some ornament of
  marcasite.

  NOTE 42.

  Master Turner was William Turner, a fashionable dancing master of
  Boston, who afterward resided in Salem, and married Judith, daughter
  of Dr. Edward Augustus Holyoke, of Salem, who died in 1829, aged one
  hundred and one years. It was recalled by an old lady that the
  scholars in the school of her youth marched through Boston streets,
  to the music of the fiddle played by "Black Henry," to Concert Hall,
  corner Tremont and Bromfield streets, to practice dancing; and that
  Mr. Turner walked at the head of the school. His advertisements may
  be seen in Boston and Salem papers, thus:--

  "Mr. Turner informs the Ladies and Gentlemen in Town and Country
  that he has reduced his price for teaching from Six Dollars Entrance
  to One Guinea, and from Four Dollars per month to Three. Those
  ladies and Gentlemen who propose sending their children to be taught
  will notice no books will be kept as Mr. T. has suffered much by
  Booking. The pupils must pay monthly if they are desirous the School
  should continue."

  NOTE 43.

  "Unkle Ned" was Edward Green, born September 18, 1733; died July 29,
  1790. He married, on April 14, 1757, Mary Storer (sister of Ebenezer
  Storer and of Hannah Storer Green). They had no children. He was, in
  1780, one of the enlisting officers for Suffolk County. In a letter
  of George Green's, written July 25, 1770, we read: "Ned still lives
  gentleman-like at Southwacks Court without doing any business tho'
  obliged to haul in his horns;" and from another of December 5, 1770:
  "Ned after having shown off as long as he you'd with his yell^o
  damask window curtains &c is (the last month) retired into the
  country and lives w^th his wife at Parson Storers at Watertown. How
  long that will hold I cant say."

  NOTE 44.

  Madam Smith was evidently Anna's teacher in sewing. The duties
  pertaining to a sewing school were, in those days, no light matter.
  From an advertisement of one I learn that there were taught at these
  schools:--

  "All kinds of Needleworks viz: point, Brussels, Dresden Gold,
  Silver, and silk Embroidery of every kind. Tambour Feather, India &
  Darning, Spriggings with a Variety of Open-work to each. Tapestry
  plain, lined, and drawn. Catgut, black & white, with a number of
  beautiful Stitches. Diaper and Plain Darnings. French Quiltings,
  Knitting, Various Sorts of marking with the Embellishments of Royal
  cross, Plain cross, Queen, Irish, and Tent Stitches."

  Can any nineteenth century woman read this list of feminine
  accomplishments without looking abashed upon her idle hands, and
  ceasing to wonder at the delicate heirlooms of lace and embroidery
  that have come down to us!

  NOTE 45.

  Grandmamma Sargent was Joshua Winslow's mother. Her maiden name was
  Sarah Pierce. She was born April 30, 1697, died August 2, 1771. She
  married on September 21, 1721, John Winslow, who lived to be
  thirty-eight years old. After his death she married Dr. Nathaniel
  Sargent in 1749.

  NOTE 46.

  These lines were a part of the epitaph said to be composed by
  Governor Thomas Dudley, who died at Andover, Mass., in 1653. They
  were found after his death and preserved in Morton's New England's
  Memorial.
    If men be left, and other wise combine
    My epitaph's, I dy'd no libertine.

  NOTE 47.

  Miss Polly Vans was Mary Vans, daughter of Hugh and Mary Pemberton
  Vans, and aunt of Caty Vans. She was born in 1733. We have some
  scattered glimpses of her life. She joined the Old South in 1755. In
  the Boston Gazette, of April 9, 1770, we read, "Fan Mounts mounted
  by Mary Vans at the house of Deacon Williams, in Cornhill." We hear
  of her at Attleborough with Samuel Whitwell's wife when the gates of
  Boston were closed, and we know she married Deacon Jonathan Mason on
  Sunday evening, December 20, 1778. Nor do our columns exhibit the
  total result of our labours. Besides the information communicated to
  ourselves, some of our friends who inserted Queries under their own
  names, have received answers to them without our intervention.
   Well might Anna term her "a
  Sister of the Old South." She was in 1817 the President of the Old
  South Charity School, and is described as a "disinterested friend,
  a judicious adviser, an affectionate counsellor, a mild but faithful
  reprover, a humble, self-denying, fervent, active, cheerful
  Christian." Jonathan Mason was not only a deacon, but a prosperous
  merchant and citizen. He helped to found the first bank in New
  England. His son was United States Senator. Two other daughters of
  Hugh Vans were a Mrs. Langdon, of Wiscasset, Maine, and Mrs. John
  Coburn.

  NOTE 48.

  St. Valentine's Day was one of the few English holidays observed in
  New England. We find even Governor Winthrop writing to his wife
  about "challenging a valentine." In England at that date, and for a
  century previous, the first person of the opposite sex seen in the
  morning was the observer's valentine. We find Madam Pepys lying in
  bed for a long time one St. Valentine's morning with eyes tightly
  closed, lest she see one of the painters who was gilding her new
  mantelpiece, and be forced to have him for her valentine. Anna
  means, doubtless, that the first person she chanced to see that
  morning was "an old country plow-joger."

  NOTE 49.

  Boston was at that date pervaded by the spirit of Liberty. Sons of
  Liberty held meetings every day and every night. Daughters of
  Liberty held spinning and weaving bees, and gathered in bands
  pledging themselves to drink no tea till the obnoxious revenue act
  was repealed. Young unmarried girls joined in an association with
  the proud declaration, "We, the daughters of those Patriots who have
  appeared for the public interest, do now with pleasure engage with
  them in denying ourselves the drinking of foreign tea." Even the
  children felt the thrill of revolt and joined in patriotic
  demonstrations--and a year or two later the entire graduating class
  at Harvard, to encourage home manufactures, took their degrees in
  homespun.

  NOTE 50.

  The cut-paper pictures referred to are the ones which are reproduced
  in this book, and which are still preserved. Anna's father finally
  received them. Mrs. Deming and other members of the Winslow family
  seem to have excelled in this art, and are remembered as usually
  bringing paper and scissors when at a tea-drinking, and assiduously
  cutting these pictures with great skill and swiftness and with
  apparently but slight attention to the work. This form of decorative
  art was very fashionable in colonial days, and was taught under the
  ambitious title of Papyrotamia.

  NOTE 51.

  The "biziness of making flowers" was a thriving one in Boston. We
  read frequently in newspapers of the day such notices as that of
  Anne Dacray, of Pudding Lane, in the Boston Evening Post, of 1769,
  who advertises that she "makes and sells Head-flowers: Ladies may be
  supplied with single buds for trimming Stomachers or sticking in the
  Hair." Advertisements of teachers in the art of flower-making also
  are frequent. I note one from the Boston Gazette, of October 19,
  1767:--

  "To the young Ladies of Boston. Elizabeth Courtney as several Ladies
  has signified of having a desire to learn that most ingenious art of
  Painting on Gauze & Catgut, proposes to open a School, and that her
  business may be a public good, designs to teach the making of all
  sorts of French Trimmings, Flowers, and Feather Muffs and Tippets.
  And as these Arts above mentioned (the Flowers excepted) are
  entirely unknown on the Continent, she flatters herself to meet with
  all due encouragement; and more so, as every Lady may have a power
  of serving herself of what she is now obliged to send to England
  for, as the whole process is attended with little or no expence. The
  Conditions are Five Dollars at entrance; to be confin'd to no
  particular hours or time: And if they apply Constant may be Compleat
  in six weeks. And when she has fifty subscribers school will be
  opened, &c, &c."

  NOTE 52.

