How much Lucy heard was uncertain; she leant on a chair with drooping head and averted face,
trembling, and suppressing a sob, apparently too much frightened to attend.  Just when the
exordium was over, and 'Therefore I lay my commands on you' might have been expected, it turned
into, 'However, upon Mr. Dusautoy's kind representation, I have resolved to give the young
man a trial, and provided he convinces me by his conduct that I may safely entrust your happiness
to him, I have told his uncle that I will not withhold my sanction.'

With a shriek of irrepressible feeling, Lucy looked from father to mother, and clasped her
hands, unable to trust her ears.

'Yes, Lucy,' said Albinia, 'your father consents, on condition that nothing further happens
to excite his doubts of Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy.  It rests with yourself now, it is not too
late.  After all that has passed, you would incur much deserved censure if you put an end to
the affair; but even that would be better, far better, than entering into an engagement with
a man without sound principle.'

'Your mother is quite right, Lucy,' said Mr. Kendal.  'This is the only time.  Gratified vanity
has led you too far, and you have acted as I hoped no child of mine would ever act, but you
have not forfeited our tenderest care.  You are not engaged to this man, and no word of yours
would be broken.  If you hesitate to commit yourself to him, you have only to speak, and we
would gladly at once do everything that could conduce to make you happy.'

'You don't want me to give him up!' cried Lucy.  'Oh! mamma, did not he say he had consented?'

'I said it rested with yourself Lucy.  Do not answer me now.  Come to me at six o'clock, and
tell me, after full reflection, whether I am to consider you as ready to pledge yourself to
this young man.'

It was all that could be done.  Albinia had a dim hope that the sense of responsibility, and
dread of that hard will and selfish temper, might so rise upon Lucy as to startle her, but
then, as Mr. Kendal observed, if she should decide against him, she would have used him so
extremely ill, that they should feel nothing but shame.

'Yes,' said Albinia, 'but it would be better to be ashamed of a girl's folly, than to see her
made miserable for life.  Poor Lucy! if she decide against him, she will become a woman at
once, if not, I'm afraid it will be the prediction about Marie Antoinette over again-- very
gay, and coming right through trial.'

They were obliged to tell Sophy of the state of things.  She stood up straight, and said, slowly
and clearly, 'I do not like the world at all.'

'I don't quite see what you mean.'

'Every one does what can't be helped, and it is not the thing.'

'Explain yourself, Sophy,' said her father, amused.

'I don't think Lucy ought to be making the decision at all,' said Sophy.  She did that long
ago, when first, she attended to what he said to her.  If she does not take him now, it will
be swearing to her neighbour, and disappointing him, because it is to her own hindrance.'

'Yes, Sophy; but I believe it is better to incur the sin of breaking a promise, than to go
on when the fulfilment involves not only suffering, but mischief.  Lucy has repeatedly declared
there was no engagement.'

'I know it could not be helped; but Mr. Dusautoy ought not to have asked papa.'

'Nor papa to have consented, my Suleiman ben Daood,' said Mr. Kendal. 'Ah! Sophy, we all have
very clear, straightforward views at eighteen of what other people ought to do.'

'Papa--I never meant--I did not think I was saying anything wrong. I only said I did not like
the world.'

'And I heartily agree with you, Sophy, and if I had lived in it as short a time as you have,
perhaps "considerations" would not affect my judgment.'

'I am always telling Sophy she will be more merciful as she grows older,' said Albinia.

'If it were only being more merciful, it would be very well,' said Mr. Kendal; 'but one also
becomes less thorough-going, because practice is more painful than theory, and one remembers
consequences that have made themselves felt.  It is just as well that there should be young
people to put us in mind what our flights once were.'

Albinia and Sophy left Lucy to herself; they both wished to avoid the useless 'What shall I
do?' and they thought that, driven back on her own resources, even her own mind might give
her better counsel than the seven watchmen aloft in a high tower.

She came down looking exceedingly pale. Mr. Kendal regarded her anxiously, and held his hand
out to her kindly.

'Papa,' she said, simply, 'I can't give it up.  I do love him.'

'Very well, my dear,' he answered, 'there is no more to be said than that I trust he will merit
your affection and make you happy.'

Good Mr. Dusautoy was as happy as a king; he took Lucy in his arms, and kissed her as if she
had been his child, and with her hands folded in his own, he told her how she was to teach
his dear Algernon to be everything that was good, and to lead him right by her influence. 
She answered with caresses and promises, and whoever had watched her eye, would have seen it
in a happy day-dream of Algernon's perfection, and his uncle thanking her for it.

She had expected that grandmamma would have been very happy; but marriage had, with the poor
old lady, led to so much separation, that her weakened faculties took the alarm, and she received
the tidings by crying bitterly, and declaring that every one was going away and leaving her.
Lucy assured her over and over again that she was never going to desert her, and as Mr. Kendal
had made it a condition that Algernon should finish his Oxford career respectably, there was
little chance that poor Mrs. Meadows would survive until the marriage.

All along Gilbert made no remark.  Though he had been left out of the family conclaves, and
his opinion not asked, he submitted with the utmost meekness, as one who knew that he had forfeited
all right to be treated as son and heir.  The more he was concerned at the engagement, the
greater stigma he would place on his own connivance; so he said nothing, and only devoted himself
to his grandmother, as though the attendance upon her were a refuge and relief.  More gentle
and patient than ever, he soothed her fretfulness, invented pleasures for her, and rendered
her so placid and contented, that her health began to improve.

Not for a moment did he seem to forget his error; and Albinia's resolution to separate Maurice
from him, could not hold when he himself silently assumed the mournful necessity, and put the
child from him when clamorous for rides, till there was an appeal to papa and mamma.  Mr. Kendal
gave one look of inquiry at Albinia, and she began some matter-of-course about Gilbert being
so kind--whereupon the brothers were together as before.  When Albinia visited her little boy
at night, she found that Gilbert had been talking to him of his eldest brother, and she heard
more of Edmund's habits and tastes from the little fellow who had never seen him, than from
either the twin-brother or the sister who had loved him so devotedly. It was as if Gilbert
knew that he could be doing Maurice no harm when leading him to think of Edmund, and perhaps
he felt some intrinsic resemblance in the deep loving strength of the two natures.

The invitation to Fairmead spared him the pain and shame of Algernon Dusautoy's first reception
as Lucy's accepted lover.  He went early on Saturday morning, and young Dusautoy, arriving
in the evening, was first ushered into the library; while Albinia did her best to soothe the
excited nerves and fluttering spirits of Lucy, who was exceedingly ashamed to meet him again
under the eyes of others, after such a course of stolen interviews, and what she had been told
of her influence doing him good only alarmed her the more.

Well she might, for if ever character resembled that of the iron pot borne down the stream
in company with the earthen one, it was the object of her choice.  Poor pipkin that Gilbert
was, the contact had cost him a smashing blow, and for all clay of the more fragile mould,
the best hope was to give the invulnerable material a wide berth. Talk of influence!  Mr. Dusautoy
might as well hope that a Wedgwood cream-jug would guide a copper cauldron and keep verdigris
aloof.

His attraction for Lucy had always been a mystery to her family, who perhaps hardly did justice
to the magnetism of mere force of purpose. Better training might have ennobled into resolution
that which was now doggedness and obstinacy, and, even in that shape, the real element of strength
had a tendency to work upon softer natures.  Thus it had acted in different ways with the Vicar,
with Gilbert, and with Lucy; each had fallen under the power of his determination, with more
or less of their own consent, and with Lucy the surrender was complete; she no sooner sat beside
Algernon than she was completely his possession, and his complacent self-satisfaction was reflected
on her face in a manner that told her parents that she was their own no longer, but given up
to a stronger master.

Albinia liked neither to see nor to think about it, and kept aloof as much as she could, dividing
herself between grandmamma and the children.  On Tuesday morning, during Maurice's lessons,
there was a knock at the sitting-room door.  She expected Gilbert, but was delighted to see
her brother.

'I thought you were much too busy to come near us?'

'So I am; I can't stay; so if Kendal be not forthcoming you must give this fellow a holiday.'

'He is gone to Hadminster, so--'

'Where's Gilbert?' broke in little Maurice.

'He went to his room to dress to go up to parade,' said Mr. Ferrars, and off rushed the boy
without waiting for permission.

Albinia sighed, and said, 'It is a perfect passion.'

'Don't mourn over it.  Love is too good a thing to be lamented over, and this may turn into
a blessing.'

'I used to be proud of it.'

'So you shall be still.  I am very much pleased with that poor lad.'

She would not raise her eyes, she was weary of hoping for Gilbert, and his last offence had
touched her where she had never been touched before.

'Whatever faults he has,' Mr. Ferrars said, 'I am much mistaken if his humility, love, and
contrition be not genuine, and what more can the best have?'

'Sincerity!' said Albinia, hopelessly.  'There's no truth in him!'

'You should discriminate between deliberate self-interested deception, and failure in truth
for want of moral courage.  Both are bad enough, but the latter is not "loving a lie," not
such a ruinous taint and evidence of corruption as the former.'

'It is curious to hear you repeating my old excuses for him,' said Albinia, 'now that he has
cast his glamour over you.'

'Not wrongly,' said her brother.  'He is in earnest; there is no acting about him.'

'Yes, that I believe; I know he loves us with all his heart, poor boy, especially Maurice and
me, and I think he had rather go right than wrong, if he could only be let alone.  But, oh!
it is all "unstable as water."  Am I unkind, Maurice?  I know how it would be if I let him
talk to me for ten minutes, or look at me with those pleading brown eyes of his!'

Mr. Ferrars knew it well, and why she was steeled against him, but he put this aside, saying
that he was come to speak of the future, not of the past, and that he wanted Edmund to reconsider
William's advice.  He told her what Gilbert had said of the difficulty of breaking off old
connexions, and the danger to Maurice from his acquaintance.  An exchange into another corps
of militia might be for the worse, the occupation was uncertain, and Mr. Ferrars believed that
a higher position, companions of a better stamp, and the protection of a man of lively manners,
quick sympathy, and sound principle, like their cousin Fred, might be the opening of a new
life.  He had found Gilbert most desirous of such a step, regarding it as his only hope, but
thinking it so offensively presumptuous to propose it to his father under present circumstances,
his Oxford terms thrown away, and himself disgraced both there and at home, that the matter
would hardly have been brought forward had not Mr. Ferrars undertaken to press it, under the
strong conviction that remaining at home would be destruction, above all, with young Dusautoy
making part of the family.

'I declare,' said Mr. Ferrars, 'he looked so much at home in the drawing-room, and welcomed
Gilbert with such an air of patronage, that I could have found it in my heart to have knocked
him down!'

It was a treat to hear Maurice speak so unguardedly, and Albinia laughed, and asked whether
he thought it very wrong to hope that the Polysyllable would yet do something flagrant enough
to open Lucy's eyes.

'I'll allow you to hope that if he should, her eyes may be opened,' said Maurice.

Albinia began a vehement vindication for their having tolerated the engagement, in the midst
of which her brother was obliged to depart, amused at her betrayal of her own sentiments by
warfare against what he had never said.

She had treated his counsel as chimerical, but when she repeated it to her husband, she thought
better of it, since, alas! it had become her great object to part those two loving brothers.
Mr. Kendal first asked where the 25th Lancers were, then spoke of expense, and inquired what
she knew of the cost of commissions, and of her cousin's means.  All she could answer for was,
that Fred's portion was much smaller than Gilbert's inheritance, but at least she knew how
to learn what was wanted, and if her friends, the old Generals, were to be trusted, she ought
to have no lack of interest at the Horse Guards.

Gilbert was taken into counsel, and showed so much right spirit and good sense, that the discussion
was friendly and unreserved.  It ended in the father and son resorting to Pettilove's office
to ascertain the amount of ready money in his hands, and what income Gilbert would receive
on coming of age.  The investigation somewhat disappointed the youth, who had never thoroughly
credited what his father told him of the necessity of his exerting himself for his own maintenance,
nor understood how heavy a drain on his property were the life-interests of his father and
grandmother, and the settlement on his aunt.  By-and-by, he might be comparatively a rich man,
but at first his present allowance would be little more than doubled, and the receipts would
be considerably diminished by an alteration of existing system of rents, such as had so long
been planned.  It was plain that the almshouses were the unsubstantial fabric of a dream, but
no one now dared to refer to them, and Mr. Kendal desired Albinia to write to consult her cousin.

Captain Ferrars was so much flattered at her asking his protection for anything, that he would
have promised to patronize Cousin Slender himself for her sake.  He praised the Colonel and
lauded the mess to the skies, and economy being his present hobby, he represented himself as
living upon nothing, and saving his pay.  He further gave notice of impending retirements,
and advised that the application should be made without loss of time, lamenting grievously
himself that there was no chance for the 25th, of a touch at the Russians.

Something in his letter put every one into a hurry, and a correspondence began, which resulted
in Gilbert's being summoned to Sandhurst for an examination, which he passed creditably.  The
purchase-money was deposited, and the household was daily thrown into a state of excitement
by the arrival of official-looking envelopes, which turned out to contain solicitations from
tailors and outfitters, bordered with portraits of camp-beds and portable baths, until, at
last, when the real document appeared, Gilbert tossed it aside as from 'another tailor:' but
Albinia knew the article too well to mistake it, and when the long blue cover was opened, it
proved to convey more than they had reckoned upon.

Gilbert Kendal held a commission in the 25th Lancers, and the corps was under immediate orders
for the East.  The number of officers being deficient, he was to join the headquarters at Cork,
without going to the depot, and would thence sail with a stated minimum of baggage.

Albinia could not look up.  She knew her husband had not intended thus to risk the last of
his eldest-born sons; and though her soldier-spirit might have swelled with exultation had
her own brave boy been concerned, she dreaded the sight of quailing or dismay in Gilbert.

'Going really to fight the Russians,' shouted Maurice, as the meaning reached him.  'Oh! Gibbie,
if I was but a man to go with you!'

'You will do your duty, my boy,' said his father.

'By God's help,' was the reverent answer which emboldened Albinia to look up at him, as he
stood with Maurice clinging by both hands to him.  She had done him injustice, and her heart
bounded at the sight of the flush on his cheek, the light in his eyes, and the expression on
his lips, making his face finer and more manly than she had ever seen it, as if the grave necessity,
and the awe of the unseen glorious danger, were fixing and elevating his wandering purpose.
To have no choice was a blessing to an infirm will, and to be inevitably out of his own power
braced him and gave him rest.  She held out her hand to him, and there was a grasp of inexpressible
feeling, the first renewal of their old terms of sympathy and confidence.

There was no time to be lost; Mr. Kendal would go to London with him by the last train that
day, to fit him out as speedily as possible, before he started for Cork.

Every one felt dizzy, and there was no space for aught but action. Perhaps Albinia was glad
of the hurry, she could not talk to Gilbert till she had learnt to put faith in him, and she
would rather do him substantial kindnesses than be made the sharer of feelings that had too
often proved like the growth of the seed which found no depth of earth.

She ran about for him, worked for him, contrived for him, and gave him directions; she could
not, or would not, perceive his yearning for an effusion of penitent tenderness.  He looked
wistfully at her when he was setting out to take leave at the Vicarage, but she had absorbed
herself in flannel shirts, and would not meet his eye, nor did he venture to make the request
that she would come with him.

Indeed, confidences there could be but few, for Maurice and Albinia hung on either side of
him, so that he could hardly move, but he resisted all attempt to free him even from the little
girl, who was hardly out of his arms for ten minutes together.  It was only from her broken
words that her mother understood that from the vicarage he had gone to the church.  Poor little
Albinia did not like it at all. 'Why was brother Edmund up in the church, and why did Gilbert cry?'

Maurice angrily enunciated, 'Men never cry,' but not a word of the visit to the church came
from him.

Algernon Dusautoy had wisely absented himself, and the two sisters devoted themselves to the
tasks in hand.  Sophy worked as hard as did Mrs. Kendal, and spoke even less, and Lucy took
care of Mrs. Meadows, whose nerves were painfully excited by the bustle in the house.  It had
been agreed that she should not hear of her grandson's intention till the last moment, and
then he went in, putting on a cheerful manner, to bid her good-bye, only disclosing that he
was going to London, but little as she could understand, there was an instinct about her that
could not be deceived, and she began to cry helplessly and violently.

Mrs. Kendal and Lucy were summoned in haste; Gilbert lingered, trying to help them to restore
her to composure.  But time ran short; his father called him, and they hardly knew that they
had received his last hurried embrace, nor that he was really gone, till they heard Maurice
shouting like a Red Indian, as he careered about in the garden, his only resource against tears;
and Sophy came in very still, very pale, and incapable of uttering a word or shedding a tear.
Albinia was much concerned, for she could not bear to have sent him away without a more real
adieu, and word of blessing and good augury; it made her feel herself truly unforgiving, and
perhaps turned her heart back to him more fully and fondly than any exchange of sentiment would
have done.  But she had not much time to dwell on this omission, for poor Mrs. Meadows missed
him sorely, and after two days' constant fretting after him, another paralytic stroke renewed
the immediate danger, so that by the time Mr. Kendal returned from London she was again hovering
between life and death.

Mr. Kendal, to his great joy, met Frederick Ferrars at the 'Family Office.'  The changes in
the regiment had given him his majority, and he had flashed over from Ireland to make his preparations
for the campaign.  His counsel had been most valuable in Gilbert's equipment, especially in
the knotty question of horses, and he had shown himself so amiable and rational that Mr. Kendal
was quite delighted, and rejoiced in committing Gilbert to his care.  He had assumed the trust
in a paternal manner, and, infected by his brilliant happiness and hopefulness, Gilbert had
gone off to Ireland in excellent spirits.

'Another thing conduced to cheer him,' said Mr. Kendal afterwards to his wife, with a tone
that caused her to exclaim, 'You don't mean that he saw Genevieve?'

'You are right.  We came upon her in Rivington's shop, while we were looking for the smallest
Bible.  I saw who it was chiefly by his change of colour, and I confess I kept out of the way.
The whole did not last five minutes; she had her pupils with her, and soon went away; but he
thanked me, and took heart from that moment.  Poor boy, who would have thought the impression
would have been so lasting?'

'Well, by the time he is a field-officer, even William will let him please himself,' said Albinia,
lightly, because her heart was too full for her to speak seriously.

She tried, by a kind letter, to atone for the omitted farewell, and it seemed to cheer and
delight Gilbert.  He wrote from Cork as if he had imbibed fresh hope and enterprise from his
new companions, he liked them all, and could not say enough of the kindness of Major Ferrars.
Everything went smoothly, and in the happiest frame he sailed from Cork, and was heard of again
at Malta and Gallipoli, direfully sea-sick, but reviving to write most amusing long descriptive
letters, and when he reached the camp at Yarna, he reported as gratefully of General Ferrars
as the General did kindly of him.

Those letters were the chief pleasures in a harassing spring and summer.  It was well that
practice had trained Sophia in the qualities of a nurse, for Lucy was seldom available when
Algernon Dusautoy was at home; she was sure to be riding with him, or sitting for her picture,
or the good Vicar, afraid of her overworking herself, insisted on her spending the evening
at the vicarage.

She yielded, but not with an easy conscience, to judge by her numerous apologies, and when
Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy returned to Oxford, she devoted herself with great assiduity to the
invalid. Her natural gifts were far more efficient than Sophy's laboriously-earned gentleness,
and her wonderful talent for prattling about nothing had a revivifying influence, sparing much
of the plaintive weariness which accompanied that mournful descent of life's hill.

Albinia had reckoned on a rational Lucy until the Oxford term should be over.  She might have
anticipated a failure in the responsions, (who, in connexion with the Polysyllable, could mention
being plucked for the little-go?) but it was more than she did expect that his rejection would
send him home in sullen resentment resolved to punish Oxford by the withdrawal of his august
name.  He had been quizzed by the young, reprimanded by the old, plucked by the middle-aged,
and he returned with his mouth, full of sentences against blind, benighted bigotry, and the
futility of classical study, and of declamations, as an injured orphan, against his uncle's
disregard of the intentions of his dear deceased parent, in keeping him from Bonn, Jena, Heidelberg,
or any other of the outlandish universities whose guttural names he showered on the meek Vicar's
desponding head.

He was twenty-one, and could not be sent whither he would not go. His uncle's resource was
Mr. Kendal, who strongly hoped that the link was about to snap, when, summoning the gentleman
to the library, he gave him to understand that he should consider a refusal to resume his studies
as tantamount to a dissolution of the engagement.  A long speech ensued about dear mothers,
amiable daughters, classics, languages, and foreign tours.  That was all the account Mr. Kendal
could give his wife of the dialogue, and she could only infer that Algernon's harangue had
sent him into such a fit of abstraction, that he really could not tell the drift of it.  However,
he was clear that he had himself given no alternative between returning to Oxford and resigning
Lucy.

That same evening, Lucy, all blushes and tears, faltered out that she was very unwilling, she
could not bear to leave them all, nor dear grandmamma, but dear Algernon had prevailed on her
to say next August!

When indignant astonishment permitted Albinia to speak, she reminded Lucy that a respectable
career at Oxford had been the condition.

'I know,' said Lucy, 'but dear Algernon convinced papa of the unreasonableness of such a stipulation
under the circumstances.'

Albinia felt the ground cut away under her feet, and all she could attempt was a dry answer.
'We shall see what papa says; but you, Lucy, how can you think of marrying with your grandmamma
in this state, and Gilbert in that camp of cholera--'

'I told Algernon it was not to be thought of,' said Lucy, her tears flowing fast.  But I don't
know what to do, no one can tell how long it may go on, and we have no right to trifle with
his feelings.'

'If he had any feelings for you, he would not ask it.'

'No, mamma, indeed!' cried Lucy, earnestly; 'it was his feeling for me; he said I was looking
quite languid and emaciated, and that he could not allow my--good looks and vivacity to be
diminished by my attendance in a sick chamber.  I told him never to mind, for it did not hurt
me; but he said it was incumbent on him to take thought for me, and that he could not present
me to his friends if I were not in full bloom of beauty; yes, indeed, he said so; and then
he said it would be the right season for Italy.'

'It is impossible you can think of going so far away!  Oh, Lucy! you should not have consented.'

'I could not help it,' said Lucy, sobbing.  'I could not bear to contradict him, but please,
mamma, let papa settle it for me.  I don't want to go away; I told him I never would, I told
him I had promised never to leave dear grandmamma; but you see he is so resolute, and he cannot
bear to be without me.  Oh! do get him to put it off--only if he is angry and goes to Italy
without me, I know I shall die!'

'We will take care of you, my dear.  I am sure we shall be able to show him how impossible
a gay wedding would be at present; and I do not think he can press it,' said Albinia, moved
into soothing the present distress, and relieved to find that there was no heartlessness on
Lucy's side.

What a grand power is sheer obstinacy!  It has all the momentum of a stone, or cannon-ball,
or any other object set in motion without inconvenient sensations to obstruct its course!

Algernon Dusautoy had decided on being married in August, and taking his obedient pupil-wife
through a course of lectures on the continental galleries of art; and his determined singleness
of aim prevailed against the united objections and opposition of four people, each of double
or quadruple his wisdom and weight.

His first great advantage was, that, as Albinia surmised, Mr. Kendal could not recal the finale
of their interview, and having lost the thread of the rigmarole, did not know to what his silence
had been supposed to assent.  Next, Algernon conquered his uncle by representing Lucy as on
the road to an atrophy, and persuading him that he should be much safer on the Continent with
a wife than without one: and though the two ladies were harder to deal with in themselves,
they were obliged to stand by the decision of their lords.  Above all, he made way by his sincere
habit of taking for granted whatever he wished, and by his magnanimous oblivion of remonstrance
and denial; so that every day one party or the other found that assumed, as fixed in his favour,
which had the day before been most strenuously refused.

'If you consented to this, I thought I could not refuse that.'

'I consent!  I told him it was the last thing I could think of.'

'Well, I own I was surprised, but he told me you had readily come into his views.'

Such was the usual tenor of consultations between the authorities, until their marvel at themselves
and each other came to a height when they found themselves preparing for the wedding on the
very day originally chosen by Algernon.

Mr. Kendal's letter to Gilbert was an absolute apology.  Gilbert in Turkey was a very different
person from Gilbert at Bayford, and had assumed in his father's mind the natural rights of
son and heir; he seemed happy and valued, and the heat of the climate, pestiferous to so many,
seemed but to give his Indian constitution the vigour it needed.  When his comrades were laid
up, or going away for better air, much duty was falling on him, and he was doing it with hearty
good-will and effectiveness.  Already the rapid changes had made him a lieutenant, and he wrote
in the highest spirits.  Moreover, he had fallen in with Bryan O'More, and had been able to
do him sundry kindnesses, the report of which brought Ulick to Willow Lawn in an overflow of
gratitude.

It was a strange state of affairs there.  Albinia was ashamed of the plea of 'could not help
it,' and yet that was the only one to rest on; the adherence to promises alone gave a sense
of duty, and when or how the promises had been given was not clear.

Besides, no one could be certain even about poor Lucy's present satisfaction; she sometimes
seemed like a little bird fluttering under the fascination of a snake.  She was evidently half
afraid of Algernon, and would breathe more freely when he was not at hand; but then a restlessness
would come on if he did not appear as soon as she expected, as if she dreaded having offended
him.  She had violent bursts of remorseful tears, and great outpourings of fondness towards
every one at home, and she positively did look ill enough to justify Algernon in saying that
the present condition of matters was hurtful to her.  Still she could not endure a word that
remotely tended towards advising her to break off the engagement, or even to retard the wedding,
and her admiration of her intended was unabated.

Indeed, his affection could not be doubted; he liked her adoration of all his performances,
and he regarded her with beneficent protection, as a piece of property; he made her magnificent
presents, and conceded to her that the wedding tour should not be beyond Clifton, whence they
would return to Willow Lawn, and judge ere deciding on going abroad.

He said that it would be 'de bon ton' to have the marriage strictly private.  Even he saw the
incongruity of festivity alongside of that chamber of decay and death; and besides, he had
conceived such a distaste to the Drury family, that he had signified to Lucy that they must
not make part of the spectacle.

Albinia and Sophy thought this so impertinent, that they manfully fought the battles of the
Drurys, but without prevailing; Albinia took her revenge, by observing that this being the
case, it was impossible to ask her brother and little Mary, whose well-sounding names she knew
Algernon ambitionated for the benefit of the county paper.

Always doing what was most contrary to the theories with which she started in life, Albinia
found herself taking the middle course that she contemned.  She was marrying her first daughter
with an aching, foreboding heart, unable either to approve or to prevent, and obliged to console
and cheer just when she would have imagined herself insisting upon a rupture at all costs.

Sophy had said from the first that her sister could not go back.  She expected her to be unhappy,
and believed it the penalty of the wrongdoings in consenting to the clandestine correspondence;
and treated her with melancholy kindness as a victim under sentence.  She was very affectionate,
but not at all consoling when Lucy was sad, and she was impatient and gloomy when the trousseau,
or any of the privileges of a fiancee brought a renewal of gaiety and importance. A broken
heart and ruined fortunes were the least of the consequences she augured, and she went about
the house as if she had realized them both herself.

The wedding-day came, and grandmamma was torpid and only half conscious, so that all could
venture to leave her.  The bride was not allowed to see her, lest the agitation should overwhelm
both; for the poor girl was indeed looking like the victim her sister thought her, pale as
death, with red rings round her extinguished eyes, and trembling from head to foot, the more
at the apprehension that Algernon would think her a fright.

After all that lavender and sal-volatile could do for her, she was such a spectacle, that when
her father came to fetch her he was shocked, and said, tenderly, 'Lucy, my child, this must
not be.  Say one word, and all shall be over, and you shall never hear a word of reproach.'

But Lucy only cast a frightened glance around, and rising up with the accents of perfect sincerity,
said, 'No, papa; I am quite ready; I am quite happy.  I was only silly.'

Her mind was evidently made up, and it was past Albinia's divination whether her agitation
were composed of fear of the future and remorse for the past, or whether it were mere love
of home and hurry of spirits, exaggerated by belief that a bride ought to weep.  Probably it
was a compound of all, and the whole of her reply perfect truth, especially the final clause.

So they married her, poor child, very much as if they had been attending her to the block.
Sophy's view of the case had infected them all beyond being dispelled by the stately complacency
of the bridegroom, or the radiant joy and affection of his uncle.

They put her into a carriage, watched her away, and turned back to the task which she had left
them, dreading the effects of her absence.  She was missed, but less than they feared; the
faculties had become too feeble for such strong emotion as had followed Gilbert's departure;
and the void was chiefly perceptible by the plaintive and exacting clinging to Albinia, who
had less and less time to herself and her children, and was somewhat uneasy as to the consequences
as regarded Maurice.  While Gilbert was at home, the child had been under some supervision;
but now his independent and unruly spirit was left almost uncontrolled, except by his own intermittent
young conscience, his father indulged him, and endured from him what would have been borne
from no one else; and Sophy was his willing slave, unable to exact obedience, and never complaining,
save under the most stringent necessity or sense of duty.  He was too young for school, and
there was nothing to be done but to go on, from day to day, in the trust that no harm could
eventually ensue in consequence of so absolute a duty as the care of the sufferer; and that
while the boy's truth and generosity were sound, though he might be a torment, his character
might be all the stronger afterwards for that very indocility.

It was not satisfactory, and many mothers would have been miserable; but it was not in Albinia's
nature to be miserable when her hands were full, and she was doing her best.  She had heard
her brother say that when good people gave their children sound principles and spoilt them,
they gave the children the trouble of self-conquest instead of doing it for them.  She had
great faith in Maurice's undertaking this task in due time; and while she felt that she still
had her hand on the rein she must be content to leave it loose for a while.

Besides, when his father and sisters, and, least of all, herself, did not find him a plague,
did it much matter if other people did?

CHAPTER XXV.

Exulting peals rang out from the Bayford tower, and as Mr. and Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy alighted
from their carriage at Willow Lawn, the cry of the vicar and of the assembled household was,
'Have you heard that Sebastopol is taken?'

'Any news of Gilbert?' was Lucy's demand.

'No, the cavalry were not landed, so he had nothing to do with it.'

'I say, uncle,' said Algernon, 'shall I send up a sovereign to those ringers?'

'Eh! poor fellows, they will he very glad of it, thank you; only I must take care they don't
drink it up.  I'm sure they must be tired enough; they've been at it ever since the telegraph
came in!'

'There!' exclaimed Algernon; 'Barton must have telegraphed from the station when we set out!'

'You?  Did you think the bells were ringing for you,' exclaimed his uncle, 'when there's a
great battle won, and Sebastopol taken?'

'Telegraphs are always lies!' quoth Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, tersely, 'I don't believe anything
has happened at all!' and he re-pocketed the sovereign.

Meantime Lucy was in a rapture of embracing.  She was spread out with stiff silk flounces and
velvet mantle, so as to emulate her husband's importance, and her chains and bracelets clattered
so much, that Mr. Kendal could not help saying, 'You should have taken lessons of your Ayah,
to learn how to manage your bangles.'

'Oh! papa,' said she, with a newly-learnt little laugh, 'I could not help it; Louise could
not find room for them in my dressing-case.'

They were not, however, lost upon the whole of the family. Grandmamma's dim eyes lighted when
she recognised her favourite grand-daughter in such gorgeous array, and that any one should
have come back again was so new and delightful, that it constantly recurred as a fresh surprise
and pleasure.

All were glad to have her again--their own Lucy, as she still was, though somewhat of the grandiose
style and self-consequence of her husband had overlaid the original nature.  She was as good-natured
and obliging as ever, and though beginning by conferring her favours as condescensions, she
soon would forget that she was the great Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy, and quickly become the eager,
helpful Lucy.  She was in very good looks, and bright and happy, admiring Algernon, rejoicing
to obey his behests, and enhancing his dignity and her own by her discourses upon his talents
and importance.  How far she was at ease with him, Albinia sometimes doubted; there now and
then was an air of greater freedom when he left the room, and some of her favourite old household
avocations were tenderly resumed by stealth, as though she feared he might think them unworthy
of his wife.

She gave her spare time to the invalid, who was revived by her presence as by a sunbeam; and
Albinia, in her relief and gratitude, did her utmost to keep Algernon happy and contented.
She resigned a room to him as an atelier, and let the little Awk be captured to have her likeness
taken, she promoted the guitar and key-bugle, and abstained from resenting his strictures on
her dinners.

Such a guest reduced Mr. Kendal to absolute silence, but she did not think he suffered much
therefrom, and he was often relieved, for all the neighbourhood asked the young couple to dinner.
Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy's toilette was as good as a play to the oldest and youngest inhabitants
of the house, her little sister used to stand by the dressing-table with her small fingers
straightened to sustain a column of rings threaded on them, and her arm weighed down with bracelets,
and grandmamma's happiest moments were when she was raised up to contemplate the costly robes,
jewelled neck, and garlanded head of her darling.

When it turned out that Sebastopol was anything but taken, Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's incredulity
was a precious confirmation of his esteem for his own sagacity, more especially as Ulick O'More
and Maurice had worn out the little brass piece of ordnance in firing feux de joie.

'But,' said Maurice, 'papa always said it was not true.  Now you only said so when you found
the bells were ringing for that, and not for you.'

Maurice's observations were not always convenient.  Algernon, with much pomp, had caused a
horse to be led to the door, for which he had lately paid eighty guineas, and he was expatiating
on its merits, when Maurice broke out, 'That's Macheath, the horse that Archie Tritton bought
of Mr. Nugent's coachman for twenty pounds.'

'Hush, Maurice!' said his father, 'you know nothing of it; and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy pursued,
'It was bred at Lord Lewthorp's, and sold because it was too tall for its companion.  Laing
was on the point of sending it to Tattersalls, where he was secure of a hundred, but he was
willing to oblige me, as we had had transactions before.'

'Papa!' cried Maurice, 'I know it is Macheath, for Mr. Tritton showed him to Gilbert and me,
when he had just got him, and said he was a showy beast, but incurably lame, so he should get
what he could for him from Laing.  Now, James, isn't it?' he called to the servant who was
sedulously turning away a grinning face, but just muttered, 'Same, sir.'

Mr. Kendal charitably looked the other way, and Algernon muttered some species of imprecation.

Thenceforth Maurice took every occasion of inquiring what had become of Macheath, whether Laing
had refunded the price, and what had been done to him for telling stories.

If the boy began in innocence, he went on in mischief; he was just old enough to be a most
aggravating compound of simplicity and malice.  He was fully aware that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy
was held cheap by his own favourites, and had been partly the cause of his dear Gilbert's troubles,
and his sharp wits and daring nature were excited to the utmost by the solemn irritation that
he produced.  Not only was it irresistibly droll to tease one so destitute of fun, but he had
the strongest desire to see how angry it was possible to make the big brother-in-law, of whom
every one seemed in awe.

First, he had recourse to the old term Polysyllable, and when Lucy remonstrated, he answered,
'I've a right to call my brother what I please.'

'You know how angry mamma would be to hear you.'

'Mamma calls him the Polysyllable herself,' said Maurice, looking full at his victim.

Lucy, who would have given the world to hinder this epithet from coming to her husband's knowledge,
began explaining something about Gilbert's nonsense before he knew him, and how it had been
long disused.

'That's not true, Lucy,' quoth the tormentor.  'I heard mamma tell Sophy herself this morning
to write for some fish-sauce, because she said that Polysyllable was so fanciful about his dinner.'

Lucy was ready to cry, and Algernon, endeavouring to recal his usual dignity, exclaimed, 'If
Mrs. Kendal--I mean, Mrs. Kendal has it in her power to take liberties, but if I find you repeating
such again, you little imp, it shall be at your risk.'

'What will you do to me?' asked the sturdy varlet.

'Dear Maurice, I hope you'll never know!  Pray don't try!' cried Lucy; but if she had had any
knowledge of character, she would have seen that she had only provoked the little Berserkar's
curiosity, and had made him determined on proving the undefined threat.  So the unfortunate
Algernon seldom descended the stairs without two childish faces being protruded from the balusters
of the nursery-flight over-head, pursuing him with hissing whispers of 'Polysyllable' and 'Polly-silly,'
and if he ventured on indignant gestures, Maurice returned them with nutcracker grimaces and
provoking assurances to his little sister that he could not hurt her.

Algernon could not complain without making himself ridiculous, and Albinia was too much engaged
to keep watch over her son, so that the persecution daily became more intolerable, and barren
indications of wrath were so diverting to the little monkey, that the presence of the heads
of the family was the sole security from his tricks.  Poor Lucy was the chief sufferer, unable
to restrain her brother, and enduring the brunt of her husband's irritation, with the great
disappointment of being unable to make him happy at her home, and fearing every day that he
would fulfil his threat of not staying another week in the house with that intolerable child,
for the sake of any one's grandmother.

Tidings came, however, that completely sobered Maurice, and made them unable to think of moving.
It was the first rumour of the charge of Balaklava, with the report that the 25th Lancers were
cut to pieces. In spite of Algernon's reiteration that telegraphs were lies, all the household
would have been glad to lose the sense of existence during the time of suspense.  Albinia's
heart was wrung as she thought of the cold hurried manner of the last farewell, and every look
she cast at her husband's calm melancholy face, seemed to be asking pardon that his son was
not safe in India.

Late that evening the maid came hurriedly in with a packet of papers. 'A telegraph, ma'am,
come express from Hadminster.'

It was to Mrs Kendal from one of her friends at the Horse Guards. She did not know how she
found courage to turn her eyes on it, but her shriek was not of sorrow.

'Major the Honourable F. Ferrars, severely wounded--right arm amputated.'

'Lieutenant Gilbert Kendal, slightly wounded--contusion, rib broken.'

She saw the light of thankfulness break upon Mr. Kendal's face, and the next moment flew up
to her boy's bed-side.  He started up, half asleep, but crying out, Mamma, where's Gibbie?'

'Safe, safe!  Maurice dearest, safe; only slightly wounded!  Oh, Maurice, God has been very
good to us!'

He flung his arms round her neck, as she knelt beside his crib in the dark, and thus Mr. Kendal
found the mother and son.  As he bent to kiss them, Maurice exclaimed, with a sort of anger,
'Oh, mamma, why have I got a bullet in my throat?'

Albinia laughed a little hysterically, as if she had the like bullet.

'It was very kind of Lord H----,' fervently exclaimed Mr. Kendal; 'you must write to thank
him, Albinia.  Gilbert may be considered safe while he is laid up.  Perhaps he may be sent
home.  What should you say to that, Maurice?'

'Oh! I wouldn't come home to lose the fun,' said Maurice.  'Oh, mamma, let me get up to tell
Awkey, and run up to Ulick!  Gilbert will be the colonel when I'm a cornet!  Oh!  I must get up!'

His outspoken childish joy seemed to relieve Albinia's swelling heart, too full for the expression
of thankfulness, and the excitement was too much even for the boy, for he burst into passionate
sobs when forbidden to get up and waken his little sister.

The sobering came in Mr. Kendal's mention of Fred.  Albinia was obliged to ask what had happened
to him, and was shocked at having overlooked so terrible a misfortune; but Maurice seemed to
be quite satisfied.  'You know, mamma, it said they were cut to pieces.  Can't they make him
a wooden arm?' evidently thinking he could be repaired as easily as the creatures in his sister's
Noah's Ark.  Even Algernon showed a heartiness and fellow-feeling that seemed to make him more
like one of the family.  Moreover, he was so much elevated at the receipt of a telegraph direct
from the fountain-head, that he rode about the next day over all the neighbourhood with the
tidings and comported himself as though he had private access to all Lord Raglan's secrets.

The unwonted emotion tamed Maurice for several days, and his behaviour was the better for his
daily rides with papa to Hadminster, to forestall the second post.  At last, on his return,
his voice rang through the house.  'Mamma, where are you?  The letter is come, and Gilbert
shot two Russians, and saved Cousin Fred!'

'I opened your letter, Albinia,' said Mr. Kendal; and, as she took it from him, he said, 'Thank
God, I never dared hope for such a day as this!'

He shut himself into the library, while Albinia was sharing with Sophy the precious letter,
but with a moment's disappointment at finding it not from Gilbert, but from her brother William.

'Before you receive this,' he wrote, 'you will have heard of the affair of to-day, and that
our two lads have come out of it better than some others.  There are but nine officers living,
and only four unhurt out of the 25th Lancers, and Fred's escape is entirely owing to your son.'

Then followed a brief narrative of the events of Balaklava, that fatal charge so well described
as 'magnifique mais pas la guerre,' a history that seemed like a dream in connexion with the
timid Gilbert. His individual story was thus:--He safely rode the 'half a league' forward,
but when more than half way back, his horse was struck to the ground by a splinter of the same
shell that overthrew Major Ferrars, at a few paces' distance from him.  Quickly disengaging
himself from his horse, Gilbert ran to assist his friend, and succeeded in extricating him
from his horse, and supporting him through the remainder of the terrible space commanded by
the batteries.  Fred, unable to move without aid, and to whom each step was agony, had entreated
Gilbert to relinquish his hold, and not peril himself for a life already past rescue; but Gilbert
had not seemed to hear, and when several of the enemy came riding down on them, he had used
his revolver with such effect, as to lay two of the number prostrate, and deter the rest from
repeating the attack.

'All this I heard from Fred,' continued the General; 'he is in his usual spirits, and tells
me that he feels quite jolly since his arm has been off, and he has been in his own bed, but
I fear he has a good deal to suffer, for his right side is terribly lacerated, and I shall
be glad when the next few days are over.  He desires me to say with his love that the best
turn you ever did him was putting young Kendal into the 25th.  Tell your husband that I congratulate
him on his son's conduct, and am afraid that his promotion without purchase is only too certain.
Gilbert's only message was his love.  Speaking seems to give him pain, and he is altogether
more prostrated than so slight a wound accounts for; but when I saw him, he had just been told
of the death of his colonel and several of his brother officers, among them young Wynne, who
shared his tent; and he was completely overcome.  There is, however, no cause for uneasiness;
he had not even been aware that he was hurt, until he fainted while Fred was under the surgeon's
hands, and was then found to have an ugly contusion of the chest, and a fracture of the uppermost
rib on the left side.  A few days' rest will set all that to rights, and I expect to see him
on horseback before we can ship poor Fred for Scutari.  In the meantime they are both in Fred's
tent, which is fairly comfortable.'

Albinia understood whence came Gilbert's heroism.  He had charged at first, as he had hunted
with Maurice, because there was no doing otherwise, and in the critical moment the warm heart
had done the rest, and equalled constitutional courage: but then, she saw the gentle tender
spirit sinking under the slight injury, and far more at the suffering of his friend, the deadly
havoc among his comrades, and his own share in the carnage.  The General coolly mentioned the
two enemies who had fallen by his pistol, and Maurice shouted about them as if they had been
two rabbits, but she knew enough of Gilbert to be sure that what he might do in the exigency
of self-defence, would shock and sicken him in recollection.  Poor Fred! how little would she
once have believed that his frightful wound could be a secondary matter with her, only enhancing
her gratitude on account of another.

That was a happy evening; Maurice was sent to ask Ulick to dinner, and at dessert drank the
healths of his soldier relatives, among whom Mr. Kendal with a smile at Ulick, included Bryan
O'More.

In the universal good-will of her triumph, Albinia having read her precious letter to every
one, resolved to let the Drurys hear it, before forwarding it to Fairmead.  Lucy's neglect
of that family was becoming flagrant, and Albinia was resolved to take her to make the call.
Therefore, after promulgating her intentions too decidedly for Algernon to oppose them, she
set out with Lucy in the most virtuous state of mind.  Maurice was to ride out with his father,
and Sophy was taking care of grandmamma, so she made her expedition with an easy mind, and
absolutely enjoyed the change of scenery.

The war had drawn every one nearer together, and Mrs. Drury was really anxious about Gilbert,
and grateful for the intelligence.  Nor did Lucy meet with anything unpleasant.  Mrs. Cavendish
Dusautoy, in waist-deep flounces, a Paris bonnet, and her husband's dignity, impressed her
cousins, and whatever use they might make of their tongues, it was not till after she was gone.

As the carriage stopped at the door, Sophy came out with such a perturbed an expression, as
seemed to prelude fatal tidings; and Lucy was pausing to listen, when she was hastily summoned
by her husband.

'Oh! mamma, he has struck Maurice such a blow!' cried Sophy.

'Algernon? where's Maurice? is he hurt?'

'He is in the library with papa.'

She was there in a moment.  Maurice sat on his father's knee, listening to Pope's Homer, leaning
against him, with eye, cheek, and nose exceedingly swelled and reddened; but these were symptoms
of which she had seen enough in past days not to be greatly terrified, even while she exclaimed
aghast.

'Aye!' said Mr. Kendal, sternly.  'What do you think of young Dusautoy's handiwork?'

'What could you have done to him, Maurice?'

'I painted his image.'

'The children got into the painting-room,' said Mr. Kendal, 'and did some mischief; Maurice
ought to have known better, but that was no excuse for his violence.  I do not know what would
have been the consequence, if poor little Albinia's screams had not alarmed me.  I found Algernon
striking him with his doubled fist.'

'But I gave him a dig in the nose,' cried Maurice, in exultation; 'I pulled ever so much hair
out of his whiskers.  I had it just now.'

'This sounds very sad,' said Albinia, interrupting the search for the trophy.  'What were you
doing in the painting-room?  You know you had no business there.'

'Why, mamma, little Awk wanted me to look at the pictures that Lucy shows her.  And then, don't
you know his image? the little white bare boy pulling the thorn out of his foot.  Awkey said
he was naughty not to have his clothes on, and so I thought it would be such fun to make a
militiaman of him, and so the paints were all about, and so I gave him a red coat and black
trousers.'

'Oh, Maurice, Maurice, how could you?'

'I couldn't help it, mamma!  I did so want to see what Algernon would do!'

'Well.'

'So he came up and caught us.  And wasn't he in a jolly good rage? that's all.  He stamped,
and called me names, and got hold of me to shake me, but I know I kicked him well, and I had
quite a handful out of his whisker; but you see poor little Awkey is only a girl, and couldn't
help squalling, so papa came up.'

'And in time!' said Mr. Kendal; 'he reeled against me, almost stunned, and was hardly himself
for some moments.  His nose bled violently.  That fellow's fist might knock down an ox.'

'But he didn't knock me down,' said Maurice.  'You told me he did not, papa.'

'That's all he thinks of!' said Mr. Kendal, in admiration.

'Not a cry nor a tear from first to last.  I told Sophy to let me know when Bowles came.'

'For a black eye?' cried the hard-hearted mother, laughing.  'You should have seen what Maurice
and Fred used to do to each other.'

'Oh, tell me, mamma,' cried Maurice, eagerly.

'Not now, master,' she said, not thinking his pugnacity in need of such respectable examples.
'It would be more to the purpose to ask Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's pardon for such very bad behaviour.'

Mr. Kendal looked at her in indignant surprise.  'Ours is not the side for the apology,' he
said.  'If Dusautoy has a spark of proper feeling, he must excuse himself for such a brutal
assault.'

'I am afraid Maurice provoked it; I hope my little boy is sorry for having been so mischievous,
and sees that he deserves--'

Mr. Kendal silenced her by an impatient gesture, and feeling that anything was better than
the discussion before the boy, she tried to speak indifferently, and not succeeding, left the
room, much annoyed that alarm and indignation had led the indulgent father to pet and coax
the spirit that only wanted to be taken down, and as if her discipline had received its first
real shock.

Mr. Kendal followed her upstairs, no less vexed.  'Albinia, this is absurd,' he said.  'I will
not have the child punished, or made to ask pardon for being shamefully struck.'

'It was shameful enough,' said Albinia; 'but, after all, I can't wonder that Algernon was in
a passion; Maurice did behave very ill, and it would be much better for him if you would not
make him more impudent than he is already.'

'I did not expect you to take part against your own child, when he has been so severely maltreated,'
said he, with such unreasonable displeasure, that almost thinking it play, she laughed and
said, 'You are as bad as the mothers of the school-children, when they wont have them beaten.'

He gave a look as if loth to trust his ears, walked into his room, and shut the door.  The
thrill of horror came over her that this was the first quarrel.  She had been saucy when he
was serious, and had offended him.  She sprang to the door, knocked and called, and was in
agony at the moment's delay ere he returned, with his face still stern and set.  Pleading and
earnest she raised her eyes, and surrendered unconditionally.  'Dear Edmund, don't be vexed
with me, I should not have said it.'

'Never mind,' he said, affectionately; 'I do not wish to interfere with your authority, but
it would be impossible to punish a child who has suffered so severely; and I neither choose
that Dusautoy should be made to think himself the injured party, nor that Maurice should be
put to the pain of apologizing for an offence, which the other party has taken on himself to
cancel with interest.'

Albinia was too much demolished to recollect her two arguments, that pride on their side would
only serve to make Algernon prouder, and that she did not believe that asking pardon would
be so bitter a pill to Maurice as his father supposed.  She could only feel thankful to have
been forgiven for her own offence.

When they met at dinner, all were formal, Algernon stiff and haughty, ashamed, but too grand
to betray himself, and Lucy restless and uneasy, her eyes looking as if she had been crying.
When Maurice came in at dessert, the fourth part of his countenance emulating the unlucky cast
in gorgeous hues of crimson and violet, Algernon was startled, and turning to Albinia, muttered
something about 'never having intended,' and 'having had no idea.'

He might have said more, if Mr. Kendal, with Maurice on his knee, had not looked as if he expected
it; and that look sealed Albinia's lips against expressing regret for the provocation; but
Maurice exclaimed, 'Never mind, Algernon, it was all fair, and it doesn't hurt now.  I wouldn't
have touched your image, but that I wanted to know what you would do to me.  Shake hands; people
always do when they've had a good mill.'

Mr. Kendal looked across the table to his wife in a state of unbounded exultation in his generous
boy, and Albinia felt infinitely relieved and grateful.  Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy took the firm
young paw, and said with an attempt at condescension, 'Very well, Maurice, the subject shall
be mentioned no more, since you have received a severer lesson than I intended, and appear
sensible of your error.'

'It wasn't you that made me so,' began Maurice, with defiant eye; but with a strong sense of
'let well alone,' his father cut him short with, 'That's enough, my man, you've said all that
can be wished,' lifted him again on his knee, and stopped his mouth with almonds and raisins.

The subject was mentioned no more; Lucy considered peace as proclaimed, and herself relieved
from the necessity of such an unprecedented deed as preferring an accusation against Maurice,
and Albinia, unaware of the previous persecution, did not trace that Maurice considered himself
as challenged to prove, that experience of his brother-in-law's fist did not suffice to make
him cease from his 'fun.'

Two days after, Algernon was coming in from riding, when a simple voice upon the stairs observed,
'Here's such a pretty picture!'

'Eh! what?' said Algernon; and Maurice held it near to him as he stood taking off his great coat.

'Such a pretty picture, but you mustn't have it!  No, it is Ulick's.'

'Heavens and earth!' thundered Algernon, as he gathered up the meaning.  'Who has dared--?
Give it me--or--' and as soon as he was freed from the sleeves, he snatched at the paper, but
the boy had already sprung up to the first landing, and waving his treasure, shouted, 'No,
it's not for you, I'll not give you Ulick's picture.'

'Ulick !' cried Algernon, in redoubled fury.  'You're put up to this! Give it me this instant,
or it shall be the worse for you;' but ere he could stride up the first flight, Maurice's last
leg was disappearing round the corner above, and the next moment the exhibition was repeated
overhead in the gallery.  Thither did Algernon rush headlong, following the scampering pattering
feet, till the door of Maurice's little room was slammed in his face.  Bursting it open, he
found the chamber empty, but there was a shout of elvish laughter outside, and a cry of dismay
coming up from the garden, impelled him to mount the rickety deal-table below the deep sunk
dormer window, when thrusting out his head and shoulders, he beheld his wife and her parents
gazing up in terror from the lawn.  No wonder, for there was a narrow ledge of leading without,
upon which Maurice had suddenly appeared, running with unwavering steps till in a moment he
stooped down, and popped through the similar window of Gilbert's room.

While still too dizzy with horror to feel secure that the child was indeed safe within, those
below were startled by a frantic shout from Algernon: 'Let me out!  I say, the imp has locked
me in!  Let me out!'

Albinia flew into the house and upstairs.   Maurice was flourishing the key, and executing
a war-dance before the captive's door, with a chant alternating of war-whoops, 'Promise not
to hurt it, and I'll let you out!' and 'Pity poor prisoners in a foreign land!'

She called to him to desist, but he was too wild to be checked by her voice, and as she advanced
to capture him, he shot like an arrow to the other end of the passage, and down the back-stairs.
She promised speedy rescue, and hurried down, hoping to seize the culprit in the hall, but
he had whipped out at the back-door, and was making for the garden gate, when his father hastened
down the path to meet him, and seeing his retreat cut off, he plunged into the bushes, and
sprang like a cat up a cockspur-thorn, too slender for ascent by a heavier weight, and thence
grinned and waved his hand to his prisoner at the window.

'Maurice,' called his father, 'what does this mean?'

'I only want to take home Ulick's picture.  Then I'll let him out.'

'What picture?'

'That's my secret.'

'This is not play, Maurice,' said Albinia.  'Attend to papa.'

The boy swung the light shrub about with him in a manner fearful to behold, and looked irresolute.
Lucy put in her cry, 'You very naughty child, give up the key this moment,' and above, Algernon
bawled appeals to Mr. Kendal, and threats to Maurice.

'Silence!' said Mr. Kendal, sternly.  'Maurice, this must not be. Come down, and give me the
key of your room.'

'I will, papa,' said Maurice, in a reasonable voice.  'Only please promise not to let Algernon
have Ulick's picture, for I got it without his knowing it.'

'I promise,' said Mr. Kendal.  'Let us put an end to this.'

Maurice came down, and brought the key to his father, and while Lucy hastened to release her
husband, Mr. Kendal seized the boy, finding him already about again to take flight.

'Papa, let me take home Ulick's picture before he gets out,' said Maurice, finding the grasp
too strong for him; but Mr. Kendal had taken the picture out of his hand, and looked at it
with changed countenance.

It depicted the famous drawing-room scene, in its native element, the moon squinting through
inky clouds at Lucy swooning on the sofa, while the lofty presence of the Polysyllable discharged
the fluid from the inkstand.

'Did Mr. O'More give you this?' asked Mr. Kendal.

'No, it tumbled out of his paper-case.  You know he said I might go to his rooms and get the
Illustrated News with the picture of Balaklava, and so the newspaper knocked the paper-case
down, and all the things tumbled out, so I picked this up, and thought I would see what Algernon
would say to it, and then put it back again.  Let me have it, papa, if he catches me, he'll
tear it to smithereens.'

'Don't talk Irish, sir,' said his father.  'I see where your impertinence comes from, and I
will put a stop to it.'

Maurice gave back a step, amazed at his father's unwonted anger, but far greater wrath was
descending in the person of Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, who came striding across the lawn, and
planting himself before his father-in-law, demanded, 'I beg to know, sir, if it is your desire
that I should be deliberately insulted in this house?'

'No one can be more concerned than I am at what has occurred.'

'Very well, sir; then I require that this intolerable child be soundly flogged, that beggarly
Irishman kicked out, and that infamous libel destroyed!'

'Oh, papa,' cried Maurice, 'you promised me the picture should be safe!'

'I promise you, you impudent brat,' cried Algernon, 'that you shall learn what it is to insult
your elders!  You shall be flogged till you repent it!'

'You will allow me to judge of the discipline of my own family,' said Mr. Kendal.

'Ay! I knew how it would be!  You encourage that child in every sort of unbearable impudence;
but I have endured it long enough, and I give you warning that I do not remain another night
under this roof unless I see the impertinence flogged out of him.'

'Papa never whips me,' interposed Maurice.  'You must ask mamma.'

Mr. Kendal bit his lips, and Albinia could have smiled, but their sense of the ludicrous inflamed
Algernon, and like one beside himself, he swung round, and declaring he should ask his uncle
if that were proper treatment, he marched across the lawn, while Mr. Kendal exclaimed, 'More
childish than Maurice!'

'Oh, mamma, what shall I do?' was Lucy's woful cry, as she turned back, finding herself unable
to keep up with his huge step, and her calls disregarded.

'My dear,' said Albinia, affectionately, 'you had better compose yourself and follow him. 
His uncle will bring him to reason, and then you can tell him how sorry we are.'

'You may assure him,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that I am as much hurt as he can be, that such an improper
use should have been made of O'More's intimacy here, and I mean to mark my sense of it.'

'And,' said Lucy, 'I don't think anything would pacify him so much as Maurice being only a
little beaten, not to hurt him, you know.'

'If Maurice be punished, it shall not be in revenge,' said Mr. Kendal.

'I'm afraid nothing else will do,' said Lucy, wringing her hands. 'He has really declared that
he will not sleep another night here unless Maurice is punished; and whatever he says, he'll
do, and I know it would kill me to go away in this manner.'

Her father confidently averred that he would do no such thing, but she cried so much as to
move Maurice into exclaiming, 'Look here, Lucy, I'll come up with you, and let him give me
one good punch, and then we shall all be comfortable again.'

'I don't know about the punching,' said Albinia; 'but I think the least you can do, Maurice,
is to go and ask his forgiveness for having been so very naughty.  You were not thinking what
you were about when you locked him in.'

This measure was adopted, Mr. Kendal accompanying Lucy and the boy, while Albinia went in search
of Sophy, whom she found in grandmamma's room, looking very pale.  'Well?' was the inquiry,
and she told what had passed.

'I hope Maurice will be punished,' said Sophy; so unwonted a sentiment, that Albinia quite
started, though it was decidedly her own opinion.

'That meddling with papers was very bad,' she said, with an extenuating smile.

'Fun is a perfect demon when it becomes master,' said Sophy.  It was plain that it was not
Maurice that she was thinking of, but the caricature.  Her sister should have been sacred from
derision.

'We must remember,' she said, 'that it was only through Maurice's meddling that we became aware
of the existence of this precious work. It is not as if ho had shown it to any one.

'How many of the O'Mores have made game of it?' asked Sophy, bitterly.  'No, I am glad I know
of it, I shall not be deceived any more.'

With these words she withdrew, evidently resolved to put an end to the subject.  Her face was
like iron, and Albinia grieved for the deep resentment that the man whom she had ventured to
think of as devoted to herself, had made game of her sister.  Poor Sophy, to her that tryste
had been a subject of unmitigated affliction and shame, and it was a cruel wound that Ulick
O'More should, of all men, have turned it into ridicule.  What would be the effect on her?

In process of time Mr. Kendal returned.  'Albinia,' he said, 'this is a most unfortunate affair.
He is perfectly impracticable, insists on starting for Paris to-morrow, and I verily believe
he will.'

'Poor Lucy.'

'She is in such distress, that I could not bear to look at her, but he will not attend to her,
nor to his uncle and aunt.  Mrs. Dusautoy proposed that they should come to the vicarage, where
there would be no danger of collisions with Maurice; but his mind can admit no idea but that
he has been insulted, and that we encourage it, and he thinks his dignity concerned in resenting
it.'

'Not much dignity in being driven off the field by a child of six years old.'

'So his aunt told him, but he mixes it up with O'More, and insists on my complaining to Mr.
Goldsmith, and getting the lad dismissed for a libellous caricaturist, as he calls it.  Now,
little as I should have expected such conduct from O'More, it could not be made a ground of
complaint to his uncle.'

'I should think not.  No one with more wit than Algernon would have dreamt of it!  But if Ulick
came and apologized?  Ah! but I forgot! Mr. Goldsmith sent him to London this morning.  Well,
it may be better that he should be out of the way of Algernon in his present mood.'

'Humph!' said Mr. Kendal.  'It is the first time I ever allowed a stranger to be intimate in
my family, and it shall be the last.  I never imagined him aware of the circumstance.'

'Nor I; I am sure none of us mentioned it.'

'Maurice told him, I suppose.  It is well that we should be aware who has instigated the child's
impertinence.  I shall keep him as much as possible with me; he must be cured of Irish brogue
and Irish coolness before they are confirmed.'

Mr. Kendal's conscience was evidently relieved by transferring to the Irishman the imputation
of fostering Maurice's malpractices.

They were interrupted by Lucy's arrival.  She was come to take leave of home, for her lord
was not to be dissuaded from going to London by the evening's train.  The greater the consternation,
the sweeter his revenge.  Never able to see more than one side of a question, he could not
perceive how impossible it was for the Kendals to fulfil his condition with regard to Ulick
O'More, and he sullenly adhered to his obstinate determination.  Lucy was in an agony of grief,
and perhaps the most painful blow was the perception how little he was swayed by consideration
for her.  Her maid packed, while her parents tried to console her.  It was easier when she
bewailed the terrors of the voyage, and the uncertainty of hearing of dear grandmamma and dear
Gilbert, than when she sobbed about Algernon having no feeling for her.  It might be only too
true, but her wifely submission ought not to have acknowledged it, and they would not hear
when they could not comfort; and so they were forced to launch her on the world, with a tyrant
instead of a guide, and dreading the effect of dissipation on her levity of mind, as much as
they grieved for her feeble spirit. It was a piteous parting--a mournful departure for a bride--a
heavy penalty for vanity and weakness.

Unfortunately the result is to an action as the lens through which it is viewed, and the turpitude
of the deed seems to increase or diminish according to the effect it produces.

Had it been in Algernon Dusautoy's nature to receive the joke good-humouredly, it might have
been regarded as an audacious exercise of wit, and have been quickly forgotten, but when it
had actually made a breach between him and his wife's family, and driven him from Bayford when
everything conspired to make his departure unfeelingly cruel, the caricature was regarded as
a serious insult and an abuse of intimacy.  Even Mr. Kendal was not superior to this view,
feeling the offence with all the sensitiveness of a hot-tempered man, a proud reserved guardian
of the sanctities of home, and of a father who had seen his daughter's weakest and most faulty
action turned into ridicule, and he seemed to feel himself bound to atone for not going to
all the lengths to which Algernon would have impelled him, by showing the utmost displeasure
within the bounds of common sense.

Albinia, better appreciating the irresistibly ludicrous aspect of the adventure, argued that
the sketch harmlessly shut up in a paper-case showed no great amount of insolence, and that
considering how the discovery had been made, it ought not to be visited.  She thought the drawing
had better be restored without remarks by the same hand that had abstracted it; but Mr. Kendal
sternly declared this was impossible, and Sophy's countenance seconded him.

'Well, then,' said Albinia, 'put it into my hands.  I'm a bad manager in general, but I can
promise that Ulick will come down so shocked and concerned, that you will not have the heart
not to forgive him.'

'The question is not of forgiveness,' said Sophy, in the most rigid of voices, as she saw yielding
in her father's face; if any one had to forgive, it was poor Lucy and Algernon.  All we have
to do, is to be on our guard for the future.'

'Sophy is right,' said Mr. Kendal; 'intimacy must be over with one who has so little discretion
or good taste.'

'Then after his saving Maurice, he is to be given up, because he quizzed the Polysyllable?'
cried Albinia.

'I do not give him up,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I highly esteem his good qualities, and should be
happy to do him a service, but I cannot have my family at the mercy of his wit, nor my child
taught disrespect. We have been unwisely familiar, and must retreat.'

'And what do you mean us to do?' exclaimed Albinia.  'Are we to cut him systematically?'

'I do not know what course you may adopt,' said Mr. Kendal, in a tone whose grave precision
rebuked her half petulant, half facetious inquiry.  'I have told you that I do not mean to
do anything extravagant, nor to discontinue ordinary civilities, but I think you will find
that our former habits are not resumed.'

'And Maurice must not be always with him,' said Sophy.

'Certainly not; I shall keep the boy with myself.'

It was with the greatest effort that Albinia held her tongue.  To have Sophy not only making
common cause against her, but inciting her father to interfere about Maurice, was well-nigh
intolerable, and she only endured it by sealing her lips as with a bar of iron.

By-and-by came the reflection that if poor Sophy had a secret cause of bitterness, it was she
herself who had given those thoughts substance and consciousness, and she quickly forgave every
one save herself and Algernon.

As to her little traitor son, she took him seriously in hand at bedtime, and argued the whole
transaction with him, representing the dreadful consequences of meddling with people's private
papers under trust.  Here was poor Lucy taken away from home, and papa made very angry with
Ulick, because Maurice had been meddlesome and mischievous; and though he had not been beaten
for it, he would find it a worse punishment not to be trusted another time, nor allowed to
be with Ulick.

Maurice turned round with mouth open at hearing of papa's anger with Ulick, and the accusation
of having brought his friend into trouble.

'Why, Maurice, you remember how unhappy we were, Gilbert and all.  It was because it was sadly
wrong of Gilbert and Lucy to have let Algernon in without papa's knowing it, and it was not
right or friendly in Ulick to laugh at what was so wrong, and grieved us all so much.'

'It was such fun,' said Maurice.

'Yes, Maurice; but fun is no excuse for doing what is unkind and mischievous.  Ulick would
not have been amused if he had cared as much for us as we thought he did, but, after all, his
drawing the picture would have done no harm but for a little boy, whom he trusted, never thinking
that an unkind wish to tease, would betray this foolish action, and set his best friends against
him.'

'I did not know I should,' said Maurice, winking hard.

'No; you did not know you were doing what, if you were older, would have been dishonourable.'

That word was too much!  First he hid his face from his mother, and cried out fiercely, 'I've
not--I've not been that and clenched his fist.  'Don't say it, mamma.'

'If you had known what you were doing, it would have been dishonourable,' she repeated, gravely.
'It will be a long time before you earn trust and confidence again.'

There was a great struggle with his tears.  She had punished him, and almost more than she
could bear to see, but she knew the conquest must be secured, and she tried, while she caressed
him, to make him look at the real cause of his lapse; he declared that it was 'such fun' to
provoke Algernon, and a little more brought out a confession of the whole course of persecution,
the child's voice becoming quite triumphant as he told of the success of his tricks, and his
mother, though appalled at their audacity, with great difficulty hindering herself from manifesting
her amusement.

She did not wonder at Algernon's having found it intolerable, and though angry with him for
having made himself such fair game, she set to work to impress upon Maurice his own errors,
and the hatefulness of practical jokes, and she succeeded so far as to leave him crying himself
to sleep, completely subdued, while she felt as if all the tears ought to have been shed by
herself for her want of vigilance.

Conflicting duties! how hard to strike the balance!  She had readily given up her own pleasures
for the care of Mrs. Meadows, but when it came to her son's training, it was another question.

She much wished to see the note with which Mr. Kendal returned the unfortunate sketch, but
one of the points on which he was sensitive, was the sacredness of his correspondence, and
all that she heard was, that Ulick had answered 'not at all as Mr. Kendal had expected; he
was nothing but an Irishman, after all.'  But at last she obtained a sight of the note.

                                       'Bayford, Nov. 20th, 1854.
'Dear Sir,

'I was much astonished at the contents of your letter of this morning, and greatly concerned
that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy should have done so much honour to any production of mine, as to
alter his arrangements on that account.

'As the scrawl in question was not meant to meet the eye of any living being, I should, for
my own part, have considered it proper to take no notice of what was betrayed by mere accident.
I should have considered it more conducive to confidence between gentlemen.  I fully acquiesce
in what you say of the cessation of our former terms of acquaintance, and with many thanks
for past kindness, believe me,

                                      'Your obedient servant,
                                            'U. O'MORE.'

Nothing was more evidently written in a passion at the invasion of these private papers, and
Albinia, though she had always feared he might consider himself the aggrieved party, had hardly
expected so much proud irritation and so little regret.  Mr. Kendal called him 'foolish boy,'
and tried to put the matter aside, but he was much hurt, and Ulick put himself decidedly in
the wrong by passing in the street with a formal bow, when Mr. Kendal, according to his purpose
of ordinary civility without an open rupture, would have shaken hands.

Sophy looked white, stern, and cold, but said not a word; she deepened her father's displeasure
quite sufficiently by her countenance.  His was grave disappointment in a youth whom he found
less grateful than he thought he had a right to expect; hers was the rankling of what she deemed
an insult to her sister, and the festering of a wound of which she was ashamed.  She meant
to bear it well, but it made her very hard and rigid, and even the children could hardly extract
a smile from her.  She seemed to have made a determination to do all that Lucy or herself had
ever done, and more too, and listened to no entreaties to spare herself.  Commands were met
with sullen resignation, entreaties were unavailing, and both in the sickroom and the parish,
she insisted on working beyond her powers.  It was a nightly battle to send her to bed, and
Albinia suspected that she did not sleep.  Meantime Lucy had sailed, and was presently heard
of in a whirl of excitement that shortened her letters, and made them joyous and self-important.

'Ah!' said Sophy, 'she will soon forget that she ever had a home.'

'Poor dear!  Wait till trouble comes, and she will remember it only too sadly,' sighed Albinia.

'Trouble is certain enough,' said Sophy; 'but I don't think what we deserve does us much good.'

Sophy could see nothing but the most ungentle and gloomy aspects. Gilbert had not yet written,
and she was convinced that he was either very ill, or had only recovered to be killed at Inkermann,
and she would only sigh at the Gazette that announced Lieutenant Gilbert Kendal's promotion
to be Captain, and Major the Honourable Frederick Ferrars to be Lieutenant-Colonel.

The day after, however, came the long expected letter from the captain himself.  It was to
Mrs. Kendal, and she detected a shade of disappointment on her husband's face, so she would
have handed it to him at once, but he said, 'No, the person to whom the letter is addressed,
should always be the first to read it.'

The letter began with Gilbert's happiness in those from home, which he called the greatest
pleasure he had ever known.  He feared he had caused uneasiness by not writing sooner, but
it had been out of his power while Fred Ferrars was in danger.  Then followed the account of
the severe illness from which Fred was scarcely beginning to rally, though that morning, on
hearing that he was to be sent home as soon as he could move, he had talked about Canada and
Emily.  Gilbert said that not only time but strength had been wanting for writing, for attendance
on Fred had been all that he could attempt, since moving produced so much pain and loss of
breath, that he had been forced to be absolutely still whenever he was not wanted, but he was
now much better.  'Though,' he continued, 'I do not now mind telling you that I had thought
myself gone.  You, who have known all my feelings, and have borne with them so kindly, will
understand the effect upon me, when on the night previous to the 25th, I distinctly heard my
own name, in Edmund's voice, at the head of my bed, just as he used to call me when he had
finished his lessons, and wanted me to come out with him.  As I started up, I heard it again
outside the tent.  I ran to the door, but of course there was nothing, nor did poor Wynne hear
anything.  I lay awake for some time, but slept at last, and had forgotten all by morning.
It did not even occur to me when I saw the pleasant race they had cut out for us, nor through
the whole affair. Do not ask me to describe it, the scene haunts me enough.  When I found that
I had not come off unhurt, and it seemed as if I could not ask for one of our fellows but to
hear he was dead or dying, poor Wynne among them, then the voice seemed a summons.  I was thoroughly
done up, and could not even speak when General Ferrars came to me; I only wanted to be let
alone to die in peace.  I fancy I slept, for the next thing I heard was the Major's voice asking
for some water, too feebly to wake the fellow who had been left in charge.  I got up, and found
him in a state of high fever and great pain, and from that time to the present, I have hardly
thought of the circumstance, and know not why I have now written it to you.  Did my danger
actually bring Edmund nearer, or did its presence act on my imagination?  Be that as it may,
I think, after the first impression of awe and terror, the having heard the dear old voice
braced me, and gave me a sense of being near home and less lonely.  Not that my hurt has been
for an instant dangerous, and I am mending every day; if it were warmer I should get on faster,
but I cannot stir into the air without bringing on cough.  Tell Ulick O'More that we entertained
his brother at tea last evening, we were obliged to desire him to bring his own cup, and he
produced the shell of a land tortoise; it was very like the fox and the crane.  Poor fellow,
it was the first good meal he had for weeks, and I was glad he came in for some famous bread
that the General had sent us in.  He made us much more merry than was convenient to either
of us, not being in condition for laughing.  He is a fine lad, and liked by all.'  Then came
a break, and the letter closed with such tidings of Inkermann as had reached the invalid's tent.

A few lines from General Ferrars spoke of the improvement in both patients, adding that Fred
had had a hard struggle for his life, and had only been saved, by Gilbert's unremitting care
by day and night.

Heroism had not transformed Gilbert, and Albinia's old fondness glowed with double ardour as
she mused over his history of the battle-eve.  His father attributed the impression to a mind
full of presage and excitement, acted upon by strong memory; but woman-like, Albinia preferred
the belief that the one twin might have been an actual messenger to cheer and strengthen the
other for the coming trial.  Sophy only said, 'Gilbert's fancies as usual.'

'This was not like fancy,' said Albinia.  'This is an unkind way of taking it.'

'It is common sense,' she bluntly answered.  'I don't see why he should think that Edmund has
nothing better to do than to call him. It would be childish.'

Albinia did not reply, disturbed by this display of jealousy and harshness, as if every bud
of tenderness had been dried up and withered, and poor Sophy only wanted to run counter to
any obvious sentiment.

Albinia was grateful for the message which gave her an excuse for seeking Ulick out, and endeavouring
to conciliate him.  Mr. Kendal made no objection, and expressed a hope that he might have become
reasonable.  She therefore contrived to waylay him in the November darkness, holding out her
hand so that he took it at unawares, as if not recollecting that he was offended, but in the
midst his grasp relaxed, and his head went up.

'I have a message for you from Gilbert about your brother Bryan,' she said, and he could not
defend himself from manifesting eager interest, as she told of the tea-party; but that over,
it was in stiff formal English that he said, 'I hope you had a good account.'

It struck a chill, and she answered, almost imploringly, 'Gilbert is much better, thank you.'

'I am glad to hear it;' and he was going to bow and pass on, when she exclaimed,

'Ulick, why are we strangers?'

'It was agreed on all hands that things past could not be undone,' he frigidly replied.

'Too true,' she said; 'but I do not think you know how sorry we are for my poor little boy's
foolish trick.'

'I owe no displeasure to Maurice.  He knew no more what he was doing than if he had been a
gust of wind; but if the wind had borne a private paper to my feet, I would never have acted
on the contents.'

'Unhappily,' said Albinia, 'some revelations, though received against our will, cannot help
being felt.  We saw the drawing before we knew how he came by it, and you cannot wonder that
it gave pain to find that a scene so distressing to us should have furnished you with amusement.
It was absurd in itself, but we had hoped it was a secret, and it wounded us because we thought
you would have been tender of our feelings.'

'You don't mean that it was fact!' cried Ulick, stopping suddenly; and as her silence replied,
he continued, 'I give you my word and honour that I never imagined there was a word of truth
in the farrago old Biddy told me, and I'll not deny that I did scrawl the scene down as the
very picture of a bit of slander.  I only wonder I'd not brought it to yourself.'

'Pray let me hear what she told you.'

'Oh! she said they two had been colloguing together by moonlight, and you came home in the
midst, and Miss Kendal fainted away, so he catches up the ink and throws it over her instead
of water, and you and Mr. Kendal came in and were mad entirely; and Mr. Kendal threatened to
brain him with the poker if he did not quit it that instant, and sent Gilbert for a soldier
for opening the door to him, but you and Lucy went down on your bare knees to get him to relent.'

'Well, I own the poker does throw an air of improbability over the whole.  Minus that and the
knees, I am afraid it is only too true. I suppose it got abroad through the servants.'

'It was an unlucky goose-quill that lay so handy,' exclaimed Ulick; 'but you may credit me,
no eye but my own ever saw the scrawl, nor would have seen it.'

'Then, Ulick, if we all own that something is to be regretted, why do we stand aloof, and persist
in quarrelling?'

'I want no quarrel,' said Ulick, stiffly.  'Mr. Kendal intimated to me that he did not wish
for my company, and I'm not the man to force it.'

'Oh, Ulick, this is not what I hoped from you!'

'I'll tell you what, Mrs. Kendal, you could talk over the Giant's Causeway if you had a mind,'
said Ulick, with much agitation; 'but you must not talk over me, for your own judgment would
be against it. You know what I am, and what I came of, and what have I in the world except
the honour of a gentleman?  Mr. Kendal and yourself have been my kindest friends, and I'll
be grateful to my dying day; but if Mr. Kendal thinks I can submit tamely when he resents what
he never ought to have noticed, why, then, what have I to do but to show him the difference?
If his kindness was to me as a gentleman and his equal, I love and bless him for it, but if
it be a patronizing of the poor clerk, why, then, I owe it to myself and my people to show
that I can stand alone, without cringing, and being thankful for affronts.'

'Did it ever occur to you to think whether pride be a sin?'

''Tis not pride!' cried Ulick.  It is my duty to my family and my name.  You'd say yourself,
as you allowed before now, that it would be mere meanness and servility to swallow insults
for one's own profit; and if I were to say "you're welcome, with many thanks, to shuffle over
my private papers, and call myself to account," I'd better have given up my name at once, for
I'd have left the gentleman behind me.'

'I do believe it is solely for the O'Mores that you are making a duty of implacability!'

'It is a duty not to run from one's word, and debase oneself for one's own advantage.'

'One would think some wonderful advantage was held out to you.'

'The pleasantest hours of my life,' murmured he sadly, under his breath.

'Well, Ulick,' she said, holding out her hand, 'I'm not quite dissatisfied; I think some day
even an O'More will see that there is no exception from the law of forgiveness in their special
favour, and that you will not be able to go on resenting what we have suffered from the young
of the spider-monkey.'

Even this allusion produced no outward effect; he only shook hands gravely, saying, 'I never
did otherwise than forgive, and regret the consequences: I am very thankful for all your past
kindness.'

Worse than the Giant's Causeway, thought Albinia as she parted from him.  Nothing is so hopeless
as that sort of forgiveness, because it satisfies the conscience.

Mr. Kendal predicted that, the Keltic dignity having been asserted, good sense and principle
would restore things to a rational footing. What this meant might be uncertain, but he certainly
missed Prometheus, and found Maurice a poor substitute.  Indulgence itself could hardly hold
out in unmitigated intercourse with an obstreperous dunce not seven years old, and Maurice,
deprived of Gilbert, cut off from Ulick, with mamma busy, and Sophy out of spirits, underwent
more snubbing than had ever yet fallen to his lot.  Not that he was much concerned thereat;
and Mr. Kendal would resume his book after a lecture upon good manners, and then be roused
to find his library a gigantic cobweb, strings tied to every leg of table or chair, and Maurice
and the little Awk enacting spider and fly, heedless of the unwilling flies who might suffer
by their trap.  Such being the case, his magnanimity was the less amazing when he said, 'Albinia,
there is no reason that O'More should not eat his Christmas dinner here.'

'Very well.  I trust he will not think it needful still to be self-denying.'

'It is not our part to press advances which are repelled,' said Sophy.

'Indeed, Sophy,' said her father, smiling, 'I see nothing attractive in the attitude of rocks
rent asunder.'

The undesigned allusion must have gone deep, for she coloured to a purple crimson, and said
in a freezing tone, 'I thought you considered that to take him up again would be a direct insult
to Lucy and her husband.'

'They do not show much consideration for us,' said Mr. Kendal.  'How long ago was the date
of her last letter?'

'Nearly three weeks,' said Albinia.  'Poor child, how could she write with the catalogue raisonnee
of the Louvre to learn by heart?'

The Dusautoys yearly gave a Christmas tea-party to the teachers in the Sunday-school, who had
of late become more numerous, as Mr. Dusautoy's influence had had more time to tell.  Mrs.
Kendal was reckoned on as one of the chief supporters of the gaiety of the evening, but on
this occasion she was forced to send Sophia alone.

Sophy regarded it as a duty and a penance, and submitted the more readily because it was so
distasteful.  It was, however, more than she had reckoned on to find that the party had been
extended to the male teachers, an exceedingly good and lugubrious-looking youth lately apprenticed
to Mr. Bowles, and Ulick O'More.  It was the first time she had met the latter since his offence.
She avoided seeing him as long as possible, though all his movements seemed to thrill her,
and so confused the conversation which she was trying to keep up, that she found herself saying
that Genevieve Durant had lost an arm, and that Gilbert would spend Christmas in London.

She felt him coming nearer; she knew he was passing the Miss Northover in the purple silk and
red neck-ribbon; she heard him exchanging a few civil words with the sister with the hair strained
off her face; she knew he was coming; she grew more eager in her fears for Mr. Rainsforth's chest.

Tea was announced.  Sophy held back in the general move, Ulick made a step nearer, their eyes
met, and if ever eyes spoke, hers ordered him to keep his distance, while he glanced affront
for affront, bowed and stepped back.

Sophy sat by Miss Jane Northover, and endeavoured to make her talk. Anything would have been
better than the echoes of the sprightliness at the lower end of the table, where Ulick was
talking what he would have called blarney to Miss Susan Northover and Miss Mary Anne Higgins,
both at once, till he excited them into a perpetual giggle. Mr. Dusautoy was delighted, and
evidently thought this brilliant success; Mrs. Dusautoy was less at her ease--the mirth was
less sober and more exclusive than she had intended; and Sophy, finding nothing could be made
of Miss Jane, turned round to her other neighbour, Mr. Hope, and asked his opinion of the Whewell
and Brewster controversy on the Plurality of Worlds.

Mr. Hope had rather a good opinion of Miss Sophia, and as she had never molested him, could
talk to her, so he straightway became engrossed in the logical and theological aspects of the
theory; and Mrs. Dusautoy could hardly suppress her smile at this unconscious ponderous attempt
at a counter flirtation, with Saturn and Jupiter as weapons for light skirmishing.

Ulick received the invitation to dinner, and did not accept it.  He said he had an engagement--Albinia
wondered what it could be, and had reason afterwards to think that he had the silent young
apothecary to a Christmas dinner in his own rooms--an act of charity at least, if not of forgiveness.
Mr. Johns, the senior clerk, whose health had long been failing, was about to retire, and this
announcement was followed by the appearance of a smart, keen-looking young man of six or seven-and-twenty,
whom Miss Goldsmith paraded as her cousin, Mr. Andrew Goldsmith, and it was generally expected
that he would be taken into partnership, and undertake old John's work, but in a fortnight
he disappeared, and young O'More was promoted to the vacant post with an increase of salary.
It was mortifying only to be informed through Mr. Dusautoy, instead of by the lad himself.

The Eastern letters were the chief comfort.  First came tidings that Gilbert, not having yet
recovered his contusion, was to accompany Colonel Ferrars to Scutari, and then after a longer
interval came a brief and joyous note--Gilbert was coming home!  On his voyage from the Crimea
he had caught cold, and this had brought on severe inflammation on the injured chest, which
had laid him by for many days at Scutari.  The colonel had become the stronger of the two,
in spite of a fragment of shell lodged so deeply in the side, that the medical board advised
his going to London for its removal.  Both were ordered home together with six months' leave,
and Gilbert's note overflowed with glad messages to all, including Algernon, of whose departure
he was still in ignorance.

Mr. Kendal knew not whether he was most gratified or discomfited by the insinuating ringer
who touched his hat, hoping for due notice of the captain's arrival in time to welcome him
with a peal of bells. Indeed, Bayford was so excited about its hero, that there were symptoms
of plans for a grand reception with speeches, cheers, and triumphal arches, which caused Sophy
to say she hoped that he would come suddenly without any notice, so as to put a stop to all
that nonsense; while Albinia could not help nourishing a strange vague expectation that his
return would be the beginning of better days.

At last, Sophia, with a touch of the old penny club fever, toiled over the school clothing
wilfully and unnecessarily for two hours, kept up till evening without owning to the pain in
her back, but finally returned so faint and dizzy that she was forced to be carried helpless
to her room, and the next day could barely drag herself to the couch in the morning-room, where
she lay quite prostrated, and grieved at increasing instead of lessening her mother's cares.

'Oh, mamma, don't stay with me.  You are much too busy.'

'No, I am not.  The children are out, and grandmamma asleep, and I am going to write to Lucy,
but there's no hurry.  Let me cool your forehead a little longer.'

'How I hate being another bother!'

'I like you much better so, than when you would not let me speak to you, my poor child.'

'I could not,' she said, stifling her voice on the cushion, and averting her head; but in a
few moments she made a great effort, and said, 'You think me unforgiving, mamma.  It was not
entirely that. It was hating myself for an old fancy, a mere mistake.  I have got over it;
and I will not be in error again.'

'Sophy dear, if you find strength in pride, it will only wound yourself.'

'I do not think I am proud,' said Sophy, quietly.  'I may have been headstrong, but I despise
myself too much for pride.'

'Are you sure it was mere fancy?  It was an idea that occurred to more than to you.'

'Hush!' cried Sophy.  'Had it been so, could he have ridiculed Lucy? Could he have flown out
so against papa?  No; that caricature undeceived me, and I am thankful.  He treated us as cousins--no
more--he would act in the same manner by any of the Miss O'Mores of Ballymakilty, nay, by Jane
Northover herself.  We did not allow for Irish manner.'

'If so, he had no right to do so.  I shall never wish to see him here again.'

'No, mamma, he did not know the folly he had to deal with.  Next time I meet him, I shall know
how to be really indifferent.  Now, this is the last time we will mention the subject!'

Albinia obeyed, but still hoped.  It was well that hope remained, for her task was heavier
than ever; Mrs. Meadows was feebler, but more restless and wakeful, asking twenty times in
an hour for Mrs. Kendal. The doctors thought it impossible that she should hold out another
fortnight, but she lived on from day to day, and at times Albinia hardly could be absent from
her for ten minutes together.  Sophy was so completely knocked up that she could barely creep
about the house, and was forbidden the sick-room; but she was softened and gentle, and was
once more a companion to her father, while eagerly looking forward to devoting herself to Gilbert.

A letter with the Malta post-mark was eagerly opened, as the harbinger of his speedy arrival.

                                        'Royal Hotel, Malta,
                                            February 10th, 1855.

'Dearest Mrs. Kendal,

'I am afraid you will all be much disappointed, though your grief cannot equal mine at the
Doctor's cruel decree.  We arrived here the day before yesterday, but I had been so ill all
the voyage with pain in the side and cough, that there was no choice but to land, and call
in Dr.----, who tells me that my broken rib has damaged my lungs so much, that I must keep
perfectly quiet, and not think of going home till warm weather.  If I am well enough to join
by that time, I shall not see you at all unless you and my father could come out.  Am I nourishing
too wild a hope in thinking it possible?  Since Lucy has been so kind as to promise never to
leave grandmamma, I cannot help hoping you might be spared.  I do not think my proposal is
selfish, since my poor grandmother is so little conscious of your cares; and Ferrars insists
on remaining with me till he sees me in your hands, though they say that the splinter must
be extracted in London, and every week he remains here is so much suffering, besides delaying
his expedition to Canada.  I have entreated him to hasten on, but he will not hear of it. 
He is like a brother or a father to me, and nurses me most tenderly, when he ought to be nursed
himself.  We are famishing for letters.  I suppose all ours have gone up to Balaklava, and
thence will be sent to England.  If we were but there!  We are both much better for the quiet
of these two days, and are to move to-morrow to a lodging that a friend of Fred's has taken
for us at Bormola, so as to be out of the Babel of these streets--we stipulated that it should
be large enough to take in you and my father.  I wish Sophy and the children would come too--it
would do them all the good in the world; and Maurice would go crazy among the big guns; I am
only afraid we should have him enlisting as a drummer.  The happy pair would be very glad to
have the house to themselves, and would persuade themselves that it was another honeymoon.

'Good-bye.  Instead of looking for a letter, I shall come down to meet you at the Quarantine
harbour.  Love to all.

                                      'Your most affectionate
                                           'GILBERT KENDAL.'

How differently Gilbert wrote when really ill, from his desponding style when he only fancied
himself so, thought Albinia, as, perplexed and grieved, she handed the letter to her husband,
and opened the enclosure, written in the laboured, ill-formed characters of a left-hand not
yet accustomed to doing the offices of both.

'Dear Albinia,

'Come, if possible.  His heart is set upon it, though he does not realize his condition, and
I cannot bear to tell him.  Only the utmost care can save him.  I am doing my best for him,
but my nursing is as left-handed as my writing.

                                           'Ever yours,
                                               'F.F.'

His wife's look of horror was Mr. Kendal's preparation for this emphatic summons, perhaps a
shock less sudden to him than to her, for he had not been without misgivings ever since he
had heard of the situation of the injury.  He read and spoke not, till the silence became intolerable,
and she burst out almost with a scream, 'Oh! Edmund, I knew not what I did when I took grandmamma
into this house!'

'This is very perplexing,' he said, his feelings so intense that he dared only speak of acting;
'I must set out to-night.'

'Order me to come with you,' she said breathlessly.  'That will cancel everything else.'

'Would Mrs. Drury take charge of her aunt?' said he, with a moment's hesitation; and Albinia
felt it implied his impression that they were bound by her repeated promises never to quit
the invalid, but she only spoke the more vehemently--

'Mrs Drury?  She might--she would, under the circumstances.  She could not refuse.  If you
desire me to come, I should not be doing wrong; and grandmamma might never even miss me.  Surely--oh
surely, a young life, full of hope and promise, that may yet be saved, is not to be set against
what cannot be prolonged more than a few weeks.'

'As to that,' said Mr. Kendal, in the deliberate tone which denoted dissatisfaction, 'though
of course it would be the greatest blessing to have you with us, I think you may trust Gilbert
to my care.  And we must consider poor Sophia.'

'She could not bear to be considered.'

'No; but it would be leaving her in a most distressing position, when she is far from well,
and with most uncongenial assistants.  You see, poor Gilbert reckons on Lucy being here, which
would make it very different.  But think of poor Sophia in the event of Mrs. Meadows not surviving
till our return!'

'You are right!  It would half kill her!  My promise was sacred; I was a wretch to think of
breaking it.  But when I think of my boy--my Gilbert pining for me, and I deserting him--'

'For the sake of duty,' said her husband.  'Let us do right, and trust that all will be overruled
for the best.  I shall go with an easier mind if I leave you with the other children, and I
can be the sooner with him.'

'I could travel as fast.'

'I may soon bring him home to you.  Or you might bring the others to join us in the south of
France.  You will all need change.'

The decision was made, and her judgment acquiesced, though she could hardly have cast the balance
for herself.  She urged no more, even when relentings came over her husband at the thought
of the trials to which he was leaving her, and of those which he should meet in solitude; yet
not without a certain secret desire to make himself sufficient for the care and contentment
of his own son.  He cast about for all possible helpers for her, but could devise nothing except
a note entreating her brother to be with her as much as possible, and commending her to the
Dusautoys.  It was a less decided kindness that he ordered Maurice's pony to be turned out
to grass, so as to prevent rides in solitude, thinking the boy too young to be trusted, and
warned by the example of Gilbert's temptations.

Going up to the bank to obtain a supply of gold, he found young O'More there without his uncle.
The tidings of Gilbert's danger had spread throughout the town, and one heart at least was
softened. Ulick wrung the hand that lately he would not touch, and Mr. Kendal forgot his wrath
as he replied to the warm-hearted inquiry for particulars.

'Then Mrs. Kendal cannot go with you?'

'No, it is impossible.  There is no one able to take charge of Mrs. Meadows.'

'Ah! and Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy is gone!  I grieve for the hour when my pen got the better
of me.  Mr. Kendal, this is worse than I thought.  Your son will never forgive me when he knows
I'm at the bottom of his disappointment.'

'There is something to forgive on all hands,' said Mr. Kendal.  'That meddlesome boy of mine
has caused worse results than we could have contemplated.  I believe it has been a lesson to him.'

'I know it has to some one else,' said Ulick.  'I wish I could do anything!  It would be the
greatest comfort you could give me to tell me of a thing I could do for Gilbert or any of you.
If you'd send me to find Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, and tell him 'twas all my fault, and bring
them back--'

'Rather too wild a project, thank you,' said Mr. Kendal, smiling. 'No; the only thing you could
do, would be--if that boy of mine have not completely forfeited your kindness--'

'Maurice!  Ah! how I have missed the rogue.'

'Poor little fellow, I am afraid he may be a burthen to himself and every one else.  It would
be a great relief if you could be kind enough now and then to give him the pleasure of a walk.'

Maurice did not attend greatly to papa's permission to go out with Mr. O'More.  Either it was
clogged with too many conditions of discretion, and too many reminiscences of the past; or
Maurice's mind was too much bent on the thought of his brother.  Both children haunted the
packing up, entreating to send out impossible presents. Maurice could hardly be persuaded out
of contributing a perilous-looking boomerang, which he argued had some sense in it; while he
scoffed at the little Awk, who stood kissing and almost crying over the china countenance of
her favourite doll, entreating that papa would take dear Miss Jenny because Gibbie loved her
the best of all, and always put her to sleep on his knees.  At last matters were compromised
by Sophy, who roused herself to do one of the few things for which she had strength, engrossing
them by cutting out in paper an interminable hunt with horses and dogs adhering together by
the noses and tails, which, when brilliantly painted according to their united taste, they
might safely imagine giving pleasure to Gilbert, while, at any rate, it would do no harm in
papa's pocket-book.

CHAPTER XXVI.

The day after Mr. Kendal's departure, Mrs. Meadows had another attack, but a fortnight still
passed before the long long task was over and the weary spirit set free.  There had been no
real consciousness and no one could speak of regret; of anything but relief and thankfulness
that release had come at last, when Albinia had redeemed her pledge and knew she should no
more hear of the dreary 'very bad night,' nor be greeted by the low, restless moan. The long
good-night was come, and, on the whole, there was peace and absence of self-condemnation in
looking back on the past connexion. Forbearance and unselfishness were recompensed by the calm
tenderness with which she could regard one who at the outset had appeared likely to cause nothing
but frets and misunderstandings.

Had she and Sophy been left to themselves, there would have been nothing to break upon this
frame of mind, but early the next day arrived Mr. and Mrs. Drury, upsetting all her arrangements,
implying that it had been presumptuous to exert any authority without relationship.  It did
seem hard that the claims of kindred should be only recollected in order to unsettle her plans,
and offend her unostentatious tastes.

Averse both to the proposals, and to the discussion, she felt unprotected and forlorn, but
her spirit revived as she heard her brother's voice in the hall, and she hastened to put herself
in his hands.  He declined doing battle, he said it would be better to yield than to argue,
and leave a grudge for ever.  'It will not vex Edmund,' he said, 'and though you and Sophy
may be pained by incongruities, they will hurt you less than disputing.'

She felt that he was right, and by yielding the main points he contrived amicably to persuade
Mr. Drury out of the numerous invitations and grand luncheon as well as to adhere to the day
that she had originally fixed for the funeral, after which he hoped to take her and the young
ones home with him and give her the thorough change and rest of which the over-energy of her
manner betrayed the need.

Not that she consented.  She could not bear not to meet her letters at once; or suppose Edmund
and Gilbert should return to an empty, unaired house, and she thought herself selfish, when
it might do so much good to Sophy, &c., &c., &c.--till Mr. Ferrars, going home for a night,
agreed with Winifred, that domineering would be the only way to deal with her.

On his return he found Albinia on the stairs, and boxes and trunks carried down after her.
Running to him, she exclaimed, abruptly, 'I am going to Malta, Maurice, to-morrow evening!'

'Has Edmund sent for you?'

'Not exactly--he did not know--but Gilbert is dying, and wretched at my not coming.  I never
wished him good-by--he thinks I did not forgive him.  Don't say a word--I shall go.'

He held her trembling hands, and said, 'This is not the way to be able to go.  Come in here,
sit down and tell me.'

'It is no use to argue.  It is my duty now,' said Albinia; but she let him lead her into the
room, where Sophy was changing the bright border of a travelling-cloak to crape, and Maurice
stood watching, as if stunned.

'It is settled,' continued she, rapidly.  'Sophy and the children go to the vicarage.  Yes,
I know, you are very kind, but Maurice would be troublesome, and Winifred is not well enough,
and the Dusautoys wish it.'

'Yes, that may be the best plan, as I shall be absent.'

She turned round, startled.

'I cannot let you go alone.'

'Nonsense--Winifred--Sunday--Lent--I don't want any one.  Nothing could happen to me.'

Mr. Ferrars caught Sophy's eye beaming with sudden relief and gratitude, and repeated, 'If
you go, I must take you.'

'I can't wait for Sunday,' she said.

'What have you heard?'

She produced the letter, and read parts of it.  The whole stood thus:--

                                               'Bormola,
                                       11 p.m., February 28th, 1855.
'Dearest Albinia,

'I hope all has gone fairly well with you in my absence, and that Sophia is well again.  Could
I have foreseen the condition of affairs here, I doubt whether I could have resolved on leaving
you at home, though you may be spared much by not being with us.  I landed at noon to-day,
and was met in the harbour by your cousin, who had come off in a boat in hopes of finding you
on board.  He did his best to prepare me for Gilbert's appearance, but I was more shocked than
I can express.  There can no longer be any doubt that it is a case of rapid decline, brought
on by exposure, and, aggravated by the injury at Balaklava.  Colonel Ferrars fancies that Gilbert's
exertions on his behalf in the early part of his illness may have done harm, by preventing
the broken bone from uniting, and causing it to press on the lungs; but knowing the constitutional
tendency, we need not dwell on secondary causes, and there is no one to whom we owe a deeper
debt of gratitude than to your cousin, for his most assiduous and affectionate attendance at
a time when he is very little equal to exertion.  They are like brothers together, and I am
sure nothing has been wanting to Gilbert that he could devise for his comfort.  They are in
a tolerably commodious airy lodging, where I found Gilbert propped up with cushions on a large
chair by the window, flushed with eager watching.  Poor fellow, to see how his countenance
fell when he found I was alone, was the most cutting reproach I ever received in my life. 
He was so completely overcome, that he could not restrain his tears, though he strove hard
to command himself in this fear of wounding my feelings; but there are moments when the truth
will have its way, and you have been more to him than his father has ever been. May it be granted
that he may yet know how I feel towards him!  His first impression was that you had never forgiven
him for his unfortunate adventure with Maurice, and could never feel towards him as before;
and though I trust I have removed this idea, perhaps such a letter as you can write might set
his heart at rest.  Ferrars says that hitherto his spirits have kept up wonderfully, though
latterly he had been evidently aware of his condition, but he has been very much depressed
this evening, probably from the reaction of excited expectation.  On learning the cause of
Lucy's desertion, he seemed to consider that his participation in the transactions of that
night had recoiled upon himself, and deprived him of your presence.  It was very painful to
see how he took it.  He was eager to be told of the children, and the only time I saw him brighten
was when I gave him their messages.  I am writing while I hope he sleeps.  I am glad to be
here to relieve the Colonel, who for several nights past has slept on the floor, in his room,
not thinking the Maltese servant trustworthy.  He looks very ill and suffering, but seems to
have no thought but for Gilbert, and will not hear of leaving him; and, in truth, they cling
together so affectionately, that I could not bear to urge their parting, even were Fred more
fit to travel home alone. I will close my letter to-morrow after the doctor's visit.'

The conclusion was even more desponding; the physician had spoken of the case as hopeless,
and likely to terminate rapidly; and Gilbert, who was always at the worst in the morning, had
shown no symptom that could lead his father to retract his first impression.

Mr. Ferrars saw that it would be useless and cruel to endeavour to detain his sister, and only
doubted whether in her precipitation, she might not cross and miss her husband in a still sadder
journey homeward, and this made him the more resolved to be her escort.  When she dissuaded
him vehemently as though she were bent on doing something desperate, he replied that he was
anxious about Fred, and if she and her husband were engrossed by their son, he should be of
service in bringing him home; and this somewhat reconciled her to what was so much to her benefit.
Only she gave notice that he must not prevent her from travelling day and night, to which he
made no answer, while Sophy hoarsely said that but for knowing herself to be a mere impediment,
she should have insisted on going, and her uncle must not keep mamma back.  Then Maurice imitatively
broke out, 'Mamma, take me to Gilbert, I wont be a plague, I promise you.'  He was scarcely
silenced before Mr. Dusautoy came striding in to urge on her that Fanny and himself should
be much happier if he were permitted to conduct Mrs. Kendal to Malta (the fact being that Fanny
was persuaded that Mr. Ferrars would obviate such necessity). Albinia almost laughed, as she
had declared that she had set all the parsons in the country in commotion, and Mr. Dusautoy
was obliged to limit his good offices to the care of the children, and the responsibility of
the Fairmead Sunday services.

The good hard-worked brother had hardly time to eat his luncheon, before he started to inform
his wife, and prepare for his journey. Winifred was a very good sister on an emergency; she
had not once growled since poor Mrs. Meadows had been really ill; and though she had been feeding
on hopes of Albinia's visit, and was far from strong, she quashed her husband's misgivings,
and cheerily strove to convince him that he would be wanted by no one, least of all by herself.
A slight vituperation of the polysyllabic pair was all the relief she permitted herself, and
who could blame her for that, when even Mr. Dusautoy called the one 'that foolish fellow,'
and the other 'poor dear Lucy?'

Albinia and Sophy safe over the fire that evening, after their sorrowful tasks unable to turn
to anything else, wondering how and when they should meet again, and their words coming slowly,
and with long intervals of silence.

'Dear child,' said Albinia, 'promise me to take care of yourself, and to let Mrs. Dusautoy
judge what you can do.'

'I'm not worth taking care of,' muttered Sophy.

'We think you worth our anxiety,' said Albinia, tenderly.

'I will not make it worse for you,' meekly replied Sophy.  'I don't think I'm cross now, I
could not be--'

'No, indeed you are not, my dear.  We have leant on each other, and when we come home, you
will make our welcome.'

'The children will.'

'Ah! I think Maurice will behave well.  He is very much subdued.  I told him he was to do no
lessons, and he fairly burst out crying.'

'Oh, mamma!' exclaimed Sophy, hurt, indignant, and nearly ready to follow his example.

'I do not think he has mastery over himself, so as to help being unruly and idle, when he is
chained to a spelling-book.  I would not for the world set him and you to worry each other
for an hour a day, and I shall start afresh with him all the better, when he knows what absence
of lessons is, and has forgotten all the old associations.'

'How could you make him cry?' said Sophy, in reproach.

'I believe the tears only wanted an excuse.  I did put it on his naughtiness, which usually
would have elated him; but his heart was so full as to make even a long holiday a punishment.
That boy often shows me what a thorough Kendal he is; things sink into him as they never did
into us at the same age, when my aunts used to think I had no feeling.  Oh, Sophy! how will
you comfort him?'

'His will be an unstained sorrow,' said Sophy, from the depths of her heart.  'O, mamma, only
tell Gilbert what you know I feel--no, you don't, no one can, but what I would not give, to
change all I have felt towards him?  If I had been like Edmund, and prized his gentleness and
sweetness, and the humility that was the best worth of all, how different it would be!  But
I was proud of despising where truth was wanting.'

'I should have thought I should have done the same,' said Albinia; but there was no keeping
from loving Gibbie.  Besides, he was sincere, except when he was afraid, and he was miserable
when he was deceiving.'

'Yes, after you came,' said Sophy; 'but I believe I helped him to think truth disagreeable.
I showed my scorn for his want of boldness, instead of helping him.  Think of my having fancied
he had no courage.'

'Kindness taught him courage,' said Albinia.  'It might perhaps have earlier taught him moral
courage.  If you and he could have leant against each other, and been fused together, you would
have made something like what Edmund was, I suppose.'

'I drove him off,' cried Sophy.  'I was no sister to him.  Will you bring me his forgiveness?'

'Indeed I will; and you may feel sure of it already, dearest.  It will make you gentler all
your life.'

'No, I shall grow harder and harsher the longer I live, and the fewer I have to love me in
spite of myself.'

'I think not,' said Albinia.  'Humility will make your severity more gentle, and you will soften,
and win love and esteem.'

She looked up, but cried, 'I shall never make up to Gilbert nor to grandmamma!'

Albinia felt it almost as hard to leave her as the two little ones.

When once on her journey, and feeling each moment an advance towards the goal, Albinia was
less unhappy than she could have thought possible; she trusted to her brother, and enjoyed
the absence of responsibility, and while he let her go on, could give her mind to what pleased
and interested him, and he, who was an excellent courier, so managed that there were few detentions
to overthrow her equanimity on the way to Marseilles.

But when the Vectis came in sight of the rocky isle, with its white stony heights, the heart-sickness
of apprehension grew over her, and she saw, as in a mist, the noble crescent-shaped harbour,
the stately ramparts, mighty batteries, the lofty terraces of flat-roofed dwellings, apparently
rather hewn out of, than built on, the dazzling white stone, between the intense blue of the
sky above and of the sea below.  Her eye roamed as in a dream over the crowds of gay boats
with white awnings, and the motley crowds of English and natives, the boatmen screaming and
fighting for the luggage, and beggars plaintively whining out their entreaties for small coins.
Her brother Maurice had been at Malta as a little boy, and remembered the habits of the place
enough, as soon as they had set foot on shore, to secure a brown-skinned loiterer, in Phrygian
cap, loose trousers, and crimson sash, to act as guide and porter.

Along the Strada San Giovanni, a street of stairs, shut in by high stone walls, with doors
opening on either side, they went not as fast as Albinia's quivering limbs would fain have
moved, yet too fast when her breath came thick with anxiety--down again by the stone stairs
called 'Nix Mangiare' (nothing to eat), from the incessant cry of the beggars that haunt them--then
again in a boat, which carried them amid a strange world of shipping to the bottom of the dockyard
creek, where, again landing, she was told she had but to ascend, and she would be at Bormola.

She could have paused, in dread; and she leant heavily on her brother's arm when they presently
turned up a lane, no broader than a passage, with low stone steps at irregular intervals. 
They were come!

The summons at the door was answered by a dark-visaged Maltese, and while Maurice was putting
the question whether Colonel Ferrars and Captain Kendal lived here, a figure appeared on the
stairs, and beckoned, ascending noiselessly with languid steps and slippered feet, and leading
the way into a slightly furnished room, with green balcony and striped blind.  There he turned
and held out his hand; but Albinia hardly recognised him till he said, 'I thought I heard your
voice, Maurice;' and then the low subdued tone, together with the gaunt wasted form, haggard
aged face, the long beard, and worn undress uniform, with the armless sleeve, made her so realize
his sufferings, that, clasping his remaining hand in both her own, she could utter nothing
but, 'Oh! Fred! Fred!'

He looked at her brother with such inquiry, perplexity, and compassion, that almost in despair
Maurice exclaimed, 'We are not too late!'

'No, thank God!' said Frederick.  'We did hope you might come!  Sit down, Albinia; I'll--'

'Edmund!  Is he there!' she said, scarcely alive to what was passing, and casting another expressively
sorrowful look at Maurice, Fred answered, 'Yes, I will tell him: I will see if you can come in.'

'Stay,' said Mr. Ferrars; 'she should compose herself, or she will only hurt herself and Gilbert.'

'I don't know,' murmured Fred, hastily leaving them.

Maurice understood that Gilbert was even then summoned by one who would brook no delays; but
Albinia, too much agitated to notice slight indications, was about to follow, when her brother
took her hand, and checked her like a child.  'Wait a minute, my dear, he will soon come back.'

'Where's Edmund?  Why mayn't I go to Gilbert?' she said, still bewildered.

'Fred is gone to tell them.  Sit down, my dear; take off your bonnet, you are heated, you will
be better able to go to him, if you are quiet.'

She passively submitted to be placed on a chair, and to remove her bonnet; and seeing some
dressing apparatus through an open door, Maurice brought her some cold water to refresh her
burning face.  She looked up with a smile, herself again.  'There thank you, Maurice: I wont
be foolish now.'

'God support you, my dear!' said her brother, for the longer the Colonel tarried, the worse
were his forebodings.

'Perhaps the doctor is there,' she proceeded.  'That will be well. Ask him everything, Maurice.
But oh! did you ever see any one so much altered as poor Fred!  He looks twenty years older!
Ah! I am quite good now!  I may go now!' she cried, as the door opened.

But as Frederick returned, there was that written on his brow, which lifted her out of the
childishness of her agitation.

'My dear Albinia,' he said in a trembling voice, 'Mr. Kendal cannot leave him to come to you.
He has been much worse since last night,' and as her face showed that she was gathering his
meaning, he pursued in a lower and more awe-struck tone: 'We think he is sensible, but we cannot
tell.  It could not hurt him for you to come in, and perhaps he may know you, but are you able
to bear it?  Is she, Maurice?'

'Yes, I am,' she answered; and the calm firmness of her tone proved that she was a woman again.
Her hand shook less than did that of her cousin, as silently and reverently he took it, and
led her into another room on the same floor.

There, in the subdued light, she saw her husband, seated on the bed, holding in his arms his
son, who lay lifted up and supported upon his breast, with head resting on his shoulder, and
eyes closed.  There was no greeting, no sound save the long, heavily drawn, gasping breaths.
Mr. Kendal raised his eyes to her; she silently knelt down and took the wasted hand that lay
helplessly on the coverlet, but it moved feebly from her as though harassed by the touch.

'Gilbert, dear boy,' said his father, earnestly, 'she is come!  Speak to him, Albinia.'

She hardly knew her own voice as she said, 'Gilbert, Gibbie dear, here I am.'

Those large brown eyes were shown for a few moments beneath the heavy lids, and met hers. 
The mouth, hitherto only gasping for air, endeavoured to form a word; the hand sought hers.
She kissed him, and his eyes opened wide and brightened, while he said, 'I think it is pardon now.'

'Pardon indeed!' said his father, with a greater look of relief than Albinia understood, 'you
are resting in His Merits.'

Gilbert's look brightened, and he said, 'I know it now.'

'Thank God,' said Mr. Kendal.

His eyes closed, and Fred whispered to the father, 'Maurice is here too.'

Again the light woke in the eye, with almost a smile, the look that always welcomed the little
brother; and Albinia grieved to say, 'Not little Maurice, though he longed to come; it is my
brother.'  But the air of eagerness did not pass away, and he seemed satisfied when Mr. Ferrars
came in.  It was as a priest, speaking words not his own; and Albinia and Fred knelt with him.
At the close of each prayer or psalm, Gilbert signed imploringly for more, even like our mighty
dying queen; and at each short pause, the distressed agonized expression would again contract
the brow, though in the sound of the holy words all was peace.  The Psalm of the Good Shepherd
with the Rod and Staff in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, recurred so strongly to Maurice,
that he repeated it like a cadence after each penitential supplication, every time bringing
a look of peace to the countenance of the sufferer.

They must have remained long thus, Fred had grown exhausted with kneeling and had been forced
to sit on the floor, and Maurice's voice waxed low and hoarse; yet he durst not pause, though
doubting whether Gilbert could follow the meaning.  At length the eyes were again raised. 
With a start as of haste, Gilbert looked full at Albinia, and said, 'Thank you.  Tell Maurice--'
He could not finish, and there was an agony for breath, then as his father raised him, he contrived
to say, 'Father--mother--kiss me; it is forgiven!'

Another look brought Fred to press his hand, and he smiled his thanks.

There were a few more terrible minutes, from which they would fain have led away Albinia, but
suddenly his brow grew smooth, his eyes were eagerly fixed as on something before him, and
as if replying to a call, he said, 'Yes!' with a start and a quiver of all his limbs, and then--

The first words were Mr. Kendal's.  'Edmund has come for him!'

It was to the rest as if the father had been in some manner conscious of the presence of the
one twin-brother, and, were resigning the other to his charge, for he calmly kissed the forehead,
closed the eyes, laid down the form, he had so long held in his arms, and after a few moments
on his knees, with his face hidden, in his hands, he rose with composure, and said to his wife,
'I am glad you were in time.'

Had he given way, Albinia would have been strong, but there was no need to support to counteract
the force of disappointment and grief, acting upon overwrought spirits, and a fatigued, exhausted
frame. Were these half-conscious looks and broken words all she had come for, all she should
ever have of Gilbert?  This was the moment's predominant sensation; she was past thinking;
and though she still controlled herself, she cast a wild, piteous eye on her husband, and as
he lifted her up, she sank on his breast, not fainting, not sobbing, but utterly prostrated,
and needing all his support as he led her out, and laid her on a couch in the next room, speaking
softly as if hoping his voice would restore her.  'We had some faint hope of you; we knew you
would wish it, so you see all is ready.  But you have done too much, my dear: Maurice should
not have let you travel so fast.'

'No, no,' said Albinia, catching her breath.  'Oh! not to have come sooner!' and she gave way
to a violent burst of tears, during which he fondled and soothed her till she suddenly said,
'I did not come here to behave in this way!  I came to help you!  Edmund, what shall I do?'
and she would have started up.

'Only lie still, and let me take care of you,' said he.  'Nothing could be to me like your
coming,' and she was forced to believe his glistening eyes and voice of tenderness.

'Can you keep quiet a little while,' said Mr. Kendal, wistfully, 'while I go to speak to your
brother?  It was very good in him to come!  Don't speak; I will come back directly.'

She did lie still, for she was too much spent to move, and the silence was good for her; for
if the overwhelming sensation of grief would sweep over her, on the other hand, there was the
remembrance of the look of peace, and the perception that her husband was not as yet so struck
to the earth as she had feared.  He was not long in returning, bringing some coffee for her
and for himself, and speaking with the same dreamy serenity, though looking excessively pale.
'Your brother told me to give you this,' he said.  'I am glad the colonel is under such care,
for he is terribly distressed and not at all fit to bear it.  I could not make him go to bed
all last night.'

'You were up all last night, and many nights before,' said Albinia; 'and all alone!  Oh! why
was I not here to help!'

'Fred was a great comfort,' said Mr. Kendal.  'I cannot describe my gratitude to him.  And
dearest--' He paused, and added with hesitation, 'I do not now regret the having come out alone.
After the first disappointment, I think that my boy and I learnt to know each other better.
If he had left me nothing but the recollection that I had been too severe and unsympathizing
to win his confidence, I hardly know how I could have borne it.'

'He was able to talk to you, then?' cried Albinia.  'That was what I always wished!  Yes, it
was right, so it came right.  I had got between you as I ought not to have done, and it was
well you should have him to yourself.'

'Not as you ought not,' he fondly answered.  'You always were his better angel, and you came
at last as a messenger of peace.  There was relief and hope from the moment that he knew you.'

He told her what could scarcely have passed his lips save in those earlier hours of affliction.
It had been a time of grievous mental distress.  Neither natural temperament nor previous life
had been such as to arm poor Gilbert to meet the King of Terrors; and as day by day he felt
the cold grasp tightening on him, he had fluttered like a bird in the snare of the fowler,
physically affrighted at the death-pang, shrinking from the lonely entrance into the unknown
future, and despairing of the acceptableness of his own repentance. He believed that he had
too often relapsed, and he could not take heart to grasp the hope of mercy and rest in the
great atonement. The last Communion had been melancholy, the contrite spirit unable to lift
itself up, and apparently only sunk the lower by the weight of love and gratitude, deepening
the sense of how much had been disregarded.  There had since been a few hopeful gleams, but
dimmed by bodily suffering and terror; and doubly mournful had been the weary hours of the
night and morning, while he lay gasping away his life upon his father's breast.  Having at
first taken the absence of his stepmother as a sign that she had not forgiven him, he had only
laid aside this notion for a more morbid fancy that the deprivation was a token of wrath from
above; and there could be little doubt that her final appearance was hailed as a seal of pardon
not merely from her.  Her brother, who had raised him up after his last fall, was likewise
the person above all others to bring the message of mercy to speed him to the Unseen, where,
as his look and gesture had persuaded his father, his brother, or some yet more blessed one,
had received and welcomed the frail and trembling spirit.

That last farewell, that dawn of peace, so long prayed for, so ardently desired, had given
Mr. Kendal such thankfulness and relief as sustained him, and enabled him to support his wife,
who knew not how to meet her first home grief; whereas to him sorrow had long been a household
guest more familiar than joy; and he was more at rest about his son than he had been for many
a year.  He could dwell on him together with Edmund, instead of connecting him with shame,
grief, and pain; though how little could he have borne to think that thus it would end, when
in the springtime of his manhood he had rejoiced over his beautiful twin boys.

He knew his son better than heretofore.  After the first day's disappointment, Gilbert had
found him all-sufficient, and had rested on his tenderness.  All sternness had ceased on one
side, all concealment on the other, and the sweetness of both characters had had full scope.
Gilbert's ardent love of home had shown itself in every word, and his last exertion, had been
to write a long letter to his little brother, which had been completed and despatched by a
private hand a few days previously.  He had desired that Maurice should have his sword, and
mentioned the books which he wished his sisters to share, talking of Sophy as one whom he honoured
much, and wished he had known better; but much pained by hearing nothing from Lucy, and lamenting
his share in her union with Algernon.  He had said something about his wish that the almshouses
should be built, but his father had turned away the subject, knowing that in case of his dying
intestate and unmarried, the property was settled on the sisters, and seeing little chance
of any such work being carried out with the co-operation of Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy.  Latterly
he had spoken of Genevieve Durant; he knew better how unworthy of her he had been, and how
harassing his pursuit must have appeared, but he could not help entreating that her pardon
might be asked in his name, that she might hear that he had loved her to the last, and above
all, that his father would never lose sight of her; and Mr. Kendal's promise to regard her
as the next thing to his daughters had been requited with a look of the utmost gratitude and
affection.

This was the substance of what Mr. Kendal told his wife as they sat together, unwitting of
the lapse of time, and shrinking from any interruption that might mar their present peace and
renew the sense of bereavement.

Mr. Ferrars was the first to knock at the door.  He had been doing his utmost to spare both
them and Fred, who needed all his care. These four months of mutual dependence had been even
more endearing than the rescue of Fred's life on the battlefield; and he declared that Gilbert
had done him more good than any one else.  They had been so thrown together as to make the
'religious sentiment' of the younger tell upon the warm though thoughtless heart of the elder.
They had been most fondly attached; and in his present state, reduced by wounds and exhausted
by watching, Fred was more overpowered than those more closely concerned.  He could hardly
speak collectedly when an officer of the garrison called to consult him with regard to a military
funeral, and it was for this that Maurice was obliged to refer to the father.  There were indeed
none of his regiment in the island, but there was a universal desire in the garrison to do
honour to the distinguished young officer, for whom great interest had been felt and the compliment
brought a glow of exultation to Mr. Kendal's face, as he expressed his warm thanks, but desired
that the decision might rest with Fred himself, as his son's lieutenant-colonel.

Maurice felt himself fully justified in his expedition when he found that all devolved on him,
even writing to Sophy, and making the most necessary arrangements; for the colonel was incapable
of exertion, Albinia was prostrated by the shock, and Mr. Kendal appeared to be lulled into
a strange calm by the effects of the excessive bodily weariness consequent on the exhausting
attendance of the last few days.  They all depended upon Mr. Ferrars, and recognised his presence
as an infinite comfort.

In the morning Albinia came forth like one who had been knocked down and shattered, weary and
gentle, and with the tears ever welling into her eyes, above all when she endeavoured to write
to Sophy; and she showed her ordinary earnestness only when she entreated to see her boy once
more.  Her husband took her to look on the countenance settled into the expression of unearthly
peace, but she was not satisfied; it was not her own Gilbert, boyish, sensitive, dependent,
and shrinking.  The pale brow, the marked manly features, the lower ones concealed by the brown
moustache, belonged to the hero who had dared the deadly ride and borne his friend through
the storm of shot and shell; the noble, settled, steadfast face was the face of a stranger,
and gave her a thrill of disappointment.  She gloried in the later Gilbert, but the last she
had seen of him whom she loved for his weakness, had been when she had not heeded his farewell.

It made the pang the less when evening came and he was carried to his resting-place.  They
would have persuaded Frederick to spare himself, but as the only officer of the same corps,
as well as for the sake of many closer ties, he would not hear of being absent, and made his
cousin Maurice do his best to restore the smart soldierly air which he for the first time thought
of regretting.

Gilbert's horse had perished at Balaklava, but his cap, sword, and spurs, were laid on the
coffin, and from her shaded window Albinia watched it borne between the files of soldiers with
arms reversed; and the procession of officers whose bright array contrasted with the colonel's
war-worn dress, ghastly cheek, and empty sleeve, tokens of the reality of war amid its pageantry,
as all moved slowly away to the deep tones of the solemn Dead March, music well befitting the
calm grandeur of the face she had seen, and leaving her heart throbbing with the deep exulting
awe and pathos of a soldier's funeral.  She knelt alone, and followed the burial service in
the stillness of the room overlooking the broad expanse of blue sea and sky; and by-and-by,
through the window came the sound of the volley fired over the grave, the farewell of the army
to the soldier at rest, his battles ended.

'There was peace, and there was glory; but she could not divest herself of a sense of unreality.
She could not feel as if it were really and truly Gilbert, and she were mourning for him. 
All was like a dream--that solemn military spectacle--the serene, grave sunshine on the fortress-harbour
stretching its mailed arms into the sea--the roofs of the knightly old monastic city rising
in steps from the bay crowded with white sails--and even those around her were different, her
husband pale and still, as in a region above common life, and her cousin like another man,
without his characteristic joyousness and insouciance.  She could hardly induce herself, in
her drowsy state, to believe that all was indeed veritable and tangible.

There was nothing to detain them at Malta, and Mr. Ferrars, who arranged everything, thought
the calm of a sea-voyage would be better for them all than the bustle and fatigue of a land
journey.

'Kendal himself does not care about getting home,' he said to Fred, who was afraid this was
determined on his account.  'I fear many annoyances are in store for him.  His son-in-law will
not be pleasant to deal with about the property.'

With an exclamation Fred started from the chairs on which he had been resting, and dived into
his sabre-tasch which hung from the wall.  'I never liked to begin about it,' he said, 'but
I ought to have given them this.  It was done when he was so bad at Scutari.  One night he
worked himself into a fever lest he should not live till his birthday, and said a great deal
about this Dusautoy making himself an annoyance, perhaps insisting on a sale and turning his
father out. Nothing pacified him till, the very day he was of age, we got the vice-consul to
draw up what he wanted, and witness it, and so did I and the doctor, and here it is.  Afterwards
he warned me to say nothing of it when Mr. Kendal came, for he said if the other fellow made
a row, it would be better his father should be able to say he had known nothing of the matter.'

'Does he make his father his heir?'

'That's the whole of it.  He said his sisters would see it was the only way to get things even,
and I was to tell Albinia something about building cottages or almshouses.  Ay, "his father
was to do what ought to have been done."'

'Well, there's the best deed of poor Gilbert's life!'

'Thank you,' mumbled Fred, hall drolly, half gravely.

'Ay, Kendal and Albinia will do more good with that property than you have thought of in all
your life, sir.'

'Their future and my past,' laughed Fred, adding more gravely, 'Scamp as I am, there's more
responsibility coming on me now, and I have gone through some preparation for it.  If I can
get out to Canada--'

'You will not lessen your responsibilities,' said Maurice, smiling, 'nor your competency to
meet them.'

'I trust not,' said Fred.

Mr. Ferrars read in his countenance far more than was implied by those words.  The General,
by treating him as a boy, had kept him one, and perhaps his levity had been prolonged by the
rejection of his first love; but a really steady attachment had settled his character, and
he had been undergoing much training through his own sufferings, Gilbert's illness, and the
sense of the new position that awaited him as commanding officer; and for the first time Maurice,
who had always been very fond of him, felt that he was talking to a high-principled and right-minded
man instead of the family pet and laughing-stock.

'I suppose,' he said, 'that you cannot have heard often from Montreal since you have been in
the East.'

'No.  If my letters are anywhere, it is at the Family Office.  I desired them to be forwarded
thither from head-quarters, not expecting to be detained here.  But,' cried Fred with animation,
'what think you of the General actually writing to Mr. Kinnaird from Balaklava?'

'It would have been too bad if he had not.'

'I believe he did so solely to make me sleep, but it is the first time he has deigned to treat
the affair as anything but a delusion, and he can't retract now.  Since that, poor Gilbert
has made a scrap or two of mine presentable, and there's all that I have been able to accomplish;
but I hope it may have set her mind at rest.'

'Shall I be secretary?'

'Thank you, I think not.  She would only worry herself about what is before me; and if the
doctors let me off easy, I had rather report of myself in person.'

His eyes danced, and Maurice thought his unselfishness deserved a reward.

'My poor Gilbert's last secret,' said Mr. Kendal, as he laid before his wife the brief document
by which his son had designated him as his sole heir and executor.  'A gift to you, and a trust
to me.'

Albinia looked up for explanation.

'While he intrusts his sisters to my justice, he tacitly commends to me the works which you
wished to see accomplished.'

'The almshouses!  The improvements!  Do you mean to undertake them?'

'It shall be my most sacred duty.'

'Oh! that we could have planned it with him!'

'Perhaps I value this the more from the certainty that it is spontaneous,' said Mr. Kendal.
'It showed great consideration and forethought, that he said nothing of his intention to me.
Had he mentioned it, I should have thought it right to suggest his leaving his sisters their
share; and yet, as we are situated with young Dusautoy, it would have been awkward to have
interfered.  He did well and wisely to be silent.'

'You don't expect Algernon to be discontented.  Impossible, at such a time, and so well off
as he is!'

'I wish it may be impossible.'

'What do you mean, to do?'

'As far as I can see at present, I shall do this.  I fear neither the mode of acquisition nor
the management of that property was such as to bring a blessing, and I believe my poor boy
has made it over to me in order to free his sisters from the necessity of winking at oppression
and iniquity.  Had it gone to them, matters must have been let alone till Sophia came of age,
and even then, all improvements must have depended on Algernon's consent.  The land and houses
we will keep, and sufficient ready money for the building and repairs; and to this, Sophia,
at least, will gladly agree.  The rest-- something under twenty thousand, if I remember correctly--is
the girls' right.  I will settle Lucy's share on her so as to be out of her husband's power,
and Sophia shall have hers when she comes of age.'

'I am sure that will take from Algernon all power of grumbling, though I cannot believe that
even he could complain.'

'You approve, then?'

'How can yon ask?  It is the first thing that has seemed like happiness, if it did not make
one long for him to talk it over!'  The wound was still very recent, and her spirits very tender,
and the more she felt the blessing of the association with Gilbert in the work of love, the
more she wept, though not altogether in sorrow.

Mortified at having come so much overworked and weakened, as to occasion only trouble and anxiety,
she yielded resignedly when forbidden to wear out strength and spirits by a visit to the burial-ground
before her embarkation.  She must content herself with Maurice's description of the locality,
and carry away in her eye only the general picture of the sapphire ocean and white rock fortress
of the holy warriors vowed to tenderness and heroism, as the last resting-place of her cherished
Gilbert, when 'out of weakness he had been made strong' in penitence and love.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Had Sophia's wishes been consulted, she would have preferred nursing her sorrows at home; but
no choice had been left, and at the vicarage the fatherly kindness of Mr. Dusautoy, and the
considerate let-alone system of his wife, kept her at ease and not far from cheerful, albeit
neither the simplicity of the one nor the keenness of the other was calculated to draw her
into unreserve: comfort was in the children.

The children clung to her as if she made their home, little Albinia preferring her even to
Uncle John, as he had insisted on being called ever since Lucy had become his niece, and Maurice
invoking caresses, the bestowal of which was his mother's rare privilege.  The boy was dull
and listless, and though riot and mirth could be only too easily excited, his wildest shouts
and most frantic gesticulations were like efforts to throw off a load at his heart.  Time hung
heavy on his hands, and he would lie rolling and kicking drearily on the floor, watching with
some envy his little sister as she spelt her way prosperously through 'Little Charles,' or
daintily and distinctly repeated her hymns.  'Nothing to do' was the burthen of his song, and
with masculine perverseness he disdained every occupation suggested to him.  Sophy might boast
of his obedience and quiescence, but Mrs. Dusautoy pitied all parties, and wondered when he
would be disposed of at school.

Permission to open letters had been left with Sophy, who with silent resignation followed the
details of poor Gilbert's rapid decay.  At last came the parcel by the private hand, containing
a small packet for each of the family.  Sophy received a silver Maltese Cross, and little Albinia
a perfumy rose-leaf bracelet.  There was a Russian grape-shot for Maurice, and with it a letter.

With childish secrecy, he refused to let any one look at so much as the envelope, and ran away
with it, shouting 'It's mine.'  Sophy was grieved that it should be treated like a toy, and
fearing that, while playing at importance, he would lose or destroy it, without coming to a
knowledge of the contents, she durst not betray her solicitude, lest she should give a stimulus
to his wilfulness and precipitate its fate.  However, when he had galloped about enough, he
called imperatively, 'Sophy;' and she found him lying on his back on the grass, the black cat
an unwilling prisoner on his chest.

'You may read it to Smut and me,' he said.

It bore date the day after his father's arrival, but it had evidently been continued at many
different times; and as the handwriting became more feeble, the style grew more earnest, so
that, but for her hoarse, indifferent voice, Sophy could hardly have accomplished the reading.

'My dear Maurice,

'Many, many thanks to you and dear little Awkey for your present.  I have set it up like a
picture, and much do I like to look at it, and guess who chose the colours and who are the
hunters.  I am sure the fat man in the red coat is the admiral.  It makes the place seem like
home to see what tells so plainly of you and baby.

'Kiss my little Awk for me, and thank her for wanting to send me Miss Jenny, dear little maid;
I like to think of it.  You will not let her quite forget me.  You must show her my name if
it is put up in church, like Edmund's and all the little ones'; and you will sometimes tell
her about dear old Ned on a Sunday evening when you are both very good.

'I think you know that you and she will never again run out into the hall to pull Gibbie almost
down between you.  Perhaps by the time you read this, you will be the only son, with all the
comfort and hope of the house resting upon you.  My poor Maurice, I know what it is to be told
so, and only to feel that one has no brother; but at least it cannot be to you as it was with
me, when it was as if half myself were gone, and all my stronger, better, braver self.

'My father has been reading to me the Rich Man and Lazarus.  Maurice, when you read of him
and the five brethren, think of me, and how I pray that I may not have left seeds of temptation
for you.  In the time of my loneliness, Tritton was good-natured, but I ought to have avoided
him; and that to which he introduced me has been the bane of my life.  Nothing gives me such
anguish as to think I have made you acquainted with that set.  Keep out of their way!  Never
go near those pigeon-shootings and donkey-races; they seem good fun, but it is disobedience
to go, and the things that happen there are like the stings of venomous creatures; the poison
was left to fester even when your mother seemed to have cured me.  Neither now nor when you
are older resort to such things or such people.  Next time you meet Tritton and Shaw tell them
I desired to be remembered to them; after that have nothing to do with them; touch your hat
and pass on.  They meant it in good nature, and thought no harm, but they were my worst enemies;
they led me astray, and taught me deception as a matter of course.  Oh! Maurice, never think
it manly to have the smallest reserve with your parents.  I would give worlds to have sooner
known that truth would have been freedom and rest.  Thank Heaven, your faults are not my faults.
If you go wrong, it will be with a high hand, but you would wring hearts that can ill bear
further grief and disappointment.  Oh! that I were more worthy to pray that you may use your
strength and spirit the right way; then you will be gladness to our father and mother, and
when you lie down to die, you will be happier than I am.

'I want to tell you more, but it hurts me to write long.  If I could only see you--not only
in my dreams.  I wake, and my heart sickens with longing for a sight of my brave boy's merry
face, till I almost feel as if it would make me well; but it is a blessing past hope to have
my father with me, and know him as I have never done before. Give little Albinia these beads,
with my love, and be a better brother to her than I was to poor Lucy.

'Good-by, Maurice.  No one can tell what you have been to me since your mother put you into
my arms, and I felt I had a brother again. God bless you and cancel all evil you may have caught
from me.  Papa will give you my sword.  Perhaps you will wear it one day, and under my colonel.
I have never been so happy as in the time it was mine. When you look at it, always say this
to yourself: "Fear God, and fear nothing else."  O that I had done so!

'Let your dear, dear mother be happy in you: it will be the only way to make her forgive me
in her heart.  Good-by, my own dear, brave boy.

                                 'Your most affectionate brother,
                                                 'G. KENDAL.'

'I say, Smut,' quoth Maurice, 'I think you and our Tabby would make two famous horses for Awkey's
little cart.  I shall take you home and harness you.'

Sophy sat breathless at his indifference.  'You mustn't,' she said in hasty anger; 'Smut is
not yours.'

'Well, Jack said that our Tabby had two kittens up in the loft; I think they'll make better
ponies.  I shall go and try them!'

'Don't plague the kittens.'

'I'll not plague them; I'll only make ponies of them.  Give me the letter.'

'No, not to play with the cats.  I thought you would have cared about such a letter!'

'You have no right to keep it!  It is mine; give it me!' cried Maurice, passionately.

'Promise to take real care of it.'

He only tore it from her, and was gone.

'I'm a fool to expect anything from such a child,' she thought.

At two o'clock the Vicar hurried into the bank.  'Good morning, Mr. Goldsmith, I beg your pardon;
I wanted to ask if Mr. O'More has seen little Maurice Kendal.'

'Not since yesterday--what's the matter?'

'The child is not come in to dinner.  He is nowhere at home or at Willow Lawn.'

'Ha!' cried Ulick.  'Can he be gone to see his pony at Hobbs's!'

'No, it has been sent to Fairmead.  Then you have no notion where the child can be?  Sophy
is nearly distracted.  She saw him last about ten o'clock, bent on harnessing some kittens,
but he's not in the hay-loft!'

'He may be gone to the toy-shop after the harness.  Or has anyone looked in the church-tower--he
was longing to go up it, and if the door were open--'

'The very thing!' cried the Vicar.  'I'll go this moment.'

'Or there's old Peter, the sailor,' called Ulick; 'if he wanted any tackle fitted, he might
go to him.'

'You had better go yourself, More,' said Mr. Goldsmith.  'One would not wish to keep poor Miss
Kendal in suspense, though I dare say the boy is safe enough.'

Mr. Goldsmith was thanked, and Ulick hurried out, Hyder Ali leaping up in amazement at his
master being loose at that time of day.

Everybody had thought the child was with somebody else till dinner-time, and the state of the
vicarage was one of dire alarm and self-reproach. Sophy was seeking and calling in every possible
place, and had just brought herself to own the message of remembrance in Gilbert's letter,
thinking it possible Maurice might have gone to deliver it at Robbles Leigh; and Mr. Hope had
undertaken to go thither in quest of him.  Ulick and Mr. Dusautoy, equally disappointed by
the tower and the sailor, went again to Willow Lawn to interrogate the servants.  The gardener's
boy had heard Maurice scolding and the cat squalling, and the cook had heard his step in the
house.  They hurried into his little room--he was not there, but the drawers had been disturbed.

'He may be gone to Fairmead!' cried the Vicar.

'How?' said Ulick.  'Ha!  Hyder, sir!' holding up a little shoe. 'Seek!  That's my fine doggie--they
only call you a mongrel because you have all the canine virtues united.  See what you can do
as sleuth hound.  Ha!  We'll nose him out for you in no time, Mr. Dusautoy!'

After sniffing round the drawers, the yellow tripod made an ungainly descent of the stairs,
his nose down all the way, then across the hall and out at the gate; but when, after poking
about, the animal set off on the turnpike-road, the Vicar demurred.

'Stay; the poor dog only wants to get you out for a walk.  He is making for the Hadminster road.'

'And why wouldn't he, if the child is nowhere in Bayford?

'I can't answer it to his mother wasting time in this way.  You may do as you like.  I shall
go to the training-stables, where he has once been, if not on to Fairmead.  I can't see Sophy
till he is found!'

'I shall abide by my little Orangeman,' said Ulick; and they parted.

Hyder Ali pursued his way in the March dust, while Ulick eagerly scanned for the traces of
a child's foot.  Four miles did the dog go on, evidently following a scent, but Ulick's mind
misgave him as Hadminster church-tower rose before him, and the dog took the ascent to the station.

Ulick made his way in as a train stood panting before the platform. He had a glimpse of a square
face and curly hair at the window of a second-class carriage.

'Maurice, come back!' he cried.  'Here, guard! this little boy must come back!'

'Go on!' shouted Maurice.  'I've got my ticket.  'No one can stop me. I'm going to Malta!'
and he tried to get to the other side of a stout traveller, who defended his legs from him,
and said, 'Ha! Running away from school, young master!  Here's your usher.'

'No, I'm not running away!  I'm not at school!  I'm Maurice Kendal! I'm going to my brother
at Malta!'

'He is the son of Mr. Kendal of Bayford,' said Ulick to the station-master,' his parents are
from home, and there will be dreadful distress if he goes in this way.  Maurice, your sister
has troubles enough already.'

'I've my ticket, and can't be stopped.'

But even as he spoke, the stout traveller picked him up by the collar, and dropped him like
a puppy dog into Ulick's arms, just as the train was getting into motion; and a head protruded
from every window to see the truant, who was pommelling Ulick in a violent fury, and roaring,
'Let me go; I will go to Gilbert!'

'Behave like a man,' said Ulick; 'don't disgrace yourself in that way.'

The boy coloured, and choking with passion and disappointment, and straining against Ulick's
hold of his shoulder.

'Indeed, sir,' said the station-master, 'if we had recognised the young gentleman, we would
have made more inquiries, but he asked so readily for his ticket, not seeming at a loss, and
we have so many young travellers, that we thought of nothing amiss.  Will you have a fly, sir?'

'I'm not going home,' said the boy, undaunted.

'You must submit, Maurice.  You do not wish to make poor Sophy miserable.'

'I must go to Malta,' the boy persisted.  'Gilbert says it would make him well to see me. 
I know my way; I saw it in the map, and I've a roll, and the end of a cold tongue, and a clean
shirt, and my own sovereign, and four shillings, and a half-crown, and a half-penny in my pocket;
and I'm going!'

'But, Maurice, this gentleman will tell you that your whole sovereign would not carry you a
quarter of the way to Malta.'

The station-master gave so formidable a description of the impossibilities of the route, that
the hardy little fellow's look of decision relaxed into dejection, his muscles lost their tension,
and he struggled hard with his tears.

He followed Ulick to the carriage, and hid his face in a corner, while orders were given to
stop at the post-office in case there were fresh letters.  There was one for Miss Kendal, in
Mr. Ferrars' writing, and with black borders.  Ulick felt too surely what it must be, and hardly
could bear to address Maurice, who had shrunk from him with some remains of passion, but hearing
suppressed sobs, he put his hand on him and said, 'My poor little man.'

'Get away,' said Maurice, shaking him off.  'Why did you come and bother?'

'I came because it would have almost killed your sister and mother for you to be lost.  If
you had seen Sophy's face, Maurice!'

'I don't care.  Now I shall never see Gilbert again, and he did want me so!' Maurice hid his
face, and his frame shook with sobs.

'Yes,' said Ulick, 'every one knew he wanted you; but if it had been possible for you to go,
your mamma would have taken you.  If your uncle had to take care of her how could you go alone?'

'I'd have got there somehow,' cried Maurice.  'I'd have seen and heard Gilbert.  He's written
me a letter to say he wants to see me, and I can't even make that out!'

'Has not your sister read it to you!'

'I hate Sophy's reading!' cried Maurice.  'It makes it all grumpy, like her.  Take it, Ulick--you
read it.'

That rich, sensitive, modulated voice brought out the meaning of the letter, though there were
places where Ulick had nearly broken down; and Maurice pressed against him with the large tears
in his eyes, and was some minutes without speaking.

'He does not think of your coming; he does not expect you, dear boy,' said Ulick.  'It is a
precious letter to have.  I hope you will keep it and read it often, and heed it too.'

'I can't read it,' said Maurice, ruefully.  'If I could, I shouldn't mind.'

'You soon will.  You see how he tells you you are to be a comfort; and if you are a good boy,
you'll quickly leave the dunce behind.'

'I can't,' said Maurice.  'Mamma said I should not do a bit of a lesson with Sophy, or I should
tease her heart out.  Would it come quite out?'

'Well, I think you've gone hard to try to-day,' said Ulick.

'Mamma said my being able to read would be a comfort, and papa says he never saw such an ignorant
boy! so what's the use of minding Gilbert's letter?  It wont let me.'

'What wont let you?'

'Fun!' said Maurice, with a sob.

'He is a rogue!' cried Ulick, vehemently; 'but a stout heart and good will can get him under
yet.  Think of what your brother says of making your father and mother happy!'

'If I could do something to please them very, very much!  Oh! if I could but learn to read
all at once.'

'You can read--anybody can read!' said Ulick, pulling a book out of his pocket.  'There! try.'

There was some laughing over this; and then Maurice leant out of window, and grew sleepy. 
They had descended into the wide basin of alluvial land through which the Baye dawdled its
meandering course, and were just about to cross the first bridge about two miles from Bayford,
when Maurice shouted, 'There's Sophy!--how funny.'

It was a tall figure, in deep mourning, slowly moving along the towing-path, intently gazing
into the river; but so strange was it to see Sophy so far from home, that Ulick paused a moment
ere calling to the driver to stop.

As he hastily wrenched open the door, she raised up her face, and he was shocked.  She looked
as if she had lived years of sorrow, and even Maurice was struck with consternation.

'Sophy!  Sophy!' he cried, hanging round her.  'I wouldn't have gone without telling you, if
I had thought you would mind it.  Speak to me, Sophy!'

She could say nothing save a hoarse 'Where?' as with both arms she pressed him as if she could
never let him go again.

'In the train--intending to go to Malta,' said Ulick.

'I didn't know I could not; I didn't mean to vex you, Sophy,' continued the child.  'I'm come
home now, and I wont try again.'

'Oh! Maurice, what would have become of you?'  She held out her hand to Ulick, the first time
for months.

'And we've got a letter for you, proceeded Maurice.

Ulick would fain have withheld it, but he had not the choice.  She caught at it, still holding
Maurice fast, and ere he could propose her opening it in the carriage while he walked home
she had torn it open, and the same moment she had sunk down, seated on the path, with an arm
round her brother.  'Oh! Maurice, it is well you are here! You would not have found them--it
is over!'

She had found one brother to lose the other; but the relief of Maurice's safety had so softened
the blow, that her tears gushed forth freely.

The sense of Ulick's presence restrained her, but raising her head, she missed him, and felt
lonely, desolate, deserted, almost fainting, and in a strange place.

'Is he dead?' said Maurice, in a solemn low voice, and she wept helplessly, while the little
fellow stood sustaining her weight like a small pillar, perplexed and dismayed.

'Are you poorly, Sophy?  What shall I do?' said he, as she almost fell back, but a stronger
arm held her up.

'Lean on me, dear Sophy,' said Ulick, who had returned, bringing some water from a small house
near at hand, and supported her and soothed her like a brother.

The mists cleared away, the sense of desertion was gone, and she rose, but could not stand
without his arm, and he almost lifted her into the carriage, where her appealing eye and helpless
gesture made him follow her, and take Maurice on his knee.  No one spoke; Maurice nestled close
to his friend; awe-struck but weighed down by weariness and excitement.  The blow had in reality
been given when he was forced to relinquish the hope of seeing his brother again, and the actual
certainty of his death fell with less comparative force. Perhaps he did not enter into the
fact enough to ask for particulars. After a short space Sophy recovered herself enough to take
out the letter, and read it over with greater comprehension.

'They were come!' she said.

'In time.  I am glad.'

'In time to bring him peace, my uncle says!  He knew mamma.  I could never have borne it if
I had deprived him of her!'

'Nor I,' said Ulick, from his heart.  'Did one but know the upshot of one's idle follies!'

Sophy looked towards Maurice.

'Asleep!' said Ulick.  'No wonder.  He has walked four miles!  He has a heart that might have
been born in Ireland;' and as he looked at the fair young face softened and sweetened by sleep,
'What an infant it is to have even fancied such an undertaking!'

'Poor child!' sighed Sophy.  'He will never be the same!'

'Nay, grief at that age does not check the spirits for life.'

'You have never known,' said Sophy.

'No; our number has never yet been broken; but for this little man, I trust that the sense
of duty may be deepened, and with it his love to you all; and surely that is not what will
quench the blithe temper.'

'May it be so!' said Sophy.  'He may have enough of his mother in him to be happy.'

'I must think that the recollection of so loving a brother, and his pride in him for a hero,
may make the stream flow more deeply, but not more darkly.'

'There never was a cloud between them,' said Sophy.

'Clouds are all past and gone now between those who can with him "take part in that thanksgiving
lay,"' answered Ulick, kindly.

'Yes,' said Sophy.  'My uncle says it was peace at last!  Oh! if humbleness and penitence could
win it, one might be sure it would be his.'

'True,' said Ulick.  'It was a beautiful thing to find the loving sweetness and kindness refined
into self-devotion and patience, and growing into something brighter and purer as it came near
the last. It will be a precious recollection.'

'To those who have no self-reproach,' sighed Sophy; and after a pause she abruptly resumed,
'You once blamed me for being hard with him. Nothing was more true.'

'Impossible--when could I have presumed?'

'When?  You remember.  After Oxford.'

'Oh! you should not have let what I said dwell with you.  I was a very raw Irishman then, and
thought it barbarity to look cold on a little indiscretion, but I have learnt to think differently,'
and he sighed.  'The severity that leads to repentance is truer affection than is shown by
making light of foolishness.'

'If it had been affection and not wounded pride.'

'The dross has been refined away, if there were any,' said Ulick. 'You will be able to love
him better now than ever you did in life.'

His comprehension met her half way, and gave her more relief and soothing than anything she
had experienced for months.  There was that response and intercommunion of spirit for which
her nature had yearned the more because of the inability to express the craving; the very turn
of the dark blue eyes, and the inflexions of the voice, did not merely convey pity, but an
entering into the very core of her sorrow, namely, that she had never loved her brother enough,
nor forgiven him for not being his fellow-twin.  Whatever he said tended to reveal to her that
there had been more justice, rectitude, sisterly feeling, and wholesome training than she had
given herself credit for, and, above all, that Gilbert had loved her all the time. She was
induced to dwell on the exalting and touching circumstances of his last redeeming year, and
her tears streamed calmly and softly, not with the harshness that had hitherto marred her grief.
Neither could have believed that there had been so long and marked a separation in feeling,
or that Ulick O'More had not always been one with the Kendal family.  It was all too soon that
the conversation ended, and Maurice wakened suddenly at the vicarage wicket.  Mrs. Dusautoy
herself came to meet them as the little boy was lifted out. She had never been seen on her
own feet so far from the house before! But no one ever knew the terror she had suffered, when
of all her three charges not one was safe but the little Albinia, whose 'poor Maurice' and
'all gone' were as trying as her alternations of merriment.  The vicar, the curate, the parish
clerk, the servants of the two establishments, and four policemen, were all gone different
ways; and poor Mrs. Dusautoy's day had been spent in hearing the results of their fruitless
researches, or in worse presages, in which, as it now appeared, the river had played its part.

She kissed Maurice, and he did not rebel!  She kissed Sophy, and could have shaken off Ulick's
hand, but he only waited to hold up Hyder Ali as the real finder, before he ran off to desire
the school-bell to be rung--the signal for announcing a discovery.  It was well that Maurice
was too much stunned and fatigued to be sensible what a commotion he had excited, or he might
have thought it good fun.

The tidings from Malta came in almost as something secondary.  The case had been too hopeless
for anything else to be looked for, and when Mrs. Dusautoy consigned her charge to a couch,
with entreaties to her not to move, there was calm tenderness in Sophy's voice as she told
what needed to be told, and did not shrink from sympathy.  She was grateful and gentle, and
lay all the rest of the day, sad and physically worn out, but quietly mournful, and no longer
dwelling on the painful side of past transactions, her remorse had given way to resigned acquiescence,
and desolation to a sense that there was one who understood her.  The sweet tones, and, above
all, those two words, 'dear Sophy,' would come chiming back from some involuntary echo, and
the turbid depths were at peace.

When Mr. Dusautoy came to her side, and held out his hand, his honest eyes brimming over, there
was no repulsion in her manner of saying affectionately, 'You have had a great deal of trouble
for my naughty little brother.'  So different was her whole tone, that her kind friends thought
how much better for some minds was any certainty than suspense.  She bethought herself of sending
to the Drurys, and showed rather gratification than her ordinary impatience at the manifold
reports of the general sympathy, and of Bayford's grief for its hero. The poison was gone from
her mind.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

The Family Office had been asked to receive the whole party on their return.  Mr. Kendal had
business in London, and could not bear to part with the colonel till he had seen him safely
lodged, and heard the surgeon's opinion.

Mr. Ferrars was laying himself out to guard his brother-in-law from being oppressed by the
sympathetic welcome of the good aunts; but though the good ladies never failed in kindness,
all the excess was directed into a different channel; Albinia herself was but secondary to
the wounded hero, for whom alone they had eyes and ears.  They would hardly let him stand erect
for a moment; easy-chairs and couches were offered, soup and wine, biscuits and coffee were
suggested, and questions were crowded on him, while he, poor fellow, wistfully gazed at the
oft-directed pile of foreign letters on the side-table, and in pure desperation became too
fatigued to go down to luncheon.

When the others returned, he was standing on the rug, curling his moustaches.  There was a
glow of colour on his hollow cheek, and his eyes danced; he put out his hand, and catching
Albinia's with boyish playfulness, he squeezed it triumphantly, with the words, 'Albinia, she's
a brick!'

They went their several ways, Fred to rest, Maurice to make an appointment for him with the
doctor, and Albinia to Genevieve, whom Mr. Kendal regarded like his son's widow, forgetting
that the attachment had been neither sanctioned nor returned.  He could not rest without seeing
her, and delivering that last message, but he was glad to have the way prepared by his wife,
and proposed to call for her when his law business should be over.

Albinia sent in her card, and asked whether Miss Durant were at liberty.  Genevieve came hurrying
to her with outstretched hands: 'Dear Mrs. Kendal, this is kind!' and led her to the back drawing-room,
where they were with one impulse enfolded in each other's tearful embrace.

'Oh! madame, how much you have suffered!'

'You know all?' said Albinia.

'O no, very little.  My aunt knows little of Bayford now, and her sight is too weak for much
writing.'

Genevieve pushed back her hair; she looked ill and heavy-eyed, with the extinguished air that
sorrow gave her.  Gilbert had distressed, perplexed her, and driven her from home, but what
could be remembered, save the warm affection he had lavished on her, and the pain she had inflicted?
Uneasiness and sorrow, necessarily unavowed, had preyed on the poor girl for weeks in secret;
and even now she hardly presumed to give way, relief, almost luxury, as it was to be pressed
in those kind arms, and suffered to weep freely for the champion of her younger days.  When
she had heard how he had thought of her to the last, her emotion grew less controllable; and
Albinia was touched by the idea that there had all along been a stifled preference.  Embellished
as Gilbert now was, she could not but wish to believe that his affection had not been wasted;
and his constancy might well be touching in one of the heroes of the six hundred.  At least,
Genevieve had a most earnest and loving appetite for every detail, and though the afternoon
was nearly gone, neither felt as if half an hour had passed when admittance was asked for Mr.
Kendal.

It was a trying moment, but Genevieve was too simple, genuine, and grateful to pause in selfish
embarrassment.  Had she toyed with Gilbert's affection, she could not have met his father with
such maidenly modesty, and sweet sympathy and respect in her blushing cheek and downcast, tearful
eyes.

He took her hand, speaking in the kindest tone of his mellow voice: 'My dear, Mrs. Kendal has
told you what brings us here, and how much we feel for and with you.'

'So kind in you,' said Genevieve, faltering.

'Poor child, she has suffered grievously for want of fuller tidings,' said Albinia; 'she has
been keeping her sorrow pent up all this time.'

'She has acted, as she has done throughout, most consistently,' said Mr. Kendal.  'My dear,
though it was inexpedient to show my sentiments, I always respected my son for having placed
his affections so worthily, and though circumstances were unfortunately adverse, I cannot thank
you enough for your course of action and the influence you exercised.'

'I never did,' murmured Genevieve.

'Not perhaps consciously; but unswerving rectitude of conduct is one of the strongest earthly
influences.  He was sensible of it.  He bade me tell you that whenever higher and better thoughts
came to him, you were connected with them; and when to his surprise, poor boy, he found that
he was thought to have distinguished himself, his first thought was that it might be a step
to your esteem.  He desired me to thank you for all that you have been to him, to entreat you
to pardon the annoyance of which he was the occasion, and to beg you to wear this for his sake,
if you could think of his presumption with forgiveness and toleration.  Those were his words;
but I trust you do not retain displeasure, for though, perhaps, foolishly and obtrusively expressed,
it was sincere and lasting affection.'

'Oh, sir!' exclaimed Genevieve, 'do not speak thus!  What can I feel save that it will be my
tenderest and deepest pride to have been so regarded.  Oh! that I could thank him! but,' clasping
her hands together, 'I cannot even thank you.'

'The best way to gratify us,' he said, 'will be always to remember that you have a home at
Willow Lawn, and a daughter's place in our hearts.  Think of me like a father, Genevieve;'
and he kissed her drooping forehead.

'Oh! Mr. Kendal, this is goodness.'

He turned to Albinia to suggest, 'It must be intolerable to be here at present.  Speak to Mrs.
Rainsforth, let us take her home, if it be but for a week.'

Leaving him to make the proposition to Genevieve, Albinia gained admittance to the other drawing-room,
which she found all over little children, and their mother looking unequal to dispensing with
their deputy.  She said she had feared Miss Durant was looking ill, and had something weighing
on her spirits, though she was always so cheerful and helpful, but baby had not been well,
and Mr. Rainsforth was not at all strong, and her views had evidently taken no wider range.

Albinia began to think her proposal cruel, and prefaced it by a few words on the state of the
case.  The little bit of romance touched the kind heart.  Mrs. Rainsforth was shocked to think
of the grief the governess must have suffered in secret while aiding to bear her burdens, and
was resolved on letting her have this respite, going eagerly to assure her that she could well
be spared; baby was better, and papa was better, and the children would be good.

But Genevieve knew too well how necessary she was, and had been telling Mr. Kendal of the poor
little mother's anxieties with her many delicate children, and her husband's failing health.
She could not leave them with a safe conscience; and she would not show how she longed after
quiet, the country, and her aunt.  She stood firm, and Albinia could not say that she was not
right.  Mrs. Rainsforth was distressed, though much relieved, and was only pacified by the
engagement that Miss Durant should, when it was practicable, spend a long holiday with her friends.

'At home!' said Mr. Kendal, and the responsive look of mournful gratitude from beneath the
black dewy eyelashes dispelled all marvel at his son's enduring attachment.

He was wonderfully patient when Mrs. Rainsforth could not be content without Mrs. Kendal's
maternal and medical opinion of the baby, on the road to and from the nursery consulting her
on all the Mediterranean climates, and telling her what each doctor had said of Mr. Rainsforth's
lungs, in the course of which Miss Durant and her romance were put as entirely out of the little
lady's mind as if she had never existed.

The next day the Kendals set their faces homewards, leaving Maurice till the surgeon's work
should be done, and Fred, as the aunts fondly hoped, to be their nursling.

But, behold!  Sunday and Monday Colonel Fred spent in bed, smiling incessantly; Tuesday and
Wednesday on the sofa; Thursday in going about London; Friday he was off to Liverpool; Saturday
had sailed for Canada.

Albinia was coming nearer to the home that was pulling her by the heart-strings.  Hadminster
was past, and she had heard the welcome wards, 'All well,' from the servant who brought the
carriage; but how much more there was to know than Sophy's detailed letters could convey--Sophy,
whose sincerity, though one of the most trustworthy things in the world, was never quite to
be relied on as to her own health or Maurice's conduct.

At the gate there was a little chestnut curled being in a short black frock, struggling to
pull the heavy gate open with her plump arms, and standing for one moment with her back to
it, screaming 'Mamma! Papa!' then jumping and clapping her hands in ecstasy and oblivion that
the swing of the gate might demolish her small person between it and the horse.  But there
was no time for fright.  Sophy caught her and secured the gate together; and the first glimpse
assured Albinia that the hard gloom was absent.  And there was Maurice, leaning against the
iron rail of the hall steps; but he hardly moved, and his face was so strangely white and set,
that Albinia caught him in her arms, crying, 'Are you well, my boy?  Sophy, is he well?'

'Quite well,' said Sophy; but the boy had wriggled himself loose, stood but for an instant
to receive his father's kiss, and had hold of the sword.  The long cavalry sabre was almost
as tall as himself, and he stood with both arms clasped round it; but no sooner did he feel
their eyes upon him, than he turned about and ran upstairs.

It was not gracious, but they excused it; they had their little Albinia comfortably and childishly
happy, as yet without those troublesome Kendal feelings that always demonstrated themselves
in some perverse manner.

And Sophy stood among them--that brighter, better Sophy who had so long been obscured, happy
to have them at home; talking and asking questions eagerly about the journey, and describing
the kindness of the Dusautoys and the goodness of the children.

'Have you heard from Lucy?' asked Mr. Kendal, as Albinia went in pursuit of her little boy.

'Yes--poor Lucy?'

'Is there no letter from him?'

'Not for you, papa.'

'What?  Did he write to his uncle?'

'No, papa--he wrote to me and to Mr. Pettilove.  Cannot he be stopped, papa?  Can he do any
harm?  Mr. Dusautoy and Mr. Pettilove think he can.'

'You mean that he wishes to question the will?  You may be quite secure, my dear.  Nothing
can be more safe.'

'Oh, papa!  I am so very glad.  Not to be able to hinder him was so dreadful, when he wanted
to pit Lucy and me against you.  I could never have looked at you.  I should always have felt
that you had something to forgive me.'

'I could not well have confounded you with Algernon, my dear,' said Mr. Kendal.  'What did
Pettilove mean?  Do you know?'

'Not exactly; something about grandpapa's old settlement; which frightened the Vicar, though
Mrs. Dusautoy said that it was only that he fancied nobody could do anything right without
his help.  Mr. Dusautoy is more angry with Algernon than I thought he could be with anybody.'

'No one but Algernon would have ever thought of it,' said Mr. Kendal. 'I am sorry he has molested
you, my dear.  Have you any objection to let me see his letter?'

'I kept it for you, papa, and a copy of my answer.  I thought though I am not of age, perhaps
my saying I would have nothing to do with it might do some good.'

Algernon magniloquently condoled with his sister-in-law on the injustice from which she and
her sister had suffered, in consequence of the adverse influence which surrounded her brother,
and generously informed her that she had a champion to defeat the machinations against their
rights.  He had little doubt of the futility of the document, and had written to the legal
adviser of the late Mr. Meadows to inquire whether the will of that gentleman did not bar any
power on the part of his grandson to dispose of the property.  She might rely on him not to
rest until she should be put in possession of the estate, unless it should prove to have been
her grandfathers intention, in case of the present melancholy occurrence, that the elder sister
should be the sole inheritrix, and he congratulated her on having such a protector, since,
under the unfortunate circumstances, the sisters would have had no one to uphold their cause
against their natural guardian.

Sophy's answer was--

'Dear Algernon,

'I prefer my natural guardian to any other whatever.  I shall for my part owe you no thanks
for attempting to frustrate my dear brother's wishes, and to raise an unbecoming dissension.
I desire that no use of my name may be made, and you may rest assured that I should find nothing
so difficult to forgive as any such interference in my behalf.

                                           'Yours truly,
                                              'SOPHIA KENDAL.'

'Certainly,' said Mr. Kendal, 'no family ill-will is complete unless money matters be brought
in to aggravate it.'

'Do you think I did right, and spoke strongly enough, papa?'

'Quite strongly enough,' said Mr. Kendal, suppressing a smile.  'I hope you wrote kindly to
Lucy at the same time.'

'One could not help that, papa; but I did say a great deal about the outrageous impropriety
of raising the question, because I thought Algernon might be ashamed.'

'Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt,' said Mr. Kendal. 'Your grandfather's acquisitions
have brought us little but evil hitherto, and now I fear that our dear Gilbert's endeavour
to break the net which bound us into that system of iniquity and oppression, may cause alienation
from poor Lucy.

He had hidden his face in his mother's lap, and when she raised it struggled to keep it down,
and she felt him sobbing and panting for breath.  Mr. Kendal stroked his hair, and they tried
to soothe him, but he started up abruptly.

'I don't mean ever to be a plague again!  So I did it.  But there-- when Ulick said it would
be a comfort, you are all going to cry again, papa and all, and that's worse!' and stamping
his foot passionately, he would have rushed out of the room, but was held fast in his father's
arms, and indeed tears were flowing fast from eyes that his brother's death had left dry.

'My child! my dear child!' said Mr. Kendal, 'it is comfort.  No one can rule you as by God's
grace you can rule yourself, and your endeavours to do this are the greatest blessing I can ask.'

One more kiss from his mother, and she let him go.  He did not know how to deal with emotion
in himself, and hated the sight of it in others; so that it was better to let him burst away
from them, while with one voice they admired, rejoiced, and interrogated Sophy.

'I know now,' she said, the rosy glow mantling in her cheek; 'it must have been Mr. O'More.'

'Ah! has he been with you?' said her father.

'Only once,' said Sophy, her colour deepening; 'but Maurice has been in a great hurry every
day to go to him, and I saw there was some secret.  One day, Susan asked me to prevent Master
Maurice from teaching baby such ugly words, that she could not sleep--not bad words, but she
thought they were Latin.  So I watched, and I heard Maurice singing out some of the legend
of Hiawatha, and insisting on poor little Awkey telling him what m-i-s-h-e-n-a-h-m-a, spelt.
Poor little Awk stared, as well she might, and obediently made the utmost efforts to say after
him, Mishenahma, king of fishes, but he was terribly discomposed at getting nothing but Niffey-ninny,
king of fithes.  I went to her rescue, and asked what they were about; but Maurice thundered
down on me all the Delawares and Mohawks, and the Choctaws and Cameches; and baby squeaked
after him as well as she could, till I fairly stopped my ears.  I thought Ulick must be reading
the legend to him.  Now I see he must have been teaching him to read it.'

'Can it be possible?' said Mr. Kendal.  'He could not read words of five letters without spelling.'

'He always could do much more when he pleased than when he did not please,' said Albinia. 
'I believe the impulse to use his understanding was all that was wanting, and I am very glad
the impulse came from such a motive.'

Mr. Kendal ordained that Maurice's reward should be learning Latin from himself, a perilous
trial; but it proved that Mr. Kendal was really a good teacher for a child of spirit and courage,
and Maurice had early come to the age when boys do better with man than with woman.  He liked
the honour and the awe of papa's tutorship, and learnt so well, that his father never believed
in his past dunceship; but over studies that he did not deem sufficiently masculine, he could
be as troublesome as ever, his attention absent, and his restlessness most wearisome.  To an
ordinary eye, he was little changed; but his mother felt that the great victory of the will
had been gained, and that his self was endeavouring to get the better of the spirit of insubordination
and mischief.  Night after night she found him sleeping with the Balaklava sword by his side,
and his hand clasped over it; and he always crept out of the way of Crimean news, though that
he gathered up the facts was plain when he committed his sovereign to Ulick, with a request
that it might be devoted to the comforts preparing to be sent to the 25th Lancers.

Ulick wished him to consult his mother, but this he repelled.  He could not endure the sight
of a tear in her eye, and she could not restrain them when that chord was touched.  It was
a propensity she much disliked, the more because she thought it looked like affectation beside
Sophy, whose feelings never took that course, but the more ill-timed the tears, the more they
would come, at the most common-place condolence or remote allusion.  It was the effect of the
long strain on her powers, and the severe shock coming suddenly after so much pressure and
fatigue; moreover, her habits had been so long disorganized that her time seemed blank, and
she could not rouse herself from a feeling of languor and depression.  Then Gilbert had been
always on her mind, whether at home or absent; and it did not seem at first as if she had enough
to fill up time or thoughts--she absolutely found herself doing nothing, because there was
nothing she cared to do.

Mr. Kendal's first object was the fulfilment of Gilbert's wishes; but Albinia soon felt how
much easier it is for women and boys to make schemes, than for men to bring them to effect,
and how rash it is hastily to condemn those who tolerate abuses.

The whole was carefully looked over with a surveyor, and it was only then understood how complicated
were the tenures, and how varied the covenants of the numerous small tenements which old Mr.
Meadows had amassed.  It was not possible to be free of the legal difficulties under at least
a year, and plans of drainage might be impeded for want of other people's consent.  Even if
all had been smooth, the sacrifice of income, by destroying Tibb's Alley, and reducing the
number of cottages, would be considerable.  Meantime, the inspection had brought to light worse
iniquities and greater wretchedness than Mr. Kendal had imagined, and his eagerness to set
to work was tenfold.  His table was heaped with sanitary reports, and his fits of abstraction
were over the components of bad air or builder's estimates.

It only depended on Ulick to have resumed his intimacy at Willow Lawn; but the habit once broken
was not resumed.  He was often there, but never without invitation; and he was not always to
be had.  He had less leisure, he was senior clerk, and the junior was dull and untrained; and
he often had work to do far into the evening.  He looked bright and well, as though possessed
of a sense of being valuable in his own place, more conducive to happiness than even congeniality
of employment; and Sophy, though now and then disappointed at his non-appearance, always had
a good reason for it, and continued to justify Mr. Dusautoy's boast that the air of the hill
had made another woman of her.

Visiting cards had, of course, come in numbers to Willow Lawn, but Albinia seemed to have caught
her husband's aversions, and it would be dangerous to say how long it was before she lashed
herself into setting off for a round of calls.

Nothing surprised her more than Miss Goldsmith's reception. Conscious of her neglect, she expected
the stiff manner to be more formal than ever; but the welcome was almost warm, and there was
something caressing in her fears that Miss Kendal would be tired. Mr. Goldsmith was not quite
well, there were threatenings of gout, and his sister had persuaded him to visit the relations
at Bristol next week; everything might safely be trusted to young More, and therewith came
such praise of his steadiness and ability, that Albinia did not know which way to look when
all was ascribed to Mr. Kendal's great kindness to him.

It was too palpable to be altogether pleasant.  Sophia Kendal was heiress enough to be a very
desirable connexion for the bank. Albinia was afraid she should see through the lady's graciousness,
and took her leave in haste; but Sophy only said, 'Do you remember, mamma, when the Goldsmiths
thought we unsettled him?'

Before Albinia had disarmed her reply of the irony on the tip of her tongue, the omnibus came
lumbering round the corner, and a voice proceeded from the rear, the door flew open, and there
was a rapid exit.

Face and voice, light step, and gay bearing, all were Fred--the empty sleeve, the sole resemblance
to the shattered convalescent of a few weeks back.

'There, Albinia!  I said you should see her first.  You haven't got any change, have you?'
the last being addressed either to Albinia, the omnibus conductor, or a lady, who made a tender
of two shillings, while Albinia ordered the luggage on to Willow Lawn, though something was
faintly said about the inn.

'And there!' cried Fred, with an emphatic twist of his moustache, 'isn't she all I ever told you?'

'The last thing was a brick,' said Albinia, laughing, as she looked at the smiling, confiding,
animated face, not the less pleasant for a French Canadian grace that recalled Genevieve.

'The right article for building a hut, I hope,' she said, merrily.

'But how and when could you have come?'

'This morning, from Liverpool.  We did not mean to storm you in this manner; we meant to have
settled ourselves at the inn, and walked down; Emily was very particular about it.'

'But you see, when he saw you, he forgot all my lectures!' said Emily, taking his welcome for
granted.

'Very proper of him!  But, Fred, I don't quite believe it yet.  How long is it since we parted?'

'Six weeks; just enough to go to Canada and back, with a fortnight in the middle to spare.'

'And pray how long has Mrs. Fred existed?'

'Three weeks and two days;' and turning half round to give her the benefit of his words, 'it
was on purely philanthropic principles, because I could not tie my own necktie.'

'Now could I,' said Emily pleadingly to Sophy--'now could I let him go back again alone, when
he came so helpless, and looking so dreadfully ill?'

'And what are you going to do?' asked Albinia.  'You can't join again.'

'Join! why not?  Here's a hand for a horse, and an arm for a wife, and the rest will be done
much better for me than ever it was before.'

'But with her? and at Sebastopol!'

'That's the very thing'' cried the colonel, again turning about. 'Nothing will serve her but
to show how a backwoodsman's daughter can live in a hut.'

'And what will the general say?'

'The general,' cried Emily, 'will endure me better as a fact than as a prospect; and we will
teach him that a lady is not all made of nerves and of fancies!  See what he will say if we
let him into our paradise!'

Fred brightened, though Albinia's inquiry had for a moment taken him a little aback.  The one
being whom he dreaded was General Ferrars, for whom he cared a thousand times more than for
his own elder brother, and he was soon speculating, with his usual insouciance, as to how his
announcement might have been received by his lordship, and whether the aunts would look at
them as they went through London.

Mr. Kendal met them at the gate, amazed at the avalanche of luggage, but well pleased, for
he had grown very fond of Fred, and had been very anxious about him, thinking him broken and
enfeebled for life, and hardly expecting him to return from his mad expedition.  He was slow
to believe his eyes and ears when he beheld a hale, handsome, vigorous man, full of life and
activity, but his welcome and congratulations were of the warmest.  He could far better stand
a sudden inroad than if he had had to meditate for a week on entertaining the bride.  Not that
the bride wanted entertainment, except waiting upon her husband, who let himself be many degrees
less handy than at Malta, for the pleasure of her attentions.

Perhaps the person least gratified was Maurice; for the child shrank with shy reverence from
him whom his brother had saved, and would as soon have thought of making a plaything of Gilbert's
sword as of having fun with the survivor.  The sight of such a merry man was a shock, and he
abruptly repelled all attempts at playing with him, and kept apart with a big book on a chair
before him, a Kendalism for which he amply compensated when familiarity had diminished his awe.

Mr. Kendal, though little disposed to exert himself to talk, liked to watch his wife reviving
into animation, and Sophy taking a full share in the glee with which Emily enjoyed turning
the laugh against the good-natured soldier.  In the midst of their flush of joy there was a
tender consideration about the young couple, such as to hinder their tone from jarring.  Indeed,
it was less consideration than fellow-feeling, for Gilbert Kendal had become enshrined in the
depths of Fred's heart; while to Emily the visit was well-nigh a pilgrimage.  All her hero-worship
was directed to the youth who had guarded her soldier's life, nursed him in his sickness, and,
as he averred, inspired him with serious thoughts.  Poor, failing, timid, penitent Gilbert
was to her a very St. George, and every relic of him was viewed with reverence; she composed
a countenance for him from his father's fine features, and fitted the fragments of his history
into an ideal, till Sophy, after being surprised and gratified, began to view Gilbert through
a like halo, and to rank him with his twin brother.  Friendship was a new and agreeable phase
of life to Sophy, who found a suitable companion in such an open-hearted person, simpler in
nature, and fresher than herself, free from English commonplaces, though older and of more
standing. She expanded and brightened wonderfully, and Emily, imagining her a female Gilbert,
was devoted to her, and thought her a marvel of learning, depth, goodness, and humility, the
more striking for her tinge of grave pensiveness.

'Why, Albinia,' said the colonel, 'didn't I hear that it was your handsome daughter who is
married?'

'Yes, poor Lucy was always called our pretty one.'

'More admired than her sister?  Why, she never could have had a countenance!'

'Yes,' said Albinia, highly gratified by the opinion of such a connoisseur.  'I always told
Winifred that Sophy was the beauty, but she has only lately had health or animation to set her off'

'I declare, when we overtook you in the street, she looked a perfect Spanish princess, in her
black robes and great shady hat.  You ought always to keep her in black.  Ha!  Emily, what
are you smiling at?'

His wife looked up into his face with mischievous shyness in her eyes, as if she wanted him
to say what would be a liberty in her. Somebody else had overtaken the ladies nearly at the
same moment, and Albinia exulted in perceiving that the embellishment had been observed by
others besides herself.  She did not look so severe but that Fred was encouraged to repeat,
'Only lately had health or animation?  When Irish winds blow this way, I fancy--But what will
the aunts say?'

'They are not Sophy's aunts, whatever they are to you.'

'What will Kendal say? which is more to the purpose.'

'Oh! he saw it first; he will be delighted; but you must not say a word to him, for it can't
come to anything just now.'

Albinia was thus confirmed in her anticipations, and the bridal pair, only wishing everybody
to be as happy as themselves, took the matter up with such vivid interest and amusement, that
she was rather afraid of a manifestation such as to shock either her husband or the parties
themselves; but Fred was too much of a gentleman, and Emily too considerate, for anything perilously
marked.  Only she thought Emily need not have been so decided in making room for Ulick next
to Sophy, when they were all looking out at the young moon at the conservatory-door that evening.

And then Emily took her husband's arm, and insisted on going down the garden to be introduced
to English nightingales; and though she was told they never had come there in the memory of
man, she was bent on doing as she would be done by, and drew him alone the silvered paths,
among the black shadows of the trees; and Ulick asked Sophy if she wished to go too.  She looked
as if she should like it very much; he fetched a couple of cloaks ont of the hall, put her
into one, and ran after Mrs. Ferrars with the other.

'Well!' thought Albinia, as she stood at the conservatory-door, 'how much more boldness and
tact some people have than others!  If I had lived a hundred years, I should not have managed
it so well!'

'What's become of them?' said Mr. Kendal, as she went back to the drawing-room.

'Gone to listen for nightingales!'

'Nightingales!  How could you let them go into the river-fog?'

'Emily was bent upon it; she is too much of a bride not to have her way.'

'Umph!  I wonder Sophy was so foolish.'

They came back in a quarter of an hour.  No nightingales; and Fred was indulging in reminiscences
of bull-frogs; the two ladies were rapturous on the effect of the moonbeams in the ripple of
the waters, and the soft furry white mist rising over the meadows.  Ulick shivered, and leant
over the fire to breathe a drier air, bantering the ladies for their admiration, and declaring
that Mrs. Ferrars had taken the moan of an imprisoned house-dog for the nightingale, which
he disdainfully imitated with buzz, zizz, and guggle, assuring her she had had no loss; but
he looked rather white and chilled.  Sophy whispered something to her papa, who rang the bell,
and ordered in wine and hot water.

'There, Emily,' said Albinia, when he had taken his leave; 'what shall we say to your nightingales,
if Mr. O'More catches his ague again?'

'Oh, there are moments when people don't catch agues,' said Fred. 'He would be a poor fellow
to catch an ague after all that, though, by-the-bye, it is not a place to go to at night without
a cigar.'

Albinia was on thorns, lest Sophy should be offended; but though her cheeks lighted up, and
she was certainly aware of some part of their meaning, either she did not believe in the possibility
of any one bantering her, or else the assumption was more agreeable than the presumption was
disagreeable.  She endured with droll puzzled dignity, when Fred teased her anxiety the next
day to know whether Mr. O'More had felt any ill effects; and it really appeared as if she liked
him better for what might have been expected to be a dire affront; but then he was a man whose
manner enabled to do and say whatever he pleased.

Emily never durst enter on the subject with her, but had more than one confidential little
gossip with Albinia, and repeatedly declared that she hoped to be in England when 'it' took
place.  Indeed that week's visit made them all so intimate, that it was not easy to believe
how recent was the acquaintance.

The aunts had been so much disappointed at Fred's desertion, so much discomfited at his recovery
contrary to all predictions, and so much annoyed at his marriage, that it took all their kindness,
and his Crimean fame, to make them invite him and his colonial wife to the Family Office, to
be present at the royal distribution of medals. However, the good ladies did their duty; and
Emily and Sophy parted with promises of letters.

The beginning of the correspondence was as full a description of the presentation of the medals
as could be given by a person who only saw one figure wherever she went, and to whom the great
incident of the day was, that the gracious and kindhearted Queen had herself fastened the left-handed
colonel's medal as well as Emily could have done it herself!  There was another medal, with
two clasps, that came to Bayford, and which was looked at in pensive but not unhappy silence.
'You shall have it some day, Maurice, but not now,' said Mr. Kendal, and all felt that now
meant his own lifetime.  It was placed where Gilbert would well have liked to see it, beside
his brother Edmund's watch.

Emily made Mrs. Annesley and Miss Ferrars more fond of her in three days, than eleven years
had made them of Winifred; too fond, indeed, for they fell to preaching to Fred upon the horrors
of Sebastopol, till they persuaded him that he was a selfish wretch, and brought him to decree
that she should stay with them during his absence.  But, as Emily observed, that was not what
she left home for; she demolished his arguments with a small amount of playing at petulance,
and triumphantly departed for the East, leaving Aunt Mary crying over her as a predestined victim.

The last thing Fred did before sailing, was to send Albinia a letter from his brother, that
she might see 'how very kind and cordial Belraven was,' besides something that concerned her
more nearly.

Lord Belraven was civil when it cost him nothing, and had lately regarded his inconvenient
younger brother with favour, as bringing him distinction, and having gained two steps without
purchase, removed, too, by his present rank, and the pension for his wound, from being likely
to become chargeable to him; so he had written such brotherly congratulations, that good honest
Fred was quite affected. He was even discursive enough to mention some connexions of the young
man who had been with Fred in the Crimea, a Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, a very good sort of fellow,
who gave excellent dinners, and was a pleasant yachting companion.  His wife was said to be
very pretty and pleasing, but she had arrived at Genoa very unwell, had been since confined,
and was not yet able to see any one.  It was said to be the effect of her distress for the
death of her brother, and the estrangement from her family, who had behaved very ill about
his property.  Had not Albinia Ferrars married into that family?

Albinia knew enough of her noble relative to be aware that good dinners and obsequiousness
were the way to his esteem, and Algernon's was the sort of arrogance that would stoop to adore
a coronet.  All this was nothing, however, to the idea of Lucy, ill in that strange place,
with no one to care for her but her hard master.  Albinia sometimes thought of going to find
her out at Genoa; but this was too utterly wild and impossible, and nothing could be done but
to write letters of affectionate inquiry, enclosing them to Lord Belraven.

Algernon's answer was solemn, and as brief as he could make anything. He was astonished that
the event bad escaped the notice of the circle at Bayford, since he believed it had appeared
in all the principal European newspapers; and his time had been so fully occupied, that he
had imagined that intimation sufficient, since it was evident from the tone of the recent correspondence,
that the family of Bayford were inclined to drop future intercourse.  He was obliged for the
inquiries for Lucy, and was happy to say she was recovering favourably, though the late unfortunate
events, and the agitation caused by letters from home, had affected her so seriously, that
they had been detained at Genoa for nearly four months to his great inconvenience, instead
of pushing on to Florence and Rome.  It had been some compensation that he had become extremely
intimate with that most agreeable and superior person, Lord Belraven, who had consented to
become sponsor to his son.

Lucy wrote to Albinia.  Poor thing, the letter was the most childishly expressed, and the least
childishly felt, she had ever written; its whole aspect was weak and wobegone; yet there was
less self-pity, and more endeavour to make the best of it, than before. She had the dearest
little baby in the world; but he was very delicate, and she wished mamma would send out an
English nurse, for she could not bear that Italian woman--her black eyes looked so fierce,
and she was sure it was not safe to have those immense pins in her hair.  Expense was nothing,
but she should never be happy till she had an Englishwoman about him, especially now that she
was getting better, and Algernon would want her to come out again with him.  Dear Algernon,
he had lost the Easter at Rome for her sake, but perhaps it was a good thing, for he was often
out in Lord Belraven's yacht, and she could be quiet with baby.  She did wish baby to have
had her dear brothers' names, but Algernon would not consent.  Next Tuesday he was to be christened;
and then followed a string of mighty names, long enough for a Spanish princess, beginning with
Belraven!!!

Lucy Dusautoy's dreary condition in the midst of all that wealth could give, was a contrast
to Emily Ferrars' buoyant delight in the burrow which was her first married home, and proved
a paradise to many a stray officer, aye, maybe, to Lieutenant-General Sir William Ferrars himself.
Her letters were charming, especially a detail of Fred meeting Bryan O'More coming out of the
trenches, grim, hungry, and tired, having recently kicked a newly alighted shell down from
the parapet, with the cool words, 'Be off with you, you ugly baste you;' of his wolfish appetite
after having been long reduced to simple rations, though he kept a curly black lamb loose about
his hut, because he hadn't the heart to kill it; and it served him for bed if not for board,
all his rugs and blankets having flown off in the hurricane, or been given to the wounded;
he had been quite affronted at the suggestion that a Galway pig was as well lodged as himself--it
was an insult to any respectable Irish animal!

Albinia sent Maurice to summon Ulick to enjoy the letter in store for him.  He looked grave
and embarrassed, and did not light up as usual at Bryan's praises.  He said that his aunt,
who had written to him on business, had given a bad account of Mr. Goldsmith, but Albinia hardly
thought this accounted for his preoccupation, and was considering how to probe it, when her
brother Maurice opened the door.  'Ulick O'More! that's right; the very man I was in search of!'

'How's Winifred, Maurice?'

'Getting on wonderfully well.  I really think she is going to make a start, after all! and
she is in such spirits herself.'

'And the boy?'

'Oh, a thumping great fellow!  I promise you he'll be a match for your Maurice.'

'I do believe it is to reward Winifred for sparing you in the spring when we wanted you so
much!  Come, sit down, and wait for Edmund.'

'No; I've not a moment to stay.  I'm to meet Bury again at Woodside at six o'clock, he drove
me there, and I walked on, looking in at your lodgings by the way, Ulick.'

'I'm not there now.  I am keeping guard at the bank.'

'So they told me.  Well, I hope your guard is not too strict for you to come over to Fairmead
on Sunday; we want you to do our boy the kindness to be his godfather!'

Sophy blushed with approving gratitude.

'I don't consider that it will be a sinecure--he squalls in such a characteristic manner that
I am convinced he will rival his cousin here in all amiable and amenable qualities; so I consider
it particularly desirable that he should be well provided with great disciplinarians.'

'You certainly could not find any one more accomplished in teaching dunces to read,' said Albinia.

'When their mammas have taught them already!' added Ulick, laughing. 'Thank you; but you know
I can't sleep out; Hyder Ali and I are responsible for a big chest of sovereigns, and all the
rest of it.'

'Nor could I lodge you at present; so we are agreed.  My proposition is that you should drive
my sister over on Sunday morning.  My wife is wearying for a sight of her; and she has not
been at Fairmead on a Sunday since she left it, eh, Albinia?'

'I suppose for such a purpose it is not wrong to use the horse,' she said, her eyes sparkling.

'And you might put my friend Maurice between you, if you can't go out pleasuring without him.'

'I scorn you, sir; Maurice is as good as gold; I shall leave him at home, I think, to prove
that I can--'

'That's the reward of merit!' exclaimed Sophy.

'She expects my children to corrupt him!' quoth Mr. Ferrars.

'For shame, Maurice; that's on purpose to make me bring him.  Well, we'll see what papa says,
and if he thinks the new black horse strong enough, or to be trusted with Mr. O'More.'

'I only wish 'twas a jaunting car!' cried Ulick.

'And what's the boy's name to be?  Not Belraven, I conclude, like my unfortunate grandson--Maurice,
I hope.'

'No; the precedent of his namesake would be too dangerous.  I believe he is to be Edmund Ulick.
Don't take it as too personal, Ulick, for it was the name of our mutual connexion.'

'I take the personal part though, Maurice; and thank you, said Albinia, and Mr. Ferrars looked
more happy and joyous than any time since his wife's health had begun to fail.  Always cheerful,
and almost always taking matters up in the most lively point of view, it was only by comparison
that want of spirits in him could be detected; and it was chiefly by the vanishing of a certain
careworn, anxious expression about his eyes, and by the ring of his merry laugh, that Albinia
knew that he thought better of his wife's state than for the last five or six years.

Albinia and Ulick drove off at six o'clock on a lovely summer Sunday morning, with Maurice
between them in a royal state of felicity. That long fresh drive, past summer hay-fields sleeping
in their silver bath of dew, and villages tardily awakening to the well-earned Sunday rest,
was not the least pleasant part of the day; and yet it was completely happy, not even clouded
by one outbreak of Master Maurice.  Luckily for him, Mary had a small class, who absorbed her
superabundant love of rule; and little Alby was a fair-haired, apple-cheeked maiden of five,
who awoke both admiration and chivalry, and managed to coquet with him and Ulick both at once,
so that Willie had no disrespect to his sisters to resent.

He was exemplary at church, well-behaved at dinner, and so little on his mamma's mind, that
she had a delightful renewal of her acquaintance with the Sunday-school, and a leisurable gossip
with Mrs. Reid and the two Miss Reids, collectively and individually; but the best of all was
a long quiet tete-a-tete with Winifred.

After the evening service, Mr. Ferrars himself carried his newly-christened boy back to the
mother, and paused that his sister might come with him, and they might feel like the old times,
when the three had been alone together.

'Yes,' said Winifred, when he had left them, 'it is very pretty playing at it; but one cannot
be the same.'

'Nor would one exactly wish it,' said Albinia; 'though I think you are going to be more the same.'

'Perhaps,' said Winifred; 'the worst of being ill is that it does wear one's husband so!  When
he came in, and tried to make me fancy we were gone back to Willie's time, I could not help
thinking how different you both looked.'

'Well, so much the better and more respectable,' said Albinia.  'You know I always wanted to
grow old; I don't want to stop short like your sister Anne, who looks as much the child of
the house as ever.

'I wish you had as few cares as Anne.  Look; I declare that's a grey hair!'

'I know.  I like it; now Sophy is growing young, and I'm growing old, it is all correct.'

'Old, indeed!' ejaculated Winifred, looking at her fair fresh complexion and bright features;
'don't try for that, when even Edmund is not grey.'

'Yes he is,' said Albinia, gravely; 'Malta sowed many white threads in his black head, and
worry about those buildings has brought more.'

'Worry; I'm very sorry to hear of it.'

'Yes; the tenures are so troublesome, and everybody is so cantankerous.  If he wanted to set
up some pernicious manufacture, it could not be worse!  The Osbornes, after having lived with
Tibb's Alley close to them all their lives, object to the almshouses!  Mr. Baron wont have
the new drains carried through his little strip of land.  The Town Council think we are going
to poison the water; and Pettilove, and everybody else who owns a wretched tenement, that we
shall increase the wants of their tenants, and lower their rents.  If it be carried through,
it will be by that sheer force in going his own way that Edmund can exert when he chooses.'

'And he will?'

'O, yes, no fear of that; he goes on, avoiding seeing or hearing what he has not to act upon;
but worse than all are the people themselves; Tibb's Alley all has notice to quit, but none
of them can be got rid of till Martinmas, and some not till Lady-day, and the beer-house people
are in such a rage!  The turn-out of the public-houses come and roar at our gate on Saturday
nights; and they write up things on the wall against him! and one day they threw over into
the garden what little Awkey called a poor dear dead pussy.  I believe they tell them all sorts
of absurd things about his tyranny; poor creatures.'

'Can't you get it stopped?'

'Edmund wont summon any one, because he thinks it would do more harm than good.  He says it
will pass off; but it grieves him more than he shows: he thinks he could once have made himself
more popular: but I don't know, it is a horrid set.'

'I thought you said he was in good spirits.'

'And so he is: he never gets depressed and unwilling to be spoken to. He is ready to take interest
in everything; and always so busy!  When I remember how he never seemed to be obliged to attend
to anything, I laugh at the contrast; and yet he goes about it all so gravely and slowly, that
it never seems like a change.'

In this and other home talk nearly an hour had passed, when Mr. Ferrars returned.  'Are you
come to tell me to go?' said Albinia.

'Not particularly,' he said, in a tone that made her laugh.

'No, no,' said Winifred.  'I want a great deal more of her.  Where have you been?'

'I have been to see old Wilks; Ulick walked down with me.  By-the-bye, Albinia, what nonsense
has Fred's wife been talking to his brother?'

'Emily does not talk nonsense!' fired up Albinia, colouring, nevertheless.

'The worse for her, then!  However, it seems Bryan has disturbed this poor fellow very much,
by congratulating him on his prospects at Willow Lawn.'

'Oh! that is what made him so distant and cautious, is it?' laughed Albinia.  'I think Mrs.
Emily might as well not have betrayed it.'

'Betrayed!  What could have passed?'

'Oh!  Emily and Fred saw it as plain as I did.  Why, it does not do credit to your discernment,
Maurice; papa found it out long ago, and told me.'

'Kendal did?'

'Yes, that he did, and did not mind the notion at all; rather liked it, in fact.'

'Well!' said Mr. Ferrars, in a different tone, 'it is a very queer business!  I certainly did
not think the lad showed any symptoms.  He said he had heard gossip about it before, and had
tried to be careful; his aunt talked to him once, but, as he said, it would be nothing but
the rankest treason to think of such a thing, on the terms on which he is treated.'

'Ay, that's it!' said Albinia; 'he acts most perfectly.'

'Perfectly indeed, if that were acting,' said Mr. Ferrars.

'And what made him speak to you?' asked Winifred.

'He wanted to consult me.  He said it was very hard on him, for all the pleasure he had came
from his intercourse with Willow Lawn; and he could not bear to keep at a distance, because
it looked as if he bad not forgotten the old folly about the caricature; but he was afraid
of the report coming to your ears or Mr. Kendal's, because you would think it so wrong and
shameful an abuse of your kindness.'

'And that's his whole concern?'

'So he told me.'

'And what advice did you give him?'

'I told him Bayford was bent on gossip, and no one heeded it less than my respected brother
and sister.'

'That was famous of you, Maurice.  I was afraid you would have put it upon his honour and the
state of his own heart.'

'Sooth to say, I did not think his heart appeared very ticklish.'

'Oh!  Maurice, Maurice!  But you've not been there to see the hot fits and the cold fits! 
It is a very fine thermometer whether he says Sophy or Miss Kendal.'

'And you say Edmund perceived this?'

'Much you would trust my unassisted 'cuteness!  I tell you he did, and that it will make him
happier than anything.'

'Very well; then my advice will have done no harm.  I did not think there had been so much
self-control in an Irishman.'

'Had he not better say, so much blindness in the rector of Fairmead?' laughed Albinia.

'And pray what course is the affair to take?'

'The present, I suppose.  Some catastrophe will occur at last to prove to him that we honour
him, and don't view it as outrageous presumption; and then--oh! there can be no doubt that
he will have a share in the bank; and Sophy may buy toleration for his round O. After all,
he has the best of it as to ancestry, and we Kendals need not turn up our noses at banking.'

'I think he will be too proud to address her, except on equality as to money matters.'

'Pride is sometimes quelled and love free,' said Albinia.  'No, no; content yourself with having
given the best advice in the world, with your eyes fast shut!'

And Albinia went home in high spirits.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Not long afterwards, Ulick O'More was summoned to Bristol, where his uncle had become suddenly
worse; but he had only reached Hadminster when a telegraph met him with the news of Mr. Goldsmith's
death, and orders to remain at his post.

He came to the Kendals in the evening in great grief; he had really come to love and esteem
his uncle, and he was very unhappy at having lost the chance of a reconciliation for his mother.
As her chief friend and confidant, he knew that she regarded the alienation of her own family
as the punishment of her disobedient marriage, and that his own appointment had been valued
chiefly as an opening towards fraternal feeling, and reproached himself for not having made
more direct efforts to induce his uncle to enter into personal intercourse with her.

'If I had only ventured it before he went to Bristol,' he said; 'I was a fool not to have done
so; and there, the Goldsmiths detest the very name of us!  Why could they not have telegraphed
for me?  I might have heard what would have done my mother's heart good for the rest of her
life.  I am sure my poor uncle wanted to ease his mind!'

'May he not have sent some communication direct to her?'

'I trust he did!  I have long thought he only kept her aloof from habit, and felt kindly towards
her all the time.'

'And never could persuade himself to make a move towards her until too late,' said Albinia.

'Yes.  Nothing comes home to one more than the words, "Agree with thine adversary quickly whiles
thou art in the way with him."  If once one comes to think there's creditable pride in holding
out, there's no end to it, or else too much end.'

'Mr. Goldsmith was persevering in the example his father had set him,' said Mr. Kendal.

'Ay! my mother never blamed either, and I'm afraid, if the truth were told, my father was hot
enough too, though it would all have been bygones with him long ago, if they would have let
it.  But I was thinking just then of my own foolishness last winter, when I would not grant
you it was pride, Mrs. Kendal, for fear I should have to repent of it.'

'What has brought you to see that it was?' asked she.

'One comes to a better mind when the fit is off,' he said.  'I hope I will not be as bad next
time.'

'I hope we shall never give you a next time,' said Albinia; 'for neither party is comfortable,
perched on a high horse.'

'And you see,' continued Ulick, 'it is hard for us to give up our pride, because it is the
only thing we've got of our own, and has been meat, drink, and clothing to us for many a year.'

'So no wonder you make the most of it.'

'True; I think a very high born and very rich man might be humble,' said Ulick, so meditatively
that they laughed; but Sophy said,

'No, that is not a paradox; the real difficulty is not in willingly yielding, but in taking
what we cannot help.'

'Well,' said Ulick, 'I hope it is not pride not to intend working under Andrew Goldsmith.'

'Do you consider that as your fate?' asked Albinia.

'Never my fate,' said Ulick, quickly; 'hardly even my alternative, for he would like to put
up a notice, "No Irish need apply."  We had enough of each other last winter.'

'And do you suppose,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that Mr. Goldsmith has left your position exactly the
same?'

'I've no reason to think otherwise.  I refused all connexion with the bank if it was to interfere
with my name.  I don't think it unlikely that he may have left me a small compliment in the
way of shares; but if so, I shall sell them, and make them keep me at Oxford.  I'm not too
old yet!'

'Then the work of these four years is wasted,' said Mr. Kendal, gravely.

'No, indeed,' cried Ulick; 'not if it takes me where I've always longed to be!  Or, if not,
I flatter myself I'm accountant enough to be an agent in my own country.'

'Anything to get away from here,' said Albinia, with a shade of asperity, provoked by the spirit
of enterprise in his voice.

'After all, it is a bit of a place,' said Ulick; 'and the office parlour is not just a paradise!
Then 'tis all on such a narrow scale, too little to absorb one, and too much to let one do
anything else; I see how larger transactions might be engrossing, but this is mere cramping
and worrying; I know I could do better for my family in the end than by what I can screw out
of my salary now; and if it is no longer to give my poor mother a sense of expiation, as she
calls it, why, then, the cage-door is open.'

His eyes glittered, and Sophy exclaimed, 'Yes; and now the training is over, it has made you
fitter to fly.'

'It has,' he said; 'and I'm thankful for it.  Without being here, I would never have learnt
application--nor some better things, I hope.'

They scarcely saw him again till after the funeral, when late in the day he came into the drawing-room,
and saying that his aunt was pretty well and composed, he knelt down on the floor with the
little Awk, and silently built up a tower with her wooden bricks.  His hand trembled nervously
at first, but gradually steadied as the elevation became critical; and a smile of interest
lighted his face as he became absorbed in raising the structure to the last brick, holding
back the eager child with one hand lest she should overthrow it. Completion, triumph, a shock,
a downfall!

'Well,' cried the elder Albinia, unable to submit to the suspense.

'Telle est la vie,' answered Ulick, smiling sadly as he passed his hand over his brow.

'It's too bad of him,' broke out Mrs. Kendal.

'I thought you were prepared,' said Sophy, severely, disappointed to see him so much discomposed.

'How should I be prepared,' said he, petulantly, 'for the whole concern, house, and bank, and
all the rest of it?'

'Left to you?' was the cry.

'Every bit of it, and an annuity apiece charged on it to my mother and aunt for their lives!
My aunt told me how it came about.  It was all that fellow Andrew's fault.'

'Or misfortune,' murmured Albinia.

'My poor uncle had made a will in Andrew's favour long before my time, and at Bristol he wanted
to make some arrangement for my mother and for me; but it seems Mr. Andrew took exception at
me--would not promise to continue me on, nor to give me a share in the business, and at last
my uncle was so much disgusted, that be sent for a lawyer and cut Andrew out of his will altogether.
My aunt says he went on asking for me, and it was Andrew's fault that they wrote instead of
telegraphing.  You can't think what kind messages he sent to me;' and Ulick's eyes filled with
tears.  'My poor uncle, away from home, and with that selfish fellow.'

'Did he send any message to your mother?'

'Yes! he told my aunt to write to her that he was sorry they had been strangers so long, and
that--I'd been like a son to him.  I'm sure I wish I had been.  I dare say he would have let
me if I had not flown out about my O.  I could have saved changing it without making such an
intolerable row, and then he might have died more at peace with the world.'

'At peace with you at least he did.'

'I trust so.  But if I could only have been by his side, and felt myself a comfort, and thanked
him with all my heart.  Maybe he would have listened to me, and not have sown ill-will between
Andrew and me, by giving neither what we would like.'

'Do you expect us to be sorry?'

'Nay, I came to be helped out of my ingratitude and discontent at finding the cage-door shut,
and myself chained to the oar; for as things are left, I could not get it off my hands without
giving up my mother's interests and my aunt's.  Besides, my poor uncle left me an entreaty
to keep things up creditably like himself, and do justice by the bank.  It is as if, poor man,
it was an idol that he had been high priest to, and wanted me to be the same--ay, and sacrifice
too.'

'Nay, there are two ways of working, two kinds of sacrifice; and besides, you are still working
for your mother.'

'So I am, but without the hope she had before.  To be sure, it would be affluence at home,
or would be if she could have it in her own hands.  Little Redmond shall have the best of educations!
And we must mind there is something in advance by the time Bryan wants to purchase his company.'

Albinia asked how his aunt liked the arrangement.  It seemed that Andrew had offended her nearly
as much as her brother, and that she was clinging to Ulick as her great comfort and support;
he did not like to stay long away from her, but he had rushed down to Willow Lawn to avoid
the jealous congratulations of the cousinhood.

'You will hardly keep from glad people,' said Albinia.  'You must shut yourself up if you cannot
be congratulated.  How rejoiced Mr. Dusautoy will be!'

'Whatever is, is best,' sighed Ulick.  'I shall mind less when the first is past!  I must go
and entertain all these people at dinner!' and he groaned.  'Good evening.  Heigh ho!  I wonder
if our Banshee will think me worth keening for?'

'I hope she will have no occasion yet,' said Albinia, as he shut the door; 'but she will be
a very foolish Banshee if she does not, for she will hardly find such another O'More!  Well,
Sophy, my dear.'

'We should have missed him,' said Sophy, as grave as a judge.

Albinia's heart beat high with the hope that Ulick would soon perceive sufficient consolation
for remaining at Bayford, but of course he could make no demonstration while Miss Goldsmith
continued with him.  She made herself very dependent on him, and he devoted his evenings to
her solace.  He had few leisure moments, for the settlement of his affairs occupied him, and
full attention was most important to establish confidence at this critical juncture, when it
might be feared that his youth, his nation, and Andrew Goldsmith's murmurs might tell against
him.  Mr. Kendal set the example of putting all his summer rents into his hands, and used his
influence to inspire trust; and fortunately the world had become so much accustomed to transacting
affairs with him, that the country business seemed by no means inclined to fall away.  Still
there was much hard work and some perplexity, the Bristol connexion made themselves troublesome,
and the ordinary business was the heavier from the clerks being both so young and inexperienced
that he was obliged to exercise close supervision.  It was guessed, too, that he was not happy
about the effect of the influx of wealth at home, and that he feared it would only add to the
number of horses and debts.

He soon looked terribly fagged and harassed, and owned that he envied Mr. Hope, who had just
received the promise of a district church, in course of building under Colonel Bury's auspices,
about four miles from Fairmead.  To work his way through the University and take Holy Orders
had been Ulick's ambition; he would gladly have endured privation for such an object, and it
did seem hard that such aspirations should be so absolutely frustrated, and himself forced
into the stream of uncongenial, unintellectual toil, in so obscure and uninviting a sphere.
The resignation of all lingering hope of escape, and the effort to be contented, cost him more
than even his original breaking in; and Mr. Kendal one day found him sitting in his little
office parlour unable to think or to speak under a terrible visitation of his autumnal tormentor,
brow-ague.

This made Mr. Kendal take to serious expostulation.  It was impossible to go on in this way;
why did he not send for a brother to help him?

Ulick could not restrain a smile at the fruitlessness of thinking of assistance of this kind
from his elder brothers, and as to little Redmond, the only younger one still to be disposed
of, he hoped to do better things for him.

'Then send for a sister.'

He hoped he might bring Rose over when his aunt was gone, but he could not shut those two up
together at any price.

Then,' said Mr. Kendal, rather angrily, 'get an experienced, trustworthy clerk, so as to be
able to go from home, or give yourself some relaxation.'

'Yes, I inquired about such a person, but there's the salary; and where would be the chance
of getting Redmond to school?'

'I think your father might see to that.'

Ulick had no answer to make to this.  The legacy to Mrs. O'More might nearly as well have been
thrown into the sea.

'Well,' said Mr. Kendal, walking about the room, 'why don't you keep a horse?'

'As a less costly animal than brother, sister, or clerk?' said Ulick, laughing.

'Your health will prove more costly than all the rest if you do not take care.'

'Well, my aunt told me it would be respectable and promote confidence if I lived like a gentleman
and kept my horse.  I'll see about it,' said Ulick, in a more persuadable tone.

The seeing about it resulted in the arrival of a genuine product of county Galway, a long-legged,
raw-boned hunter, with a wild, frightened eye, quivering, suspicious-looking ears, and an ill-omened
name compounded of kill and of kick, which Maurice alone endeavoured to pronounce; also an
outside car, very nearly as good as new.  This last exceeded Ulick's commission, but it had
been such a bargain, that Connel had not been able to resist it, indeed it cost more in coming
over than the original price; but Ulick nearly danced round it, promising Mrs. and Miss Kendal
that when new cushioned and new painted they would find it beat everything.

He was not quite so envious of Mr. Hope when he devoted the early morning hours to Killye-kickye,
as the incorrect world called his steed, and, if the truth must be told, he first began to
realize the advantages of wealth, when he set his name down among the subscribers to the hounds.

Nor was this the only subscription to which he was glad to set his name; there were others
where Mr. Dusautoy wanted funds, and Mr. Kendal's difficulties were lessened by having another
lord of the soil on his side.  Some exchanges brought land enough within their power to make
drainage feasible, and Ulick started the idea that it would be better to locate the almshouses
at the top of the hill, on the site of Madame Belmarche's old house, than to place them where
Tibb's Alley at present was, close to the river, and far from church.

Mr. Kendal's plans were unpopular, and two or three untoward circumstances combined to lead
to his being regarded as a tyrant.  He could not do things gently, and had not a conciliating
manner.  Had he been more free spoken, real oppression would have been better endured than
benefits against people's will.  He interfered to prevent some Sunday trading; and some of
the Tibb's Alley tenants who ought to have gone at midsummer, chose to stay on and set him
at defiance till they had to be forcibly ejected; whereupon Ulick O'More showed that he was
not thoroughly Anglicised by demanding if, under such circumstances, it was safe to keep the
window shutters unclosed at night, Mr. Kendal's head was such a beautiful mark under the lamp.

If not a mark for a pistol, he was one for the disaffected blackguard papers, which made up
a pathetic case of a helpless widow with her bed taken away from under her, ending with certain
vague denunciations which were read with roars of applause at the last beer shop which could
not be cleared till Christmas, while the closing of the rest sent herds thither; and papers
were nightly read; representing the Nabob expelling the industrious from the beloved cottages
of their ancestors, by turns, to swell his own overgrown garden, or to found a convent, whence,
as a disguised Jesuit, he meant to convert all Bayford to popery.

As Albinia wrote to Genevieve, they were in a state of siege, for only in the middle of the
day did Mr. Kendal allow the womankind to venture out without an escort, the evening was disturbed
by howlings at the gate, and all sorts of petty acts of spite were committed in the garden,
such as injuring trees, stealing fruit, and carrying off the children's rabbits.  Let that
be as it might, Genevieve owned herself glad to come to hospitable Willow Lawn, though sorry
for the cause.

Poor Mr. Rainsforth, after vainly striving to recruit his health at Torquay during the vacation,
had been sentenced to give up his profession, and ordered to Madeira, and Genevieve was upon
the world again.

The Kendals claimed her promise of a long visit, or rather that she should come home, and take
time and choice in making any fresh engagement, nay, that she should not even inquire for a
situation till after Christmas.  And after staying to the last moment when she could help the
Rainsforths, she proposed to spend a day or two with her aunt at the convent, and then come
to her friends at Bayford.

Mr. Kendal drove his ladies to fetch her.  He had lately indulged the household with a large
comfortable open carriage with two horses, a rival to Mr. O'More's notable car, where he used
to drive in an easy lounging fashion on one side, with Hyder Ali to balance him on the other.

This was a grand shopping day, an endless business, and as the autumn day began to close in,
even Mr. Kendal's model patience was nearly exhausted before they called for their little friend.
There was something very sweet and appropriate in her appearance; her dress, without presuming
to share their mourning, did not insult it by gay colouring; it was a quiet dark violet and
white checked silk, a black mantle, and black velvet bonnet with a few green leaves to the
lilac flowers, and the face when at rest was softly pensive, but ready to respond with cheerful
smiles and grateful looks.  She had become more English, and had dropped much foreign accent
and idiom, but without losing her characteristic grace and power of disembarrassing those to
whom she spoke, and in a few moments even Sophy had lost all sense of meeting under awkward
or melancholy circumstances, and was talking eagerly to her dear old sympathizing friend.

There was a great exchange of tidings; Genevieve had much to tell of her dear Rainsforths,
the many vicissitudes of anxiety in which she had shared, and of the children's ways of taking
the parting; and of the dear little Fanny who seemed to have carried away so large a piece
of her susceptible heart, that Sophy could not help breaking out, 'Well, I do think it is very
hard to make yourself a bit of a mother's heart, only to have it torn out again.'

Albinia smiled, and said, 'After all, Sophy, happiness in this world is in such loving, only
we don't find it out till the rent has been made.'

'And some people can get fond of anything,' said Sophy.

'I'm sure,' said Genevieve, 'every one is so kind to me I can't help it.'

'I was not blaming you,' said Sophy.  'People are the better for it, but I cannot like except
where I esteem, and that does not often come.'

'Oh! don't you think so?' cried Genevieve.

'I don't mean moderate approval.  That may extend far, and with it good-will, but there is
a deep, concentrated feeling which I don't believe those who like every one can ever have,
and that is life.'

Perhaps the deepening twilight favoured the utterance of her feelings, for, as they were descending
a hill, she said, 'Mamma, that was the place where Maurice was brought back to me.'

She had before passed it in silence, but in the dark she was not afraid of betraying the expression
that the thrill of exquisite recollection brought to her countenance; and leaning back in her
corner indulged in listening to the narration, as Albinia, unaware of the special point of
the episode, related Maurice's desperate enterprise, going on to dilate on the benefit of having
Mr. O'More at the bank rather than Andrew Goldsmith.

'Ah!' said Genevieve, 'it is he who wants to pull down our dear old house.  I shall quarrel
with him.'

'Genevieve making common cause with the obstructives of Bayford, as if he had not enemies enough!'

'What's that light in the sky?' exclaimed Sophy, starting up to speak to her father on the
driving seat.

'A bonfire,' said Mr. Kendal.  'If we had remembered that it was the 5th of November, we would
not have stayed out so late.'  The next moment he drew up the horses, exclaiming, 'Mr. Hope,
will you have a lift?'

Mr. Hope, rather to the ladies' surprise, took the vacant place beside Sophy, instead of climbing
up to the box.  He had been to see his intended parish, and was an enviable man, for he was
as proud of it as if it had been an intended wife, and Albinia, who knew it for a slice of
dreary heath, was entertained with his raptures.  Church, schools, and parsonage, each in their
way were perfection or at least promised to be, and he had never been so much elevated or so
communicative.  The speechless little curate seemed to have vanished.

The road, as may be remembered, did not run parallel with the curve of the river, but cutting
straight across, entered Bayford over the hill, passing a small open bit of waste land, where
stood a few cottages, the outskirts of the town.

Suddenly coming from an overshadowed lane upon this common, a glare of light flashed on them,
showing them each other's faces, and casting the shadow of the carriage into full relief. 
The horses shied violently, and they beheld an enormous bonfire raised on a little knoll about
twenty yards in front of them, surrounded by a dense crowd, making every species of hideous noise.

Mr. Kendal checked the horses' start, and Mr. Hope sprang to their heads.  They were young
and scarcely trustworthy, their restless movements showed alarm, and it was impossible to turn
them without both disturbing the crowd and giving them a fuller view of the object of their
terror.  Mr. Kendal came down, and reconnoitring for a moment, said, 'You had better get out
while we try to lead them round, we will go home by Squash Lane.'

Just then a brilliant glow of white flame, and a tremendous roar of applause, put the horses
in such an agony, that they would have been too much for Mr. Hope, had not Mr. Kendal started
to his assistance, and a man standing by likewise caught the rein.  He was a respectable carpenter
who lived on the heath, and touching his hat as he recognised them, said, 'Sir, if the ladies
would come into my house, and you too, sir.  The people are going on in an odd sort of way,
and Mrs. Kendal would be frightened.  I'll take care of the carriage.'

Mr. Kendal went to the side of the carriage, and asked the ladies if they were alarmed.

'O no!' answered Albinia, 'it is great fun;' and as the horses fidgeted again, 'it feels like
a review.'

'You had better get out,' he said; 'I must try to back the horses till I can turn them without
running over any one.  Will you go into the house?  You did not expect to find Bayford so riotous,'
he added with a smile, as he assisted Genevieve out.

'You are not going to get up again,' said Albinia, catching hold of him, and in her dread of
his committing himself to the mercy of the horses, returning unmeaning thanks to the carpenter's
urgent requests that she would take refuge in his house.

In fact, the scene was new and entertaining, and on the farther side of the road, sheltered
by the carriage, the party were entirely apart from the throng, which was too much absorbed
to notice them, only a few heads turning at the rattling of the harness, and the ladies were
amused at the bright flame, and the dark figures glancing in and out of the light, the shouts
of delight and the merry faces.

'There's Guy Fawkes,' cried Albinia, as a procession of scarecrows were home on chairs amid
thunders of acclamation; 'but whom have they besides?  Here are some new characters.'

'Most lugubrious looking,' said Genevieve.  'I cannot make out the shouts.'

'It is the Nabob,' said Mr. Kendal.  'Perhaps you do not know that is my alias.  This is my
execution.'

The carpenter implored them to come in, and Mr. Hope added his entreaties, but Mr. Kendal would
not leave the horses, and the ladies would not leave him; and they all stood still while his
effigy was paraded round the knoll, the mark of every squib, the object of every invective
that the rabble could roar out at the top of their voices. Jesuits and Papists; Englishmen
treated like blackamoor slaves in the Indies; honest folk driven out of house and home; such
was the burthen of the cries that assailed the grim representative carried aloft, while the
real man stood unmoved as a statue, his tall, powerful figure unstirred, his long driving-whip
resting against his shoulder without betraying the slightest motion, neither firm lip nor steady
eye changing.  Genevieve, with tears in her eyes, exclaimed, 'Oh! this is madness!  Will no
one tell them how wicked they are?'

'Never mind, my dear,' said Mr. Kendal, pressing the hand that in her fervour she had laid
on his arm, 'they will come to their senses in time.  No, Mr. Hope, I beg you will not interfere,
they are in no state for it; they have done no harm as yet.'

'I wonder what the police are about?' cried Albinia, indignantly.

'They are too few to do any good,' said Mr. Kendal.  'It may be better that they are not incensing
the mob.  It will all go off quietly when this explosion has relieved their feelings.'

They felt as if there were something grand in this perfectly dispassionate reception of the
outrage, and they stood awed and silenced, Sophy leaning on him.

'It will soon be over now,' he said, 'they are poking up the name to receive me.'

'Hark! what's that?'

The mob came swaying back, and a rich voice swelled above all the din, 'Boys, boys, is it burning
your friends you are?  Then, for the first time, Mr. Kendal started, and muttered, 'foolish
lad! is he here?'

Confused cries rose again, but the other voice gained the mastery.

'So you call that undertaker-looking figure there Mr. Kendal.  Small credit to your taste.
You want to burn him.  What for?'

'For being a Nabob and a tyrant,' was the shout.

'Much you know of Nabobs!  No; I'll tell you what it's for.  It is because his son got his
death fighting for his queen and his country a year ago, and on his death-bed bade him do his
best to drive the fever from your doors, and shelter you and save you from the Union in your
old age.  Is that a thing to burn him for?'

'We want no Irish papists here!' shouted a blackguard voice.

'Serve him with the same sauce.'

'I never was a papist,' was the indignant reply.  'No more was he; but I've said that the place
shan't disgrace itself, and--'

'I'm with you,' shouted another above all the howls of the mob. 'Gilbert Kendal was as kind-hearted
a chap as ever lived, and I'll see no wrong done to his father.'

Tremendous uproar ensued; then the well-known tones pealed out again, 'I've given my word to
save his likeness.  Come on, boys.  Hurrah for Kendal!'

The war-cry was echoed by a body of voices, there was a furious melee and a charge towards
the Nabob, who rocked and toppled down, while stragglers came pressed backwards on all sides.

'Here, Hope, take care of them.  Stay with them,' said Mr. Kendal, putting the whip into the
curate's hand, and striding towards the nucleus of the fray, through the throng who were driven
backwards.

'O'More,' he called, 'what's all this?  Give over!  Are you mad?' and then catching up, and
setting on his legs, a little fallen boy, 'Go home; get out of all this mischief.  What are
you doing?  Take home that child,' to a gaping girl with a baby.  'O'More, I say, I'll commit
every man of you if you don't give over.'

He was recognised, and those who had little appetite for the skirmish gave back from him; but
the more reckless and daring small fry began shrieking, 'The Nabob!' and letting off crackers
and squibs, through which he advanced upon the knot of positive combatants, who were exchanging
blows over his prostrate image in front of the fire.

One he caught by the collar, in the act of aiming a blow.  The fist was instantly levelled
at him, with the cry, 'You rascal! what do you mean by it?'  But the fierce struggle failed
to shake off the powerful grasp; and at the command, 'Don't be such a fool!' Ulick burst out,
'Murder! 'tis himself!' and in the surprise was dragged some paces before recovering his perceptions.

The cry of police had at the same instant produced a universal scattering, and five policemen,
coming on the ground, found scarcely any one to separate or capture.  Mr. Kendal relaxed his
hold, saying, 'You are my prisoner.'

'I didn't think you'd been so strong,' said Ulick, shaking himself, and looking bewildered.
'Where's the effigy?'

'What's that to you.  Come away, like a rational being.'

'Ha! what's that?' as a frightful, agonizing shriek rent the air, and a pillar of flame came
rushing across the now open space.  It was a child, one mass of fire, and flying, in its anguish,
from all who would have seized it.  One moment of horror, and it had vanished! The next, Genevieve's
voice was heard crying, 'Bring me something more to press on it.'  She had contrived to cross
its path with her large carriage rug, and was kneeling over it, forcing down the rug to smother
the flames.  Mr. Hope brought her a shawl, and they all stood round in silent awe.

'The poor child will be stifled,' said Albinia, kneeling down to help to unfold its face.

Poor little face, distorted with terror and agony!  One of the policemen recognised it as the
child of the public-house in Tibb's Alley.  There were moans, but no one dared to uncover the
limbs; and the policeman and Mr. Hope proposed carrying it at once to Mr. Bowles, and then
home.  Mr. Kendal desired that it should be laid on the seat of the carriage, which he would
drive gently to the doctor's.  Genevieve got in to watch over the poor little boy, and the
others walked on by the side, passed the battle-field, now entirely deserted, too much shocked
for aught but conjectures on his injuries, and the cause of the misfortune.  Either he must
have been pushed in on the fire by the runaway rabble, or have trod upon some of the scattered
combustibles.

Mr. Bowles desired that the child should be taken home at once, promising to follow instantly;
so at the entrance of Tibb's Alley, the carriage stopped, and Mr. Hope lifted out the poor
little wailing bundle.  Albinia was following, but a decided prohibition from her husband checked
her.  'I would not have either of you go to that house on any account.  Tell them to send to
us for whatever they want, but that is enough.'

There was no gainsaying such a command, but as they reached the door of Willow Lawn, Mr. Kendal
exclaimed, 'Where is Miss Durant?'

'She is gone with the little boy,' said Sophy.  'She told me she hoped you would not be displeased.
Mr. Hope will take care of her, and she will soon come in.'

'Every one is mad to-night!' cried Mr. Kendal.  'In such a place as that!  I will go for her
directly.'

'Pray don't,' said Albinia, 'no one could speak a rude word to her on such an errand.  She
and Mr. Hope will be much more secure from incivility without you.'

'I believe it may be so, but I wish--'

His wish was broken off, for his little Albinia, screaming, 'Papa! papa!' clung to him in a
transport of caresses, which Maurice explained by saying, 'Little Awkey has been crying, mamma,
she thought they were burning papa in the bonnie.'

'Papa not burnt!' cried little Awkey, patting his cheeks, and laying her head on his shoulders
alternately, as he held her to his breast. 'Naughty people wanted to make a fire, but they
sha'n't burn papa or poor Guy Fawkes, or any of the good men.'

'And where were you, Ulick?' cried Maurice, in an imperious, injured way.  'You said once,
perhaps you would take me to see the fire; and I went up to the bank, and they said you were
gone, and it was glaring so in the sky, and I did so want to go.'

'I am glad you stayed away, my man,' said Albinia.

'I did want to go,' said Maurice; 'and I ran up to the top of the street, and there was Mr.
Tritton; and he said if I liked a lark, he would take care of me; but--' and there he stopped
short, and the colour came into his face.

Albinia threw her arm round him, and kissed him, saying, 'My trusty boy! and so you came home?'

'Yes; and there was Awkey crying about their burning papa, and she would not go up to the garret-window
to see the fire, nor do anything.'

'Why, what is the sword here for?' exclaimed Sophy, finding it on the stairs.

'Because then Awkey was not so afraid.'

For once, Maurice had been exemplary, keeping from the tempting uproar, and devoting himself
to soothing his little sister.  It was worth all the vexations of the evening; but he went
on to ask if Ulick could not take him now, if the fire was not out yet,

'Not exactly,' said Mr. Kendal, drily.

'I beg your pardon, Mr. Kendal,' said Ulick, who had apparently only just resumed the use of
speech; 'don't know what I may have done when you collared me, but I'd no more notion of its
being you than the Lord Lieutenant.'

'And pray what took you there?' asked Mr. Kendal.  'The surprise was quite as great to me.'

'Why,' said Ulick, 'one of the little lads of my Sunday class gave me a hint the other day
that those brutes meant to have a pretty go to-night, and that Jackson was getting up a figure
of the Nabob to break their spite upon.  So I told my little fellow to give a hint to a few
more of the right sort, and we'd go up together and not let the rascals have their own way.'

'Upon my word, I wonder what the Vicar will say to the use you make of his Sunday-school. 
Pretty work for his model teacher.'

'What better could the boys be taught than to fight for the good cause?  Why, no one is a scratch
the worse for it.  And do you think we could sit by and see our best friend used worse than a dog?'

'Why not give notice to the police?'

'And would you have me hinder a fight?' cried Ulick, in the most Irish of all his voices.

'Oh! very well, if you like--only there will be a run on the bank to-morrow.'

'What has Ulick been doing, Sophy?' asked Maurice.

'Only what you would have done had you been older, Maurice,' she said, in a hurt voice; 'defending
papa's effigy, for which he does not seem to meet with much gratitude.'

'Well,' said Mr. Kendal, who all the time had had more gratitude in his eyes than on his tongue,
'if the burning had had the same consequence as melting one's waxen effigy was thought to have,
it might have been worth while to interfere, but I should have thought it more dignified in
a respectable substantial householder to let those foolish fellows have their swing.'

'More dignified maybe,' smiled Albinia, 'but less like an O'More.'

'No, you are not going,' said Mr. Kendal; 'I shall not release my prisoner just yet.'

'You carried off all the honour of the day,' said Ulick.  'I had no notion you had such an
arm.  Why, you swung me round like a tom-cat, or--' and he exemplified the exploit upon Maurice,
and was well buffeted.

'That's a little Irish blarney to propitiate me,' laughed Mr. Kendal, who certainly was in
unusual spirits after his execution and rescue by proxy, but you wont escape prison fare.'

'There's no doubt who was the heroine of the day,' added Sophy.  'How one envies her!'

'What! your little governess friend?' said Ulick.  'Yes; she did show superior wit, when the
rest of the world stood gaping round.'

'It was admirable--just like Genevieve's tenderness and dexterity,' said Albinia.  'I dare
say she is doing everything for the poor little fellow.'

'Yes, admirable,' said Mr. Kendal; 'but you all behaved very creditably, ladies.'

'Ay,' said Albinia; 'not to scream is what a man thinks the climax of excellence in a woman.'

'It is generally all that is required,' said Mr. Kendal.  I don't know what I should have done
if poor Lucy had been there.'

Thereupon the ladies went upstairs, Maurice following Sophy to extract a full account of the
skirmish.  The imp probably had an instinct that she would think more of what redounded to
Ulick O'More's glory than of what would be edifying to his own infant mind. It was doubtful
how long it would be before Guy Fawkes would arrive at his proper standing in the little Awk's
opinion, after the honour of an auto-da-fe in company with papa.

Mr. Hope escorted Genevieve home, and was kept to dinner.  They narrated that they had found
the public-house open, and the bar full of noisy runaways.

The burns were dreadful, but the surgeon did not think they would be fatal, and the child had
held Genevieve's hand throughout the dressing, and seemed so unwilling to part with her, that
she had promised to come again the next day, and had been thanked gratefully. There seemed
no positive want of comforts, and there was every hope that all would do well.

Genevieve looked pale after the scene she had gone through, and could not readily persuade
herself to eat, still less rally her spirits to talk; but she managed to avoid observation
at dinner-time, and afterwards a rest on the sofa restored her.  She evidently felt, as she
said, that this was coming home, and her exquisite gift of tact making her perceive that she
was to be at ease and on an equality, she assumed her position without giving her friends the
embarrassment of installing her, and Mr. Hope was in such a state of transparent admiration,
that Albinia could not help two or three times noiselessly clapping her hands under the table,
and secretly thanking the rioters and their tag-rag and bob-tail for having provided a home
for little Genevieve Durant.

There was indeed a pang as she thought of Gilbert; but she believed that Genevieve's heart
had never been really touched, and was still fresh and open.  She thought she might make Mr.
Kendal and Sophy equally magnanimous.  Perhaps by that time Sophy would be too happy to have
leisure to be hurt, and she had little fear but that Mr. Kendal's good sense would conquer
his jealousy for his son, though it might cost him something.

Two lovers to befriend at once!  Two desirable attachments to foster! There was glory!  Not
that Albinia fulfilled her mission to a great extent; shamefacedness always restrained her,
and she had not Emily's gift for making opportunities.  Indeed, when she did her best, so perversely
bashful were the parties, that the wrong pairs resorted together, the two who could talk being
driven into conversation by the silence of the others.

Of Mr. Hope's sentiments there could be no doubt.  He was fairly carried off his feet by the
absorption of the passion, which was doubly engrossing because all ladies had hitherto appeared
to him as beings with whom conversation was an impossible duty; but after all he had heard
of Miss Durant, he might as a judicious man select her for an excellent parsoness, and as a
young man fall vehemently in love.  Nothing could be more evident to the lookers-on, but Albinia
could not satisfy herself whether Genevieve had any suspicion.

She was not very young, knew something of the world, and was acute and observing; but on the
other hand, she had made it a principle never to admit the thought of courtship, and she might
not be sufficiently acquainted with the habits of the individual to be sensible of the symptomatic
alteration.

She had begged the Dusautoys to make her leisure profitable, and spent much of her time upon
the schools, on her little patient in Tibb's Alley, and in going about among the poor; she
visited her old shopkeeper friends, and drank tea with them much oftener than gratified Mr.
Kendal, talking so openly of the pleasure of seeing them again, that Albinia sometimes thought
the blood of the O'Mores was a little chafed.

'There,' said Genevieve, completing a housewife, filled with needles ready threaded, 'I wonder
whether the omnibus is too protestant to leave a parcel at the convent?'

'I don't think its scruples of conscience would withstand sixpence,' said Albinia.

'You might post it for less than that,' said Sophy.

'Don't you know,' said Ulick O'More, who was playing with the little Awk in the window, 'that
the feminine mind loves expedients?  It would be less commonplace to confide the parcel to
the conductor, than merely let him receive it as guard of the mail bag and servant of the public.'

'Exactly,' laughed Genevieve.  'Think of the moral influence of being selected as bearer of
a token of tenderness to my aunt on her fete, instead of being treated as a mere machine, devoid
of human sympathies.'

'Sophy, where were we reading of a nation which gives the simplest transaction the air of a
little romance?' said Ulick.

'And I have heard of a nation which denudes every action of sentiment, and leaves you the tree
without the leaves,' was Genevieve's retort.

'That misses fire, Miss Durant; my nation does everything by the soul, nothing by mechanism.'

'When they do do it.'

'That's a defiance.  You must deprive the conductor of the moral influence, whether as man
or machine, and entrust the parcel to me.'

'That would be like chartering a steamer to send home a Chinese puzzle.'

'No, indeed; I must go to Hadminster.  Bear me witness, Sophy, Miss Goldsmith wants me to talk
to the house agent.'

'Mind, if you miss St. Leocadia's day, you will miss my aunt's fete.'

Mr. O'More succeeded in carrying off the little parcel.  The next morning, as the ladies were
descending the hill, a hurried step came after them, and the curate said in an abrupt rapid
manner, 'I beg your pardon, I was going to Hadminster; could I do anything for you?'

'Nothing, thank you,' said Albinia, at whom he looked.

'Did I not hear--Miss Durant had some work to send her aunt to-day?'

'How did you know that, Mr. Hope?' exclaimed Genevieve.

'I heard something pass, when some one was admiring your work,' he said, not looking at her.
'And this--I think--is St. Leocadia's day.'

'I am very much obliged to you for remembering it, but I have sent my little parcel otherwise,
so I need not trouble you.'

'Ah! how stupid in me!  I am very sorry.  I beg your pardon,' and he hurried off, looking as
if very sorry were not a mere matter of course.

'Poor man,' thought Albinia, 'I dare say he has reckoned on it all this time, and hunted out
St. Leocadia in Alban Butler, and then tried to screw up his courage all yesterday.  Ulick
has managed to traverse a romance, but perhaps it is just as well, for what would be the effect
on the public of Mr. Hope in that coat being seen ringing at the convent door?'

'Well, Miss Durant,' said Ulick, entering the drawing-room in the winter twilight, 'here is
evidence for you!'

'You have actually penetrated the convent, and seen my aunt? Impossible! and yet this pencilled
note is her own dear writing!'

'You don't mean that you really were let in?' cried Sophy.

'I entered quite legitimately, I assure you.  It was all luck.  I'd just been putting up at
the Crown, when what should I see in a sort of a trance, staring right into the inn-yard, but
as jolly-looking a priest as ever held a station.  "An' it's long since I've seen the like
of you," says he aloud to himself.  "Is it the car?" says I. "Sure it is," says he.  "I've
not laid my eyes on so iligant a vehicle since I left County Tyrone."'

'Mr. O'Hara!' exclaimed Genevieve.

'"And I'm mistaken if you're not the master of it," he goes on, taking the measure of me all
over,' continued Ulick, putting on his drollest brogue.  'You see he had too much manners to
say that such a personable young gentleman, speaking such correct English, could be no other
than an Irishman, so I made my bow, and said the car and I were both from County Galway, and
we were straight as good friends as if we'd hunted together at Ballymakilty.  To be sure, he
was a little taken aback when he found I was one of the Protestant branch, of the O'Mores,
but a countryman is a countryman in a barbarous land, and he asked me to call upon him, and
offered to do me any service in his power.'

'I am sure he would.  He is the kindest old gentleman I know,' exclaimed Genevieve.  'He always
used to bring me barleysugar-drops when I was a little girl, and it was he who found out our
poor old Biddy in distress at Hadminster, and sent her to live with us.'

