Late in the year, on the 12th before the calends of January, or the 21st of December, there
took place a little party at Puteoli, the account of which interests us. Cicero entertained
Cæsar at supper. Though the date is given as above, and though December had originally been
intended to signify, as it does with us, a winter month, the year, from want of proper knowledge,
had run itself out of order, and the period was now that of October. The amendment of the calendar,
which was made under Cæsar's auspices, had not as yet been brought into use, and we must understand
that October, the most delightful month of the year, was the period in question. Cicero was
staying at his Puteolan villa, not far from Baiæ, close upon the sea-shore--the corner of the
world most loved by all the great Romans of the day for their retreat in autumn.[166] Puteoli,
we may imagine, was as pleasant as Baiæ, but less fashionable, and, if all that we hear be
true, less immoral. Here Cicero had one of his villas, and here, a few months before his death,
Cæsar came to visit him. He gives, in a very few lines to Atticus, a graphic account of the
entertainment. Cæsar had sent on word to say that he was coming, so that Cicero was prepared
for him. But the lord of all the world had already made himself so evidently the lord, that
Cicero could not entertain him without certain of those inner quakings of the heart which are
common to us now when some great magnate may come across our path and demand hospitality for
a moment. Cicero jokes at his own solicitude, but nevertheless we know that he has felt it
when, on the next morning, he sent Atticus an account of it. His guest has been a burden to
him indeed, but still he does not regret it, for the guest behaved himself so pleasantly! We
must remark that Cicero did not ostensibly shake in his shoes before him. Cicero had been Consul,
and has had to lead the Senate when Cæsar was probably anxious to escape himself as an undetected
conspirator. Cæsar has grown since, but only by degrees. He has not become, as Augustus did,
"facile princeps." He is aware of his own power, but aware also that it becomes him to ignore
his own knowledge. And Cicero is also aware of it, but conscious at the same time of a nominal
equality. Cæsar is now Dictator, has been Consul four times, and will be Consul again when
the new year comes on. But other Romans have been Dictator and Consul. All of which Cæsar feels
on the occasion, and shows that he feels it. Cicero feels it also, and endeavors, not quite
successfully, to hide it.

Cæsar has come accompanied by troops. Cicero names two thousand men--probably at random. When
Cicero hears that they have come into the neighborhood, he is terribly put about till one Barba
Cassius, a lieutenant in Cæsar's employment, comes and reassures him. A camp is made for the
men outside in the fields, and a guard is put on to protect the villa. On the following day,
about one o'clock, Cæsar comes. He is shut up at the house of one Philippus, and will admit
no one. He is supposed to be transacting accounts with Balbus. We can imagine how Cicero's
cooks were boiling and stewing at the time. Then the great man walked down upon the sea-shore.
Rome was the only recognized nation in the world. The others were provinces of Rome, and the
rest were outlying barbaric people, hardly as yet fit to be Roman provinces. And he was now
lord of Rome. Did he think of this as he walked on the shore of Puteoli--or of the ceremony
he was about to encounter before he ate his dinner? He did not walk long, for at two o'clock
he bathed, and heard "that story about Mamurra" without moving a muscle. Turn to your Catullus,
the 57th Epigram, and read what Cæsar had read to him on this occasion, without showing by
his face the slightest feeling. It is short enough, but I cannot quote it even in a note, even
in Latin. Who told Cæsar of the foul words, and why were they read to him on this occasion?
He thought but little about them, for he forgave the author and asked him afterward to supper.
This was at the bath, we may suppose. He then took his siesta, and after that "[Greek: emetikên]
agebat." How the Romans went through the daily process and lived, is to us a marvel. I think
we may say that Cicero did not practise it. Cæsar, on this occasion, ate and drank plenteously
and with pleasure. It was all well arranged, and the conversation was good of its kind, witty
and pleasant. Cæsar's couch seems to have been in the midst, and around him lay supping, at
other tables, his freedmen, and the rest of his suite. It was all very well; but still, says
Cicero, he was not such a guest as you would welcome back--not one to whom you would say, "Come
again, I beg, when you return this way." Once is enough. There were no politics talked--nothing
of serious matters. Cæsar had begun to find now that no use could be made of Cicero for politics.
He had tried that, and had given it up. Philology was the subject--the science of literature
and languages. Cæsar could talk literature as well as Cicero, and turned the conversation in
that direction. Cicero was apt, and took the desired part, and so the afternoon passed pleasantly,
but still with a little feeling that he was glad when his guest was gone.[167]

Cæsar declared, as he went, that he would spend one day at Puteoli and another at Baiæ. Dolabella
had a villa down in those parts, and Cicero knows that Cæsar, as he passed by Dolabella's house,
rode in the midst of soldiers--in state, as we should say--but that he had not done this anywhere
else. He had already promised Dolabella the Consulship.

Was Cicero mean in his conduct toward Cæsar? Up to this moment there had been nothing mean,
except that Roman flattery which was simply Roman good manners. He had opposed him at Pharsalia--or
rather in Macedonia. He had gone across the water--not to fight, for he was no fighting man--but
to show on which side he had placed himself. He had done this, not believing in Pompey, but
still convinced that it was his duty to let all men know that he was against Cæsar. He had
resisted every attempt which Cæsar had made to purchase his services. Neither with Pompey nor
with Cæsar did he agree. But with the former--though he feared that a second Sulla would arise
should he be victorious--there was some touch of the old Republic. Something might have been
done then to carry on the government upon the old lines. Cæsar had shown his intention to be
lord of all, and with that Cicero could hold no sympathy. Cæsar had seen his position, and
had respected it. He would have nothing done to drive such a man from Rome. Under these circumstances
Cicero consented to live at Rome, or in the neighborhood, and became a man of letters. It must
be remembered that up to the ides of March he had heard of no conspiracy. The two men, Cæsar
and Cicero, had agreed to differ, and had talked of philology when they met. There has been,
I think, as yet, nothing mean in his conduct.

CHAPTER VIII.

CÆSAR'S DEATH.

[Sidenote: B.C. 44, ætat. 63.]

After the dinner-party at Puteoli, described in the last chapter, Cicero came up to Rome, and
was engaged in literary pursuits. Cæsar was now master and lord of everything. In January Cicero
wrote to his friend Curio, and told him with disgust of the tomfooleries which were being carried
on at the election of Quæstors. An empty chair had been put down, and was declared to be the
Consul's chair. Then it was taken away, and another chair was placed, and another Consul was
declared. It wanted then but a few hours to the end of the consular year--but not the less
was Caninius, the new Consul, appointed, "who would not sleep during his Consulship," which
lasted but from mid-day to the evening. "If you saw all this you would not fail to weep," says
Cicero![168] After this he seems to have recovered from his sorrow. We have a correspondence
with Poetus which always typifies hilarity of spirits. There is a discussion, of which we have
but the one side, on "double entendre" and plain speaking. Poetus had advocated the propriety
of calling a spade a spade, and Cicero shows him the inexpediency. Then we come suddenly upon
his letter to Atticus, written on the 7th of April, three weeks after the fall of Cæsar.

Mommsen endeavors to explain the intention of Cæsar in the adoption of the names by which he
chose to be called, and in his acceptance of those which, without his choosing, were imposed
upon him.[169] He has done it perhaps with too great precision, but he leaves upon our minds
a correct idea of the resolution which Cæsar had made to be King, Emperor, Dictator, or what
not, before he started for Macedonia, B.C. 49,[170] and the disinclination which moved him
at once to proclaim himself a tyrant. Dictator was the title which he first assumed, as being
temporary, Roman, and in a certain degree usual. He was Dictator for an indefinite period,
annually, for ten years, and, when he died, had been designated Dictator for life. He had already
been, for the last two years, named "Imperator" for life; but that title--which I think to
have had a military sound in men's ears, though it may, as Mommsen says, imply also civil rule--was
not enough to convey to men all that it was necessary that they should understand. Till the
moment of his triumph had come, and that "Veni, vidi, vici" had been flaunted in the eyes of
Rome--till Cæsar, though he had been ashamed to call himself a king, had consented to be associated
with the gods--Brutus, Cassius, and those others, sixty in number we are told, who became the
conspirators, had hardly realized the fact that the Republic was altogether at an end. A bitter
time had come upon them; but it was softened by the personal urbanity of the victor. But now,
gradually, the truth was declaring itself, and the conspiracy was formed. I am inclined to
think that Shakspeare has been right in his conception of the plot. "I do fear the people choose
Cæsar for their king," says Brutus. "I had as lief not be, as live to be in awe of such a thing
as I myself," says Cassius.[171] It had come home to them at length that Cæsar was to be king,
and therefore they conspired.

It would be a difficult task in the present era to recommend to my readers the murderers of
Cæsar as honest, loyal politicians, who did for their country, in its emergency, the best that
the circumstances would allow. The feeling of the world in regard to murder has so changed
during the last two thousand years, that men, hindered by their sense of what is at present
odious, refuse to throw themselves back into the condition of things a knowledge of which can
have come to them only from books. They measure events individually by the present scale, and
refuse to see that Brutus should be judged by us now in reference to the judgment that was
formed of it then. In an age in which it was considered wise and fitting to destroy the nobles
of a barbarous community which had defended itself, and to sell all others as slaves, so that
the perpetrator simply recorded the act he had done as though necessary, can it have been a
base thing to kill a tyrant? Was it considered base by other Romans of the day? Was that plea
ever made even by Cæsar's friends, or was it not acknowledged by them all that "Brutus was
an honorable man," even when they had collected themselves sufficiently to look upon him as
an enemy? It appears abundantly in Cicero's letters that no one dreamed of regarding them as
we regard assassins now, or spoke of Cæsar's death as we look upon assassination. "Shall we
defend the deeds of him at whose death we are rejoiced?" he says: and again, he deplores the
feeling of regret which was growing in Rome on account of Cæsar's death, "lest it should be
dangerous to those who have slain the tyrant for us."[172] We find that Quintilian, among his
stock lessons in oratory, constantly refers to the old established rule that a man did a good
deed who had killed a tyrant--a lesson which he had taken from the Greek teachers.[173] We
are, therefore, bound to accept this murder as a thing praiseworthy according to the light
of the age in which it was done, and to recognize the fact that it was so regarded by the men
of the day.

We are told now that Cicero "hated" Cæsar. There was no such hatred as the word implies. And
we are told of "assassins," with an intention to bring down on the perpetrators of the deed
the odium they would have deserved had the deed been done to-day; but the word has, I think,
been misused. A king was abominable to Roman ears, and was especially distasteful to men like
Cicero, Brutus, and the other "optimates" who claimed to be peers. To be "primus inter pares"
had been Cicero's ambition--to be the leading oligarch of the day. Cæsar had gradually mounted
higher and still higher, but always leaving some hope--infinitesimally small at last--that
he might be induced to submit himself to the Republic. Sulla had submitted. Personally there
was no hatred; but that hope had almost vanished, and therefore, judging as a Roman, when the
deed was done, Cicero believed it to have been a glorious deed. There can be no doubt on that
subject. The passages in which he praises it are too numerous for direct quotation; but there
they are, interspersed through the letters and the Philippics. There was no doubt of his approval.
The "assassination" of Cæsar, if that is to be the word used, was to his idea a glorious act
done on behalf of humanity. The all-powerful tyrant who had usurped dominion over his country
had been made away with, and again they might fall back upon the law. He had filched the army.
He had run through various provinces, and had enriched himself with their wealth. He was above
all law; he was worse than a Marius or a Sulla, who confessed themselves, by their open violence,
to be temporary evils. Cæsar was creating himself king for all time. No law had established
him. No plebiscite of the nation had endowed him with kingly power. With his life in his hands,
he had dared to do it, and was almost successful. It is of no purpose to say that he was right
and Cicero was wrong in their views as to the government of so mean a people as the Romans
had become. Cicero's form of government, under men who were not Ciceros, had been wrong, and
had led to a state of things in which a tyrant might for the time be the lesser evil; but not
on that account was Cicero wrong to applaud the deed which removed Cæsar. Middleton in his
life (vol. ii, p. 435) gives us the opinion of Suetonius on this subject, and tells us that
the best and wisest men in Rome supposed Cæsar to have been justly killed. Mr. Forsyth generously
abstains from blaming the deed, as to which he leaves his readers to form their own opinion.
Abeken expresses no opinion concerning its morality, nor does Morabin. It is the critics of
Cicero's works who have condemned him without thinking much, perhaps, of the judgment they
have given.

But Cicero was not in the conspiracy, nor had he even contemplated Cæsar's death. Assertions
to the contrary have been made both lately and in former years, but without foundation. I have
already alluded to some of these, and have shown that phrases in his letters have been misinterpreted.
A passage was quoted by M. Du Rozoir--Ad Att., lib. x., 8--"I don't think that he can endure
longer than six months. He must fall, even if we do nothing." How often might it be said that
the murder of an English minister had been intended if the utterings of such words be taken
as a testimony! He quotes again--Ad Att., lib. xiii., 40--"What good news could Brutus hear
of Cæsar, unless that he hung himself?" This is to be taken as meditating Cæsar's death, and
is quoted by a French critic, after two thousand years, in proof of Cicero's fatal ill-will![174]
The whole tenor of Cicero's letters proves that he had never entertained the idea of Cæsar's
destruction.

How long before the time the conspiracy may have been in existence we have no means of knowing;
but we feel that Cicero was not a man likely to be taken into the plot. He would have dissuaded
Brutus and Cassius. Judging from what we know of his character, we think that he would have
distrusted its success. Though he rejoiced in it after it was done, he would have been wretched
while burdened with the secret. At any rate, we have the fact that he was not so burdened.
The sight of Cæsar's slaughter, when he saw it, must have struck him with infinite surprise,
but we have no knowledge of what his feelings may have been when the crowd had gathered round
the doomed man. Cicero has left us no description of the moment in which Cæsar is supposed
to have gathered his toga over his face so that he might fall with dignity. It certainly is
the case that when you take your facts from the chance correspondence of a man you lose something
of the most touching episodes of the day. The writer passes these things by, as having been
surely handled elsewhere. It is always so with Cicero. The trial of Milo, the passing of the
Rubicon, the battle of the Pharsalus, and the murder of Pompey are, with the death of Cæsar,
alike unnoticed. "I have paid him a visit as to whom we spoke this morning. Nothing could be
more forlorn."[175] It is thus the next letter begins, after Cæsar's death, and the person
he refers to is Matius, Cæsar's friend; but in three weeks the world had become used to Cæsar's
death. The scene had passed away, and the inhabitants of Rome were already becoming accustomed
to his absence. But there can be no doubt as to Cicero's presence at Cæsar's fall. He says
so clearly to Atticus.[176] Morabin throws a doubt upon it. The story goes that Brutus, descending
from the platform on which Cæsar had been seated, and brandishing the bloody dagger in his
hand, appealed to Cicero. Morabin says that there is no proof of this, and alleges that Brutus
did it for stage effect. But he cannot have seen the letter above quoted, or seeing it, must
have misunderstood it.[177]

It soon became evident to the conspirators that they had scotched the snake, and not killed
it. Cassius and others had desired that Antony also should be killed, and with him Lepidus.
That Antony would be dangerous they were sure. But Marcus Brutus and Decimus overruled their
counsels. Marcus had declared that the "blood of the tyrant was all that the people required."[178]
The people required nothing of the kind. They were desirous only of ease and quiet, and were
anxious to follow either side which might be able to lead them and had something to give away.
But Antony had been spared; and though cowed at the moment by the death of Cæsar, and by the
assumption of a certain dignified forbearance on the part of the conspirators, was soon ready
again to fight the battle for the Cæsareans. It is singular to see how completely he was cowed,
and how quickly he recovered himself.

Mommsen finishes his history with a loud pæan in praise of Cæsar, but does not tell us of his
death. His readers, had they nothing else to inform them, might be led to suppose that he had
gone direct to heaven, or at any rate had vanished from the world, as soon as he had made the
Empire perfect. He seems to have thought that had he described the work of the daggers in the
Senate-house he would have acknowledged the mortality of his godlike hero. We have no right
to complain of his omissions. For research, for labor, and for accuracy he has produced a work
almost without parallel. That he should have seen how great was Cæsar because he accomplished
so much, and that he should have thought Cicero to be small because, burdened with scruples
of justice, he did so little, is in the idiosyncrasy of the man. A Cæsar was wanted, impervious
to clemency, to justice, to moderation--a man who could work with any tools. It would be absurd
to talk about him as dishonest. He was above honesty. He was "supra grammaticam." It is well
that some one should have arisen to sing the praises of such a man--some two or three in these
latter days. To me the character of the man is unpleasant to contemplate, unimpressionable,
very far from divine. There is none of the human softness necessary for love; none of the human
weakness needed for sympathy.

On the 15th of March Cæsar fell. When the murder had been effected. Brutus and the others concerned
in it went out among the people expecting to be greeted as saviors of their country. Brutus
did address the populace, and was well received; but some bad feeling seems to have been aroused
by hard expressions as to Cæsar's memory coming from one of the Prætors. For the people, though
they regarded Cæsar as a tyrant, and expressed themselves as gratified when told that the would-be
king had been slaughtered, still did not endure to hear ill spoken of him. He had understood
that it behooved a tyrant to be generous, and appealed among them always with full hands--not
having been scrupulous as to his mode of filling them. Then the conspirators, frightened at
menacing words from the crowd, betook themselves to the Capitol. Why they should have gone
to the Capitol as to a sanctuary I do not think that we know. The Capitol is that hill to a
portion of which access is now had by the steps of the church of the Ara Coeli in front, and
from the Forum in the rear. On one side was the fall from the Tarpeian rock down which malefactors
were flung. On the top of it was the temple to Jupiter, standing on the site of the present
church. And it was here that Brutus and Cassius and the other conspirators sought for safety
on the evening of the day on which Cæsar had been killed. Here they remained for the two following
days, till on the 18th they ventured down into the city. On the 17th Dolabella claimed to be
Consul, in compliance with Cæsar's promise, and on the same day the Senate, moved by Antony,
decreed a public funeral to Cæsar. We may imagine that the decree was made by them with fainting
hearts. There were many fainting hearts in Rome during those days, for it became very soon
apparent that the conspirators had carried their plot no farther than the death of Cæsar.

Brutus, as far as the public service was concerned, was an unpractical, useless man. We know
nothing of public work done by him to much purpose. He was filled with high ideas as to his
own position among the oligarchs, and with especial notions as to what was due by Rome to men
of his name. He had a fierce conception of his own rights--among which to be Prætor, and Consul,
and Governor of a province were among the number. But he had taken early in life to literature
and philosophy, and eschewed the crowd of "Fish-ponders," such as were Antony and Dolabella,
men prone to indulge the luxury of their own senses. His idea of liberty seems to have been
much the same as Cicero's--the liberty to live as one of the first men in Rome; but it was
not accompanied, as it was with Cicero, by an innate desire to do good to those around him.
To maintain the Prætors, Consuls, and Governors so that each man high in position should win
his way to them as he might be able to obtain the voices of the people, and not to leave them
to be bestowed at the call of one man who had thrust himself higher than all--that seems to
have been his beau ideal of Roman government. It was Cicero's also--with the addition that
when he had achieved his high place he should serve the people honestly. Brutus had killed
Cæsar, but had spared Antony, thinking that all things would fall into their accustomed places
when the tyrant should be no more. But he found that Cæsar had been tyrant long enough to create
a lust for tyranny; and that though he might suffice to kill a king, he had no aptitude for
ruling a people.

It was now that those scenes took place which Shakspeare has described with such accuracy--the
public funeral, Antony's oration, and the rising of the people against the conspirators. Antony,
when he found that no plan had been devised for carrying on the government, and that the men
were struck by amazement at the deed they had themselves done, collected his thoughts and did
his best to put himself in Cæsar's place. Cicero had pleaded in the Senate for a general amnesty,
and had carried it as far as the voice of the Senate could do so. But the amnesty only intended
that men should pretend to think that all should be forgotten and forgiven. There was no forgiving,
as there could be no forgetting. Then Cæsar's will was brought forth. They could not surely
dispute his will or destroy it. In this way Antony got hold of the dead man's papers, and with
the aid of the dead man's private secretary or amanuensis, one Fabricius, began a series of
most unblushing forgeries. He procured, or said that he procured, a decree to be passed confirming
by law all Cæsar's written purposes. Such a decree he could use to any extent to which he could
carry with him the sympathies of the people. He did use it to a great extent, and seems at
this period to have contemplated the assumption of dictatorial power in his own hands. Antony
was nearly being one of the greatest rascals the world has known. The desire was there, and
so was the intellect, had it not been weighted by personal luxury and indulgence.

Now young Octavius came upon the scene. He was the great-nephew of Cæsar, whose sister Julia
had married one Marcus Atius. Their daughter Atia had married Caius Octavius, and of that marriage
Augustus was the child. When Octavius, the father, died, Atia, the widow, married Marcius Philippus,
who was Consul B.C. 56. Cæsar, having no nearer heir, took charge of the boy, and had, for
the last years of his life, treated him as his son, though he had not adopted him. At this
period the youth had been sent to Apollonia, on the other side of the Adriatic, in Macedonia,
to study with Apollodorus, a Greek tutor, and was there when he heard of Cæsar's death. He
was informed that Cæsar had made him his heir and at once crossed over into Italy with his
friend Agrippa. On the way up to Rome he met Cicero at one of his southern villas, and in the
presence of the great orator behaved himself with becoming respect. He was then not twenty
years old, but in the present difficulty of his position conducted himself with a caution most
unlike a boy. He had only come, he said for what his great-uncle had left him; and when he
found that Antony had spent the money, does not appear to have expressed himself immediately
in anger. He went on to Rome, where he found that Antony and Dolabella and Marcus Brutus and
Decimus Brutus and Cassius were scrambling for the provinces and the legions. Some of the soldiers
came to him, asking him to avenge his uncle's death; but he was too prudent as yet to declare
any purpose of revenge.

