ESSAYS, SECOND SERIES

By Ralph Waldo Emerson

     THE POET.

     A moody child and wildly wise
     Pursued the game with joyful eyes,
     Which chose, like meteors, their way,
     And rived the dark with private ray:
     They overleapt the horizon's edge,
     Searched with Apollo's privilege;
     Through man, and woman, and sea, and star
     Saw the dance of nature forward far;
     Through worlds, and races, and terms, and times
     Saw musical order, and pairing rhymes.

     Olympian bards who sung
       Divine ideas below,
     Which always find us young,
       And always keep us so.

I. THE POET.

Those who are esteemed umpires of taste are often persons who have acquired some knowledge
of admired pictures or sculptures, and have an inclination for whatever is elegant; but if
you inquire whether they are beautiful souls, and whether their own acts are like fair pictures,
you learn that they are selfish and sensual. Their cultivation is local, as if you should rub
a log of dry wood in one spot to produce fire, all the rest remaining cold. Their knowledge
of the fine arts is some study of rules and particulars, or some limited judgment of color
or form, which is exercised for amusement or for show. It is a proof of the shallowness of
the doctrine of beauty as it lies in the minds of our amateurs, that men seem to have lost
the perception of the instant dependence of form upon soul. There is no doctrine of forms in
our philosophy. We were put into our bodies, as fire is put into a pan to be carried about;
but there is no accurate adjustment between the spirit and the organ, much less is the latter
the germination of the former. So in regard to other forms, the intellectual men do not believe
in any essential dependence of the material world on thought and volition. Theologians think
it a pretty air-castle to talk of the Spiritual meaning of a ship or a cloud, of a city or
a contract, but they prefer to come again to the solid ground of historical evidence; and even
the poets are contented with a civil and conformed manner of living, and to write poems from
the fancy, at a safe distance from their own experience. While in quantity and quality the least
favored acre could be made to produce as much as one best situated, yet, almost none of its production
would be available to sell, while the product of the favorably located acre could be sold as rapidly
as grown.

CHAPTER VIII
THE KITCHEN GARDEN

The aim of the kitchen garden is to provide an
abundance and variety of food for the family. As the object of the
cultivator is to get the largest product for his labor, he ought to
produce all that he can consume on the least possible area. And this hidden truth, that the fountains whence all this river of Time and
its creatures floweth are intrinsically ideal and beautiful, draws us to the consideration
of the nature and functions of the Poet, or the man of Beauty; to the means and materials he
uses, and to the general aspect of the art in the present time.

The breadth of the problem is great, for the poet is representative. He stands among partial
men for the complete man, and apprises us not of his wealth, but of the common wealth. The
young man reveres men of genius, because, to speak truly, they are more himself than he is.
They receive of the soul as he also receives, but they more. Nature enhances her beauty, to
the eye of loving men, from their belief that the poet is beholding her shows at the same time.
He is isolated among his contemporaries by truth and by his art, but with this consolation
in his pursuits, that they will draw all men sooner or later. For all men live by truth and
stand in need of expression. In love, in art, in avarice, in politics, in labor, in games,
we study to utter our painful secret. The man is only half himself, the other half is his expression.

Notwithstanding this necessity to be published, adequate expression is rare. I know not how
it is that we need an interpreter, but the great majority of men seem to be minors, who have
not yet come into possession of their own, or mutes, who cannot report the conversation they
have had with nature. There is no man who does not anticipate a supersensual utility in the
sun and stars, earth and water. These stand and wait to render him a peculiar service. But
there is some obstruction or some excess of phlegm in our constitution, which does not suffer
them to yield the due effect. Too feeble fall the impressions of nature on us to make us artists.
Every touch should thrill. Every man should be so much an artist that he could report in conversation
what had befallen him. Yet, in our experience, the rays or appulses have sufficient force to
arrive at the senses, but not enough to reach the quick and compel the reproduction of themselves
in speech. The poet is the person in whom these powers are in balance, the man without impediment,
who sees and handles that which others dream of, traverses the whole scale of experience, and
is representative of man, in virtue of being the largest power to receive and to impart.

For the Universe has three children, born at one time, which reappear under different names
in every system of thought, whether they be called cause, operation, and effect; or, more poetically,
Jove, Pluto, Neptune; or, theologically, the Father, the Spirit, and the Son; but which we
will call here the Knower, the Doer, and the Sayer. These stand respectively for the love of
truth, for the love of good, and for the love of beauty. These three are equal. Each is that
which he is essentially, so that he cannot be surmounted or analyzed, and each of these three
has the power of the others latent in him, and his own, patent.

The poet is the sayer, the namer, and represents beauty. He is a sovereign, and stands on the
centre. For the world is not painted or adorned, but is from the beginning beautiful; and God
has not made some beautiful things, but Beauty is the creator of the universe. Therefore the
poet is not any permissive potentate, but is emperor in his own right. Criticism is infested
with a cant of materialism, which assumes that manual skill and activity is the first merit
of all men, and disparages such as say and do not, overlooking the fact that some men, namely
poets, are natural sayers, sent into the world to the end of expression, and confounds them
with those whose province is action but who quit it to imitate the sayers. But Homer's words
are as costly and admirable to Homer as Agamemnon's victories are to Agamemnon. The poet does
not wait for the hero or the sage, but, as they act and think primarily, so he writes primarily
what will and must be spoken, reckoning the others, though primaries also, yet, in respect
to him, secondaries and servants; as sitters or models in the studio of a painter, or as assistants
who bring building materials to an architect.

For poetry was all written before time was, and whenever we are so finely organized that we
can penetrate into that region where the air is music, we hear those primal warblings and attempt
to write them down, but we lose ever and anon a word or a verse and substitute something of
our own, and thus miswrite the poem. The men of more delicate ear write down these cadences
more faithfully, and these transcripts, though imperfect, become the songs of the nations.
For nature is as truly beautiful as it is good, or as it is reasonable, and must as much appear
as it must be done, or be known. Words and deeds are quite indifferent modes of the divine
energy. Words are also actions, and actions are a kind of words.

The sign and credentials of the poet are that he announces that which no man foretold. He is
the true and only doctor; he knows and tells; he is the only teller of news, for he was present
and privy to the appearance which he describes. He is a beholder of ideas and an utterer of
the necessary and causal. For we do not speak now of men of poetical talents, or of industry
and skill in metre, but of the true poet. I took part in a conversation the other day concerning
a recent writer of lyrics, a man of subtle mind, whose head appeared to be a music-box of delicate
tunes and rhythms, and whose skill and command of language, we could not sufficiently praise.
But when the question arose whether he was not only a lyrist but a poet, we were obliged to
confess that he is plainly a contemporary, not an eternal man. He does not stand out of our
low limitations, like a Chimborazo under the line, running up from the torrid Base through
all the climates of the globe, with belts of the herbage of every latitude on its high and
mottled sides; but this genius is the landscape-garden of a modern house, adorned with fountains
and statues, with well-bred men and women standing and sitting in the walks and terraces. We
hear, through all the varied music, the ground-tone of conventional life. Our poets are men
of talents who sing, and not the children of music. The argument is secondary, the finish of
the verses is primary.

For it is not metres, but a metre-making argument that makes a poem,--a thought so passionate
and alive that like the spirit of a plant or an animal it has an architecture of its own, and
adorns nature with a new thing. The thought and the form are equal in the order of time, but
in the order of genesis the thought is prior to the form. The poet has a new thought; he has
a whole new experience to unfold; he will tell us how it was with him, and all men will be
the richer in his fortune. For the experience of each new age requires a new confession, and
the world seems always waiting for its poet. I remember when I was young how much I was moved
one morning by tidings that genius had appeared in a youth who sat near me at table. He had
left his work and gone rambling none knew whither, and had written hundreds of lines, but could
not tell whether that which was in him was therein told; he could tell nothing but that all
was changed,--man, beast, heaven, earth and sea. How gladly we listened! how credulous! Society
seemed to be compromised. We sat in the aurora of a sunrise which was to put out all the stars.
Boston seemed to be at twice the distance it had the night before, or was much farther than
that. Rome,--what was Rome? Plutarch and Shakspeare were in the yellow leaf, and Homer no more
should be heard of. It is much to know that poetry has been written this very day, under this
very roof, by your side. What! that wonderful spirit has not expired! These stony moments are
still sparkling and animated! I had fancied that the oracles were all silent, and nature had
spent her fires; and behold! all night, from every pore, these fine auroras have been streaming.
Every one has some interest in the advent of the poet, and no one knows how much it may concern
him. We know that the secret of the world is profound, but who or what shall be our interpreter,
we know not. A mountain ramble, a new style of face, a new person, may put the key into our
hands. Of course the value of genius to us is in the veracity of its report. Talent may frolic
and juggle; genius realizes and adds. Mankind in good earnest have availed so far in understanding
themselves and their work, that the foremost watchman on the peak announces his news. It is
the truest word ever spoken, and the phrase will be the fittest, most musical, and the unerring
voice of the world for that time.

All that we call sacred history attests that the birth of a poet is the principal event in
chronology. Man, never so often deceived, still watches for the arrival of a brother who can
hold him steady to a truth until he has made it his own. With what joy I begin to read a poem
which I confide in as an inspiration! And now my chains are to be broken; I shall mount above
these clouds and opaque airs in which I live,--opaque, though they seem transparent,--and from
the heaven of truth I shall see and comprehend my relations. That will reconcile me to life
and renovate nature, to see trifles animated by a tendency, and to know what I am doing. Life
will no more be a noise; now I shall see men and women, and know the signs by which they may
be discerned from fools and satans. This day shall be better than my birthday: then I became
an animal; now I am invited into the science of the real. Such is the hope, but the fruition
is postponed. Oftener it falls that this winged man, who will carry me into the heaven, whirls
me into mists, then leaps and frisks about with me as it were from cloud to cloud, still affirming
that he is bound heavenward; and I, being myself a novice, am slow in perceiving that he does
not know the way into the heavens, and is merely bent that I should admire his skill to rise
like a fowl or a flying fish, a little way from the ground or the water; but the all-piercing,
all-feeding, and ocular air of heaven that man shall never inhabit. I tumble down again soon
into my old nooks, and lead the life of exaggerations as before, and have lost my faith in
the possibility of any guide who can lead me thither where I would be.

But, leaving these victims of vanity, let us, with new hope, observe how nature, by worthier
impulses, has ensured the poet's fidelity to his office of announcement and affirming, namely
by the beauty of things, which becomes a new and higher beauty when expressed. Nature offers
all her creatures to him as a picture-language. Being used as a type, a second wonderful value
appears in the object, far better than its old value; as the carpenter's stretched cord, if
you hold your ear close enough, is musical in the breeze. "Things more excellent than every
image," says Jamblichus, "are expressed through images." Things admit of being used as symbols
because nature is a symbol, in the whole, and in every part. Every line we can draw in the
sand has expression; and there is no body without its spirit or genius. All form is an effect
of character; all condition, of the quality of the life; all harmony, of health; and for this
reason a perception of beauty should be sympathetic, or proper only to the good. The beautiful
rests on the foundations of the necessary. The soul makes the body, as the wise Spenser teaches:--

     "So every spirit, as it is most pure,
      And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
      So it the fairer body doth procure
      To habit in, and it more fairly dight,
      With cheerful grace and amiable sight.
      For, of the soul, the body form doth take,
      For soul is form, and doth the body make."

Here we find ourselves suddenly not in a critical speculation but in a holy place, and should
go very warily and reverently. We stand before the secret of the world, there where Being passes
into Appearance and Unity into Variety.

The Universe is the externization of the soul. Wherever the life is, that bursts into appearance
around it. Our science is sensual, and therefore superficial. The earth and the heavenly bodies,
physics, and chemistry, we sensually treat, as if they were self-existent; but these are the
retinue of that Being we have. "The mighty heaven," said Proclus, "exhibits, in its transfigurations,
clear images of the splendor of intellectual perceptions; being moved in conjunction with the
unapparent periods of intellectual natures." Therefore science always goes abreast with the
just elevation of the man, keeping step with religion and metaphysics; or the state of science
is an index of our self-knowledge. Since everything in nature answers to a moral power, if
any phenomenon remains brute and dark it is that the corresponding faculty in the observer
is not yet active.

No wonder then, if these waters be so deep, that we hover over them with a religious regard.
The beauty of the fable proves the importance of the sense; to the poet, and to all others;
or, if you please, every man is so far a poet as to be susceptible of these enchantments of
nature; for all men have the thoughts whereof the universe is the celebration. I find that
the fascination resides in the symbol. Who loves nature? Who does not? Is it only poets, and
men of leisure and cultivation, who live with her? No; but also hunters, farmers, grooms, and
butchers, though they express their affection in their choice of life and not in their choice
of words. The writer wonders what the coachman or the hunter values in riding, in horses and
dogs. It is not superficial qualities. When you talk with him he holds these at as slight a
rate as you. His worship is sympathetic; he has no definitions, but he is commanded in nature,
by the living power which he feels to be there present. No imitation or playing of these things
would content him; he loves the earnest of the north wind, of rain, of stone, and wood, and
iron. A beauty not explicable is dearer than a beauty which we can see to the end of. It is
nature the symbol, nature certifying the supernatural, body overflowed by life which he worships
with coarse but sincere rites.

The inwardness and mystery of this attachment drives men of every class to the use of emblems.
The schools of poets and philosophers are not more intoxicated with their symbols than the
populace with theirs. In our political parties, compute the power of badges and emblems. See
the great ball which they roll from Baltimore to Bunker hill! In the political processions,
Lowell goes in a loom, and Lynn in a shoe, and Salem in a ship. Witness the cider-barrel, the
log-cabin, the hickory-stick, the palmetto, and all the cognizances of party. See the power
of national emblems. Some stars, lilies, leopards, a crescent, a lion, an eagle, or other figure
which came into credit God knows how, on an old rag of bunting, blowing in the wind on a fort
at the ends of the earth, shall make the blood tingle under the rudest or the most conventional
exterior. The people fancy they hate poetry, and they are all poets and mystics!

Beyond this universality of the symbolic language, we are apprised of the divineness of this
superior use of things, whereby the world is a temple whose walls are covered with emblems,
pictures, and commandments of the Deity,--in this, that there is no fact in nature which does
not carry the whole sense of nature; and the distinctions which we make in events and in affairs,
of low and high, honest and base, disappear when nature is used as a symbol. Thought makes
everything fit for use. The vocabulary of an omniscient man would embrace words and images
excluded from polite conversation. What would be base, or even obscene, to the obscene, becomes
illustrious, spoken in a new connexion of thought. The piety of the Hebrew prophets purges
their grossness. The circumcision is an example of the power of poetry to raise the low and
offensive. Small and mean things serve as well as great symbols. The meaner the type by which
a law is expressed, the more pungent it is, and the more lasting in the memories of men: just
as we choose the smallest box or case in which any needful utensil can be carried. Bare lists
of words are found suggestive to an imaginative and excited mind; as it is related of Lord
Chatham that he was accustomed to read in Bailey's Dictionary when he was preparing to speak
in Parliament. The poorest experience is rich enough for all the purposes of expressing thought.
Why covet a knowledge of new facts? Day and night, house and garden, a few books, a few actions,
serve us as well as would all trades and all spectacles. We are far from having exhausted the
significance of the few symbols we use. We can come to use them yet with a terrible simplicity.
It does not need that a poem should be long. Every word was once a poem. Every new relation
is a new word. Also we use defects and deformities to a sacred purpose, so expressing our sense
that the evils of the world are such only to the evil eye. In the old mythology, mythologists
observe, defects are ascribed to divine natures, as lameness to Vulcan, blindness to Cupid,
and the like,--to signify exuberances.

For as it is dislocation and detachment from the life of God that makes things ugly, the poet,
who re-attaches things to nature and the Whole,--re-attaching even artificial things and violations
of nature, to nature, by a deeper insight,--disposes very easily of the most disagreeable facts.
Readers of poetry see the factory-village and the railway, and fancy that the poetry of the
landscape is broken up by these; for these works of art are not yet consecrated in their reading;
but the poet sees them fall within the great Order not less than the beehive or the spider's
geometrical web. Nature adopts them very fast into her vital circles, and the gliding train
of cars she loves like her own. Besides, in a centred mind, it signifies nothing how many mechanical
inventions you exhibit. Though you add millions, and never so surprising, the fact of mechanics
has not gained a grain's weight. The spiritual fact remains unalterable, by many or by few
particulars; as no mountain is of any appreciable height to break the curve of the sphere.
A shrewd country-boy goes to the city for the first time, and the complacent citizen is not
satisfied with his little wonder. It is not that he does not see all the fine houses and know
that he never saw such before, but he disposes of them as easily as the poet finds place for
the railway. The chief value of the new fact is to enhance the great and constant fact of Life,
which can dwarf any and every circumstance, and to which the belt of wampum and the commerce
of America are alike.

The world being thus put under the mind for verb and noun, the poet is he who can articulate
it. For though life is great, and fascinates, and absorbs; and though all men are intelligent
of the symbols through which it is named; yet they cannot originally use them. We are symbols
and inhabit symbols; workmen, work, and tools, words and things, birth and death, all are emblems;
but we sympathize with the symbols, and being infatuated with the economical uses of things,
we do not know that they are thoughts. The poet, by an ulterior intellectual perception, gives
them a power which makes their old use forgotten, and puts eyes and a tongue into every dumb
and inanimate object. He perceives the independence of the thought on the symbol, the stability
of the thought, the accidency and fugacity of the symbol. As the eyes of Lyncaeus were said
to see through the earth, so the poet turns the world to glass, and shows us all things in
their right series and procession. For through that better perception he stands one step nearer
to things, and sees the flowing or metamorphosis; perceives that thought is multiform; that
within the form of every creature is a force impelling it to ascend into a higher form; and
following with his eyes the life, uses the forms which express that life, and so his speech
flows with the flowing of nature. All the facts of the animal economy, sex, nutriment, gestation,
birth, growth, are symbols of the passage of the world into the soul of man, to suffer there
a change and reappear a new and higher fact. He uses forms according to the life, and not according
to the form. This is true science. The poet alone knows astronomy, chemistry, vegetation and
animation, for he does not stop at these facts, but employs them as signs. He knows why the
plain or meadow of space was strewn with these flowers we call suns and moons and stars; why
the great deep is adorned with animals, with men, and gods; for in every word he speaks he
rides on them as the horses of thought.

By virtue of this science the poet is the Namer or Language-maker, naming things sometimes
after their appearance, sometimes after their essence, and giving to every one its own name
and not another's, thereby rejoicing the intellect, which delights in detachment or boundary.
The poets made all the words, and therefore language is the archives of history, and, if we
must say it, a sort of tomb of the muses. For though the origin of most of our words is forgotten,
each word was at first a stroke of genius, and obtained currency because for the moment it
symbolized the world to the first speaker and to the hearer. The etymologist finds the deadest
word to have been once a brilliant picture. Language is fossil poetry. As the limestone of
the continent consists of infinite masses of the shells of animalcules, so language is made
up of images or tropes, which now, in their secondary use, have long ceased to remind us of
their poetic origin. But the poet names the thing because he sees it, or comes one step nearer
to it than any other. This expression or naming is not art, but a second nature, grown out
of the first, as a leaf out of a tree. What we call nature is a certain self-regulated motion
or change; and nature does all things by her own hands, and does not leave another to baptize
her but baptizes herself; and this through the metamorphosis again. I remember that a certain
poet described it to me thus:

Genius is the activity which repairs the decays of things, whether wholly or partly of a material
and finite kind. Nature, through all her kingdoms, insures herself. Nobody cares for planting
the poor fungus; so she shakes down from the gills of one agaric countless spores, any one
of which, being preserved, transmits new billions of spores to-morrow or next day. The new
agaric of this hour has a chance which the old one had not. This atom of seed is thrown into
a new place, not subject to the accidents which destroyed its parent two rods off. She makes
a man; and having brought him to ripe age, she will no longer run the risk of losing this wonder
at a blow, but she detaches from him a new self, that the kind may be safe from accidents to
which the individual is exposed. So when the soul of the poet has come to ripeness of thought,
she detaches and sends away from it its poems or songs,--a fearless, sleepless, deathless progeny,
which is not exposed to the accidents of the weary kingdom of time; a fearless, vivacious offspring,
clad with wings (such was the virtue of the soul out of which they came) which carry them fast
and far, and infix them irrecoverably into the hearts of men. These wings are the beauty of
the poet's soul. The songs, thus flying immortal from their mortal parent, are pursued by clamorous
flights of censures, which swarm in far greater numbers and threaten to devour them; but these
last are not winged. At the end of a very short leap they fall plump down and rot, having received
from the souls out of which they came no beautiful wings. But the melodies of the poet ascend
and leap and pierce into the deeps of infinite time.

So far the bard taught me, using his freer speech. But nature has a higher end, in the production
of New individuals, than security, namely ascension, or the passage of the soul into higher
forms. I knew in my younger days the sculptor who made the statue of the youth which stands
in the public garden. He was, as I remember, unable to tell directly, what made him happy or
unhappy, but by wonderful indirections he could tell. He rose one day, according to his habit,
before the dawn, and saw the morning break, grand as the eternity out of which it came, and
for many days after, he strove to express this tranquillity, and lo! his chisel had fashioned
out of marble the form of a beautiful youth, Phosphorus, whose aspect is such that it is said
all persons who look on it become silent. The poet also resigns himself to his mood, and that
thought which agitated him is expressed, but alter idem, in a manner totally new. The expression
is organic, or the new type which things themselves take when liberated. As, in the sun, objects
paint their images on the retina of the eye, so they, sharing the aspiration of the whole universe,
tend to paint a far more delicate copy of their essence in his mind. Like the metamorphosis
of things into higher organic forms is their change into melodies. Over everything stands its
daemon or soul, and, as the form of the thing is reflected by the eye, so the soul of the thing
is reflected by a melody. The sea, the mountain-ridge, Niagara, and every flower-bed, pre-exist,
or super-exist, in pre-cantations, which sail like odors in the air, and when any man goes
by with an ear sufficiently fine, he overhears them and endeavors to write down the notes without
diluting or depraving them. And herein is the legitimation of criticism, in the mind's faith
that the poems are a corrupt version of some text in nature with which they ought to be made
to tally. A rhyme in one of our sonnets should not be less pleasing than the iterated nodes
of a sea-shell, or the resembling difference of a group of flowers. The pairing of the birds
is an idyl, not tedious as our idyls are; a tempest is a rough ode, without falsehood or rant;
a summer, with its harvest sown, reaped, and stored, is an epic song, subordinating how many
admirably executed parts. Why should not the symmetry and truth that modulate these, glide
into our spirits, and we participate the invention of nature?

This insight, which expresses itself by what is called Imagination, is a very high sort of
seeing, which does not come by study, but by the intellect being where and what it sees; by
sharing the path or circuit of things through forms, and so making them translucid to others.
The path of things is silent. Will they suffer a speaker to go with them? A spy they will not
suffer; a lover, a poet, is the transcendency of their own nature,--him they will suffer. The
condition of true naming, on the poet's part, is his resigning himself to the divine aura which
breathes through forms, and accompanying that.

It is a secret which every intellectual man quickly learns, that, beyond the energy of his
possessed and conscious intellect he is capable of a new energy (as of an intellect doubled
on itself), by abandonment to the nature of things; that beside his privacy of power as an
individual man, there is a great public power on which he can draw, by unlocking, at all risks,
his human doors, and suffering the ethereal tides to roll and circulate through him; then he
is caught up into the life of the Universe, his speech is thunder, his thought is law, and
his words are universally intelligible as the plants and animals. The poet knows that he speaks
adequately then only when he speaks somewhat wildly, or, "with the flower of the mind;" not
with the intellect used as an organ, but with the intellect released from all service and suffered
to take its direction from its celestial life; or as the ancients were wont to express themselves,
not with intellect alone but with the intellect inebriated by nectar. As the traveller who
has lost his way throws his reins on his horse's neck and trusts to the instinct of the animal
to find his road, so must we do with the divine animal who carries us through this world. For
if in any manner we can stimulate this instinct, new passages are opened for us into nature;
the mind flows into and through things hardest and highest, and the metamorphosis is possible.

This is the reason why bards love wine, mead, narcotics, coffee, tea, opium, the fumes of sandal-wood
and tobacco, or whatever other procurers of animal exhilaration. All men avail themselves of
such means as they can, to add this extraordinary power to their normal powers; and to this
end they prize conversation, music, pictures, sculpture, dancing, theatres, travelling, war,
mobs, fires, gaming, politics, or love, or science, or animal intoxication,--which are several
coarser or finer quasi-mechanical substitutes for the true nectar, which is the ravishment
of the intellect by coming nearer to the fact. These are auxiliaries to the centrifugal tendency
of a man, to his passage out into free space, and they help him to escape the custody of that
body in which he is pent up, and of that jail-yard of individual relations in which he is enclosed.
Hence a great number of such as were professionally expressers of Beauty, as painters, poets,
musicians, and actors, have been more than others wont to lead a life of pleasure and indulgence;
all but the few who received the true nectar; and, as it was a spurious mode of attaining freedom,
as it was an emancipation not into the heavens but into the freedom of baser places, they were
punished for that advantage they won, by a dissipation and deterioration. But never can any
advantage be taken of nature by a trick. The spirit of the world, the great calm presence of
the Creator, comes not forth to the sorceries of opium or of wine. The sublime vision comes
to the pure and simple soul in a clean and chaste body. That is not an inspiration, which we
owe to narcotics, but some counterfeit excitement and fury. Milton says that the lyric poet
may drink wine and live generously, but the epic poet, he who shall sing of the gods and their
descent unto men, must drink water out of a wooden bowl. For poetry is not 'Devil's wine,'
but God's wine. It is with this as it is with toys. We fill the hands and nurseries of our
children with all manner of dolls, drums, and horses; withdrawing their eyes from the plain
face and sufficing objects of nature, the sun, and moon, the animals, the water, and stones,
which should be their toys. So the poet's habit of living should be set on a key so low that
the common influences should delight him. His cheerfulness should be the gift of the sunlight;
the air should suffice for his inspiration, and he should be tipsy with water. That spirit
which suffices quiet hearts, which seems to come forth to such from every dry knoll of sere
grass, from every pine-stump and half-imbedded stone on which the dull March sun shines, comes
forth to the poor and hungry, and such as are of simple taste. If thou fill thy brain with
Boston and New York, with fashion and covetousness, and wilt stimulate thy jaded senses with
wine and French coffee, thou shalt find no radiance of wisdom in the lonely waste of the pinewoods.

If the imagination intoxicates the poet, it is not inactive in other men. The metamorphosis
excites in the beholder an emotion of joy. The use of symbols has a certain power of emancipation
and exhilaration for all men. We seem to be touched by a wand which makes us dance and run
about happily, like children. We are like persons who come out of a cave or cellar into the
open air. This is the effect on us of tropes, fables, oracles, and all poetic forms. Poets
are thus liberating gods. Men have really got a new sense, and found within their world another
world, or nest of worlds; for, the metamorphosis once seen, we divine that it does not stop.
I will not now consider how much this makes the charm of algebra and the mathematics, which
also have their tropes, but it is felt in every definition; as when Aristotle defines space
to be an immovable vessel in which things are contained;--or when Plato defines a line to be
a flowing point; or figure to be a bound of solid; and many the like. What a joyful sense of
freedom we have when Vitruvius announces the old opinion of artists that no architect can build
any house well who does not know something of anatomy. When Socrates, in Charmides, tells us
that the soul is cured of its maladies by certain incantations, and that these incantations
are beautiful reasons, from which temperance is generated in souls; when Plato calls the world
an animal; and Timaeus affirms that the plants also are animals; or affirms a man to be a heavenly
tree, growing with his root, which is his head, upward; and, as George Chapman, following him,
writes,--

     "So in our tree of man, whose nervie root
      Springs in his top;"--

when Orpheus speaks of hoariness as "that white flower which marks extreme old age;" when Proclus
calls the universe the statue of the intellect; when Chaucer, in his praise of 'Gentilesse,'
compares good blood in mean condition to fire, which, though carried to the darkest house betwixt
this and the mount of Caucasus, will yet hold its natural office and burn as bright as if twenty
thousand men did it behold; when John saw, in the Apocalypse, the ruin of the world through
evil, and the stars fall from heaven as the figtree casteth her untimely fruit; when Aesop
reports the whole catalogue of common daily relations through the masquerade of birds and beasts;--we
take the cheerful hint of the immortality of our essence and its versatile habit and escapes,
as when the gypsies say "it is in vain to hang them, they cannot die."

The poets are thus liberating gods. The ancient British bards had for the title of their order,
"Those Who are free throughout the world." They are free, and they make free. An imaginative
book renders us much more service at first, by stimulating us through its tropes, than afterward
when we arrive at the precise sense of the author. I think nothing is of any value in books
excepting the transcendental and extraordinary. If a man is inflamed and carried away by his
thought, to that degree that he forgets the authors and the public and heeds only this one
dream which holds him like an insanity, let me read his paper, and you may have all the arguments
and histories and criticism. All the value which attaches to Pythagoras, Paracelsus, Cornelius
Agrippa, Cardan, Kepler, Swedenborg, Schelling, Oken, or any other who introduces questionable
facts into his cosmogony, as angels, devils, magic, astrology, palmistry, mesmerism, and so
on, is the certificate we have of departure from routine, and that here is a new witness. That
also is the best success in conversation, the magic of liberty, which puts the world like a
ball in our hands. How cheap even the liberty then seems; how mean to study, when an emotion
communicates to the intellect the power to sap and upheave nature; how great the perspective!
nations, times, systems, enter and disappear like threads in tapestry of large figure and many
colors; dream delivers us to dream, and while the drunkenness lasts we will sell our bed, our
philosophy, our religion, in our opulence.

There is good reason why we should prize this liberation. The fate of the poor shepherd, who,
blinded and lost in the snow-storm, perishes in a drift within a few feet of his cottage door,
is an emblem of the state of man. On the brink of the waters of life and truth, we are miserably
dying. The inaccessibleness of every thought but that we are in, is wonderful. What if you
come near to it; you are as remote when you are nearest as when you are farthest. Every thought
is also a prison; every heaven is also a prison. Therefore we love the poet, the inventor,
who in any form, whether in an ode or in an action or in looks and behavior has yielded us
a new thought. He unlocks our chains and admits us to a new scene.

This emancipation is dear to all men, and the power to impart it, as it must come from greater
depth and scope of thought, is a measure of intellect. Therefore all books of the imagination
endure, all which ascend to that truth that the writer sees nature beneath him, and uses it
as his exponent. Every verse or sentence possessing this virtue will take care of its own immortality.
The religions of the world are the ejaculations of a few imaginative men.

But the quality of the imagination is to flow, and not to freeze. The poet did not stop at
the color or the form, but read their meaning; neither may he rest in this meaning, but he
makes the same objects exponents of his new thought. Here is the difference betwixt the poet
and the mystic, that the last nails a symbol to one sense, which was a true sense for a moment,
but soon becomes old and false. For all symbols are fluxional; all language is vehicular and
transitive, and is good, as ferries and horses are, for conveyance, not as farms and houses
are, for homestead. Mysticism consists in the mistake of an accidental and individual symbol
for an universal one. The morning-redness happens to be the favorite meteor to the eyes of
Jacob Behmen, and comes to stand to him for truth and faith; and, he believes, should stand
for the same realities to every reader. But the first reader prefers as naturally the symbol
of a mother and child, or a gardener and his bulb, or a jeweller polishing a gem. Either of
these, or of a myriad more, are equally good to the person to whom they are significant. Only
they must be held lightly, and be very willingly translated into the equivalent terms which
others use. And the mystic must be steadily told,--All that you say is just as true without
the tedious use of that symbol as with it. Let us have a little algebra, instead of this trite
rhetoric,--universal signs, instead of these village symbols,--and we shall both be gainers.
The history of hierarchies seems to show that all religious error consisted in making the symbol
too stark and solid, and was at last nothing but an excess of the organ of language.

Swedenborg, of all men in the recent ages, stands eminently for the translator of nature into
thought. I do not know the man in history to whom things stood so uniformly for words. Before
him the metamorphosis continually plays. Everything on which his eye rests, obeys the impulses
of moral nature. The figs become grapes whilst he eats them. When some of his angels affirmed
a truth, the laurel twig which they held blossomed in their hands. The noise which at a distance
appeared like gnashing and thumping, on coming nearer was found to be the voice of disputants.
The men in one of his visions, seen in heavenly light, appeared like dragons, and seemed in
darkness; but to each other they appeared as men, and when the light from heaven shone into
their cabin, they complained of the darkness, and were compelled to shut the window that they
might see.

There was this perception in him which makes the poet or seer an object of awe and terror,
namely that the same man or society of men may wear one aspect to themselves and their companions,
and a different aspect to higher intelligences. Certain priests, whom he describes as conversing
very learnedly together, appeared to the children who were at some distance, like dead horses;
and many the like misappearances. And instantly the mind inquires whether these fishes under
the bridge, yonder oxen in the pasture, those dogs in the yard, are immutably fishes, oxen,
and dogs, or only so appear to me, and perchance to themselves appear upright men; and whether
I appear as a man to all eyes. The Bramins and Pythagoras propounded the same question, and
if any poet has witnessed the transformation he doubtless found it in harmony with various
experiences. We have all seen changes as considerable in wheat and caterpillars. He is the
poet and shall draw us with love and terror, who sees through the flowing vest the firm nature,
and can declare it.

I look in vain for the poet whom I describe. We do not with sufficient plainness or sufficient
profoundness address ourselves to life, nor dare we chaunt our own times and social circumstance.
If we filled the day with bravery, we should not shrink from celebrating it. Time and nature
yield us many gifts, but not yet the timely man, the new religion, the reconciler, whom all
things await. Dante's praise is that he dared to write his autobiography in colossal cipher,
or into universality. We have yet had no genius in America, with tyrannous eye, which knew
the value of our incomparable materials, and saw, in the barbarism and materialism of the times,
another carnival of the same gods whose picture he so much admires in Homer; then in the Middle
Age; then in Calvinism. Banks and tariffs, the newspaper and caucus, Methodism and Unitarianism,
are flat and dull to dull people, but rest on the same foundations of wonder as the town of
Troy and the temple of Delphi, and are as swiftly passing away. Our logrolling, our stumps
and their politics, our fisheries, our Negroes and Indians, our boats and our repudiations,
the wrath of rogues and the pusillanimity of honest men, the northern trade, the southern planting,
the western clearing, Oregon and Texas, are yet unsung. Yet America is a poem in our eyes;
its ample geography dazzles the imagination, and it will not wait long for metres. If I have
not found that excellent combination of gifts in my countrymen which I seek, neither could
I aid myself to fix the idea of the poet by reading now and then in Chalmers's collection of
five centuries of English poets. These are wits more than poets, though there have been poets
among them. But when we adhere to the ideal of the poet, we have our difficulties even with
Milton and Homer. Milton is too literary, and Homer too literal and historical.

But I am not wise enough for a national criticism, and must use the old largeness a little
longer, to discharge my errand from the muse to the poet concerning his art.

Art is the path of the creator to his work. The paths or methods are ideal and eternal, though
few men ever see them; not the artist himself for years, or for a lifetime, unless he come
into the conditions. The painter, the sculptor, the composer, the epic rhapsodist, the orator,
all partake one desire, namely to express themselves symmetrically and abundantly, not dwarfishly
and fragmentarily. They found or put themselves in certain conditions, as, the painter and
sculptor before some impressive human figures; the orator, into the assembly of the people;
and the others in such scenes as each has found exciting to his intellect; and each presently
feels the new desire. He hears a voice, he sees a beckoning. Then he is apprised, with wonder,
what herds of daemons hem him in. He can no more rest; he says, with the old painter, "By God,
it is in me and must go forth of me." He pursues a beauty, half seen, which flies before him.
The poet pours out verses in every solitude. Most of the things he says are conventional, no
doubt; but by and by he says something which is original and beautiful. That charms him. He
would say nothing else but such things. In our way of talking we say 'That is yours, this is
mine;' but the poet knows well that it is not his; that it is as strange and beautiful to him
as to you; he would fain hear the like eloquence at length. Once having tasted this immortal
ichor, he cannot have enough of it, and as an admirable creative power exists in these intellections,
it is of the last importance that these things get spoken. What a little of all we know is
said! What drops of all the sea of our science are baled up! and by what accident it is that
these are exposed, when so many secrets sleep in nature! Hence the necessity of speech and
song; hence these throbs and heart-beatings in the orator, at the door of the assembly, to
the end namely that thought may be ejaculated as Logos, or Word.

Doubt not, O poet, but persist. Say 'It is in me, and shall out.' Stand there, balked and dumb,
stuttering and stammering, hissed and hooted, stand and strive, until at last rage draw out
of thee that dream-power which every night shows thee is thine own; a power transcending all
limit and privacy, and by virtue of which a man is the conductor of the whole river of electricity.
Nothing walks, or creeps, or grows, or exists, which must not in turn arise and walk before
him as exponent of his meaning. Comes he to that power, his genius is no longer exhaustible.
All the creatures by pairs and by tribes pour into his mind as into a Noah's ark, to come forth
again to people a new world. This is like the stock of air for our respiration or for the combustion
of our fireplace; not a measure of gallons, but the entire atmosphere if wanted. And therefore
the rich poets, as Homer, Chaucer, Shakspeare, and Raphael, have obviously no limits to their
works except the limits of their lifetime, and resemble a mirror carried through the street,
ready to render an image of every created thing.

O poet! a new nobility is conferred in groves and pastures, and not in castles or by the sword-blade
any longer. The conditions are hard, but equal. Thou shalt leave the world, and know the muse
only. Thou shalt not know any longer the times, customs, graces, politics, or opinions of men,
but shalt take all from the muse. For the time of towns is tolled from the world by funereal
chimes, but in nature the universal hours are counted by succeeding tribes of animals and plants,
and by growth of joy on joy. God wills also that thou abdicate a manifold and duplex life,
and that thou be content that others speak for thee. Others shall be thy gentlemen and shall
represent all courtesy and worldly life for thee; others shall do the great and resounding
actions also. Thou shalt lie close hid with nature, and canst not be afforded to the Capitol
or the Exchange. The world is full of renunciations and apprenticeships, and this is thine:
thou must pass for a fool and a churl for a long season. This is the screen and sheath in which
Pan has protected his well-beloved flower, and thou shalt be known only to thine own, and they
shall console thee with tenderest love. And thou shalt not be able to rehearse the names of
thy friends in thy verse, for an old shame before the holy ideal. And this is the reward; that
the ideal shall be real to thee, and the impressions of the actual world shall fall like summer
rain, copious, but not troublesome, to thy invulnerable essence. Thou shalt have the whole
land for thy park and manor, the sea for thy bath and navigation, without tax and without envy;
the woods and the rivers thou shalt own; and thou shalt possess that wherein others are only
tenants and boarders. Thou true land-lord! sea-lord! air-lord! Wherever snow falls or water
flows or birds fly, wherever day and night meet in twilight, wherever the blue heaven is hung
by clouds or sown with stars, wherever are forms with transparent boundaries, wherever are
outlets into celestial space, wherever is danger, and awe, and love,--there is Beauty, plenteous
as rain, shed for thee, and though thou shouldest walk the world over, thou shalt not be able
to find a condition inopportune or ignoble.

*****

      EXPERIENCE.

      THE lords of life, the lords of life,--
      I saw them pass,
      In their own guise,
      Like and unlike,
      Portly and grim,
      Use and Surprise,
      Surface and Dream,
      Succession swift, and spectral Wrong,
      Temperament without a tongue,
      And the inventor of the game
      Omnipresent without name;--
      Some to see, some to be guessed,
      They marched from east to west:
      Little man, least of all,
      Among the legs of his guardians tall,
      Walked about with puzzled look:--
      Him by the hand dear Nature took;
      Dearest Nature, strong and kind,
      Whispered, 'Darling, never mind!
      Tomorrow they will wear another face,
      The founder thou! these are thy race!'

II. EXPERIENCE.

WHERE do we find ourselves? In a series of which we do not know the extremes, and believe that
it has none. We wake and find ourselves on a stair; there are stairs below us, which we seem
to have ascended; there are stairs above us, many a one, which go upward and out of sight.
But the Genius which according to the old belief stands at the door by which we enter, and
gives us the lethe to drink, that we may tell no tales, mixed the cup too strongly, and we
cannot shake off the lethargy now at noonday. Sleep lingers all our lifetime about our eyes,
as night hovers all day in the boughs of the fir-tree. All things swim and glitter. Our life
is not so much threatened as our perception. Ghostlike we glide through nature, and should
not know our place again. Did our birth fall in some fit of indigence and frugality in nature,
that she was so sparing of her fire and so liberal of her earth that it appears to us that
we lack the affirmative principle, and though we have health and reason, yet we have no superfluity
of spirit for new creation? We have enough to live and bring the year about, but not an ounce
to impart or to invest. Ah that our Genius were a little more of a genius! We are like millers
on the lower levels of a stream, when the factories above them have exhausted the water. We
too fancy that the upper people must have raised their dams.

If any of us knew what we were doing, or where we are going, then when we think we best know!
We do not know to-day whether we are busy or idle. In times when we thought ourselves indolent,
we have afterwards discovered that much was accomplished, and much was begun in us. All our
days are so unprofitable while they pass, that 'tis wonderful where or when we ever got anything
of this which we call wisdom, poetry, virtue. We never got it on any dated calendar day. Some
heavenly days must have been intercalated somewhere, like those that Hermes won with dice of
the Moon, that Osiris might be born. It is said all martyrdoms looked mean when they were suffered.
Every ship is a romantic object, except that we sail in. Embark, and the romance quits our
vessel and hangs on every other sail in the horizon. Our life looks trivial, and we shun to
record it. Men seem to have learned of the horizon the art of perpetual retreating and reference.
'Yonder uplands are rich pasturage, and my neighbor has fertile meadow, but my field,' says
the querulous farmer, 'only holds the world together.' I quote another man's saying; unluckily
that other withdraws himself in the same way, and quotes me. 'Tis the trick of nature thus
to degrade to-day; a good deal of buzz, and somewhere a result slipped magically in. Every
roof is agreeable to the eye until it is lifted; then we find tragedy and moaning women and
hard-eyed husbands and deluges of lethe, and the men ask, 'What's the news?' as if the old
were so bad. How many individuals can we count in society? how many actions? how many opinions?
So much of our time is preparation, so much is routine, and so much retrospect, that the pith
of each man's genius contracts itself to a very few hours. The history of literature--take
the net result of Tiraboschi, Warton, or Schlegel,--is a sum of very few ideas and of very
few original tales; all the rest being variation of these. So in this great society wide lying
around us, a critical analysis would find very few spontaneous actions. It is almost all custom
and gross sense. There are even few opinions, and these seem organic in the speakers, and do
not disturb the universal necessity.

What opium is instilled into all disaster! It shows formidable as we approach it, but there
is at last no rough rasping friction, but the most slippery sliding surfaces. We fall soft
on a thought; Ate Dea is gentle,--

     "Over men's heads walking aloft,
      With tender feet treading so soft."

People grieve and bemoan themselves, but it is not half so bad with them as they say. There
are moods in which we court suffering, in the hope that here at least we shall find reality,
sharp peaks and edges of truth. But it turns out to be scene-painting and counterfeit. The
only thing grief has taught me is to know how shallow it is. That, like all the rest, plays
about the surface, and never introduces me into the reality, for contact with which we would
even pay the costly price of sons and lovers. Was it Boscovich who found out that bodies never
come in contact? Well, souls never touch their objects. An innavigable sea washes with silent
waves between us and the things we aim at and converse with. Grief too will make us idealists.
In the death of my son, now more than two years ago, I seem to have lost a beautiful estate,--no
more. I cannot get it nearer to me. If to-morrow I should be informed of the bankruptcy of
my principal debtors, the loss of my property would be a great inconvenience to me, perhaps,
for many years; but it would leave me as it found me,--neither better nor worse. So is it with
this calamity: it does not touch me; something which I fancied was a part of me, which could
not be torn away without tearing me nor enlarged without enriching me, falls off from me and
leaves no scar. It was caducous. I grieve that grief can teach me nothing, nor carry me one
step into real nature. The Indian who was laid under a curse that the wind should not blow
on him, nor water flow to him, nor fire burn him, is a type of us all. The dearest events are
summer-rain, and we the Para coats that shed every drop. Nothing is left us now but death.
We look to that with a grim satisfaction, saying There at least is reality that will not dodge us.

I take this evanescence and lubricity of all objects, which lets them slip through our fingers
then when we clutch hardest, to be the most unhandsome part of our condition. Nature does not
like to be observed, and likes that we should be her fools and playmates. We may have the sphere
for our cricket-ball, but not a berry for our philosophy. Direct strokes she never gave us
power to make; all our blows glance, all our hits are accidents. Our relations to each other
are oblique and casual.

Dream delivers us to dream, and there is no end to illusion. Life is a train of moods like
a string of beads, and as we pass through them they prove to be many-colored lenses which paint
the world their own hue, and each shows only what lies in its focus. From the mountain you
see the mountain. We animate what we can, and we see only what we animate. Nature and books
belong to the eyes that see them. It depends on the mood of the man whether he shall see the
sunset or the fine poem. There are always sunsets, and there is always genius; but only a few
hours so serene that we can relish nature or criticism. The more or less depends on structure
or temperament. Temperament is the iron wire on which the beads are strung. Of what use is
fortune or talent to a cold and defective nature? Who cares what sensibility or discrimination
a man has at some time shown, if he falls asleep in his chair? or if he laugh and giggle? or
if he apologize? or is infected with egotism? or thinks of his dollar? or cannot go by food?
or has gotten a child in his boyhood? Of what use is genius, if the organ is too convex or
too concave and cannot find a focal distance within the actual horizon of human life? Of what
use, if the brain is too cold or too hot, and the man does not care enough for results to stimulate
him to experiment, and hold him up in it? or if the web is too finely woven, too irritable
by pleasure and pain, so that life stagnates from too much reception without due outlet? Of
what use to make heroic vows of amendment, if the same old law-breaker is to keep them? What
cheer can the religious sentiment yield, when that is suspected to be secretly dependent on
the seasons of the year and the state of the blood? I knew a witty physician who found the
creed in the biliary duct, and used to affirm that if there was disease in the liver, the man
became a Calvinist, and if that organ was sound, he became a Unitarian. Very mortifying is
the reluctant experience that some unfriendly excess or imbecility neutralizes the promise
of genius. We see young men who owe us a new world, so readily and lavishly they promise, but
they never acquit the debt; they die young and dodge the account; or if they live they lose
themselves in the crowd.

Temperament also enters fully into the system of illusions and shuts us in a prison of glass
which we cannot see. There is an optical illusion about every person we meet. In truth they
are all creatures of given temperament, which will appear in a given character, whose boundaries
they will never pass: but we look at them, they seem alive, and we presume there is impulse
in them. In the moment it seems impulse; in the year, in the lifetime, it turns out to be a
certain uniform tune which the revolving barrel of the music-box must play. Men resist the
conclusion in the morning, but adopt it as the evening wears on, that temper prevails over
everything of time, place, and condition, and is inconsumable in the flames of religion. Some
modifications the moral sentiment avails to impose, but the individual texture holds its dominion,
if not to bias the moral judgments, yet to fix the measure of activity and of enjoyment.

I thus express the law as it is read from the platform of ordinary life, but must not leave
it without noticing the capital exception. For temperament is a power which no man willingly
hears any one praise but himself. On the platform of physics we cannot resist the contracting
influences of so-called science. Temperament puts all divinity to rout. I know the mental proclivity
of physicians. I hear the chuckle of the phrenologists. Theoretic kidnappers and slave-drivers,
they esteem each man the victim of another, who winds him round his finger by knowing the law
of his being; and by such cheap signboards as the color of his beard or the slope of his occiput,
reads the inventory of his fortunes and character. The grossest ignorance does not disgust
like this impudent knowingness. The physicians say they are not materialists; but they are:--Spirit
is matter reduced to an extreme thinness: O so thin!--But the definition of spiritual should
be, that which is its own evidence. What notions do they attach to love! what to religion!
One would not willingly pronounce these words in their hearing, and give them the occasion
to profane them. I saw a gracious gentleman who adapts his conversation to the form of the
head of the man he talks with! I had fancied that the value of life lay in its inscrutable
possibilities; in the fact that I never know, in addressing myself to a new individual, what
may befall me. I carry the keys of my castle in my hand, ready to throw them at the feet of
my lord, whenever and in what disguise soever he shall appear. I know he is in the neighborhood
hidden among vagabonds. Shall I preclude my future by taking a high seat and kindly adapting
my conversation to the shape of heads? When I come to that, the doctors shall buy me for a
cent.--'But, sir, medical history; the report to the Institute; the proven facts!'--I distrust
the facts and the inferences. Temperament is the veto or limitation-power in the constitution,
very justly applied to restrain an opposite excess in the constitution, but absurdly offered
as a bar to original equity. When virtue is in presence, all subordinate powers sleep. On its
own level, or in view of nature, temperament is final. I see not, if one be once caught in
this trap of so-called sciences, any escape for the man from the links of the chain of physical
necessity. Given such an embryo, such a history must follow. On this platform one lives in
a sty of sensualism, and would soon come to suicide. But it is impossible that the creative
power should exclude itself. Into every intelligence there is a door which is never closed,
through which the creator passes. The intellect, seeker of absolute truth, or the heart, lover
of absolute good, intervenes for our succor, and at one whisper of these high powers we awake
from ineffectual struggles with this nightmare. We hurl it into its own hell, and cannot again
contract ourselves to so base a state.

The secret of the illusoriness is in the necessity of a succession of moods or objects. Gladly
we would anchor, but the anchorage is quicksand. This onward trick of nature is too strong
for us: Pero si muove. When at night I look at the moon and stars, I seem stationary, and they
to hurry. Our love of the real draws us to permanence, but health of body consists in circulation,
and sanity of mind in variety or facility of association. We need change of objects. Dedication
to one thought is quickly odious. We house with the insane, and must humor them; then conversation
dies out. Once I took such delight in Montaigne, that I thought I should not need any other
book; before that, in Shakspeare; then in Plutarch; then in Plotinus; at one time in Bacon;
afterwards in Goethe; even in Bettine; but now I turn the pages of either of them languidly,
whilst I still cherish their genius. So with pictures; each will bear an emphasis of attention
once, which it cannot retain, though we fain would continue to be pleased in that manner. How
strongly I have felt of pictures that when you have seen one well, you must take your leave
of it; you shall never see it again. I have had good lessons from pictures which I have since
seen without emotion or remark. A deduction must be made from the opinion which even the wise
express of a new book or occurrence. Their opinion gives me tidings of their mood, and some
vague guess at the new fact, but is nowise to be trusted as the lasting relation between that
intellect and that thing. The child asks, 'Mamma, why don't I like the story as well as when
you told it me yesterday?' Alas! child it is even so with the oldest cherubim of knowledge.
But will it answer thy question to say, Because thou wert born to a whole and this story is
a particular? The reason of the pain this discovery causes us (and we make it late in respect
to works of art and intellect), is the plaint of tragedy which murmurs from it in regard to
persons, to friendship and love.

That immobility and absence of elasticity which we find in the arts, we find with more pain
in the artist. There is no power of expansion in men. Our friends early appear to us as representatives
of certain ideas which they never pass or exceed. They stand on the brink of the ocean of thought
and power, but they never take the single step that would bring them there. A man is like a
bit of Labrador spar, which has no lustre as you turn it in your hand until you come to a particular
angle; then it shows deep and beautiful colors. There is no adaptation or universal applicability
in men, but each has his special talent, and the mastery of successful men consists in adroitly
keeping themselves where and when that turn shall be oftenest to be practised. We do what we
must, and call it by the best names we can, and would fain have the praise of having intended
the result which ensues. I cannot recall any form of man who is not superfluous sometimes.
But is not this pitiful? Life is not worth the taking, to do tricks in.

Of course it needs the whole society to give the symmetry we seek. The party-colored wheel
must revolve very fast to appear white. Something is earned too by conversing with so much
folly and defect. In fine, whoever loses, we are always of the gaining party. Divinity is behind
our failures and follies also. The plays of children are nonsense, but very educative nonsense.
So it is with the largest and solemnest things, with commerce, government, church, marriage,
and so with the history of every man's bread, and the ways by which he is to come by it. Like
a bird which alights nowhere, but hops perpetually from bough to bough, is the Power which
abides in no man and in no woman, but for a moment speaks from this one, and for another moment
from that one.

But what help from these fineries or pedantries? What help from thought? Life is not dialectics.
We, I think, in these times, have had lessons enough of the futility of criticism. Our young
people have thought and written much on labor and reform, and for all that they have written,
neither the world nor themselves have got on a step. Intellectual tasting of life will not
supersede muscular activity. If a man should consider the nicety of the passage of a piece
of bread down his throat, he would starve. At Education-Farm, the noblest theory of life sat
on the noblest figures of young men and maidens, quite powerless and melancholy. It would not
rake or pitch a ton of hay; it would not rub down a horse; and the men and maidens it left
pale and hungry. A political orator wittily compared our party promises to western roads, which
opened stately enough, with planted trees on either side to tempt the traveller, but soon became
narrow and narrower and ended in a squirrel-track and ran up a tree. So does culture with us;
it ends in headache. Unspeakably sad and barren does life look to those who a few months ago
were dazzled with the splendor of the promise of the times. "There is now no longer any right
course of action nor any self-devotion left among the Iranis." Objections and criticism we
have had our fill of. There are objections to every course of life and action, and the practical
wisdom infers an indifferency, from the omnipresence of objection. The whole frame of things
preaches indifferency. Do not craze yourself with thinking, but go about your business anywhere.
Life is not intellectual or critical, but sturdy. Its chief good is for well-mixed people who
can enjoy what they find, without question. Nature hates peeping, and our mothers speak her
very sense when they say, "Children, eat your victuals, and say no more of it." To fill the
hour,--that is happiness; to fill the hour and leave no crevice for a repentance or an approval.
We live amid surfaces, and the true art of life is to skate well on them. Under the oldest
mouldiest conventions a man of native force prospers just as well as in the newest world, and
that by skill of handling and treatment. He can take hold anywhere. Life itself is a mixture
of power and form, and will not bear the least excess of either. Let us be poised, and wise,
and our own, today. Let us treat the men and women well; treat them as if they were real; perhaps
they are. Men live in their fancy, like drunkards whose hands are too soft and tremulous for
successful labor. It is a tempest of fancies, and the only ballast I know is a respect to the
present hour. If these are mean and malignant, their contentment, which is the last victory
of justice, is a more satisfying echo to the heart than the voice of poets and the casual sympathy
of admirable persons. I think that however a thoughtful man may suffer from the defects and
absurdities of his company, he cannot without affectation deny to any set of men and women
a sensibility to extraordinary merit. The coarse and frivolous have an instinct of superiority,
if they have not a sympathy, and honor it in their blind capricious way with sincere homage.

The fine young people despise life, but in me, and in such as with me are free from dyspepsia,
and to whom a day is a sound and solid good, it is a great excess of politeness to look scornful
and to cry for company. I am grown by sympathy a little eager and sentimental, but leave me
alone and I should relish every hour and what it brought me, the potluck of the day, as heartily
as the oldest gossip in the bar-room. I am thankful for small mercies. I compared notes with
one of my friends who expects everything of the universe and is disappointed when anything
is less than the best, and I found that I begin at the other extreme, expecting nothing, and
am always full of thanks for moderate goods. I accept the clangor and jangle of contrary tendencies.
I find my account in sots and bores also. They give a reality to the circumjacent picture which
such a vanishing meteorous appearance can ill spare. In the morning I awake and find the old
world, wife, babes, and mother, Concord and Boston, the dear old spiritual world and even the
dear old devil not far off. If we will take the good we find, asking no questions, we shall
have heaping measures. The great gifts are not got by analysis. Everything good is on the highway.
The middle region of our being is the temperate zone. We may climb into the thin and cold realm
of pure geometry and lifeless science, or sink into that of sensation. Between these extremes
is the equator of life, of thought, of spirit, of poetry,--a narrow belt. Moreover, in popular
experience everything good is on the highway. A collector peeps into all the picture-shops
of Europe for a landscape of Poussin, a crayon-sketch of Salvator; but the Transfiguration,
the Last Judgment, the Communion of St. Jerome, and what are as transcendent as these, are
on the walls of the Vatican, the Uffizii, or the Louvre, where every footman may see them;
to say nothing of Nature's pictures in every street, of sunsets and sunrises every day, and
the sculpture of the human body never absent. I think I will never read any but the commonest
books,--the Bible, Homer, Dante, Shakspeare, and Milton. Then we are impatient of so public
a life and planet, and run hither and thither for nooks and secrets. The imagination delights
in the woodcraft of Indians, trappers, and bee-hunters. We fancy that we are strangers, and
not so intimately domesticated in the planet as the wild man and the wild beast and bird. But
the exclusion reaches them also; reaches the climbing, flying, gliding, feathered and four-footed
man. Fox and woodchuck, hawk and snipe and bittern, when nearly seen, have no more root in
the deep world than man, and are just such superficial tenants of the globe. Then the new molecular
philosophy shows astronomical interspaces betwixt atom and atom, shows that the world is all
outside; it has no inside.

The mid-world is best. Nature, as we know her, is no saint. The lights of the church, the ascetics,
Gentoos, and corn-eaters, she does not distinguish by any favor. She comes eating and drinking
and sinning. Her darlings, the great, the strong, the beautiful, are not children of our law;
do not come out of the Sunday School, nor weigh their food, nor punctually keep the commandments.
If we will be strong with her strength we must not harbor such disconsolate consciences, borrowed
too from the consciences of other nations. We must set up the strong present tense against
all the rumors of wrath, past or to come. So many things are unsettled which it is of the first
importance to settle;--and, pending their settlement, we will do as we do. Whilst the debate
goes forward on the equity of commerce, and will not be closed for a century or two, New and
Old England may keep shop. Law of copyright and international copyright is to be discussed,
and in the interim we will sell our books for the most we can. Expediency of literature, reason
of literature, lawfulness of writing down a thought, is questioned; much is to say on both
sides, and, while the fight waxes hot, thou, dearest scholar, stick to thy foolish task, add
a line every hour, and between whiles add a line. Right to hold land, right of property, is
disputed, and the conventions convene, and before the vote is taken, dig away in your garden,
and spend your earnings as a waif or godsend to all serene and beautiful purposes. Life itself
is a bubble and a skepticism, and a sleep within a sleep. Grant it, and as much more as they
will,--but thou, God's darling! heed thy private dream; thou wilt not be missed in the scorning
and skepticism; there are enough of them; stay there in thy closet and toil until the rest
are agreed what to do about it. Thy sickness, they say, and thy puny habit require that thou
do this or avoid that, but know that thy life is a flitting state, a tent for a night, and
do thou, sick or well, finish that stint. Thou art sick, but shalt not be worse, and the universe,
which holds thee dear, shall be the better.

Human life is made up of the two elements, power and form, and the proportion must be invariably
kept if we would have it sweet and sound. Each of these elements in excess makes a mischief
as hurtful as its defect. Everything runs to excess; every good quality is noxious if unmixed,
and, to carry the danger to the edge of ruin, nature causes each man's peculiarity to superabound.
Here, among the farms, we adduce the scholars as examples of this treachery. They are nature's
victims of expression. You who see the artist, the orator, the poet, too near, and find their
life no more excellent than that of mechanics or farmers, and themselves victims of partiality,
very hollow and haggard, and pronounce them failures, not heroes, but quacks,--conclude very
reasonably that these arts are not for man, but are disease. Yet nature will not bear you out.
Irresistible nature made men such, and makes legions more of such, every day. You love the
boy reading in a book, gazing at a drawing, or a cast; yet what are these millions who read
and behold, but incipient writers and sculptors? Add a little more of that quality which now
reads and sees, and they will seize the pen and chisel. And if one remembers how innocently
he began to be an artist, he perceives that nature joined with his enemy. A man is a golden
impossibility. The line he must walk is a hair's breadth. The wise through excess of wisdom
is made a fool.

How easily, if fate would suffer it, we might keep forever these beautiful limits, and adjust
ourselves, once for all, to the perfect calculation of the kingdom of known cause and effect.
In the street and in the newspapers, life appears so plain a business that manly resolution
and adherence to the multiplication-table through all weathers will insure success. But ah!
presently comes a day, or is it only a half-hour, with its angel-whispering,--which discomfits
the conclusions of nations and of years! Tomorrow again everything looks real and angular,
the habitual standards are reinstated, common sense is as rare as genius,--is the basis of
genius, and experience is hands and feet to every enterprise;--and yet, he who should do his
business on this understanding would be quickly bankrupt. Power keeps quite another road than
the turnpikes of choice and will; namely the subterranean and invisible tunnels and channels
of life. It is ridiculous that we are diplomatists, and doctors, and considerate people: there
are no dupes like these. Life is a series of surprises, and would not be worth taking or keeping
if it were not. God delights to isolate us every day, and hide from us the past and the future.
We would look about us, but with grand politeness he draws down before us an impenetrable screen
of purest sky, and another behind us of purest sky. 'You will not remember,' he seems to say,
`and you will not expect.' All good conversation, manners, and action, come from a spontaneity
which forgets usages and makes the moment great. Nature hates calculators; her methods are
saltatory and impulsive. Man lives by pulses; our organic movements are such; and the chemical
and ethereal agents are undulatory and alternate; and the mind goes antagonizing on, and never
prospers but by fits. We thrive by casualties. Our chief experiences have been casual. The
most attractive class of people are those who are powerful obliquely and not by the direct
stroke; men of genius, but not yet accredited; one gets the cheer of their light without paying
too great a tax. Theirs is the beauty of the bird or the morning light, and not of art. In
the thought of genius there is always a surprise; and the moral sentiment is well called "the
newness," for it is never other; as new to the oldest intelligence as to the young child;--"the
kingdom that cometh without observation." In like manner, for practical success, there must
not be too much design. A man will not be observed in doing that which he can do best. There
is a certain magic about his properest action which stupefies your powers of observation, so
that though it is done before you, you wist not of it. The art of life has a pudency, and will
not be exposed. Every man is an impossibility until he is born; every thing impossible until
we see a success. The ardors of piety agree at last with the coldest skepticism,--that nothing
is of us or our works,--that all is of God. Nature will not spare us the smallest leaf of laurel.
All writing comes by the grace of God, and all doing and having. I would gladly be moral and
keep due metes and bounds, which I dearly love, and allow the most to the will of man; but
I have set my heart on honesty in this chapter, and I can see nothing at last, in success or
failure, than more or less of vital force supplied from the Eternal. The results of life are
uncalculated and uncalculable. The years teach much which the days never know. The persons
who compose our company, converse, and come and go, and design and execute many things, and
somewhat comes of it all, but an unlooked-for result. The individual is always mistaken. He
designed many things, and drew in other persons as coadjutors, quarrelled with some or all,
blundered much, and something is done; all are a little advanced, but the individual is always
mistaken. It turns out somewhat new and very unlike what he promised himself.

The ancients, struck with this irreducibleness of the elements of human life to calculation,
exalted Chance into a divinity; but that is to stay too long at the spark, which glitters truly
at one point, but the universe is warm with the latency of the same fire. The miracle of life
which will not be expounded but will remain a miracle, introduces a new element. In the growth
of the embryo, Sir Everard Home I think noticed that the evolution was not from one central
point, but coactive from three or more points. Life has no memory. That which proceeds in succession
might be remembered, but that which is coexistent, or ejaculated from a deeper cause, as yet
far from being conscious, knows not its own tendency. So is it with us, now skeptical or without
unity, because immersed in forms and effects all seeming to be of equal yet hostile value,
and now religious, whilst in the reception of spiritual law. Bear with these distractions,
with this coetaneous growth of the parts; they will one day be members, and obey one will.
On that one will, on that secret cause, they nail our attention and hope. Life is hereby melted
into an expectation or a religion. Underneath the inharmonious and trivial particulars, is
a musical perfection; the Ideal journeying always with us, the heaven without rent or seam.
Do but observe the mode of our illumination. When I converse with a profound mind, or if at
any time being alone I have good thoughts, I do not at once arrive at satisfactions, as when,
being thirsty, I drink water; or go to the fire, being cold; no! but I am at first apprised
of my vicinity to a new and excellent region of life. By persisting to read or to think, this
region gives further sign of itself, as it were in flashes of light, in sudden discoveries
of its profound beauty and repose, as if the clouds that covered it parted at intervals and
showed the approaching traveller the inland mountains, with the tranquil eternal meadows spread
at their base, whereon flocks graze and shepherds pipe and dance. But every insight from this
realm of thought is felt as initial, and promises a sequel. I do not make it; I arrive there,
and behold what was there already. I make! O no! I clap my hands in infantine joy and amazement
before the first opening to me of this august magnificence, old with the love and homage of
innumerable ages, young with the life of life, the sunbright Mecca of the desert. And what
a future it opens! I feel a new heart beating with the love of the new beauty. I am ready to
die out of nature and be born again into this new yet unapproachable America I have found in
the West:--

     "Since neither now nor yesterday began
      These thoughts, which have been ever, nor yet can
      A man be found who their first entrance knew."

If I have described life as a flux of moods, I must now add that there is that in us which
changes not and which ranks all sensations and states of mind. The consciousness in each man
is a sliding scale, which identifies him now with the First Cause, and now with the flesh of
his body; life above life, in infinite degrees. The sentiment from which it sprung determines
the dignity of any deed, and the question ever is, not what you have done or forborne, but
at whose command you have done or forborne it.

Fortune, Minerva, Muse, Holy Ghost,--these are quaint names, too narrow to cover this unbounded
substance. The baffled intellect must still kneel before this cause, which refuses to be named,--ineffable
cause, which every fine genius has essayed to represent by some emphatic symbol, as, Thales
by water, Anaximenes by air, Anaxagoras by (Nous) thought, Zoroaster by fire, Jesus and the
moderns by love; and the metaphor of each has become a national religion. The Chinese Mencius
has not been the least successful in his generalization. "I fully understand language," he
said, "and nourish well my vast-flowing vigor."--"I beg to ask what you call vast-flowing vigor?"--said
his companion. "The explanation," replied Mencius, "is difficult. This vigor is supremely great,
and in the highest degree unbending. Nourish it correctly and do it no injury, and it will
fill up the vacancy between heaven and earth. This vigor accords with and assists justice and
reason, and leaves no hunger."--In our more correct writing we give to this generalization
the name of Being, and thereby confess that we have arrived as far as we can go. Suffice it
for the joy of the universe that we have not arrived at a wall, but at interminable oceans.
Our life seems not present so much as prospective; not for the affairs on which it is wasted,
but as a hint of this vast-flowing vigor. Most of life seems to be mere advertisement of faculty;
information is given us not to sell ourselves cheap; that we are very great. So, in particulars,
our greatness is always in a tendency or direction, not in an action. It is for us to believe
in the rule, not in the exception. The noble are thus known from the ignoble. So in accepting
the leading of the sentiments, it is not what we believe concerning the immortality of the
soul or the like, but the universal impulse to believe, that is the material circumstance and
is the principal fact in the history of the globe. Shall we describe this cause as that which
works directly? The spirit is not helpless or needful of mediate organs. It has plentiful powers
and direct effects. I am explained without explaining, I am felt without acting, and where
I am not. Therefore all just persons are satisfied with their own praise. They refuse to explain
themselves, and are content that new actions should do them that office. They believe that
we communicate without speech and above speech, and that no right action of ours is quite unaffecting
to our friends, at whatever distance; for the influence of action is not to be measured by
miles. Why should I fret myself because a circumstance has occurred which hinders my presence
where I was expected? If I am not at the meeting, my presence where I am should be as useful
to the commonwealth of friendship and wisdom, as would be my presence in that place. I exert
the same quality of power in all places. Thus journeys the mighty Ideal before us; it never
was known to fall into the rear. No man ever came to an experience which was satiating, but
his good is tidings of a better. Onward and onward! In liberated moments we know that a new
picture of life and duty is already possible; the elements already exist in many minds around
you of a doctrine of life which shall transcend any written record we have. The new statement
will comprise the skepticisms as well as the faiths of society, and out of unbeliefs a creed
shall be formed. For skepticisms are not gratuitous or lawless, but are limitations of the
affirmative statement, and the new philosophy must take them in and make affirmations outside
of them, just as much as it must include the oldest beliefs.

It is very unhappy, but too late to be helped, the discovery we have made that we exist. That
discovery is called the Fall of Man. Ever afterwards we suspect our instruments. We have learned
that we do not see directly, but mediately, and that we have no means of correcting these colored
and distorting lenses which we are, or of computing the amount of their errors. Perhaps these
subject-lenses have a creative power; perhaps there are no objects. Once we lived in what we
saw; now, the rapaciousness of this new power, which threatens to absorb all things, engages
us. Nature, art, persons, letters, religions, objects, successively tumble in, and God is but
one of its ideas. Nature and literature are subjective phenomena; every evil and every good
thing is a shadow which we cast. The street is full of humiliations to the proud. As the fop
contrived to dress his bailiffs in his livery and make them wait on his guests at table, so
the chagrins which the bad heart gives off as bubbles, at once take form as ladies and gentlemen
in the street, shopmen or bar-keepers in hotels, and threaten or insult whatever is threatenable
and insultable in us. 'Tis the same with our idolatries. People forget that it is the eye which
makes the horizon, and the rounding mind's eye which makes this or that man a type or representative
of humanity, with the name of hero or saint. Jesus, the "providential man," is a good man on
whom many people are agreed that these optical laws shall take effect. By love on one part
and by forbearance to press objection on the other part, it is for a time settled, that we
will look at him in the centre of the horizon, and ascribe to him the properties that will
attach to any man so seen. But the longest love or aversion has a speedy term. The great and
crescive self, rooted in absolute nature, supplants all relative existence and ruins the kingdom
of mortal friendship and love. Marriage (in what is called the spiritual world) is impossible,
because of the inequality between every subject and every object. The subject is the receiver
of Godhead, and at every comparison must feel his being enhanced by that cryptic might. Though
not in energy, yet by presence, this magazine of substance cannot be otherwise than felt; nor
can any force of intellect attribute to the object the proper deity which sleeps or wakes forever
in every subject. Never can love make consciousness and ascription equal in force. There will
be the same gulf between every me and thee as between the original and the picture. The universe
is the bride of the soul. All private sympathy is partial. Two human beings are like globes,
which can touch only in a point, and whilst they remain in contact, all other points of each
of the spheres are inert; their turn must also come, and the longer a particular union lasts
the more energy of appetency the parts not in union acquire.

Life will be imaged, but cannot be divided nor doubled. Any invasion of its unity would be
chaos. The soul is not twin-born but the only begotten, and though revealing itself as child
in time, child in appearance, is of a fatal and universal power, admitting no co-life. Every
day, every act betrays the ill-concealed deity. We believe in ourselves as we do not believe
in others. We permit all things to ourselves, and that which we call sin in others is experiment
for us. It is an instance of our faith in ourselves that men never speak of crime as lightly
as they think; or every man thinks a latitude safe for himself which is nowise to be indulged
to another. The act looks very differently on the inside and on the outside; in its quality
and in its consequences. Murder in the murderer is no such ruinous thought as poets and romancers
will have it; it does not unsettle him or fright him from his ordinary notice of trifles; it
is an act quite easy to be contemplated; but in its sequel it turns out to be a horrible jangle
and confounding of all relations. Especially the crimes that spring from love seem right and
fair from the actor's point of view, but when acted are found destructive of society. No man
at last believes that he can be lost, nor that the crime in him is as black as in the felon.
Because the intellect qualifies in our own case the moral judgments. For there is no crime
to the intellect. That is antinomian or hypernomian, and judges law as well as fact. "It is
worse than a crime, it is a blunder," said Napoleon, speaking the language of the intellect.
To it, the world is a problem in mathematics or the science of quantity, and it leaves out
praise and blame and all weak emotions. All stealing is comparative. If you come to absolutes,
pray who does not steal? Saints are sad, because they behold sin (even when they speculate),
from the point of view of the conscience, and not of the intellect; a confusion of thought.
Sin, seen from the thought, is a diminution, or less: seen from the conscience or will, it
is pravity or bad. The intellect names it shade, absence of light, and no essence. The conscience
must feel it as essence, essential evil. This it is not; it has an objective existence, but
no subjective.

Thus inevitably does the universe wear our color, and every object fall successively into the
subject itself. The subject exists, the subject enlarges; all things sooner or later fall into
place. As I am, so I see; use what language we will, we can never say anything but what we
are; Hermes, Cadmus, Columbus, Newton, Bonaparte, are the mind's ministers. Instead of feeling
a poverty when we encounter a great man, let us treat the new comer like a travelling geologist
who passes through our estate and shows us good slate, or limestone, or anthracite, in our
brush pasture. The partial action of each strong mind in one direction is a telescope for the
objects on which it is pointed. But every other part of knowledge is to be pushed to the same
extravagance, ere the soul attains her due sphericity. Do you see that kitten chasing so prettily
her own tail? If you could look with her eyes you might see her surrounded with hundreds of
figures performing complex dramas, with tragic and comic issues, long conversations, many characters,
many ups and downs of fate,--and meantime it is only puss and her tail. How long before our
masquerade will end its noise of tambourines, laughter, and shouting, and we shall find it
was a solitary performance? A subject and an object,--it takes so much to make the galvanic
circuit complete, but magnitude adds nothing. What imports it whether it is Kepler and the
sphere, Columbus and America, a reader and his book, or puss with her tail?

It is true that all the muses and love and religion hate these developments, and will find
a way to punish the chemist who publishes in the parlor the secrets of the laboratory. And
we cannot say too little of our constitutional necessity of seeing things under private aspects,
or saturated with our humors. And yet is the God the native of these bleak rocks. That need
makes in morals the capital virtue of self-trust. We must hold hard to this poverty, however
scandalous, and by more vigorous self-recoveries, after the sallies of action, possess our
axis more firmly. The life of truth is cold and so far mournful; but it is not the slave of
tears, contritions and perturbations. It does not attempt another's work, nor adopt another's
facts. It is a main lesson of wisdom to know your own from another's. I have learned that I
cannot dispose of other people's facts; but I possess such a key to my own as persuades me,
against all their denials, that they also have a key to theirs. A sympathetic person is placed
in the dilemma of a swimmer among drowning men, who all catch at him, and if he give so much
as a leg or a finger they will drown him. They wish to be saved from the mischiefs of their
vices, but not from their vices. Charity would be wasted on this poor waiting on the symptoms.
A wise and hardy physician will say, Come out of that, as the first condition of advice.

In this our talking America we are ruined by our good nature and listening on all sides. This
compliance takes away the power of being greatly useful. A man should not be able to look other
than directly and forthright. A preoccupied attention is the only answer to the importunate
frivolity of other people; an attention, and to an aim which makes their wants frivolous. This
is a divine answer, and leaves no appeal and no hard thoughts. In Flaxman's drawing of the
Eumenides of Aeschylus, Orestes supplicates Apollo, whilst the Furies sleep on the threshold.
The face of the god expresses a shade of regret and compassion, but is calm with the conviction
of the irreconcilableness of the two spheres. He is born into other politics, into the eternal
and beautiful. The man at his feet asks for his interest in turmoils of the earth, into which
his nature cannot enter. And the Eumenides there lying express pictorially this disparity.
The god is surcharged with his divine destiny.

Illusion, Temperament, Succession, Surface, Surprise, Reality, Subjectiveness,--these are threads
on the loom of time, these are the lords of life. I dare not assume to give their order, but
I name them as I find them in my way. I know better than to claim any completeness for my picture.
I am a fragment, and this is a fragment of me. I can very confidently announce one or another
law, which throws itself into relief and form, but I am too young yet by some ages to compile
a code. I gossip for my hour concerning the eternal politics. I have seen many fair pictures
not in vain. A wonderful time I have lived in. I am not the novice I was fourteen, nor yet
seven years ago. Let who will ask Where is the fruit? I find a private fruit sufficient. This
is a fruit,--that I should not ask for a rash effect from meditations, counsels and the hiving
of truths. I should feel it pitiful to demand a result on this town and county, an overt effect
on the instant month and year. The effect is deep and secular as the cause. It works on periods
in which mortal lifetime is lost. All I know is reception; I am and I have: but I do not get,
and when I have fancied I had gotten anything, I found I did not. I worship with wonder the
great Fortune. My reception has been so large, that I am not annoyed by receiving this or that
superabundantly. I say to the Genius, if he will pardon the proverb, In for a mill, in for
a million. When I receive a new gift, I do not macerate my body to make the account square,
for if I should die I could not make the account square. The benefit overran the merit the
first day, and has overrun the merit ever since. The merit itself, so-called, I reckon part
of the receiving.

Also that hankering after an overt or practical effect seems to me an apostasy. In good earnest
I am willing to spare this most unnecessary deal of doing. Life wears to me a visionary face.
Hardest roughest action is visionary also. It is but a choice between soft and turbulent dreams.
People disparage knowing and the intellectual life, and urge doing. I am very content with
knowing, if only I could know. That is an august entertainment, and would suffice me a great
while. To know a little would be worth the expense of this world. I hear always the law of
Adrastia, "that every soul which had acquired any truth, should be safe from harm until another
period."

I know that the world I converse with in the city and in the farms, is not the world I think.
I observe that difference, and shall observe it. One day I shall know the value and law of
this discrepance. But I have not found that much was gained by manipular attempts to realize
the world of thought. Many eager persons successively make an experiment in this way, and make
themselves ridiculous. They acquire democratic manners, they foam at the mouth, they hate and
deny. Worse, I observe that in the history of mankind there is never a solitary example of
success,--taking their own tests of success. I say this polemically, or in reply to the inquiry,
Why not realize your world? But far be from me the despair which prejudges the law by a paltry
empiricism;--since there never was a right endeavor but it succeeded. Patience and patience,
we shall win at the last. We must be very suspicious of the deceptions of the element of time.
It takes a good deal of time to eat or to sleep, or to earn a hundred dollars, and a very little
time to entertain a hope and an insight which becomes the light of our life. We dress our garden,
eat our dinners, discuss the household with our wives, and these things make no impression,
are forgotten next week; but, in the solitude to which every man is always returning, he has
a sanity and revelations which in his passage into new worlds he will carry with him. Never
mind the ridicule, never mind the defeat; up again, old heart!--it seems to say,--there is
victory yet for all justice; and the true romance which the world exists to realize will be
the transformation of genius into practical power.

*****

     CHARACTER.

     The sun set; but set not his hope:
     Stars rose; his faith was earlier up:
     Fixed on the enormous galaxy,
     Deeper and older seemed his eye:
     And matched his sufferance sublime
     The taciturnity of time.
     He spoke, and words more soft than rain
     Brought the Age of Gold again:
     His action won such reverence sweet,
     As hid all measure of the feat.

     Work of his hand
     He nor commends nor grieves
     Pleads for itself the fact;
     As unrepenting Nature leaves
     Her every act.

III. CHARACTER.

I HAVE read that those who listened to Lord Chatham felt that there was something finer in
the man than any thing which he said. It is conceived of as a certain undemonstrable force,
a Familiar or Genius, by whose impulses the man is guided but whose counsels he cannot impart;
which is company for him, so that such men are often solitary, or if they chance to be social,
do not need society but can entertain themselves very well alone. The purest literary talent
appears at one time great, at another time small, but character is of a stellar and undiminishable
greatness. What others effect by talent or by eloquence, this man accomplishes by some magnetism.
"Half his strength he put not forth." Man, ordinarily a pendant to events, only half attached,
and that awkwardly, to the world he lives in, in these examples appears to share the life of
things, and to be an expression of the same laws which control the tides and the sun, numbers
and quantities.

But to use a more modest illustration and nearer home, I observe that in our political elections,
where this element, if it appears at all, can only occur in its coarsest form, we sufficiently
understand its incomparable rate. The people know that they need in their representative much
more than talent, namely the power to make his talent trusted. They cannot come at their ends
by sending to Congress a learned, acute, and fluent speaker, if he be not one who, before he
was appointed by the people to represent them, was appointed by Almighty God to stand for a
fact,--invincibly persuaded of that fact in himself,--so that the most confident and the most
violent persons learn that here is resistance on which both impudence and terror are wasted,
namely faith in a fact. The men who carry their points do not need to inquire of their constituents
what they should say, but are themselves the country which they represent; nowhere are its
emotions or opinions so instant and true as in them; nowhere so pure from a selfish infusion.
The constituency at home hearkens to their words, watches the color of their cheek, and therein,
as in a glass, dresses its own. Our public assemblies are pretty good tests of manly force.
Our frank countrymen of the west and south have a taste for character, and like to know whether
the New Englander is a substantial man, or whether the hand can pass through him.

The same motive force appears in trade. There are geniuses in trade, as well as in war, or
the State, or letters; and the reason why this or that man is fortunate is not to be told.
It lies in the man; that is all anybody can tell you about it. See him and you will know as
easily why he succeeds, as, if you see Napoleon, you would comprehend his fortune. In the new
objects we recognize the old game, the Habit of fronting the fact, and not dealing with it
at second hand, through the perceptions of somebody else. Nature seems to authorize trade,
as soon as you see the natural merchant, who appears not so much a private agent as her factor
and Minister of Commerce. His natural probity combines with his insight into the fabric of
society to put him above tricks, and he communicates to all his own faith that contracts are
of no private interpretation. The habit of his mind is a reference to standards of natural
equity and public advantage; and he inspires respect and the wish to deal with him, both for
the quiet spirit of honor which attends him, and for the intellectual pastime which the spectacle
of so much ability affords. This immensely stretched trade, which makes the capes of the Southern
Ocean his wharves, and the Atlantic Sea his familiar port, centres in his brain only; and nobody
in the universe can make his place good. In his parlor I see very well that he has been at
hard work this morning, with that knitted brow and that settled humor, which all his desire
to be courteous cannot shake off. I see plainly how many firm acts have been done; how many
valiant noes have this day been spoken, when others would have uttered ruinous yeas. I see,
with the pride of art and skill of masterly arithmetic and power of remote combination, the
consciousness of being an agent and playfellow of the original laws of the world. He too believes
that none can supply him, and that a man must be born to trade or he cannot learn it.

This virtue draws the mind more when it appears in action to ends not so mixed. It works with
most energy in the smallest companies and in private relations. In all cases it is an extraordinary
and incomputable agent. The excess of physical strength is paralyzed by it. Higher natures
overpower lower ones by affecting them with a certain sleep. The faculties are locked up, and
offer no resistance. Perhaps that is the universal law. When the high cannot bring up the low
to itself, it benumbs it, as man charms down the resistance of the lower animals. Men exert
on each other a similar occult power. How often has the influence of a true master realized
all the tales of magic! A river of command seemed to run down from his eyes into all those
who beheld him, a torrent of strong sad light, like an Ohio or Danube, which pervaded them
with his thoughts and colored all events with the hue of his mind. "What means did you employ?"
was the question asked of the wife of Concini, in regard to her treatment of Mary of Medici;
and the answer was, "Only that influence which every strong mind has over a weak one." Cannot
Caesar in irons shuffle off the irons and transfer them to the person of Hippo or Thraso the
turnkey? Is an iron handcuff so immutable a bond? Suppose a slaver on the coast of Guinea should
take on board a gang of negroes which should contain persons of the stamp of Toussaint L'Ouverture:
or, let us fancy, under these swarthy masks he has a gang of Washingtons in chains. When they
arrive at Cuba, will the relative order of the ship's company be the same? Is there nothing
but rope and iron? Is there no love, no reverence? Is there never a glimpse of right in a poor
slave-captain's mind; and cannot these be supposed available to break or elude or in any manner
overmatch the tension of an inch or two of iron ring?

This is a natural power, like light and heat, and all nature cooperates with it. The reason
why we feel one man's presence and do not feel another's is as simple as gravity. Truth is
the summit of being; justice is the application of it to affairs. All individual natures stand
in a scale, according to the purity of this element in them. The will of the pure runs down
from them into other natures as water runs down from a higher into a lower vessel. This natural
force is no more to be withstood than any other natural force. We can drive a stone upward
for a moment into the air, but it is yet true that all stones will forever fall; and whatever
instances can be quoted of unpunished theft, or of a lie which somebody credited, justice must
prevail, and it is the privilege of truth to make itself believed. Character is this moral
order seen through the medium of an individual nature. An individual is an encloser. Time and
space, liberty and necessity, truth and thought, are left at large no longer. Now, the universe
is a close or pound. All things exist in the man tinged with the manners of his soul. With
what quality is in him he infuses all nature that he can reach; nor does he tend to lose himself
in vastness, but, at how long a curve soever, all his regards return into his own good at last.
He animates all he can, and he sees only what he animates. He encloses the world, as the patriot
does his country, as a material basis for his character, and a theatre for action. A healthy
soul stands united with the Just and the True, as the magnet arranges itself with the pole;
so that he stands to all beholders like a transparent object betwixt them and the sun, and
whoso journeys towards the sun, journeys towards that person. He is thus the medium of the
highest influence to all who are not on the same level. Thus, men of character are the conscience
of the society to which they belong.

The natural measure of this power is the resistance of circumstances. Impure men consider life
as it is reflected in opinions, events, and persons. They cannot see the action until it is
done. Yet its moral element preexisted in the actor, and its quality as right or wrong it was
easy to predict. Everything in nature is bipolar, or has a positive and negative pole. There
is a male and a female, a spirit and a fact, a north and a south. Spirit is the positive, the
event is the negative. Will is the north, action the south pole. Character may be ranked as
having its natural place in the north. It shares the magnetic currents of the system. The feeble
souls are drawn to the south or negative pole. They look at the profit or hurt of the action.
They never behold a principle until it is lodged in a person. They do not wish to be lovely,
but to be loved. Men of character like to hear of their faults; the other class do not like
to hear of faults; they worship events; secure to them a fact, a connection, a certain chain
of circumstances, and they will ask no more. The hero sees that the event is ancillary; it
must follow him. A given order of events has no power to secure to him the satisfaction which
the imagination attaches to it; the soul of goodness escapes from any set of circumstances;
whilst prosperity belongs to a certain mind, and will introduce that power and victory which
is its natural fruit, into any order of events. No change of circumstances can repair a defect
of character. We boast our emancipation from many superstitions; but if we have broken any
idols it is through a transfer of the idolatry. What have I gained, that I no longer immolate
a bull to Jove or to Neptune, or a mouse to Hecate; that I do not tremble before the Eumenides,
or the Catholic Purgatory, or the Calvinistic Judgment-day,--if I quake at opinion, the public
opinion, as we call it; or at the threat of assault, or contumely, or bad neighbors, or poverty,
or mutilation, or at the rumor of revolution, or of murder? If I quake, what matters it what
I quake at? Our proper vice takes form in one or another shape, according to the sex, age,
or temperament of the person, and, if we are capable of fear, will readily find terrors. The
covetousness or the malignity which saddens me when I ascribe it to society, is my own. I am
always environed by myself. On the other part, rectitude is a perpetual victory, celebrated
not by cries of joy but by serenity, which is joy fixed or habitual. It is disgraceful to fly
to events for confirmation of our truth and worth. The capitalist does not run every hour to
the broker to coin his advantages into current money of the realm; he is satisfied to read
in the quotations of the market that his stocks have risen. The same transport which the occurrence
of the best events in the best order would occasion me, I must learn to taste purer in the
perception that my position is every hour meliorated, and does already command those events
I desire. That exultation is only to be checked by the foresight of an order of things so excellent
as to throw all our prosperities into the deepest shade.

The face which character wears to me is self-sufficingness. I revere the person who is riches;
so that I cannot think of him as alone, or poor, or exiled, or unhappy, or a client, but as
perpetual patron, benefactor, and beatified man. Character is centrality, the impossibility
of being displaced or overset. A man should give us a sense of mass. Society is frivolous,
and shreds its day into scraps, its conversation into ceremonies and escapes. But if I go to
see an ingenious man I shall think myself poorly entertained if he give me nimble pieces of
benevolence and etiquette; rather he shall stand stoutly in his place and let me apprehend
if it were only his resistance; know that I have encountered a new and positive quality;--great
refreshment for both of us. It is much that he does not accept the conventional opinions and
practices. That nonconformity will remain a goad and remembrancer, and every inquirer will
have to dispose of him, in the first place. There is nothing real or useful that is not a seat
of war. Our houses ring with laughter and personal and critical gossip, but it helps little.
But the uncivil, unavailable man, who is a problem and a threat to society, whom it cannot
let pass in silence but must either worship or hate,--and to whom all parties feel related,
both the leaders of opinion and the obscure and eccentric,--he helps; he puts America and Europe
in the wrong, and destroys the skepticism which says, 'man is a doll, let us eat and drink,
'tis the best we can do,' by illuminating the untried and unknown. Acquiescence in the establishment
and appeal to the public, indicate infirm faith, heads which are not clear, and which must
see a house built, before they can comprehend the plan of it. The wise man not only leaves
out of his thought the many, but leaves out the few. Fountains, the self-moved, the absorbed,
the commander because he is commanded, the assured, the primary,--they are good; for these
announce the instant presence of supreme power.

Our action should rest mathematically on our substance. In nature, there are no false valuations.
A pound of water in the ocean-tempest has no more gravity than in a midsummer pond. All things
work exactly according to their quality and according to their quantity; attempt nothing they
cannot do, except man only. He has pretension; he wishes and attempts things beyond his force.
I read in a book of English memoirs, "Mr. Fox (afterwards Lord Holland) said, he must have
the Treasury; he had served up to it, and would have it." Xenophon and his Ten Thousand were
quite equal to what they attempted, and did it; so equal, that it was not suspected to be a
grand and inimitable exploit. Yet there stands that fact unrepeated, a high-water mark in military
history. Many have attempted it since, and not been equal to it. It is only on reality that
any power of action can be based. No institution will be better than the institutor. I knew
an amiable and accomplished person who undertook a practical reform, yet I was never able to
find in him the enterprise of love he took in hand. He adopted it by ear and by the understanding
from the books he had been reading. All his action was tentative, a piece of the city carried
out into the fields, and was the city still, and no new fact, and could not inspire enthusiasm.
Had there been something latent in the man, a terrible undemonstrated genius agitating and
embarrassing his demeanor, we had watched for its advent. It is not enough that the intellect
should see the evils and their remedy. We shall still postpone our existence, nor take the
ground to which we are entitled, whilst it is only a thought and not a spirit that incites
us. We have not yet served up to it.

These are properties of life, and another trait is the notice of incessant growth. Men should
be intelligent and earnest. They must also make us feel that they have a controlling happy
future opening before them, whose early twilights already kindle in the passing hour. The hero
is misconceived and misreported; he cannot therefore wait to unravel any man's blunders; he
is again on his road, adding new powers and honors to his domain and new claims on your heart,
which will bankrupt you if you have loitered about the old things and have not kept your relation
to him by adding to your wealth. New actions are the only apologies and explanations of old
ones which the noble can bear to offer or to receive. If your friend has displeased you, you
shall not sit down to consider it, for he has already lost all memory of the passage, and has
doubled his power to serve you, and ere you can rise up again will burden you with blessings.

We have no pleasure in thinking of a benevolence that is only measured by its works. Love is
inexhaustible, and if its estate is wasted, its granary emptied, still cheers and enriches,
and the man, though he sleep, seems to purify the air and his house to adorn the landscape
and strengthen the laws. People always recognize this difference. We know who is benevolent,
by quite other means than the amount of subscription to soup-societies. It is only low merits
that can be enumerated. Fear, when your friends say to you what you have done well, and say
it through; but when they stand with uncertain timid looks of respect and half-dislike, and
must suspend their judgment for years to come, you may begin to hope. Those who live to the
future must always appear selfish to those who live to the present. Therefore it was droll
in the good Riemer, who has written memoirs of Goethe, to make out a list of his donations
and good deeds, as, so many hundred thalers given to Stilling, to Hegel, to Tischbein; a lucrative
place found for Professor Voss, a post under the Grand Duke for Herder, a pension for Meyer,
two professors recommended to foreign universities; &c., &c. The longest list of specifications
of benefit would look very short. A man is a poor creature if he is to be measured so. For
all these of course are exceptions, and the rule and hodiernal life of a good man is benefaction.
The true charity of Goethe is to be inferred from the account he gave Dr. Eckermann of the
way in which he had spent his fortune. "Each bon-mot of mine has cost a purse of gold. Half
a million of my own money, the fortune I inherited, my salary and the large income derived
from my writings for fifty years back, have been expended to instruct me in what I now know.
I have besides seen," &c.

I own it is but poor chat and gossip to go to enumerate traits of this simple and rapid power,
and we are painting the lightning with charcoal; but in these long nights and vacations I like
to console myself so. Nothing but itself can copy it. A word warm from the heart enriches me.
I surrender at discretion. How death-cold is literary genius before this fire of life! These
are the touches that reanimate my heavy soul and give it eyes to pierce the dark of nature.
I find, where I thought myself poor, there was I most rich. Thence comes a new intellectual
exaltation, to be again rebuked by some new exhibition of character. Strange alternation of
attraction and repulsion! Character repudiates intellect, yet excites it; and character passes
into thought, is published so, and then is ashamed before new flashes of moral worth.

Character is nature in the highest form. It is of no use to ape it or to contend with it. Somewhat
is possible of resistance, and of persistence, and of creation, to this power, which will foil
all emulation.

This masterpiece is best where no hands but nature's have been laid on it. Care is taken that
the greatly-destined shall slip up into life in the shade, with no thousand-eyed Athens to
watch and blazon every new thought, every blushing emotion of young genius. Two persons lately,
very young children of the most high God, have given me occasion for thought. When I explored
the source of their sanctity and charm for the imagination, it seemed as if each answered,
'From my nonconformity; I never listened to your people's law, or to what they call their gospel,
and wasted my time. I was content with the simple rural poverty of my own; hence this sweetness;
my work never reminds you of that;--is pure of that.' And nature advertises me in such persons
that in democratic America she will not be democratized. How cloistered and constitutionally
sequestered from the market and from scandal! It was only this morning that I sent away some
wild flowers of these wood-gods. They are a relief from literature,--these fresh draughts from
the sources of thought and sentiment; as we read, in an age of polish and criticism, the first
lines of written prose and verse of a nation. How captivating is their devotion to their favorite
books, whether Aeschylus, Dante, Shakspeare, or Scott, as feeling that they have a stake in
that book; who touches that, touches them;--and especially the total solitude of the critic,
the Patmos of thought from which he writes, in unconsciousness of any eyes that shall ever
read this writing. Could they dream on still, as angels, and not wake to comparisons, and to
be flattered! Yet some natures are too good to be spoiled by praise, and wherever the vein
of thought reaches down into the profound, there is no danger from vanity. Solemn friends will
warn them of the danger of the head's being turned by the flourish of trumpets, but they can
afford to smile. I remember the indignation of an eloquent Methodist at the kind admonitions
of a Doctor of Divinity,--'My friend, a man can neither be praised nor insulted.' But forgive
the counsels; they are very natural. I remember the thought which occurred to me when some
ingenious and spiritual foreigners came to America, was, Have you been victimized in being
brought hither?--or, prior to that, answer me this, 'Are you victimizable?'

As I have said, Nature keeps these sovereignties in her own hands, and however pertly our sermons
and disciplines would divide some share of credit, and teach that the laws fashion the citizen,
she goes her own gait and puts the wisest in the wrong. She makes very light of gospels and
prophets, as one who has a great many more to produce and no excess of time to spare on any
one. There is a class of men, individuals of which appear at long intervals, so eminently endowed
with insight and virtue that they have been unanimously saluted as divine, and who seem to
be an accumulation of that power we consider. Divine persons are character born, or, to borrow
a phrase from Napoleon, they are victory organized. They are usually received with ill-will,
because they are new and because they set a bound to the exaggeration that has been made of
the personality of the last divine person. Nature never rhymes her children, nor makes two
men alike. When we see a great man we fancy a resemblance to some historical person, and predict
the sequel of his character and fortune; a result which he is sure to disappoint. None will
ever solve the problem of his character according to our prejudice, but only in his own high
unprecedented way. Character wants room; must not be crowded on by persons nor be judged from
glimpses got in the press of affairs or on few occasions. It needs perspective, as a great
building. It may not, probably does not, form relations rapidly; and we should not require
rash explanation, either on the popular ethics, or on our own, of its action.

I look on Sculpture as history. I do not think the Apollo and the Jove impossible in flesh
and blood. Every trait which the artist recorded in stone he had seen in life, and better than
his copy. We have seen many counterfeits, but we are born believers in great men. How easily
we read in old books, when men were few, of the smallest action of the patriarchs. We require
that a man should be so large and columnar in the landscape, that it should deserve to be recorded
that he arose, and girded up his loins, and departed to such a place. The most credible pictures
are those of majestic men who prevailed at their entrance, and convinced the senses; as happened
to the eastern magian who was sent to test the merits of Zertusht or Zoroaster. When the Yunani
sage arrived at Balkh, the Persians tell us, Gushtasp appointed a day on which the Mobeds of
every country should assemble, and a golden chair was placed for the Yunani sage. Then the
beloved of Yezdam, the prophet Zertusht, advanced into the midst of the assembly. The Yunani
sage, on seeing that chief, said, "This form and this gait cannot lie, and nothing but truth
can proceed from them." Plato said it was impossible not to believe in the children of the
gods, "though they should speak without probable or necessary arguments." I should think myself
very unhappy in my associates if I could not credit the best things in history. "John Bradshaw,"
says Milton, "appears like a consul, from whom the fasces are not to depart with the year;
so that not on the tribunal only, but throughout his life, you would regard him as sitting
in judgment upon kings." I find it more credible, since it is anterior information, that one
man should know heaven, as the Chinese say, than that so many men should know the world. "The
virtuous prince confronts the gods, without any misgiving. He waits a hundred ages till a sage
comes, and does not doubt. He who confronts the gods, without any misgiving, knows heaven;
he who waits a hundred ages until a sage comes, without doubting, knows men. Hence the virtuous
prince moves, and for ages shows empire the way." But there is no need to seek remote examples.
He is a dull observer whose experience has not taught him the reality and force of magic, as
well as of chemistry. The coldest precisian cannot go abroad without encountering inexplicable
influences. One man fastens an eye on him and the graves of the memory render up their dead;
the secrets that make him wretched either to keep or to betray must be yielded;--another, and
he cannot speak, and the bones of his body seem to lose their cartilages; the entrance of a
friend adds grace, boldness, and eloquence to him; and there are persons he cannot choose but
remember, who gave a transcendent expansion to his thought, and kindled another life in his bosom.

What is so excellent as strict relations of amity, when they spring from this deep root? The
sufficient reply to the skeptic who doubts the power and the furniture of man, is in that possibility
of joyful intercourse with persons, which makes the faith and practice of all reasonable men.
I know nothing which life has to offer so satisfying as the profound good understanding which
can subsist after much exchange of good offices, between two virtuous men, each of whom is
sure of himself and sure of his friend. It is a happiness which postpones all other gratifications,
and makes politics, and commerce, and churches, cheap. For when men shall meet as they ought,
each a benefactor, a shower of stars, clothed with thoughts, with deeds, with accomplishments,
it should be the festival of nature which all things announce. Of such friendship, love in
the sexes is the first symbol, as all other things are symbols of love. Those relations to
the best men, which, at one time, we reckoned the romances of youth, become, in the progress
of the character, the most solid enjoyment.

If it were possible to live in right relations with men!--if we could abstain from asking anything
of them, from asking their praise, or help, or pity, and content us with compelling them through
the virtue of the eldest laws! Could we not deal with a few persons,--with one person,--after
the unwritten statutes, and make an experiment of their efficacy? Could we not pay our friend
the compliment of truth, of silence, of forbearing? Need we be so eager to seek him? If we
are related, we shall meet. It was a tradition of the ancient world that no metamorphosis could
hide a god from a god; and there is a Greek verse which runs,--

     "The Gods are to each other not unknown."

Friends also follow the laws of divine necessity; they gravitate to each other, and cannot
otherwise:--

     When each the other shall avoid,
     Shall each by each be most enjoyed.

Their relation is not made, but allowed. The gods must seat themselves without seneschal in
our Olympus, and as they can instal themselves by seniority divine. Society is spoiled if pains
are taken, if the associates are brought a mile to meet. And if it be not society, it is a
mischievous, low, degrading jangle, though made up of the best. All the greatness of each is
kept back and every foible in painful activity, as if the Olympians should meet to exchange
snuff-boxes.

Life goes headlong. We chase some flying scheme, or we are hunted by some fear or command behind
us. But if suddenly we encounter a friend, we pause; our heat and hurry look foolish enough;
now pause, now possession is required, and the power to swell the moment from the resources
of the heart. The moment is all, in all noble relations.

A divine person is the prophecy of the mind; a friend is the hope of the heart. Our beatitude
waits for the fulfilment of these two in one. The ages are opening this moral force. All force
is the shadow or symbol of that. Poetry is joyful and strong as it draws its inspiration thence.
Men write their names on the world as they are filled with this. History has been mean; our
nations have been mobs; we have never seen a man: that divine form we do not yet know, but
only the dream and prophecy of such: we do not know the majestic manners which belong to him,
which appease and exalt the beholder. We shall one day see that the most private is the most
public energy, that quality atones for quantity, and grandeur of character acts in the dark,
and succors them who never saw it. What greatness has yet appeared is beginnings and encouragements
to us in this direction. The history of those gods and saints which the world has written and
then worshipped, are documents of character. The ages have exulted in the manners of a youth
who owed nothing to fortune, and who was hanged at the Tyburn of his nation, who, by the pure
quality of his nature, shed an epic splendor around the facts of his death which has transfigured
every particular into an universal symbol for the eyes of mankind. This great defeat is hitherto
our highest fact. But the mind requires a victory to the senses; a force of character which
will convert judge, jury, soldier, and king; which will rule animal and mineral virtues, and
blend with the courses of sap, of rivers, of winds, of stars, and of moral agents.

If we cannot attain at a bound to these grandeurs, at least let us do them homage. In society,
high advantages are set down to the possessor as disadvantages. It requires the more wariness
in our private estimates. I do not forgive in my friends the failure to know a fine character
and to entertain it with thankful hospitality. When at last that which we have always longed
for is arrived and shines on us with glad rays out of that far celestial land, then to be coarse,
then to be critical and treat such a visitant with the jabber and suspicion of the streets,
argues a vulgarity that seems to shut the doors of heaven. This is confusion, this the right
insanity, when the soul no longer knows its own, nor where its allegiance, its religion, are
due. Is there any religion but this, to know that wherever in the wide desert of being the
holy sentiment we cherish has opened into a flower, it blooms for me? if none sees it, I see
it; I am aware, if I alone, of the greatness of the fact. Whilst it blooms, I will keep sabbath
or holy time, and suspend my gloom and my folly and jokes. Nature is indulged by the presence
of this guest. There are many eyes that can detect and honor the prudent and household virtues;
there are many that can discern Genius on his starry track, though the mob is incapable; but
when that love which is all-suffering, all-abstaining, all-aspiring, which has vowed to itself
that it will be a wretch and also a fool in this world sooner than soil its white hands by
any compliances, comes into our streets and houses,--only the pure and aspiring can know its
face, and the only compliment they can pay it is to own it.

*****

     MANNERS.

     "HOW near to good is what is fair!
     Which we no sooner see,
     But with the lines and outward air
     Our senses taken be.

     Again yourselves compose,
     And now put all the aptness on
     Of Figure, that Proportion
     Or Color can disclose;
     That if those silent arts were lost,
     Design and Picture, they might boast
     From you a newer ground,
     Instructed by the heightening sense
     Of dignity and reverence
     In their true motions found."
                        BEN JONSON

IV. MANNERS.

What fact more conspicuous in modern history than the creation of the gentleman? And yet we
are not often gratified by this hospitality. No rentroll nor army-list can dignify skulking
and dissimulation; and the first point of courtesy must always be truth, as really all the
forms of good-breeding point that way. His lords brave each other in smart epigramatic speeches,
but the dialogue is in costume, and does not please on the second reading: it is not warm with
life.

     Gifts of one who loved me,--
     'T was high time they came;
     When he ceased to love me,
     Time they stopped for shame.

V. GIFTS. How far off yet is the trilobite! how far the quadruped! how inconceivably remote
is man! Yet all must come, as surely as the first atom has two sides.

*****

     POLITICS.

     Gold and iron are good
     To buy iron and gold;
     All earth's fleece and food
     For their like are sold.
     Boded Merlin wise,
     Proved Napoleon great,--
     Nor kind nor coinage buys
     Aught above its rate.
     Fear, Craft, and Avarice
     Cannot rear a State.
     Out of dust to build
     What is more than dust,--
     Walls Amphion piled
     Phoebus stablish must.
     When the Muses nine
     With the Virtues meet,
     Find to their design
     An Atlantic seat,
     By green orchard boughs
     Fended from the heat,
     Where the statesman ploughs
     Furrow for the wheat;
     When the Church is social worth,
     When the state-house is the hearth,
     Then the perfect State is come,
     The republican at home.

VII. POLITICS.

In dealing with the State we ought to remember that its institution are not aboriginal, though
they existed before we were born; that they are not superior to the citizen; that every one
of them was once the act of a single man; every law and usage was a man's expedient to meet
a particular case; that they all are imitable, all alterable; we may make as good, we may make
better. Society is an illusion to the young citizen. It lies before him in rigid repose, with
certain names, men and institutions rooted like oak-trees to the centre, round which all arrange
themselves the best they can. But the old statesman knows that society is fluid; there are
no such roots and centres, but any particle may suddenly become the centre of the movement
and compel the system to gyrate round it; as every man of strong will, like Pisistratus, or
Cromwell, does for a time, and every man of truth, like Plato or Paul, does forever. But politics
rest on necessary foundations, and cannot be treated with levity. Republics abound in young
civilians, who believe that the laws make the city, that grave modifications of the policy
and modes of living and employments of the population, that commerce, education, and religion,
may be voted in or out; and that any measure, though it were absurd, may be imposed on a people
if only you can get sufficient voices to make it a law. But the wise know that foolish legislation
is a rope of sand which perishes in the twisting; that the State must follow and not lead the
character and progress of the citizen; the strongest usurper is quickly got rid of; and they
only who build on Ideas, build for eternity; and that the form of government which prevails
is the expression of what cultivation exists in the population which permits it. The law is
only a memorandum. We are superstitious, and esteem the statute somewhat: so much life as it
has in the character of living men is its force. The statute stands there to say, Yesterday
we agreed so and so, but how feel ye this article to-day? Our statute is a currency which we
stamp with our own portrait: it soon becomes unrecognizable, and in process of time will return
to the mint. Nature is not democratic, nor limited-monarchical, but despotic, and will not
be fooled or abated of any jot of her authority by the pertest of her sons; and as fast as
the public mind is opened to more intelligence, the code is seen to be brute and stammering.
It speaks not articulately, and must be made to. Meantime the education of the general mind
never stops. The reveries of the true and simple are prophetic. What the tender poetic youth
dreams, and prays, and paints to-day, but shuns the ridicule of saying aloud, shall presently
be the resolutions of public bodies; then shall be carried as grievance and bill of rights
through conflict and war, and then shall be triumphant law and establishment for a hundred
years, until it gives place in turn to new prayers and pictures. The history of the State sketches
in coarse outline the progress of thought, and follows at a distance the delicacy of culture
and of aspiration.

The theory of politics which has possessed the mind of men, and which they have expressed the
best they could in their laws and in their revolutions, considers persons and property as the
two objects for whose protection government exists. Of persons, all have equal rights, in virtue
of being identical in nature. This interest of course with its whole power demands a democracy.
Whilst the rights of all as persons are equal, in virtue of their access to reason, their rights
in property are very unequal. One man owns his clothes, and another owns a county. This accident,
depending primarily on the skill and virtue of the parties, of which there is every degree,
and secondarily on patrimony, falls unequally, and its rights of course are unequal. Personal
rights, universally the same, demand a government framed on the ratio of the census; property
demands a government framed on the ratio of owners and of owning. Laban, who has flocks and
herds, wishes them looked after by an officer on the frontiers, lest the Midianites shall drive
them off; and pays a tax to that end. Jacob has no flocks or herds and no fear of the Midianites,
and pays no tax to the officer. It seemed fit that Laban and Jacob should have equal rights
to elect the officer who is to defend their persons, but that Laban and not Jacob should elect
the officer who is to guard the sheep and cattle. And if question arise whether additional
officers or watch-towers should be provided, must not Laban and Isaac, and those who must sell
part of their herds to buy protection for the rest, judge better of this, and with more right,
than Jacob, who, because he is a youth and a traveller, eats their bread and not his own?

In the earliest society the proprietors made their own wealth, and so long as it comes to the
owners in the direct way, no other opinion would arise in any equitable community than that
property should make the law for property, and persons the law for persons.

But property passes through donation or inheritance to those who do not create it. Gift, in
one case, makes it as really the new owner's, as labor made it the first owner's: in the other
case, of patrimony, the law makes an ownership which will be valid in each man's view according
to the estimate which he sets on the public tranquillity.

It was not however found easy to embody the readily admitted principle that property should
make law for property, and persons for persons; since persons and property mixed themselves
in every transaction. At last it seemed settled that the rightful distinction was that the
proprietors should have more elective franchise than non-proprietors, on the Spartan principle
of "calling that which is just, equal; not that which is equal, just."

That principle no longer looks so self-evident as it appeared in former times, partly, because
doubts have arisen whether too much weight had not been allowed in the laws to property, and
such a structure given to our usages as allowed the rich to encroach on the poor, and to keep
them poor; but mainly because there is an instinctive sense, however obscure and yet inarticulate,
that the whole constitution of property, on its present tenures, is injurious, and its influence
on persons deteriorating and degrading; that truly the only interest for the consideration
of the State is persons; that property will always follow persons; that the highest end of
government is the culture of men; and if men can be educated, the institutions will share their
improvement and the moral sentiment will write the law of the land.

If it be not easy to settle the equity of this question, the peril is less when we take note
of our natural defences. We are kept by better guards than the vigilance of such magistrates
as we commonly elect. Society always consists in greatest part of young and foolish persons.
The old, who have seen through the hypocrisy of courts and statesmen, die and leave no wisdom
to their sons. They believe their own newspaper, as their fathers did at their age. With such
an ignorant and deceivable majority, States would soon run to ruin, but that there are limitations
beyond which the folly and ambition of governors cannot go. Things have their laws, as well
as men; and things refuse to be trifled with. Property will be protected. Corn will not grow
unless it is planted and manured; but the farmer will not plant or hoe it unless the chances
are a hundred to one that he will cut and harvest it. Under any forms, persons and property
must and will have their just sway. They exert their power, as steadily as matter its attraction.
Cover up a pound of earth never so cunningly, divide and subdivide it; melt it to liquid, convert
it to gas; it will always weigh a pound; it will always attract and resist other matter by
the full virtue of one pound weight:--and the attributes of a person, his wit and his moral
energy, will exercise, under any law or extinguishing tyranny, their proper force,--if not
overtly, then covertly; if not for the law, then against it; if not wholesomely, then poisonously;
with right, or by might.

The boundaries of personal influence it is impossible to fix, as persons are organs of moral
or supernatural force. Under the dominion of an idea which possesses the minds of multitudes,
as civil freedom, or the religious sentiment, the powers of persons are no longer subjects
of calculation. A nation of men unanimously bent on freedom or conquest can easily confound
the arithmetic of statists, and achieve extravagant actions, out of all proportion to their
means; as the Greeks, the Saracens, the Swiss, the Americans, and the French have done.

In like manner to every particle of property belongs its own attraction. A cent is the representative
of a certain quantity of corn or other commodity. Its value is in the necessities of the animal
man. It is so much warmth, so much bread, so much water, so much land. The law may do what
it will with the owner of property; its just power will still attach to the cent. The law may
in a mad freak say that all shall have power except the owners of property; they shall have
no vote. Nevertheless, by a higher law, the property will, year after year, write every statute
that respects property. The non-proprietor will be the scribe of the proprietor. What the owners
wish to do, the whole power of property will do, either through the law or else in defiance
of it. Of course I speak of all the property, not merely of the great estates. When the rich
are outvoted, as frequently happens, it is the joint treasury of the poor which exceeds their
accumulations. Every man owns something, if it is only a cow, or a wheel-barrow, or his arms,
and so has that property to dispose of.

The same necessity which secures the rights of person and property against the malignity or
folly of the magistrate, determines the form and methods of governing, which are proper to
each nation and to its habit of thought, and nowise transferable to other states of society.
In this country we are very vain of our political institutions, which are singular in this,
that they sprung, within the memory of living men, from the character and condition of the
people, which they still express with sufficient fidelity,--and we ostentatiously prefer them
to any other in history. Not until they reached the Penniman gate did she issue from this abstraction
to ask the Wilbur twin rather severely what lesson he had learned from the morning sermon. The
Wilbur twin, with immense difficulty, brought her to believe that he had not heard a word
of the sermon. This was especially incredible, because it had dealt with the parable of the prodigal
son who spent all his substance in riotous living. One would have thought, said Winona, that
this lesson would have come home to one who had so lately followed the same bad course, and
she sought now to enlighten the offender.

"And he had to eat with the pigs when his money was all gone," Merle submitted in an effort
to aid Winona.

But the Wilbur twin's perverse mind merely ran to the picture of fatted calf, though without relish--he
did not like fat meat.

It was good to be back in a human atmosphere once more, where he could hear his father's quips.
The Penniman Sunday dinner was based notably on chicken, as were all other Sunday dinners in
Newbern, and his father, when he entered the house, was already beginning the gayety by pledging
Mrs. Penniman in a wineglass of the Ajax Invigorator. He called it ruby liquor and said that, taken in
moderation, it would harm no one, though he estimated that as few as three glasses would cause
people to climb trees like a monkey.

The Wilbur twin was puzzled by this and would have preferred that his present be devoted solely
to making a new man of Judge Penniman, but he laughed loyally with his father, and rejoiced when Mrs.
Penniman, in the character of the abandoned duchess, put her own lips to the glass at his father's
urging. The judge did not enter into this spirit of foolery, resenting, indeed, that a sound medicinal
compound should be thus impugned. And Winona was even more severe. Not for her to-day were jests
about Madame la Marquise and her heart of adamant. Dave Cowan tried a few of these without result.

Winona
was still silent with importance, or spoke cryptically, and she lavished upon the Merle twin such
attention as she could give from her own mysterious calculations. One might have gathered that
she was beholding the Merle twin in some high new light. The Wilbur twin ate silently and as
unobtrusively as he could, for table manners were especially watched by Winona on Sunday. Not
until the blackberry pie did he break into speech, and even then, it appeared, not with the
utmost felicity. His information that these here blackberries had been picked off the grave
of some old Jonas Whipple up in the burying ground caused him to be regarded coldly by more
than one of those about the table; and Winona wished to be told how many times she had asked him
not to say "these here." Of course he couldn't tell her.

Dinner over, it appeared that Winona would take Merle with her to call upon poor old Mrs. Dodwell,
who had been bedridden for twenty years, but was so patient with it all. She loved to have
Merle sit by her bedside of a Sunday and tell of the morning's sermon. They would also take
her a custard. The Wilbur twin was not invited upon this excursion, but his father winked at him
when it was mentioned and he was happy. He could in no manner have edified the afflicted Mrs.
Dodwell, and the wink meant that he would go with his father for a walk over the hills--perhaps
to the gypsy camp. So he winked back at his father, being no longer in Sunday-school, and was impatient
to be off.

In the little house he watched from a window until Winona and Merle
had gone on their errand of mercy--Merle carrying nicely the bowl
of custard swathed in a napkin--and thereupon heartily divested himself
of shoes and stockings.

Winona, for some reason she could never make apparent to him, believed that boys could not
decently go barefoot on the Lord's Day. He did not wish to affront her, but neither would
he wear shoes and stockings with no one to make him. His bare feet rejoiced at the cool touch
of the grass as he waited in the front yard for his father. He would have liked to change his
Sunday clothes for the old ones of a better feel, but this even he felt would be going too far.
You had to draw the line somewhere.

His father came out, lighting his calabash pipe. He wore a tweed cap now in place of the formal
derby, but he was otherwise attired as on the previous evening, in the blue coal and vivid
waistcoat, the inferior trousers, and the undesirable shoes. As they went down the street under shading
elms the dog, Frank, capered at the end of his taut leash.

They went up Fair Street to reach the wooded hills beyond the town. The street was still and vacant.
The neat white houses with green blinds set back in their flowered yards would be at this hour
sheltering people who had eaten heavily of chicken for dinner and now dozed away its benign effects.
Even song birds had stilled their pipings, and made but brief flights through the sultry air.

Dave Cowan sauntered through the silence in a glow of genial tolerance for the small town, for Dave
knew cities. In Newbern he was but a merry transient; indeed, in all those strange cities he
went off to he was but a transient. So frequent his flittings, none could claim him for its
own. He had the air of being in the world itself, but a transient, a cheerful and observant explorer
finding entertainment in the manners and customs of a curious tribe, its foibles, conceits,
and quaint standards of value--since the most of them curiously adhered to one spot even though
the round earth invited them to wander.

Sometimes Dave lingered in Newbern--to the benefit of the Weekly Advance--for as long as three
months. Sometimes he declared he would stay but a day and stayed long; sometimes he declared
he would stay a long time and stayed but a day. He was a creature happily pliant to the rule of
all his whims. He never bothered to know why he dropped into Newbern, nor bothered to know why
he left. On some morning like other mornings, without plan, he would know he was going and go,
stirred by some vagrant longing for a strange city--and it was so easy to go. He was unencumbered
with belongings. He had no troublesome packing to do, and took not even the smallest of bags
in his farings forth. Unlike the twins, Dave had no Sunday clothes. What clothes he had he wore, very
sensibly, it seemed to him. He had but to go on and on, equipped with his union card and his printer's
steel rule, the sole machinery of his trade, and where he would linger he was welcome, for
as long as he chose and at a wage ample for his few needs, to embalm the doings of a queer world
in type. Little wonder he should always obey the wander-bidding.

They passed a place where the head of the clan, having dined, had been overtaken with lethargy
and in a hammock on his porch was asleep in a public and noisy manner.

"Small-town stuff!" murmured Dave, amiably contemptuous.

The Wilbur twin could never understand why his father called Newbern a small town. They came to
the end of Fair Street, where the white houses dwindled into open country. The road led away
from the river and climbed the gentle slope of West Hill. The Wilbur twin had climbed that
slope the day before under auspices that he now recalled with disgust. Beyond, at the top of
the hill, its chimneys lifted above the trees and its red walls showing warmly through the
cool green of its shading foliage, was the Whipple New Place. To the left, across the western end of
the little town and capping another hill, was the Whipple Old Place, where dwelt Sharon Whipple
and his daughter, Juliana. The walls of the Whipple Old Place were more weathered, of a duller
red. The two places looked down upon the town quite as castles of old looked down upon their feudatories.

"I
was right inside that house yesterday," said the Wilbur twin, pointing to the Whipple New Place and
boasting a little--he would not have to reveal the dreadful details of his entry. "Right inside
of it," he added to make sure that his father would get all his importance. But the father seemed
not enough impressed.

"You'll probably go into better houses than that some day," he merely said, and added: "You
learn a good trade like mine and you can always go anywhere; always
make your good money and be more independent than Whipples or even
kings in their palaces.

Remember that, Sputterboy."

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur.

His father never addressed the Merle twin by any but his rightful name, nor did he ever address
the other by the one the dead mother had affixed to him, miscalling him by a number of titles,
among which were Sputterboy, Gig, Doctor, and Bill.

Before ascending quite to the Whipple New Place they left the dusty road for a path that led
over a lawnlike stretch of upland, starred with buttercups and tiny anemones, and inhabited
by a colony of gophers that instantly engaged Frank, the dog, now free of his leash, in futile
dashes. They stood erect, with languidly drooped paws, until he was too near; then they were
inexplicably not there. Frank at length divined that they unfairly achieved these disappearances
by descending into caverns beneath the surface of the earth. At first, with frantic claws
and eager squeals, he tore at the entrances to these until the prey appeared at exits farther on,
only to repeat the disappearance when dashed at. Frank presently
saw the chase to be hopeless.

It was no good digging for something that wouldn't be there.

"There's life for you, Doctor," said Dave Cowan. "Life has to live on life, humans same as
dogs. Life is something that keeps tearing itself down and building itself up again; everybody
killing something else and eating it. Do you understand that?"

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur, believing he did. Dogs killed gophers if they caught them, and human beings
killed chickens for Sunday dinners.

"Humans are the best killers of all," said Dave. "That's the reason they came up from monkeys, and
got civilized so they wear neckties and have religion and post offices and all such."

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur.

They climbed to a green height and reclined on the cool sward in the shade of a beech tree.
Here they could pick out the winding of the quick little river between its green banks far below,
and look across the roofs of slumbrous Newbern. The Wilbur twin could almost pick out the Penniman
house. Then he looked up, and low in the sky he surprisingly beheld the moon, an orb of pale
bronze dulled from its night shine. Never before had he seen the moon by day. He had supposed
it was in the sky only at night. So his father lectured now on astronomy and the cosmos. It seemed
that the moon was always there, or about there, a lonesome old thing, because there was no life
on it. Dave spoke learnedly, for his Sunday paper had devoted a page to something of this sort.

"Everything
is electricity or something," said Dave, "and it crackles and works on itself until it makes
star dust, and it shakes this together till it makes lumps, and they float round, and pretty
soon they're big lumps like the moon and like this little ball of star dust we're riding on--and
there are millions of them out there all round and about, some a million times bigger than
this little one, and they all whirl and whirl, the little ones whirling round the big ones
and the big ones whirling round still bigger ones, dancing and swinging and going off to some
place that no one knows anything about; and some are old and have lost their people; and some
are too young to have any people yet; but millions like this one
have people, and on some they are a million years older than we are,
and know everything that it'll take us a million years to find out;
but even they haven't begun to really know anything--compared with
what they don't know.

They'll have to go on forever finding out things about what it all means. Do you understand
that, Bill?"

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur.

"Do you understand how people like us get on these whirling lumps?"

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur.

"How do they?"

"No, sir," said Wilbur.

"Well, it's simple enough. This star dust shakes together, and pretty soon some of it gets to be one
chemical and some of it gets to be another, like water and salt and lime and phosphorus and
stuff like that, and it gets together in little combinations and it makes little animals, so
little you couldn't see them, and they get together and make bigger animals, and pretty soon they
have brains and stomachs--and there you are. This electricity or something that shook the star dust together
and made the chemicals, and shook the chemicals together and made the animals--well, it's fierce stuff.
It wants to find out all about itself.

It keeps making animals with bigger brains all the time, so it can examine itself and write
books about itself--but the animals have to be good killers, or something else kills them. This
electricity that makes 'em don't care which kills which. It knows the best killer will have the
best brain in the long run; that's all it cares about. It's a good sporty scheme, all right.
Do you understand that, Doctor?"

"Yes, sir," said Wilbur.

"Everything's got a fair chance to kill; this power shows no favours to anything. If gophers
could kill dogs it would rather have gophers; when microbes kill us it will rather have microbes
than people. It just wants a winner and don't care a snap which it is."

"Yes, sir."

"Of course, now, you hear human people swell and brag and strut round about how they are different
from the animals and have something they call a soul that the animals haven't got, but that's
just the natural conceit of this electricity or something before it has found out much about
itself. Not different from the animals, you ain't. This tree I'm leaning against is your second
or third cousin. Only difference, you can walk and talk and see.

Understand?"

     

     
     "Yes, sir," said Wilbur. "Couldn't
     we go up to the gypsy camp now?"
     
     Dave refilled the calabash pipe,
     lighted it, and held the
     match while it burned out.
     
     "That fire came from the sun," he said.
     "We're only burning matches ourselves--burning with a little fire
from the sun.

Pretty soon it flickers out."

"It's just over this next hill, and they got circus wagons and a fire where they cook their
dinners, right outdoors, and fighting roosters, and tell your fortune."

Dave
rose.

"Of course I don't say I know it all yet. There's a catch in
it I haven't figured out. But I'm right as far as I've gone. You can't
go wrong if you take the facts and stay by 'em and don't read books
that leave the facts to one side, like most books do."

"Yes, sir,"
said Wilbur, "and they sleep inside their wagons and I wish we had
a wagon like that and drove round the country and lived in it."

"All
right," said his father. "Stir your stumps."

They followed the path
that led up over another little hill winding through clumps of hazel
brush and a sparse growth of oak and beech. From the summit of this
they could see the gypsy camp below them, in an open glade by the
roadside. It was as the Wilbur twin had said: there were gayly-painted
wagons--houses on wheels--and a campfire and tethered horses and the
lolling gypsies themselves. About the outskirts loafed a dozen or
so of the less socially eligible of Newbern. Above a fire at the camp
centre a kettle simmered on its pothook, being stirred at this moment
by a brown and aged crone in frivolous-patterned calico, who wore
gold hoops in her ears and bangles at her neck and bracelets of silver
on her arms--bejewelled, indeed, most unbecomingly for a person of
her years.

The Wilbur twin would have lingered on the edge of the
glade with other local visitors, a mere silent observer of this delightful
life; he had not dreamed of being accepted as a social equal by such
exalted beings. But his father stalked boldly through the outer ring
of spectators to the camp's centre and genially hailed the aged woman,
who, on first looking up from her cookery, held out a withered palm
for the silver that should buy him secrets of his future.

But Dave
Cowan merely preened his beautiful yellow moustache at her and said,
"How's business, Mother?" Whereupon she saw that Dave was not a villager
to be wheedled by her patter. She recognized him, indeed, as belonging
like herself to the freemasonry of them that know men and cities,
and she spoke to him as one human to another.

"Business been pretty
rotten here," she said as she stirred the kettle's contents. "Oh,
we made two-three pretty good horse trades--nothing much. We go on
to a bigger town to-morrow."

A male gypsy in corduroy trousers and
scarlet sash and calico shirt open on his brown throat came to the
fire now, and the Wilbur twin admiringly noted that his father greeted
this rare being, too, as an equal. The gypsy held beneath an arm a
trim young gamecock feathered in rich browns and reds, with a hint
of black, and armed with needle-pointed spurs. He stroked the neck
of the bird and sat on his haunches with Dave before the fire to discuss
affairs of the road; for he, too, divined at a glance that Dave was
here but a gypsy transient, even though he spoke a different lingo.

The
Wilbur twin sat also on his haunches before the fire, and thrilled
with pride as his father spoke easily of distant strange cities that
the gypsies also knew; cities of the North where summer found them,
and cities of the South to which they fared in winter. He had always
been proud of his father, but never so proud as now, when he sat there
talking to real gypsies as if they were no greater than any one. He
was quite ashamed when the gypsies' dog, a gaunt, hungry-looking beast,
narrowly escaped being eaten up by his own dog. But Frank, at the
sheer verge of a deplorable offense, implicitly obeyed his master's
command and forbore to destroy the gypsy mongrel. Again he flopped
to his back at the interested approach of the other dog, held four
limp paws aloft, and simpered at the stranger.

Other gypsies, male
and female, came to the group about the fire, and lively chatter ensued,
a continuous flashing of white teeth and shaking of golden ear hoops
and rattling of silver bracelets. The Wilbur twin fondly noted that
his father knew every city the gypsies knew, and even told them the
advantages of some to which they had not penetrated. He gathered this
much of the talk, though much was beyond him. He kept close to his
father's side when the latter took his leave of these new friends. Long afterwards I find that quality elsewhere
which he promised me. The genius of the Platonists is intoxicating to the student, yet how
few particulars of it can I detach from all their books. The man momentarily stands for the
thought, but will not bear examination; and a society of men will cursorily represent well
enough a certain quality and culture, for example, chivalry or beauty of manners; but separate
them and there is no gentleman and no lady in the group. The least hint sets us on the pursuit
of a character which no man realizes. We have such exorbitant eyes that on seeing the smallest
arc we complete the curve, and when the curtain is lifted from the diagram which it seemed
to veil, we are vexed to find that no more was drawn than just that fragment of an arc which
we first beheld. We are greatly too liberal in our construction of each other's faculty and
promise. Exactly what the parties have already done they shall do again; but that which we
inferred from their nature and inception, they will not do. That is in nature, but not in them.
That happens in the world, which we often witness in a public debate. Each of the speakers
expresses himself imperfectly; no one of them hears much that another says, such is the preoccupation
of mind of each; and the audience, who have only to hear and not to speak, judge very wisely
and superiorly how wrongheaded and unskilful is each of the debaters to his own affair. Great
men or men of great gifts you shall easily find, but symmetrical men never. When I meet a pure
intellectual force or a generosity of affection, I believe here then is man; and am presently
mortified by the discovery that this individual is no more available to his own or to the general
ends than his companions; because the power which drew my respect is not supported by the total
symphony of his talents. All persons exist to society by some shining trait of beauty or utility
which they have. We borrow the proportions of the man from that one fine feature, and finish
the portrait symmetrically; which is false, for the rest of his body is small or deformed.
I observe a person who makes a good public appearance, and conclude thence the perfection of
his private character, on which this is based; but he has no private character. He is a graceful
cloak or lay-figure for holidays. All our poets, heroes, and saints, fail utterly in some one
or in many parts to satisfy our idea, fail to draw our spontaneous interest, and so leave us
without any hope of realization but in our own future. Our exaggeration of all fine characters
arises from the fact that we identify each in turn with the soul. But there are no such men
as we fable; no Jesus, nor Pericles, nor Caesar, nor Angelo, nor Washington, such as we have
made. We consecrate a great deal of nonsense because it was allowed by great men. There is
none without his foible. I verily believe if an angel should come to chant the chorus of the
moral law, he would eat too much gingerbread, or take liberties with private letters, or do
some precious atrocity. It is bad enough that our geniuses cannot do anything useful, but it
is worse that no man is fit for society who has fine traits. He is admired at a distance, but
he cannot come near without appearing a cripple. The men of fine parts protect themselves by
solitude, or by courtesy, or by satire, or by an acid worldly manner, each concealing as he
best can his incapacity for useful association, but they want either love or self-reliance.

Our native love of reality joins with this experience to teach us a little reserve, and to
dissuade a too sudden surrender to the brilliant qualities of persons. Young people admire
talents or particular excellences; as we grow older we value total powers and effects, as the
impression, the quality, the spirit of men and things. The genius is all. The man,--it is his
system: we do not try a solitary word or act, but his habit. The acts which you praise, I praise
not, since they are departures from his faith, and are mere compliances. The magnetism which
arranges tribes and races in one polarity is alone to be respected; the men are steel-filings.
Yet we unjustly select a particle, and say, 'O steel-filing number one! what heart-drawings
I feel to thee! what prodigious virtues are these of thine! how constitutional to thee, and
incommunicable.' Whilst we speak the loadstone is withdrawn; down falls our filing in a heap
with the rest, and we continue our mummery to the wretched shaving. Let us go for universals;
for the magnetism, not for the needles. Human life and its persons are poor empirical pretensions.
A personal influence is an ignis fatuus. If they say it is great, it is great; if they say
it is small, it is small; you see it, and you see it not, by turns; it borrows all its size
from the momentary estimation of the speakers: the Will-of-the-wisp vanishes if you go too
near, vanishes if you go too far, and only blazes at one angle. Who can tell if Washington
be a great man or no? Who can tell if Franklin be? Yes, or any but the twelve, or six, or three
great gods of fame? And they too loom and fade before the eternal.

We are amphibious creatures, weaponed for two elements, having two sets of faculties, the particular
and the catholic. We adjust our instrument for general observation, and sweep the heavens as
easily as we pick out a single figure in the terrestrial landscape. We are practically skilful
in detecting elements for which we have no place in our theory, and no name. Thus we are very
sensible of an atmospheric influence in men and in bodies of men, not accounted for in an arithmetical
addition of all their measurable properties. There is a genius of a nation, which is not to
be found in the numerical citizens, but which characterizes the society. England, strong, punctual,
practical, well-spoken England I should not find if I should go to the island to seek it. In
the parliament, in the play-house, at dinner-tables, I might see a great number of rich, ignorant,
book-read, conventional, proud men,--many old women,--and not anywhere the Englishman who made
the good speeches, combined the accurate engines, and did the bold and nervous deeds. It is
even worse in America, where, from the intellectual quickness of the race, the genius of the
country is more splendid in its promise and more slight in its performance. Webster cannot
do the work of Webster. We conceive distinctly enough the French, the Spanish, the German genius,
and it is not the less real that perhaps we should not meet in either of those nations a single
individual who corresponded with the type. We infer the spirit of the nation in great measure
from the language, which is a sort of monument to which each forcible individual in a course
of many hundred years has contributed a stone. And, universally, a good example of this social
force is the veracity of language, which cannot be debauched. In any controversy concerning
morals, an appeal may be made with safety to the sentiments which the language of the people
expresses. Proverbs, words, and grammar-inflections convey the public sense with more purity
and precision than the wisest individual.

In the famous dispute with the Nominalists, the Realists had a good deal of reason. General
ideas are essences. They are our gods: they round and ennoble the most partial and sordid way
of living. Our proclivity to details cannot quite degrade our life and divest it of poetry.
The day-laborer is reckoned as standing at the foot of the social scale, yet he is saturated
with the laws of the world. His measures are the hours; morning and night, solstice and equinox,
geometry, astronomy and all the lovely accidents of nature play through his mind. Money, which
represents the prose of life, and which is hardly spoken of in parlors without an apology,
is, in its effects and laws, as beautiful as roses. Property keeps the accounts of the world,
and is always moral. The property will be found where the labor, the wisdom, and the virtue
have been in nations, in classes, and (the whole life-time considered, with the compensations)
in the individual also. How wise the world appears, when the laws and usages of nations are
largely detailed, and the completeness of the municipal system is considered! Nothing is left
out. If you go into the markets and the custom-houses, the insurers' and notaries' offices,
the offices of sealers of weights and measures, of inspection of provisions,--it will appear
as if one man had made it all. Wherever you go, a wit like your own has been before you, and
has realized its thought. The Eleusinian mysteries, the Egyptian architecture, the Indian astronomy,
the Greek sculpture, show that there always were seeing and knowing men in the planet. The
world is full of masonic ties, of guilds, of secret and public legions of honor; that of scholars,
for example; and that of gentlemen, fraternizing with the upper class of every country and
every culture.

I am very much struck in literature by the appearance that one person wrote all the books;
as if the editor of a journal planted his body of reporters in different parts of the field
of action, and relieved some by others from time to time; but there is such equality and identity
both of judgment and point of view in the narrative that it is plainly the work of one all-seeing,
all-hearing gentleman. I looked into Pope's Odyssey yesterday: it is as correct and elegant
after our canon of to-day as if it were newly written. The modernness of all good books seems
to give me an existence as wide as man. What is well done I feel as if I did; what is ill done
I reck not of. Shakspeare's passages of passion (for example, in Lear and Hamlet) are in the
very dialect of the present year. I am faithful again to the whole over the members in my use
of books. I find the most pleasure in reading a book in a manner least flattering to the author.
I read Proclus, and sometimes Plato, as I might read a dictionary, for a mechanical help to
the fancy and the imagination. I read for the lustres, as if one should use a fine picture
in a chromatic experiment, for its rich colors. 'Tis not Proclus, but a piece of nature and
fate that I explore. It is a greater joy to see the author's author, than himself. A higher
pleasure of the same kind I found lately at a concert, where I went to hear Handel's Messiah.
As the master overpowered the littleness and incapableness of the performers and made them
conductors of his electricity, so it was easy to observe what efforts nature was making, through
so many hoarse, wooden, and imperfect persons, to produce beautiful voices, fluid and soul-guided
men and women. The genius of nature was paramount at the oratorio.

This preference of the genius to the parts is the secret of that deification of art, which
is found in all superior minds. Art, in the artist, is proportion, or a habitual respect to
the whole by an eye loving beauty in details. And the wonder and charm of it is the sanity
in insanity which it denotes. Proportion is almost impossible to human beings. There is no
one who does not exaggerate. In conversation, men are encumbered with personality, and talk
too much. In modern sculpture, picture, and poetry, the beauty is miscellaneous; the artist
works here and there and at all points, adding and adding, instead of unfolding the unit of
his thought. Beautiful details we must have, or no artist; but they must be means and never
other. The eye must not lose sight for a moment of the purpose. Lively boys write to their
ear and eye, and the cool reader finds nothing but sweet jingles in it. When they grow older,
they respect the argument.

We obey the same intellectual integrity when we study in exceptions the law of the world. Anomalous
facts, as the never quite obsolete rumors of magic and demonology, and the new allegations
of phrenologists and neurologists, are of ideal use. They are good indications. Homoeopathy
is insignificant as an art of healing, but of great value as criticism on the hygeia or medical
practice of the time. So with Mesmerism, Swedenborgism, Fourierism, and the Millennial Church;
they are poor pretensions enough, but good criticism on the science, philosophy, and preaching
of the day. For these abnormal insights of the adepts ought to be normal, and things of course.

All things show us that on every side we are very near to the best. It seems not worth while
to execute with too much pains some one intellectual, or aesthetical, or civil feat, when presently
the dream will scatter, and we shall burst into universal power. The reason of idleness and
of crime is the deferring of our hopes. Whilst we are waiting we beguile the time with jokes,
with sleep, with eating, and with crimes.

Thus we settle it in our cool libraries, that all the agents with which we deal are subalterns,
which we can well afford to let pass, and life will be simpler when we live at the centre and
flout the surfaces. I wish to speak with all respect of persons, but sometimes I must pinch
myself to keep awake and preserve the due decorum. They melt so fast into each other that they
are like grass and trees, and it needs an effort to treat them as individuals. Though the uninspired
man certainly finds persons a conveniency in household matters, the divine man does not respect
them; he sees them as a rack of clouds, or a fleet of ripples which the wind drives over the
surface of the water. But this is flat rebellion. Nature will not be Buddhist: she resents
generalizing, and insults the philosopher in every moment with a million of fresh particulars.
It is all idle talking: as much as a man is a whole, so is he also a part; and it were partial
not to see it. What you say in your pompous distribution only distributes you into your class
and section. You have not got rid of parts by denying them, but are the more partial. You are
one thing, but Nature is one thing and the other thing, in the same moment. She will not remain
orbed in a thought, but rushes into persons; and when each person, inflamed to a fury of personality,
would conquer all things to his poor crotchet, she raises up against him another person, and
by many persons incarnates again a sort of whole. She will have all. Nick Bottom cannot play
all the parts, work it how he may; there will be somebody else, and the world will be round.
Everything must have its flower or effort at the beautiful, coarser or finer according to its
stuff. They relieve and recommend each other, and the sanity of society is a balance of a thousand
insanities. She punishes abstractionists, and will only forgive an induction which is rare
and casual. We like to come to a height of land and see the landscape, just as we value a general
remark in conversation. But it is not the intention of Nature that we should live by general
views. We fetch fire and water, run about all day among the shops and markets, and get our
clothes and shoes made and mended, and are the victims of these details; and once in a fortnight
we arrive perhaps at a rational moment. If we were not thus infatuated, if we saw the real
from hour to hour, we should not be here to write and to read, but should have been burned
or frozen long ago. She would never get anything done, if she suffered admirable Crichtons
and universal geniuses. She loves better a wheelwright who dreams all night of wheels, and
a groom who is part of his horse; for she is full of work, and these are her hands. As the
frugal farmer takes care that his cattle shall eat down the rowen, and swine shall eat the
waste of his house, and poultry shall pick the crumbs,--so our economical mother dispatches
a new genius and habit of mind into every district and condition of existence, plants an eye
wherever a new ray of light can fall, and gathering up into some man every property in the
universe, establishes thousandfold occult mutual attractions among her offspring, that all
this wash and waste of power may be imparted and exchanged.

Great dangers undoubtedly accrue from this incarnation and distribution of the godhead, and
hence Nature has her maligners, as if she were Circe; and Alphonso of Castille fancied he could
have given useful advice. But she does not go unprovided; she has hellebore at the bottom of
the cup. Solitude would ripen a plentiful crop of despots. The recluse thinks of men as having
his manner, or as not having his manner; and as having degrees of it, more and less. But when
he comes into a public assembly he sees that men have very different manners from his own,
and in their way admirable. In his childhood and youth he has had many checks and censures,
and thinks modestly enough of his own endowment. When afterwards he comes to unfold it in propitious
circumstance, it seems the only talent; he is delighted with his success, and accounts himself
already the fellow of the great. But he goes into a mob, into a banking house, into a mechanic's
shop, into a mill, into a laboratory, into a ship, into a camp, and in each new place he is
no better than an idiot; other talents take place, and rule the hour. The rotation which whirls
every leaf and pebble to the meridian, reaches to every gift of man, and we all take turns
at the top.

For Nature, who abhors mannerism, has set her heart on breaking up all styles and tricks, and
it is so much easier to do what one has done before than to do a new thing, that there is a
perpetual tendency to a set mode. In every conversation, even the highest, there is a certain
trick, which may be soon learned by an acute person and then that particular style continued
indefinitely. Each man too is a tyrant in tendency, because he would impose his idea on others;
and their trick is their natural defence. Jesus would absorb the race; but Tom Paine or the
coarsest blasphemer helps humanity by resisting this exuberance of power. Hence the immense
benefit of party in politics, as it reveals faults of character in a chief, which the intellectual
force of the persons, with ordinary opportunity and not hurled into aphelion by hatred, could
not have seen. Since we are all so stupid, what benefit that there should be two stupidities!
It is like that brute advantage so essential to astronomy, of having the diameter of the earth's
orbit for a base of its triangles. Democracy is morose, and runs to anarchy, but in the State
and in the schools it is indispensable to resist the consolidation of all men into a few men.
If John was perfect, why are you and I alive? As long as any man exists, there is some need
of him; let him fight for his own. A new poet has appeared; a new character approached us;
why should we refuse to eat bread until we have found his regiment and section in our old army-files?
Why not a new man? Here is a new enterprise of Brook Farm, of Skeneateles, of Northampton:
why so impatient to baptize them Essenes, or Port-Royalists, or Shakers, or by any known and
effete name? Let it be a new way of living. Why have only two or three ways of life, and not
thousands? Every man is wanted, and no man is wanted much. We came this time for condiments,
not for corn. We want the great genius only for joy; for one star more in our constellation,
for one tree more in our grove. But he thinks we wish to belong to him, as he wishes to occupy
us. He greatly mistakes us. I think I have done well if I have acquired a new word from a good
author; and my business with him is to find my own, though it were only to melt him down into
an epithet or an image for daily use:--

     "Into paint will I grind thee, my bride!"

To embroil the confusion, and make it impossible to arrive at any general statement,--when
we have insisted on the imperfection of individuals, our affections and our experience urge
that every individual is entitled to honor, and a very generous treatment is sure to be repaid.
A recluse sees only two or three persons, and allows them all their room; they spread themselves
at large. The statesman looks at many, and compares the few habitually with others, and these
look less. Yet are they not entitled to this generosity of reception? and is not munificence
the means of insight? For though gamesters say that the cards beat all the players, though
they were never so skilful, yet in the contest we are now considering, the players are also
the game, and share the power of the cards. If you criticise a fine genius, the odds are that
you are out of your reckoning, and instead of the poet, are censuring your own caricature of
him. For there is somewhat spheral and infinite in every man, especially in every genius, which,
if you can come very near him, sports with all your limitations. For rightly every man is a
channel through which heaven floweth, and whilst I fancied I was criticising him, I was censuring
or rather terminating my own soul. After taxing Goethe as a courtier, artificial, unbelieving,
worldly,--I took up this book of Helena, and found him an Indian of the wilderness, a piece
of pure nature like an apple or an oak, large as morning or night, and virtuous as a brier-rose.

But care is taken that the whole tune shall be played. If we were not kept among surfaces,
every thing would be large and universal; now the excluded attributes burst in on us with the
more brightness that they have been excluded. "Your turn now, my turn next," is the rule of
the game. The universality being hindered in its primary form, comes in the secondary form
of all sides; the points come in succession to the meridian, and by the speed of rotation a
new whole is formed. Nature keeps herself whole and her representation complete in the experience
of each mind. She suffers no seat to be vacant in her college. It is the secret of the world
that all things subsist and do not die but only retire a little from sight and afterwards return
again. Whatever does not concern us is concealed from us. As soon as a person is no longer
related to our present well-being, he is concealed, or dies, as we say. Really, all things
and persons are related to us, but according to our nature they act on us not at once but in
succession, and we are made aware of their presence one at a time. All persons, all things
which we have known, are here present, and many more than we see; the world is full. As the
ancient said, the world is a plenum or solid; and if we saw all things that really surround
us we should be imprisoned and unable to move. For though nothing is impassable to the soul,
but all things are pervious to it and like highways, yet this is only whilst the soul does
not see them. As soon as the soul sees any object, it stops before that object. Therefore,
the divine Providence which keeps the universe open in every direction to the soul, conceals
all the furniture and all the persons that do not concern a particular soul, from the senses
of that individual. Through solidest eternal things the man finds his road as if they did not
subsist, and does not once suspect their being. As soon as he needs a new object, suddenly
he beholds it, and no longer attempts to pass through it, but takes another way. When he has
exhausted for the time the nourishment to be drawn from any one person or thing, that object
is withdrawn from his observation, and though still in his immediate neighborhood, he does
not suspect its presence. Nothing is dead: men feign themselves dead, and endure mock funerals
and mournful obituaries, and there they stand looking out of the window, sound and well, in
some new and strange disguise. Jesus is not dead; he is very well alive: nor John, nor Paul,
nor Mahomet, nor Aristotle; at times we believe we have seen them all, and could easily tell
the names under which they go.

If we cannot make voluntary and conscious steps in the admirable science of universals, let
us see the parts wisely, and infer the genius of nature from the best particulars with a becoming
charity. What is best in each kind is an index of what should be the average of that thing.
Love shows me the opulence of nature, by disclosing to me in my friend a hidden wealth, and
I infer an equal depth of good in every other direction. It is commonly said by farmers that
a good pear or apple costs no more time or pains to rear than a poor one; so I would have no
work of art, no speech, or action, or thought, or friend, but the best.

The end and the means, the gamester and the game,--life is made up of the intermixture and
reaction of these two amicable powers, whose marriage appears beforehand monstrous, as each
denies and tends to abolish the other. We must reconcile the contradictions as we can, but
their discord and their concord introduce wild absurdities into our thinking and speech. No
sentence will hold the whole truth, and the only way in which we can be just, is by giving
ourselves the lie; Speech is better than silence; silence is better than speech;--All things
are in contact; every atom has a sphere of repulsion;--Things are, and are not, at the same
time;--and the like. All the universe over, there is but one thing, this old Two-Face, creator-creature,
mind-matter, right-wrong, of which any proposition may be affirmed or denied. Very fitly therefore
I assert that every man is a partialist, that nature secures him as an instrument by self-conceit,
preventing the tendencies to religion and science; and now further assert, that, each man's
genius being nearly and affectionately explored, he is justified in his individuality, as his
nature is found to be immense; and now I add that every man is a universalist also, and, as
our earth, whilst it spins on its own axis, spins all the time around the sun through the celestial
spaces, so the least of its rational children, the most dedicated to his private affair, works
out, though as it were under a disguise, the universal problem. We fancy men are individuals;
so are pumpkins; but every pumpkin in the field goes through every point of pumpkin history.
The rabid democrat, as soon as he is senator and rich man, has ripened beyond possibility of
sincere radicalism, and unless he can resist the sun, he must be conservative the remainder
of his days. Lord Eldon said in his old age that "if he were to begin life again, he would
be damned but he would begin as agitator."

We hide this universality if we can, but it appears at all points. We are as ungrateful as
children. There is nothing we cherish and strive to draw to us but in some hour we turn and
rend it. We keep a running fire of sarcasm at ignorance and the life of the senses; then goes
by, perchance, a fair girl, a piece of life, gay and happy, and making the commonest offices
beautiful by the energy and heart with which she does them; and seeing this we admire and love
her and them, and say, 'Lo! a genuine creature of the fair earth, not dissipated or too early
ripened by books, philosophy, religion, society, or care!' insinuating a treachery and contempt
for all we had so long loved and wrought in ourselves and others.

If we could have any security against moods! If the profoundest prophet could be holden to
his words, and the hearer who is ready to sell all and join the crusade could have any certificate
that tomorrow his prophet shall not unsay his testimony! But the Truth sits veiled there on
the Bench, and never interposes an adamantine syllable; and the most sincere and revolutionary
doctrine, put as if the ark of God were carried forward some furlongs, and planted there for
the succor of the world, shall in a few weeks be coldly set aside by the same speaker, as morbid;
"I thought I was right, but I was not,"--and the same immeasurable credulity demanded for new
audacities. If we were not of all opinions! if we did not in any moment shift the platform
on which we stand, and look and speak from another! if there could be any regulation, any 'one-hour-rule,'
that a man should never leave his point of view without sound of trumpet. I am always insincere,
as always knowing there are other moods.

How sincere and confidential we can be, saying all that lies in the mind, and yet go away feeling
that all is yet unsaid, from the incapacity of the parties to know each other, although they
use the same words! My companion assumes to know my mood and habit of thought, and we go on
from explanation to explanation until all is said which words can, and we leave matters just
as they were at first, because of that vicious assumption. Is it that every man believes every
other to be an incurable partialist, and himself a universalist? I talked yesterday with a
pair of philosophers; I endeavored to show my good men that I love everything by turns and
nothing long; that I loved the centre, but doated on the superficies; that I loved man, if
men seemed to me mice and rats; that I revered saints, but woke up glad that the old pagan
world stood its ground and died hard; that I was glad of men of every gift and nobility, but
would not live in their arms. Could they but once understand that I loved to know that they
existed, and heartily wished them God-speed, yet, out of my poverty of life and thought, had
no word or welcome for them when they came to see me, and could well consent to their living
in Oregon, for any claim I felt on them,--it would be a great satisfaction.

*****

     NEW ENGLAND REFORMERS.

     In the suburb, in the town,
     On the railway, in the square,
     Came a beam of goodness down
     Doubling daylight everywhere:
     Peace now each for malice takes,
     Beauty for his sinful weeks,
     For the angel Hope aye makes
     Him an angel whom she leads.

NEW ENGLAND REFORMERS.

A LECTURE READ BEFORE THE SOCIETY IN AMORY HALL, ON SUNDAY, MARCH 3, 1844.

WHOEVER has had opportunity of acquaintance with society in New England during the last twenty-five
years, with those middle and with those leading sections that may constitute any just representation
of the character and aim of the community, will have been struck with the great activity of
thought and experimenting. His attention must be commanded by the signs that the Church, or
religious party, is falling from the Church nominal, and is appearing in temperance and non-resistance
societies; in movements of abolitionists and of socialists; and in very significant assemblies
called Sabbath and Bible Conventions; composed of ultraists, of seekers, of all the soul of
the soldiery of dissent, and meeting to call in question the authority of the Sabbath, of the
priesthood, and of the Church. In these movements nothing was more remarkable than the discontent
they begot in the movers. The spirit of protest and of detachment drove the members of these
Conventions to bear testimony against the Church, and immediately afterward, to declare their
discontent with these Conventions, their independence of their colleagues, and their impatience
of the methods whereby they were working. They defied each other, like a congress of kings,
each of whom had a realm to rule, and a way of his own that made concert unprofitable. What
a fertility of projects for the salvation of the world! One apostle thought all men should
go to farming, and another that no man should buy or sell, that the use of money was the cardinal
evil; another that the mischief was in our diet, that we eat and drink damnation. These made
unleavened bread, and were foes to the death to fermentation. It was in vain urged by the housewife
that God made yeast, as well as dough, and loves fermentation just as dearly as he loves vegetation;
that fermentation develops the saccharine element in the grain, and makes it more palatable
and more digestible. No; they wish the pure wheat, and will die but it shall not ferment. Stop,
dear nature, these incessant advances of thine; let us scotch these ever-rolling wheels! Others
attacked the system of agriculture, the use of animal manures in farming, and the tyranny of
man over brute nature; these abuses polluted his food. The ox must be taken from the plough
and the horse from the cart, the hundred acres of the farm must be spaded, and the man must
walk, wherever boats and locomotives will not carry him. Even the insect world was to be defended,--that
had been too long neglected, and a society for the protection of ground-worms, slugs, and mosquitos
was to be incorporated without delay. With these appeared the adepts of homoeopathy, of hydropathy,
of mesmerism, of phrenology, and their wonderful theories of the Christian miracles! Others
assailed particular vocations, as that of the lawyer, that of the merchant, of the manufacturer,
of the clergyman, of the scholar. Others attacked the institution of marriage as the fountain
of social evils. Others devoted themselves to the worrying of churches and meetings for public
worship; and the fertile forms of antinomianism among the elder puritans seemed to have their
match in the plenty of the new harvest of reform.

With this din of opinion and debate there was a keener scrutiny of institutions and domestic
life than any we had known; there was sincere protesting against existing evils, and there
were changes of employment dictated by conscience. No doubt there was plentiful vaporing, and
cases of backsliding might occur. But in each of these movements emerged a good result, a tendency
to the adoption of simpler methods, and an assertion of the sufficiency of the private man.
Thus it was directly in the spirit and genius of the age, what happened in one instance when
a church censured and threatened to excommunicate one of its members on account of the somewhat
hostile part to the church which his conscience led him to take in the anti-slavery business;
the threatened individual immediately excommunicated the church in a public and formal process.
This has been several times repeated: it was excellent when it was done the first time, but
of course loses all value when it is copied. Every project in the history of reform, no matter
how violent and surprising, is good when it is the dictate of a man's genius and constitution,
but very dull and suspicious when adopted from another. It is right and beautiful in any man
to say, 'I will take this coat, or this book, or this measure of corn of yours,'--in whom we
see the act to be original, and to flow from the whole spirit and faith of him; for then that
taking will have a giving as free and divine; but we are very easily disposed to resist the
same generosity of speech when we miss originality and truth to character in it.

There was in all the practical activities of New England for the last quarter of a century,
a gradual withdrawal of tender consciences from the social organizations. There is observable
throughout, the contest between mechanical and spiritual methods, but with a steady tendency
of the thoughtful and virtuous to a deeper belief and reliance on spiritual facts.

In politics for example it is easy to see the progress of dissent. The country is full of rebellion;
the country is full of kings. Hands off! let there be no control and no interference in the
administration of the affairs of this kingdom of me. Hence the growth of the doctrine and of
the party of Free Trade, and the willingness to try that experiment, in the face of what appear
incontestable facts. I confess, the motto of the Globe newspaper is so attractive to me that
I can seldom find much appetite to read what is below it in its columns: "The world is governed
too much." So the country is frequently affording solitary examples of resistance to the government,
solitary nullifiers, who throw themselves on their reserved rights; nay, who have reserved
all their rights; who reply to the assessor and to the clerk of court that they do not know
the State, and embarrass the courts of law by non-juring and the commander-in-chief of the
militia by non-resistance.

The same disposition to scrutiny and dissent appeared in civil, festive, neighborly, and domestic
society. A restless, prying, conscientious criticism broke out in unexpected quarters. Who
gave me the money with which I bought my coat? Why should professional labor and that of the
counting-house be paid so disproportionately to the labor of the porter and woodsawyer? This
whole business of Trade gives me to pause and think, as it constitutes false relations between
men; inasmuch as I am prone to count myself relieved of any responsibility to behave well and
nobly to that person whom I pay with money; whereas if I had not that commodity, I should be
put on my good behavior in all companies, and man would be a benefactor to man, as being himself
his only certificate that he had a right to those aids and services which each asked of the
other. Am I not too protected a person? is there not a wide disparity between the lot of me
and the lot of thee, my poor brother, my poor sister? Am I not defrauded of my best culture
in the loss of those gymnastics which manual labor and the emergencies of poverty constitute?
I find nothing healthful or exalting in the smooth conventions of society; I do not like the
close air of saloons. I begin to suspect myself to be a prisoner, though treated with all this
courtesy and luxury. I pay a destructive tax in my conformity.

The same insatiable criticism may be traced in the efforts for the reform of Education. The
popular education has been taxed with a want of truth and nature. It was complained that an
education to things was not given. We are students of words: we are shut up in schools, and
colleges, and recitation-rooms, for ten or fifteen years, and come out at last with a bag of
wind, a memory of words, and do not know a thing. We cannot use our hands, or our legs, or
our eyes, or our arms. We do not know an edible root in the woods, we cannot tell our course
by the stars, nor the hour of the day by the sun. It is well if we can swim and skate. We are
afraid of a horse, of a cow, of a dog, of a snake, of a spider. The Roman rule was to teach
a boy nothing that he could not learn standing. The old English rule was, 'All summer in the
field, and all winter in the study.' And it seems as if a man should learn to plant, or to
fish, or to hunt, that he might secure his subsistence at all events, and not be painful to
his friends and fellow-men. The lessons of science should be experimental also. The sight of
the planet through a telescope is worth all the course on astronomy; the shock of the electric
spark in the elbow, outvalues all the theories; the taste of the nitrous oxide, the firing
of an artificial volcano, are better than volumes of chemistry.

One of the traits of the new spirit is the inquisition it fixed on our scholastic devotion
to the dead languages. The ancient languages, with great beauty of structure, contain wonderful
remains of genius, which draw, and always will draw, certain likeminded men,--Greek men, and
Roman men,--in all countries, to their study; but by a wonderful drowsiness of usage they had
exacted the study of all men. Once (say two centuries ago), Latin and Greek had a strict relation
to all the science and culture there was in Europe, and the Mathematics had a momentary importance
at some era of activity in physical science. These things became stereotyped as education,
as the manner of men is. But the Good Spirit never cared for the colleges, and though all men
and boys were now drilled in Latin, Greek, and Mathematics, it had quite left these shells
high and dry on the beach, and was now creating and feeding other matters at other ends of
the world. But in a hundred high schools and colleges this warfare against common sense still
goes on. Four, or six, or ten years, the pupil is parsing Greek and Latin, and as soon as he
leaves the University, as it is ludicrously called, he shuts those books for the last time.
Some thousands of young men are graduated at our colleges in this country every year, and the
persons who, at forty years, still read Greek, can all be counted on your hand. I never met
with ten. Four or five persons I have seen who read Plato.

But is not this absurd, that the whole liberal talent of this country should be directed in
its best years on studies which lead to nothing? What was the consequence? Some intelligent
persons said or thought, 'Is that Greek and Latin some spell to conjure with, and not words
of reason? If the physician, the lawyer, the divine, never use it to come at their ends, I
need never learn it to come at mine. Conjuring is gone out of fashion, and I will omit this
conjugating, and go straight to affairs.' So they jumped the Greek and Latin, and read law,
medicine, or sermons, without it. To the astonishment of all, the self-made men took even ground
at once with the oldest of the regular graduates, and in a few months the most conservative
circles of Boston and New York had quite forgotten who of their gownsmen was college-bred,
and who was not.

One tendency appears alike in the philosophical speculation and in the rudest democratical
movements, through all the petulance and all the puerility, the wish, namely, to cast aside
the superfluous and arrive at short methods; urged, as I suppose, by an intuition that the
human spirit is equal to all emergencies, alone, and that man is more often injured than helped
by the means he uses.

I conceive this gradual casting off of material aids, and the indication of growing trust in
the private self-supplied powers of the individual, to be the affirmative principle of the
recent philosophy, and that it is feeling its own profound truth and is reaching forward at
this very hour to the happiest conclusions. I readily concede that in this, as in every period
of intellectual activity, there has been a noise of denial and protest; much was to be resisted,
much was to be got rid of by those who were reared in the old, before they could begin to affirm
and to construct. Many a reformer perishes in his removal of rubbish; and that makes the offensiveness
of the class. They are partial; they are not equal to the work they pretend. They lose their
way; in the assault on the kingdom of darkness they expend all their energy on some accidental
evil, and lose their sanity and power of benefit. It is of little moment that one or two or
twenty errors of our social system be corrected, but of much that the man be in his senses.

The criticism and attack on institutions, which we have witnessed, has made one thing plain,
that society gains nothing whilst a man, not himself renovated, attempts to renovate things
around him: he has become tediously good in some particular but negligent or narrow in the
rest; and hypocrisy and vanity are often the disgusting result.

It is handsomer to remain in the establishment better than the establishment, and conduct that
in the best manner, than to make a sally against evil by some single improvement, without supporting
it by a total regeneration. Do not be so vain of your one objection. Do you think there is
only one? Alas! my good friend, there is no part of society or of life better than any other
part. All our things are right and wrong together. The wave of evil washes all our institutions
alike. Do you complain of our Marriage? Our marriage is no worse than our education, our diet,
our trade, our social customs. Do you complain of the laws of Property? It is a pedantry to
give such importance to them. Can we not play the game of life with these counters, as well
as with those? in the institution of property, as well as out of it? Let into it the new and
renewing principle of love, and property will be universality. No one gives the impression
of superiority to the institution, which he must give who will reform it. It makes no difference
what you say, you must make me feel that you are aloof from it; by your natural and supernatural
advantages do easily see to the end of it,--do see how man can do without it. Now all men are
on one side. No man deserves to be heard against property. Only Love, only an Idea, is against
property as we hold it.

I cannot afford to be irritable and captious, nor to waste all my time in attacks. If I should
go out of church whenever I hear a false sentiment I could never stay there five minutes. But
why come out? the street is as false as the church, and when I get to my house, or to my manners,
or to my speech, I have not got away from the lie. When we see an eager assailant of one of
these wrongs, a special reformer, we feel like asking him, What right have you, sir, to your
one virtue? Is virtue piecemeal? This is a jewel amidst the rags of a beggar.

In another way the right will be vindicated. In the midst of abuses, in the heart of cities,
in the aisles of false churches, alike in one place and in another,--wherever, namely, a just
and heroic soul finds itself, there it will do what is next at hand, and by the new quality
of character it shall put forth it shall abrogate that old condition, law or school in which
it stands, before the law of its own mind.

If partiality was one fault of the movement party, the other defect was their reliance on Association.
Doubts such as those I have intimated drove many good persons to agitate the questions of social
reform. But the revolt against the spirit of commerce, the spirit of aristocracy, and the inveterate
abuses of cities, did not appear possible to individuals; and to do battle against numbers
they armed themselves with numbers, and against concert they relied on new concert.

Following or advancing beyond the ideas of St. Simon, of Fourier, and of Owen, three communities
have already been formed in Massachusetts on kindred plans, and many more in the country at
large. They aim to give every member a share in the manual labor, to give an equal reward to
labor and to talent, and to unite a liberal culture with an education to labor. The scheme
offers, by the economies of associated labor and expense, to make every member rich, on the
same amount of property, that, in separate families, would leave every member poor. These new
associations are composed of men and women of superior talents and sentiments; yet it may easily
be questioned whether such a community will draw, except in its beginnings, the able and the
good; whether those who have energy will not prefer their chance of superiority and power in
the world, to the humble certainties of the association; whether such a retreat does not promise
to become an asylum to those who have tried and failed, rather than a field to the strong;
and whether the members will not necessarily be fractions of men, because each finds that he
cannot enter it, without some compromise. Friendship and association are very fine things,
and a grand phalanx of the best of the human race, banded for some catholic object; yes, excellent;
but remember that no society can ever be so large as one man. He, in his friendship, in his
natural and momentary associations, doubles or multiplies himself; but in the hour in which
he mortgages himself to two or ten or twenty, he dwarfs himself below the stature of one.

But the men of less faith could not thus believe, and to such, concert appears the sole specific
of strength. I have failed, and you have failed, but perhaps together we shall not fail. Our
housekeeping is not satisfactory to us, but perhaps a phalanx, a community, might be. Many
of us have differed in opinion, and we could find no man who could make the truth plain, but
possibly a college, or an ecclesiastical council might. I have not been able either to persuade
my brother or to prevail on myself, to disuse the traffic or the potation of brandy, but perhaps
a pledge of total abstinence might effectually restrain us. The candidate my party votes for
is not to be trusted with a dollar, but he will be honest in the Senate, for we can bring public
opinion to bear on him. Thus concert was the specific in all cases. But concert is neither
better nor worse, neither more nor less potent than individual force. All the men in the world
cannot make a statue walk and speak, cannot make a drop of blood, or a blade of grass, any
more than one man can. But let there be one man, let there be truth in two men, in ten men,
then is concert for the first time possible; because the force which moves the world is a new
quality, and can never be furnished by adding whatever quantities of a different kind. What
is the use of the concert of the false and the disunited? There can be no concert in two, where
there is no concert in one. When the individual is not individual, but is dual; when his thoughts
look one way and his actions another; when his faith is traversed by his habits; when his will,
enlightened by reason, is warped by his sense; when with one hand he rows and with the other
backs water, what concert can be?

I do not wonder at the interest these projects inspire. The world is awaking to the idea of
union, and these experiments show what it is thinking of. It is and will be magic. Men will
live and communicate, and plough, and reap, and govern, as by added ethereal power, when once
they are united; as in a celebrated experiment, by expiration and respiration exactly together,
four persons lift a heavy man from the ground by the little finger only, and without sense
of weight. But this union must be inward, and not one of covenants, and is to be reached by
a reverse of the methods they use. The union is only perfect when all the uniters are isolated.
It is the union of friends who live in different streets or towns. Each man, if he attempts
to join himself to others, is on all sides cramped and diminished of his proportion; and the
stricter the union the smaller and the more pitiful he is. But leave him alone, to recognize
in every hour and place the secret soul; he will go up and down doing the works of a true member,
and, to the astonishment of all, the work will be done with concert, though no man spoke. Government
will be adamantine without any governor. The union must be ideal in actual individualism.

I pass to the indication in some particulars of that faith in man, which the heart is preaching
to us in these days, and which engages the more regard, from the consideration that the speculations
of one generation are the history of the next following.

In alluding just now to our system of education, I spoke of the deadness of its details. But
it is open to graver criticism than the palsy of its members: it is a system of despair. The
disease with which the human mind now labors is want of faith. Men do not believe in a power
of education. We do not think we can speak to divine sentiments in man, and we do not try.
We renounce all high aims. We believe that the defects of so many perverse and so many frivolous
people who make up society, are organic, and society is a hospital of incurables. A man of
good sense but of little faith, whose compassion seemed to lead him to church as often as he
went there, said to me that "he liked to have concerts, and fairs, and churches, and other
public amusements go on." I am afraid the remark is too honest, and comes from the same origin
as the maxim of the tyrant, "If you would rule the world quietly, you must keep it amused."
I notice too that the ground on which eminent public servants urge the claims of popular education
is fear; 'This country is filling up with thousands and millions of voters, and you must educate
them to keep them from our throats.' We do not believe that any education, any system of philosophy,
any influence of genius, will ever give depth of insight to a superficial mind. Having settled
ourselves into this infidelity, our skill is expended to procure alleviations, diversion, opiates.
We adorn the victim with manual skill, his tongue with languages, his body with inoffensive
and comely manners. So have we cunningly hid the tragedy of limitation and inner death we cannot
avert. Is it strange that society should be devoured by a secret melancholy which breaks through
all its smiles and all its gayety and games?

But even one step farther our infidelity has gone. It appears that some doubt is felt by good
and wise men whether really the happiness and probity of men is increased by the culture of
the mind in those disciplines to which we give the name of education. Unhappily too the doubt
comes from scholars, from persons who have tried these methods. In their experience the scholar
was not raised by the sacred thoughts amongst which he dwelt, but used them to selfish ends.
He was a profane person, and became a showman, turning his gifts to a marketable use, and not
to his own sustenance and growth. It was found that the intellect could be independently developed,
that is, in separation from the man, as any single organ can be invigorated, and the result
was monstrous. A canine appetite for knowledge was generated, which must still be fed but was
never satisfied, and this knowledge, not being directed on action, never took the character
of substantial, humane truth, blessing those whom it entered. It gave the scholar certain powers
of expression, the power of speech, the power of poetry, of literary art, but it did not bring
him to peace or to beneficence.

When the literary class betray a destitution of faith, it is not strange that society should
be disheartened and sensualized by unbelief. What remedy? Life must be lived on a higher plane.
We must go up to a higher platform, to which we are always invited to ascend; there, the whole
aspect of things changes. I resist the skepticism of our education and of our educated men.
I do not believe that the differences of opinion and character in men are organic. I do not
recognize, beside the class of the good and the wise, a permanent class of skeptics, or a class
of conservatives, or of malignants, or of materialists. I do not believe in two classes. You
remember the story of the poor woman who importuned King Philip of Macedon to grant her justice,
which Philip refused: the woman exclaimed, "I appeal:" the king, astonished, asked to whom
she appealed: the woman replied, "From Philip drunk to Philip sober." The text will suit me
very well. I believe not in two classes of men, but in man in two moods, in Philip drunk and
Philip sober. I think, according to the good-hearted word of Plato, "Unwillingly the soul is
deprived of truth." Iron conservative, miser, or thief, no man is but by a supposed necessity
which he tolerates by shortness or torpidity of sight. The soul lets no man go without some
visitations and holydays of a diviner presence. It would be easy to show, by a narrow scanning
of any man's biography, that we are not so wedded to our paltry performances of every kind
but that every man has at intervals the grace to scorn his performances, in comparing them
with his belief of what he should do;--that he puts himself on the side of his enemies, listening
gladly to what they say of him, and accusing himself of the same things.

What is it men love in Genius, but its infinite hope, which degrades all it has done? Genius
counts all its miracles poor and short. Its own idea it never executed. The Iliad, the Hamlet,
the Doric column, the Roman arch, the Gothic minster, the German anthem, when they are ended,
the master casts behind him. How sinks the song in the waves of melody which the universe pours
over his soul! Before that gracious Infinite out of which he drew these few strokes, how mean
they look, though the praises of the world attend them. From the triumphs of his art he turns
with desire to this greater defeat. Let those admire who will. With silent joy he sees himself
to be capable of a beauty that eclipses all which his hands have done; all which human hands
have ever done.

Well, we are all the children of genius, the children of virtue,--and feel their inspirations
in our happier hours. Is not every man sometimes a radical in politics? Men are conservatives
when they are least vigorous, or when they are most luxurious. They are conservatives after
dinner, or before taking their rest; when they are sick, or aged: in the morning, or when their
intellect or their conscience has been aroused; when they hear music, or when they read poetry,
they are radicals. In the circle of the rankest tories that could be collected in England,
Old or New, let a powerful and stimulating intellect, a man of great heart and mind, act on
them, and very quickly these frozen conservators will yield to the friendly influence, these
hopeless will begin to hope, these haters will begin to love, these immovable statues will
begin to spin and revolve. I cannot help recalling the fine anecdote which Warton relates of
Bishop Berkeley, when he was preparing to leave England with his plan of planting the gospel
among the American savages. "Lord Bathurst told me that the members of the Scriblerus club
being met at his house at dinner, they agreed to rally Berkeley, who was also his guest, on
his scheme at Bermudas. Berkeley, having listened to the many lively things they had to say,
begged to be heard in his turn, and displayed his plan with such an astonishing and animating
force of eloquence and enthusiasm, that they were struck dumb, and, after some pause, rose
up all together with earnestness, exclaiming, 'Let us set out with him immediately.'" Men in
all ways are better than they seem. They like flattery for the moment, but they know the truth
for their own. It is a foolish cowardice which keeps us from trusting them and speaking to
them rude truth. They resent your honesty for an instant, they will thank you for it always.
What is it we heartily wish of each other? Is it to be pleased and flattered? No, but to be
convicted and exposed, to be shamed out of our nonsense of all kinds, and made men of, instead
of ghosts and phantoms. We are weary of gliding ghostlike through the world, which is itself
so slight and unreal. We crave a sense of reality, though it come in strokes of pain. I explain
so,--by this manlike love of truth,--those excesses and errors into which souls of great vigor,
but not equal insight, often fall. They feel the poverty at the bottom of all the seeming affluence
of the world. They know the speed with which they come straight through the thin masquerade,
and conceive a disgust at the indigence of nature: Rousseau, Mirabeau, Charles Fox, Napoleon,
Byron,--and I could easily add names nearer home, of raging riders, who drive their steeds
so hard, in the violence of living to forget its illusion: they would know the worst, and tread
the floors of hell. The heroes of ancient and modern fame, Cimon, Themistocles, Alcibiades,
Alexander, Caesar, have treated life and fortune as a game to be well and skilfully played,
but the stake not to be so valued but that any time it could be held as a trifle light as air,
and thrown up. Caesar, just before the battle of Pharsalia, discourses with the Egyptian priest
concerning the fountains of the Nile, and offers to quit the army, the empire, and Cleopatra,
if he will show him those mysterious sources.

The same magnanimity shows itself in our social relations, in the preference, namely, which
each man gives to the society of superiors over that of his equals. All that a man has will
he give for right relations with his mates. All that he has will he give for an erect demeanor
in every company and on each occasion. He aims at such things as his neighbors prize, and gives
his days and nights, his talents and his heart, to strike a good stroke, to acquit himself
in all men's sight as a man. The consideration of an eminent citizen, of a noted merchant,
of a man of mark in his profession; a naval and military honor, a general's commission, a marshal's
baton, a ducal coronet, the laurel of poets, and, anyhow procured, the acknowledgment of eminent
merit,--have this lustre for each candidate that they enable him to walk erect and unashamed
in the presence of some persons before whom he felt himself inferior. Having raised himself
to this rank, having established his equality with class after class of those with whom he
would live well, he still finds certain others before whom he cannot possess himself, because
they have somewhat fairer, somewhat grander, somewhat purer, which extorts homage of him. Hungry,
weary, and wet, the Romans came on and hastened to form in order of battle, the cavalry, as usual,
on the wings, the infantry in the centre. The light troops, who formed the vanguard on both sides,
began the combat: but the Romans had already almost exhausted their missiles against the cavalry,
and immediately gave way. In like manner the cavalry gave way on the wings, hard pressed by the
elephants in front, and outflanked right and left by the far more numerous Carthaginian horse.
But the Roman infantry proved itself worthy of its name: at the beginning of the battle it fought
with very decided superiority against the infantry of the enemy, and even when the repulse of the
Roman horse allowed the enemy's cavalry and light-armed troops to turn their attacks against the
Roman infantry, the latter, although ceasing to advance, obstinately maintained its ground. At this
stage a select Carthaginian band of 1000 infantry, and as many horsemen, under the leadership
of Mago, Hannibal's youngest brother, suddenly emerged from an ambush in the rear of the Roman
army, and fell upon the densely entangled masses. The wings of the army and the rear ranks of
the Roman centre were broken up and scattered by this attack, while the first division, 10,000 men
strong, in compact array broke through the Carthaginian line, and made a passage for itself obliquely
through the midst of the enemy, inflicting great loss on the opposing
infantry and more especially on the Gallic insurgents.

This brave body, pursued but feebly, thus reached Placentia. The remaining mass was for the most
part slaughtered by the elephants and light troops of the enemy in attempting to cross the river:
only part of the cavalry and some divisions of infantry were able, by wading through the river,
to gain the camp whither the Carthaginians did not follow them, and thus they too reached Placentia.(1)
Few battles confer more honour on the Roman soldier than this on the Trebia, and few at the same
time furnish graver impeachment of the general in command; although the candid judge will not forget
that a commandership in chief expiring on a definite day was an unmilitary institution, and that figs
cannot be reaped from thistles. The victory came to be costly even to the victors. Although
the loss in the battle fell chiefly on the Celtic insurgents, yet a multitude of the veteran
soldiers of Hannibal died afterwards from diseases engendered by that raw and wet winter day,
and all the elephants perished except one.

Hannibal Master of Northern Italy

The effect of this first victory of the invading army was, that the national insurrection now
spread and assumed shape without hindrance throughout the Celtic territory. The remains of the
Roman army of the Po threw themselves into the fortresses of Placentia and Cremona: completely
cut off from home, they were obliged to procure their supplies by way of the river. The consul
Tiberius Sempronius only escaped, as if by miracle, from being taken prisoner, when with a
weak escort of cavalry he went to Rome on account of the elections.

Hannibal, who would not hazard the health of his troops by further marches at that inclement
season, bivouacked for the winter where he was; and, as a serious attempt on the larger fortresses
would have led to no result, contented himself with annoying the
enemy by attacks on the river port of Placentia and other minor Roman
positions. Could it be received
into common belief, suicide would unpeople the planet. It has had a name to live in some dogmatic
theology, but each man's innocence and his real liking of his neighbor have kept it a dead
letter. I remember standing at the polls one day when the anger of the political contest gave
a certain grimness to the faces of the independent electors, and a good man at my side, looking
on the people, remarked, "I am satisfied that the largest part of these men, on either side,
mean to vote right." I suppose considerate observers, looking at the masses of men in their
blameless and in their equivocal actions, will assent, that in spite of selfishness and frivolity,
the general purpose in the great number of persons is fidelity. The reason why any one refuses
his assent to your opinion, or his aid to your benevolent design, is in you: he refuses to
accept you as a bringer of truth, because, though you think you have it, he feels that you
have it not. You have not given him the authentic sign.

If it were worth while to run into details this general doctrine of the latent but ever soliciting
Spirit, it would be easy to adduce illustration in particulars of a man's equality to the Church,
of his equality to the State, and of his equality to every other man. It is yet in all men's
memory that, a few years ago, the liberal churches complained that the Calvinistic church denied
to them the name of Christian. I think the complaint was confession: a religious church would
not complain. A religious man like Behmen, Fox, or Swedenborg is not irritated by wanting the
sanction of the Church, but the Church feels the accusation of his presence and belief.

It only needs that a just man should walk in our streets to make it appear how pitiful and
inartificial a contrivance is our legislation. The man whose part is taken and who does not
wait for society in anything, has a power which society cannot choose but feel. The familiar
experiment called the hydrostatic paradox, in which a capillary column of water balances the
ocean, is a symbol of the relation of one man to the whole family of men. The wise Dandamis,
on hearing the lives of Socrates, Pythagoras and Diogenes read, "judged them to be great men
every way, excepting, that they were too much subjected to the reverence of the laws, which
to second and authorize, true virtue must abate very much of its original vigor."

And as a man is equal to the Church and equal to the State, so he is equal to every other man.
The disparities of power in men are superficial; and all frank and searching conversation,
in which a man lays himself open to his brother, apprises each of their radical unity. When
two persons sit and converse in a thoroughly good understanding, the remark is sure to be made,
See how we have disputed about words! Let a clear, apprehensive mind, such as every man knows
among his friends, converse with the most commanding poetic genius, I think it would appear
that there was no inequality such as men fancy, between them; that a perfect understanding,
a like receiving, a like perceiving, abolished differences; and the poet would confess that
his creative imagination gave him no deep advantage, but only the superficial one that he could
express himself and the other could not; that his advantage was a knack, which might impose
on indolent men but could not impose on lovers of truth; for they know the tax of talent, or
what a price of greatness the power of expression too often pays. But, when Euripides undertook to
present man as he is, the advance was logical and in a certain sense historical rather than poetical.
He was able to destroy the ancient tragedy, but not to create the modern. Everywhere he halted
half-way. Masks, through which the expression of the life of the soul is, as it were, translated
from the particular into the general, were as necessary for the typical
tragedy of antiquity as they are incompatible with the tragedy of
character; but Euripides retained them.

 There is power over and behind us, and we are the channels of its
communications. We seek to say thus and so, and over our head some spirit sits which contradicts
what we say. We would persuade our fellow to this or that; another self within our eyes dissuades
him. That which we keep back, this reveals. In vain we compose our faces and our words; it
holds uncontrollable communication with the enemy, and he answers civilly to us, but believes
the spirit. We exclaim, 'There's a traitor in the house!' but at last it appears that he is
the true man, and I am the traitor. This open channel to the highest life is the first and
last reality, so subtle, so quiet, yet so tenacious, that although I have never expressed the
truth, and although I have never heard the expression of it from any other, I know that the
whole truth is here for me. What if I cannot answer your questions? I am not pained that I
cannot frame a reply to the question, What is the operation we call Providence? There lies
the unspoken thing, present, omnipresent. Every time we converse we seek to translate it into
speech, but whether we hit or whether we miss, we have the fact. Every discourse is an approximate
answer: but it is of small consequence that we do not get it into verbs and nouns, whilst it
abides for contemplation forever.

If the auguries of the prophesying heart shall make themselves good in time, the man who shall
be born, whose advent men and events prepare and foreshow, is one who shall enjoy his connection
with a higher life, with the man within man; shall destroy distrust by his trust, shall use
his native but forgotten methods, shall not take counsel of flesh and blood, but shall rely
on the Law alive and beautiful which works over our heads and under our feet. Pitiless, it
avails itself of our success when we obey it, and of our ruin when we contravene it. Men are
all secret believers in it, else the word justice would have no meaning: they believe that
the best is the true; that right is done at last; or chaos would come. It rewards actions after
their nature, and not after the design of the agent. 'Work,' it saith to man, 'in every hour,
paid or unpaid, see only that thou work, and thou canst not escape the reward: whether thy
work be fine or coarse, planting corn or writing epics, so only it be honest work, done to
thine own approbation, it shall earn a reward to the senses as well as to the thought: no matter
how often defeated, you are born to victory. The reward of a thing well done, is to have done it.'

As soon as a man is wonted to look beyond surfaces, and to see how this high will prevails
without an exception or an interval, he settles himself into serenity. He can already rely
on the laws of gravity, that every stone will fall where it is due; the good globe is faithful,
and carries us securely through the celestial spaces, anxious or resigned, we need not interfere
to help it on: and he will learn one day the mild lesson they teach, that our own orbit is
all our task, and we need not assist the administration of the universe. Do not be so impatient
to set the town right concerning the unfounded pretensions and the false reputation of certain
men of standing. They are laboring harder to set the town right concerning themselves, and
will certainly succeed. He had sold his soul and was taking the price. His wrists projected far
from the gingham sleeves, and in truth he looked little enough like a girl. The girl looked much
more like a boy. The further price of his shame was paid in full. Obedience
to his genius is the only liberating influence. We wish to escape from subjection and a sense
of inferiority, and we make self-denying ordinances, we drink water, we eat grass, we refuse
the laws, we go to jail: it is all in vain; only by obedience to his genius, only by the freest
activity in the way constitutional to him, does an angel seem to arise before a man and lead
him by the hand out of all the wards of the prison.

That which befits us, embosomed in beauty and wonder as we are, is cheerfulness and courage,
and the endeavor to realize our aspirations. The life of man is the true romance, which when
it is valiantly conducted will yield the imagination a higher joy than any fiction. All around
us what powers are wrapped up under the coarse mattings of custom, and all wonder prevented.
It is so wonderful to our neurologists that a man can see without his eyes, that it does not
occur to them that it is just as wonderful that he should see with them; and that is ever the
difference between the wise and the unwise: the latter wonders at what is unusual, the wise
man wonders at the usual. Shall not the heart which has received so much, trust the Power by
which it lives? May it not quit other leadings, and listen to the Soul that has guided it so
gently and taught it so much, secure that the future will be worthy of the past?

