I do not remember that I was "very angry" about Hooker's despatch, as General Sherman says
(Vol. II, page 59), though I think Sherman was.  Indeed, he had more reason to be angry than
I; for the fact, and evidence of it, were so plain that the Twenty-third Corps had done its
duty as ordered, that if Hooker's despatch was meant to imply the contrary, which I doubt,
that was a cause of anger to the general-in-chief, whom he had unnecessarily alarmed, rather
than to me, who had no apprehension of being suspected by the general-in-chief of having failed
in my duty.

In fact, I do not recollect having seen Hooker's despatch at all until I saw it quoted in Sherman's
"Memoirs."  My recollection is that Sherman told me, on his visiting us the next day, that
he had received during the battle a despatch from Hooker to the effect that his flank was unprotected.
In reply to this I explained to General Sherman where my troops had been during the engagement,
and showed him the dead of the 14th Kentucky lying on the advanced ground they had held while
Hascall's division was forming.  I believe that if I had seen Hooker's despatch at the time,
I should have interpreted it then, as I do now, as referring, not to his immediate right, but
to the extreme right of the line.  I do not recollect any words, "pretty sharp" or otherwise,
between General Hooker and myself on that subject, and do not believe it was ever mentioned
between us.  In short, I do not think I was present at the interview in the "little church"
described by General Sherman (Sherman's "Memoirs," Vol. II, page 59).  I have an impression
that General Hascall was there, and that it is to him General Sherman refers.  I believe the
Kolb House difficulty was almost entirely a misapprehension between General Sherman and General
Hooker.  Why this mistake was not explained at the time or afterward I do not know, unless
it was that the feelings of those two gentlemen toward each other were unfavorable to any such
explanation.

I will add that General Hooker and I were together both before and after the opening of the
Kolb House engagement.  He knew perfectly well where my troops were, and what they were doing,
and it seems to me utterly impossible that he can have meant by his despatch what General Sherman
understood it to mean.

My despatches of that date to Sherman show that I had no special apprehension even in respect
to our extreme right flank, and that I doubted the report that one whole corps was in our front.

My orders on that day,( 2) show that Hascall was up with Hooker at the intersection of the
Marietta and Powder Spring roads, near the Kolb House, as early as 3 P. M., and that Cox was
ordered up with three brigades at 4:15 P. M., before the assault began.  Cox arrived with the
head of his column during the enemy's attack, and was directed by me in person where and how
to put his troops in position.  Hence I think I must be right in the inference that in Hooker's
despatch to Sherman of 5:30 P. M., the words "our extreme right flank" must have been intended
to refer to my extreme right, and not his.  He was simply unduly apprehensive for the safety
of the extreme right flank of the army, not of his own corps in particular.  My report to General
Sherman at 9 P. M. simply shows that I did not share that apprehension; that, instead of believing
there were "three entire corps in front of us," I doubted whether there was even all of Hood's
corps.

General Hooker's habit of swinging off from the rest of General Thomas's army, and getting
possession of roads designated for McPherson or for me, was a common subject of remark between
Sherman, Thomas, McPherson, and myself; and his motive was understood to be, as General Sherman
states, to get command of one of the armies, in the event of battle, by virtue of his senior
commission.  But the subject was never mentioned between General Hooker and me, and he never
even approximated to giving me an order.  No doubt he entertained the opinion that he would
have a right to give orders to either General McPherson or myself under certain circumstances
likely to arise, for General Sherman entertained the same opinion. What General Thomas thought
on the question I never knew.  My own opinion and McPherson's were decidedly the contrary.

                            CONVERSATION OVER THE QUESTION OF RELATIVE RANK

In the final movement which resulted in the withdrawal of Johnston's army from Kenesaw, the
Army of the Tennessee passed by the right flank of my infantry line along the famous Sandtown
Road.  While this was going on, McPherson and I sat on our horses together a long time, observing
the movement and renewing the familiar intercourse of our youth.  We had a long and free conversation
on a great variety of subjects--a rare opportunity for commanders, even in the same army, where
their troops were generally from ten to twenty miles apart in line of battle.  One of the first
subjects that came up was that question of relative rank; for our troops had "met" and were
then "doing duty together," in the language of the old article of war.  But the subject was
quickly dismissed with the remark, made almost simultaneously by both, that such a question
could not possible cause any difficulty between us.  McPherson had the senior commission of
major-general, and I the senior assignment as army commander.  Perhaps it would have puzzled
even Halleck to frame a satisfactory decision in that peculiar case.  I had long before determined
what my decision would be if that question ever became a practical one between McPherson and
myself on the field of battle.  I would have said, in substance at least:  "Mac, just tell
me what you want me to do."

As we sat together that day, McPherson confided to me the secret of his marriage engagement,
for the purpose, as he stated, of inquiring whether, in my opinion, he could before long find
a chance to go home and get married.  I told him I thought that after the capture of Atlanta
operations would be suspended long enough for that.  But my dear and noble friend was killed
in the next great battle.  After Atlanta had fallen I went home, as McPherson would doubtless
have done if he had lived; but our common friend and classmate Hood cut the visit so short
that there would have been little time for marriage festivities.

McPherson, among other high qualities, was one of the most generous men I ever knew.  He was
remarkably skilful in topographical drawing, etching, lettering, and all other uses of the
pen.  Although at the head of the class and a most conscientious student whose time was very
valuable to himself, he would spend a very large part of that precious time in "lettering"
problems for classmates who needed such help.  For this reason and others he was, by common
consent of all the classes, the most popular man in the corps.  I could not compete with "Mac"
at all in the lettering business, but I tried to follow his good example, in my own way, by
helping the boys over knotty points in "math" and "phil."  I had taught district school one
winter before going to West Point, and hence had acquired the knack of explaining things.

Hood was not well up in mathematics.  The first part of the course especially he found very
hard--so much so that he became discouraged. After the unauthorized festivities of Christmas,
particularly, he seemed much depressed.  On the 26th he asked me which I would prefer to be,
"an officer of the army or a farmer in Kentucky?"  I replied in a way which aroused his ambition
to accomplish what he had set out to do in coming to West Point, without regard to preference
between farming and soldiering.  He went to work in good earnest, and passed the January examinations,
though by a very narrow margin. From that time on he did not seem to have so much difficulty.
When we were fighting each other so desperately fifteen years later, I wondered whether Hood
remembered the encouragement I had given him to become a soldier, and came very near thinking
once or twice that perhaps I had made a mistake.  But I do not believe that public enmity ever
diminished my personal regard for my old friend and classmate.

                                   VISIT TO THE CAMP OF FRANK P. BLAIR, JR.

In thinking of McPherson, I recall an interesting incident connected with Frank P. Blair, Jr.'s
arrival with his corps about June 9, referred to by General Sherman (Vol. II, page 24).  For
some reason we had an afternoon's rest the day after Blair arrived; so I rode over to his camp--seven
or eight miles, perhaps--to greet my old friend.  McPherson, to whose army Blair's corps belonged,
and other officers were there.  To our immense surprise, Blair had brought along great hogsheads
of ice and numerous baskets of champagne, as if to increase the warmth of our welcome.  Of
course we did not disdain such an unusual treat in the enemy's country.  About sunset McPherson
invited me to visit his camp, and we started off at a full gallop, which we kept up all the
way, yet it was some time after dark when we reached the headquarters of the Army of the Tennessee.
A good camp supper was awaiting us, with jolly young officers to make it merry.  It was not
until supper was ended that I began to realize the necessity of a night's march to get back
to my own camp.  As our infantry line was twenty miles long, and the cavalry stretched it out
on either flank as many more, my single orderly was quite sufficient protection from any attack
by the enemy; but the Georgia bushes, brambles, and mud, combined with the absence of any known
road, constituted an enemy hard to overcome. However, by the aid of the compass which I have
always carried in my head since I used to hunt in the wilds of the West, I got back to camp,
and went to bed, taking care not to observe the time of night by my watch.

As I have said, I was often much annoyed by General Hooker's corps getting possession of roads
which had been designated for mine to advance upon, thus greatly delaying my movements.  But
it is but just to say that this is susceptible of an explanation much more creditable to General
Hooker than that given by General Sherman. General Thomas's army was so large that he could
never get his three corps into position as soon as expected by the use of the roads designated
for him.  Hence, when Hooker was not in advance he would "switch off" and hunt for another
road to the right or left, and thus sometimes strike in ahead of McPherson or me, and leave
us no road at all to move on.  In fact, the army was so large and the roads were so few that
our movements were often painfully slow and tedious, and General Hooker's motive may have been
only to get ahead and bring his corps into action or to the position assigned to it in whatever
way he could.

                                  ANECDOTE OF SHERMAN AND HOOKER UNDER FIRE

The first time I ever saw General Sherman and General Hooker together, or got even a suspicion
that their personal relations were other than the most satisfactory, was at Resaca.  Cox's
division had gained possession of some portions of the enemy's outer works, so that from a
bald hill just in rear of our line some parts of the main line of defense could be distinctly
seen.  Upon my informing General Sherman of this, he soon appeared on the ground, accompanied
or closely followed by a large number of general and staff officers. Besides Sherman, Thomas,
Hooker, and Newton, a score of others were there, all eager to see what they could of the now
famous stronghold which McPherson had refrained from assaulting.  I led them to the hill, on
which a few dead trees were still standing, and from which the much-desired view could be obtained.
Of course all were on foot, yet they were too numerous not to attract the attention of the
enemy.  Very soon the sound of musketry in front, then not very heavy, was varied by the sharp
explosion of a shell overhead, and fragments of branches of dead trees came falling all around.
A general "scatteration" occurred in all directions save one.  Newton and I, who were conversing
at the time, quietly stepped aside a few paces out of the line of fire, where we were much
safer than we would have been in full retreat, and then turned round to see what had become
of our companions.  All save two had disappeared, even Thomas having abandoned the field, probably
for the first and only time in his life.  But still there, on the bald hill, in full view of
the hostile artillery, were the two already highly distinguished generals, Sherman and Hooker,
both alike famous for supreme courage, striding round the ground, appearing to look at nothing
in particular and not conversing with each other, but seeming at least a foot taller than usual,
each waiting for the other to lead off in retreat.  After quite a long continuance of this
little drama, which greatly entertained Newton and me, the two great soldiers, as if by some
mysterious impulse,--for they did not speak a word,--simultaneously and slowly strode to the
rear, where their horses were held.  I cheerfully gave the "Johnny Rebs" credit for the courtesy
of not firing another shot after they saw the effect of the first, which I doubt not was intended
only as a gentle hint that such impudence in Yankees was not to be tolerated.  Yet a single
shell from the same direction,--probably from the same battery,--when we were moving into action
that morning, exploded near my head, and killed the aide who was riding behind me.( 3)  My
too numerous staff and escort had attracted attention. I had at Dalton a few days before forbade
the staff and escort to follow me into action, unless specially ordered to do so; but they
had not so soon learned the lesson which the sad casualty at Resaca taught them.  It was then
early in the campaign.  Later, both generals and orderlies had learned to restrain somewhat
their curiosity and their too thoughtless bravery.  The perfect old soldier has learned to
economize the life and strength of men, including his own, with somewhat the same care that
he does those of artillery horses and transportation mules.  It is only the young soldier who
does not know the difference between husbanding the national resources and showing cowardice
in face of the enemy.

At Wilson's Creek, where the brave Lyon was killed in August, 1861, and where the gallant volunteers
on both sides had fought with almost unexampled courage, standing up to their work all the
time, until one third of their numbers were killed or wounded, and their forty rounds of ammunition
gone, the little companies of old, regular Indian-fighters had been deployed as skirmishers
in close order, behind trees and bushes and hillocks, and had suffered comparatively small
losses.  The following colloquy occurred between one of them and a volunteer whose cartridge-box,
as he was proud to show, was empty.  Volunteer:  "How many shots did you fire?" Old soldier
(looking into his cartridge-box):  "I fired just nineteen."  Volunteer:  "And how many rebs
do you think you killed?" Old soldier:  "I guess I killed about nineteen."

One beautiful, quiet Sunday afternoon, in front of Atlanta, when even the pickets were respecting
the Sabbath day, my headquarters band, which had been playing selections of sacred music, easily
heard on the other side of the lines, struck up a favorite Southern air of quite a different
character.  Quickly came a shell crashing through the trees far over our heads.  The band as
quickly took the hint and changed the tune.  Such little "courtesies" from our "friends the
enemy" were not at all uncommon in the short intervals of rest from deadly work.

                                                     THE ASSAULT ON KENESAW

General Sherman says in Vol. II, page 60, of his "Memoirs":

"During the 24th and 25th of June, General Schofield extended his right as far as prudent,
so as to compel the enemy to thin out his lines correspondingly, with the intention to make
two strong assaults at points where success would give us the greatest advantage.  I had consulted
Generals Thomas, McPherson, and Schofield, and we all agreed that we could not with prudence
stretch out any more, and therefore there was no alternative but to attack 'fortified lines'--a
thing carefully avoided up to that time."

The first sentence literally means that I extended my right "with the intention," on my part,
"to make two strong assaults," etc. But that is a mere verbal error.  General Sherman, of course,
meant to say that the intention was his.

The second sentence is, perhaps, ambiguous.  At least it has been construed to mean more than
the truth.  It is undoubtedly true that "we all agreed that we could not with prudence stretch
out any more," but we did not agree in the conclusion "and therefore there was no alternative,"
etc.

Indeed, such conclusion was extremely illogical, as was demonstrated a few days later, when
one of the other "alternatives" was adopted with success.  This successful movement was essentially
the same as that which had been previously made to dislodge the enemy from Dalton, and that
by which Sherman's army had been transferred from New Hope Church to the railroad in front
of Allatoona, as well as that by which Atlanta was afterward captured.  Hence the existence
of this "alternative" could not have been unthought of by any of us at the time of the assault
on Kenesaw.

But there was another alternative in this and similar cases, which was much discussed at various
times during the campaign.  Its practicability can be judged of only upon general principles,
for it was never tried.  It was to detach two or three corps, nearly half our army (which was
about double the strength of the enemy), make a detour wide enough to avoid his fortifications,
and strike directly at his flank and rear.  Such a movement, it was urged, at Dalton, Kenesaw,
or Atlanta would have compelled Johnston to fight a battle on equal terms with one half of
Sherman's army, while he had to hold his parapets against the other half.  Whatever else may
be said of this proposed movement, it would undoubtedly have been more hazardous and much more
decisive, one way or the other, than any of the plans actually adopted.  It certainly promised
success proportionate to the cost, instead of a costly failure, which the assault of fortified
lines had almost invariably proved to be.

I did not see Thomas or McPherson for some days before the assault, but I believe their judgment,
like mine, was opposed to it. Undoubtedly it was generally opposed, though deferentially as
became subordinates toward the commanding general.  The responsibility was entirely Sherman's,
as he afterward frankly stated; and I presume he did not mean to imply otherwise by the language
used in his "Memoirs" above quoted (Vol. II, page 60).  General Sherman's orders, issued on
June 24 (Special Field Orders, No. 28), directed each of the three armies to make an attack
(under the word "assault" for Thomas and "attack" for McPherson and me).  I had made all preparations
to carry out the order on my part.  Being visited by General Sherman a day or two before the
date named for the execution of the order (June 27), I explained to him what I had done, and
how little hope there was of success, on account of the smallness of my reserve to push the
advantage even if we should break the line, when he at once replied that it was not intended
that I should make an attack in front, but to make a strong demonstration in my front, and
gain what advantage I could on the enemy's flank.  During the day Cox's division forced the
passage of Olley's Creek and secured a position on the head of Nickajack, which was spoken
of by Sherman as the only success of the day.

                                                 TENDENCY OF VETERAN TROOPS

There were doubtless many occasions in the Atlanta campaign when the enemy's intrenchments
could have been assaulted with success. These were when the position had been but recently
occupied and the fortifications were very slight.  After several days' occupation, as at the
points attacked by Thomas and McPherson, the lines became impregnable.  Frequent efforts were
made, and by none more earnestly than by General Sherman, to press the troops to a vigorous
assault of the enemy's position under the favorable circumstances above referred to.  But the
general feeling of the army, including not only privates, but officers of nearly all grades,
was undoubtedly opposed to such attacks.  The notion was very prevalent that there was no necessity
of fighting the enemy on unequal terms.  When attacked, either with or without cover, the troops
would fight with the most determined valor, and almost invariably with success.  So when attacking
the enemy in open ground there was no lack of energy or pluck.  But we lose one of the most
important lessons of the war if we fail to remember and appreciate the fact that our veteran
troops are very loath to make an attack where they believe they have not a fair chance of success.
This feeling must be attributed, not to a lack of high soldierly qualities, but to intelligence
and good sense.  The veteran American soldier fights very much as he has been accustomed to
work his farm or run his sawmill:  He wants to see a fair prospect that it is "going to pay."
His loyalty, discipline, and pluck will not allow him under any circumstances to retreat without
orders, much less to run away; but if he encounters a resistance which he thinks he cannot
overcome, or which he thinks it would "cost too much" to overcome, he will lie down, cover
himself with a little parapet, and hold his ground against any force that may attempt to drive
him back.  This feeling of the soldier is an element in the problem of war which cannot be
ignored. The general who, with such an army, would win the full measure of success due to greatly
superior numbers, must manoeuver so as to compel the enemy to fight him on approximately equal
terms, instead of assaulting fortifications where, against modern weapons, numbers are of little
or no avail.  In the days of the bayonet successful tactics consisted in massing a superior
force upon some vital point, and breaking the enemy's line.  Now it is the fire of the musket,
not the bayonet, that decides the battle.  To mass troops against the fire of a covered line
is simply to devote them to destruction. The greater the mass, the greater the loss--that is
all.  A large mass has no more chance of success than a small one.  That this is absolutely
true since the introduction of breech-loaders is probably not doubted by any one; and it was
very nearly true with the muzzle- loading rifles used during our late war, as was abundantly
demonstrated on many occasions.

I have always believed that the true tactics of our late war, whenever our force was double
that of the enemy (as it sometimes was and always should have been at all points where decisive
movements were to be made), were to throw one half the force upon the enemy's rear, so as to
compel him to attack that force or else retreat by side roads with loss of trains and artillery.
This would doubtless have been a bold departure from the ancient tactics, which had not yet
been proved obsolete.  Yet I always thought it strange that our leading generals were unwilling
to attempt it. Had Sherman divided his army in such a way, and struck at Hood's rear, he might
have found a chance to destroy that army as well as the railroads in Georgia.

                                      THE DEATH OF McPHERSON BEFORE ATLANTA

The death of McPherson, on July 22, was felt by all to be an irreparable loss, and by none
more so than by General Sherman, who manifested deep feeling when the body was brought to the
Howard House, east of Atlanta.  I recollect well his remark to the effect that the whole of
the Confederacy could not atone for the sacrifice of one such life.

My recollection of some of the incidents of that day differs in some respects from that of
General Sherman.  As soon as it was known that the Army of the Tennessee was heavily engaged
I drew out of line the larger part of my troops, leaving the picket-line in position, with
strong reserves behind the parapets, and massed them near my left, ready to send reinforcements
to the Army of the Tennessee if necessary, or to form a temporary left flank if the line on
my left should be broken, as it was late in the day, as described by General Sherman.( 4)

When that break was made in the line immediately to the left of mine, I had a rare opportunity
of witnessing Sherman's splendid conduct as a simple soldier, the occasion for which occurs
so rarely to the general-in-chief of a great army.  Sherman at once sent to me for all my artillery,
which responded to his call at a full gallop.  He led the batteries in person to some high,
open ground in front of our line near the Howard House, placed them in position, and directed
their fire, which from that advanced position enfiladed the parapets from which our troops
had been driven, and which the enemy then occupied.  With the aid of that terrible raking fire,
the division of Union troops very quickly regained the intrenchments they had lost.  General
Sherman, on page 81, Vol. II, gives me the credit due to himself for that soldierly conduct
as an artillery commander.  I was occupied in forming my infantry reserve to meet the enemy
if Logan's troops did not drive them back.  Only my artillery was used in restoring this broken
line, because Logan's infantry proved sufficient without further aid. This action of mine was
taken with General Sherman's knowledge and approval, and was the correct thing to do, for the
reason that the ground in my front was such as to make both my position and that of the enemy
practically unassailable.  I had no apprehension of an attack in my front, and there was no
question of my attempting to "make a lodgment in Atlanta" that day, as stated by Sherman in
Vol. II, page 80.

It was proposed by me that my reserve and Thomas's should go the assistance of the Army of
the Tennessee, either directly or, better still, by making a counter-attack in front of the
right of that army, which, if successful, would cut off the hostile force then attacking in
left.  Sherman replied, as I recollect, that he had asked Thomas to send some troops to the
left, and the latter had replied that he had none to spare.  Without these the proposition
to make a counter-attack could not be entertained.  But my memory is only that of conversations
with General Sherman during the day, and he ought to be much better informed than I concerning
what passed between General Thomas and himself.  I recollect that General Sherman during the
day expressed something like a wish to "let the Army of the Tennessee fight its own battle,"
but in his statement of motive for so doing I think he does that army injustice.  My impression
was, and is, that they would have been very glad of assistance, and that timely help would
have increased the fraternal feeling between the armies, instead of creating unworthy jealousy.

I cannot but believe, as I then thought, that we were losing a great opportunity that day.
A large force of the enemy had made a wide circuit from his defenses about Atlanta and attacked
our left several miles distant.  We there had a chance to fight him on equal terms.  I thought,
and still think, we ought to have concentrated a large part of Thomas's force and mine near
the Howard House, and made a strong counter-attack upon this attacking column of the enemy,
with the hope of cutting it off from Atlanta.  Instead of this, Thomas spent the day in efforts
to "make a lodgment in Atlanta" over well-prepared fortifications which the Georgia militia
could hold against him about as well as the veteran Confederate troops.

The movement of August 4 and 5 was designed to be substantially what had been frequently suggested,
but which I have heretofore referred to as having never been tried, with the exception that
the attacking force was not to sever its connection with the main body, and hence might not
reach far enough to strike an exposed flank of the enemy.  But even with this modification
I thought the movement ought to have a fair chance of success.  That movement was not suggested
by me in any way, and, so far as I know, not by General Thomas.  I believe it originated entirely
with General Sherman.  I never heard of it until I received his orders.  There was no "argument"
by me of the question of relative rank, as suggested by General Sherman (Vol. II, page 99).

                             SHERMAN'S ERROR IN A QUESTION OF RELATIVE RANK

The positions of the troops when the order for the movement was made rendered it convenient
that the Twenty-third Corps be put in first,--that is, next to the right of General Thomas's
troops then in position,--while the Fourteenth Corps, commanded by General John M. Palmer,
was relied upon to develop rapidly to our right and endeavor to strike the enemy's flank before
he could extend his intrenched line far enough to meet and resist our attack.  It was not until
some time after my orders for this movement had been issued and should have been in progress
of vigorous execution that I received the first intimation that the question of rank had been
raised, as stated by General Sherman, and that my orders had simply been transmitted to the
division commanders of the Fourteenth Corps.

It cannot for a moment be admitted that any share of the blame for that failure attaches to
the Fourteenth Corps, as such.  Nor do I believe with General Sherman that its slowness on
that occasion was due to anything "imbibed" from General Thomas.

                             SHERMAN'S ERROR IN A QUESTION OF RELATIVE RANK

My own view of military duty was different from that entertained by the commander of the Fourteenth
Corps, as was shown in my subsequent action, hereinafter referred to, when I was ordered to
report to and act under the orders of General Stanley.  But if the distinguished statesman
who then commanded the Fourteenth Corps fell into error at that time, he has doubtless since
regretted it far more than any other man could possible do; and he has many times atoned for
that error by the great services to the country which he has continued to render up to the
present time.

The primary and principal cause of this and all similar difficulties during the Atlanta campaign
was the grave error of opinion which disregarded the special rank of army and department commanders
given them by the President's assignment under the law, and the still graver error of judgment
in leaving such an important question open until the eve of battle, in the "hope that there
would be no necessity for making this decision."  This error seems incomprehensible when it
is considered that it in effect nullified the President's selection of army and department
commanders at the most important of all moments, the crisis of battle, by making these commanders
subject to the orders of any general of older commission whose troops happened to be adjacent
to theirs.

In the midst of battle, when the orders of a common superior cannot be obtained in time to
meet an emergency, the highest commander present must give the necessary orders and must be
obeyed.  This is probably the gravest responsibility of war.  Yet Sherman's opinion and decision
would have placed this responsibility, not upon the army commander who had been selected by
the President, upon the advice of the general-in-chief, under an act of Congress passed especially
for the purpose, but upon some one who through political influence or otherwise had got an
earlier commission of major-general.  So many of the latter had proved to be unqualified for
responsible command that Congress had enacted a special law authorizing the President to supersede
such prior commissions and assign commanders of armies or army corps in the field and in any
department whom he deemed competent.( 5)  Palpable as this fallacy seems, yet it was adhered
to until overruled by the War Department.

It is proper for me to add that I had at that time but a very slight personal acquaintance
with General Palmer.  However, I knew him well by reputation, and esteemed him highly.  General
Thomas, especially, had given me a high estimate of his character and abilities.  If there
was any cause of jealousy or ill-feeling between us, I never suspected it.

[( 1) War Records, Vol. XXXVIII, part iv, p. 558.]

[( 2) War Records, Vol. XXXVIII, part iv, pp. 566 and 568.]

[( 3) Captain A. H. Engle, who was killed at Resaca, was a most charming and talented youth,
only twenty years of age.  That was his first battle.  He was caterer of the headquarters mess.
That morning, before leaving camp, Captain Engle made out all his accounts and handed them,
with the money for which he was responsible, to another staff officer, saying that he was going
to be killed that day.]

[( 4) Vol.

When all our efforts to accomplish decisive results by partial operations upon the flanks had
failed, this question was much discussed:  What more decisive movement shall next be made for
the capture of Atlanta?  There were practically but two propositions to be considered:  That
of General Sherman, which was adopted with success; and that heretofore referred to as having
never been tried, to detach two or more corps to make a lodgment on the railroad at or below
East Point, and then compel the enemy to come out of Atlanta and endeavor to regain control
of his only line of supply, or abandon that city altogether.  General Sherman thought it too
hazardous to detach two corps, though he was willing for me to undertake it with one.  In fact,
this feeling marked General Sherman's action throughout the campaign.  He had no hesitation
in detaching a small force, the loss of which would still leave him greatly superior in numbers
to the enemy, or a very large force under his own command, leaving the enemy to the care of
the smaller part, as in his march to Savannah.  General Thomas, on the contrary, thought the
movement proposed by General Sherman "extra hazardous," as Sherman says in his "Memoirs" (Vol.
II, page 106).  I did not regard either of them as very hazardous, and upon consideration rather
preferred General Sherman's, because I thought it could not fail to be decisive of the capture
of Atlanta, while the other might fail if not executed with promptness and vigor, and this,
experience had warned us, we could not be quite sure of.

                                      JOHNSTON'S UNTRIED PLAN OF RESISTANCE

Some time after the war, that very able commander General Joseph E. Johnston told me that in
his judgment Sherman's operations in Hood's rear ought not to have caused the evacuation of
Atlanta; that he (Johnston), when in command, had anticipated such a movement, and had prepared,
or intended to prepare, to oppose it by constructing artillery redoubts at all suitable points
in the rear of Atlanta, as well as in front, which redoubts could be very speedily connected
by infantry intrenchments whenever necessary; that he aimed to keep on longer than Sherman's
army could subsist on the contents of their wagons and haversacks; and that Sherman could not
possibly hold all the railroads leading into Atlanta at the same time, nor destroy any one
of them so thoroughly that it could not be repaired in time to replenish Johnston's supplies
in Atlanta.

Here is presented a question well worthy of the candid study of military critics.  Whatever
may be the final judgment upon that question, it seems perfectly clear that Johnston's plan
of defense ought at least to have been tried by his successor.  If Hood had kept all his troops
in compact order about Atlanta, he would have been in the best possible condition to resist
Sherman if the latter turned back from Jonesboro' and attacked Atlanta from the rear, or to
strike Sherman's rear or flank in full force if he made any other movement.  The division of
Hood's forces at that time, one part holding on to Atlanta while the other went to head off
Sherman, was the worst disposition that could have been made.

As related to me personally by General Sheridan,--for I have not yet studied the Virginia campaigns
so thoroughly as to justify me in speaking from the records,--it was a similar mistake on the
part of the Confederate cavalry commander J. E. B. Stuart, in trying to get between Sheridan
and Richmond, which gave Sheridan the advantage and led to Stuart's defeat.  Stuart had ridden
hard all night, and got between Sheridan and Richmond, his men and horses exhausted, while
Sheridan had been resting and feeding his own men and animals. In the morning Sheridan "rode
over" his exhausted antagonist. These are among the many cases where exaggerated ideas of the
importance of places have led to the defeat of armies.  I knew Stuart well at West Point, he
having been in the class next to mine.  He then gave promise of his future as a cavalry leader.

The only specially hazardous part of Sherman's movement was that which would fall to my lot--namely,
to hold the "pivot" against a possible attack of Hood's whole army while Thomas and Howard
should swing round it, and then draw out and join them after the swing was made.  Upon my reporting
that I was perfectly willing to undertake this task, and had no doubt of the ability of my
corps to accomplish it, all question about making the movement appeared to be settled, and
it was at once ordered.  Hood did not avail himself of his opportunity to attack me when alone,
either in position or in motion, hence my part of the movement proved easiest of all.

I had placed my corps in a completely inclosed field-work, large enough to contain all my trains,
and strong enough to resist any attack from a greatly superior force until Sherman's movement
could be accomplished.

                                          ANECDOTES OF THE MEN IN THE RANKS

I recollect even to this day a little incident of that time which was, at least to me, both
amusing and instructive.  After receiving Sherman's orders, which meant "suspend aggressive
work and go to fortifying," I was directing the laying out of the new work at the most important
part of the line, and the men had been ordered to commence digging, when I heard an old volunteer,
as he laid aside his gun and put off his accoutrements with manifest reluctance, say, sotto
voce:  "Well, if digging is the way to put down the rebellion, I guess we will have to do it."
Our old soldiers had a "mind of their own," and were not afraid to let their commanders know
it; yet they were essentially as thoroughly subordinate and reliable as any troops any general
ever had the honor to command.

I now recall another incident which occurred a few days earlier, in which a young Indiana volunteer
was somewhat less respectful, though he had no idea whom he was addressing, nor, probably,
any thought whatever about "relative rank."  I had come out from my tent, before sunrise in
the morning, and was performing my morning ablutions in the ordinary camp basin, preparatory
to putting on my outer clothing.  None of my "people" were yet up, and the night sentinel of
my camp was a little way off.  There came up a weary, belated soldier who had, perhaps, been
trudging along much of the night, trying to overtake his regiment.  I heard him ask in a loud
voice:  "Where is the 128th Indiana?"  Not supposing the question was addressed to me, I did
not look up.  Then came in still louder tones and in an amended form which left no room for
doubt as to whom it was addressed:  "I mean you old fellow there with the red shirt!  Where
is the 128th Indiana?"

If from lapse of time my memory may not be exact as to the number of the regiment, I am sure
no apology is necessary to the gallant 128th.  It was, anyhow, one of those very high-numbered
new Indiana regiments which had recently joined the army.  The young soldier was sent to the
headquarters escort, given his breakfast, and carried along until his regiment was overtaken.

The Twenty-third Corps reached the railroad about the close of day on August 31, having time
to do no more than intrench our positions. The orders that day and night were urgent to make
the destruction of the railroad thorough and extensive.  This was evidently General Sherman's
primary object, showing a doubt in his mind whether the effect of his movement would be the
speedy abandonment of Atlanta, or whether he would have to trust to his destruction of the
railroad to accomplish that object.

Late in the night of the 31st, after General Stanley and I, who were encamped near together,
had gone to sleep, we received despatches from General Sherman stating in effect that as we
were too far from the main body of the army to receive orders from him or General Thomas, our
two corps must act on the morrow under the orders of the highest commander present, and that
General Stanley, having the older commission, was that highest commander.  I was therefore
directed to report to General Stanley and act under his orders. I replied to General Sherman
that while I differed from him in opinion upon the question of relative rank, I would for the
present cheerfully abide his decision and execute his orders.  Early the next morning, before
I had time to report to General Stanley, he appeared at my camp, evidently much disturbed by
the orders he had received.  He said General Sherman was wrong; that he was not entitled to
the command and did not want it; and urged me to accept the chief command, and let him act
under my orders.  I replied that General Sherman's order was imperative, and I could not relieve
him (General Stanley) from the responsibility of executing it.  It was all wrong, but there
was no present remedy, and he must do the best he could.  The position of his corps on the
right made it necessary that it should have the advance in the day's movement, while I would
follow close after and support him under all circumstances.

                                                  THE FAILURE AT JONESBORO'

So we started early in the morning to execute Sherman's orders-- thoroughly to destroy the
railroad, and close down on Thomas toward Jonesboro'.  That morning, as Sherman says (Vol.
II, page 107), "Howard found an intrenched foe (Hardee's corps) covering Jonesboro'," and "orders
were sent to Generals Thomas and Schofield to turn straight for Jonesboro', tearing up the
railroad track as they advanced."  But of course, as General Sherman had anticipated, such
orders could not reach me in time to do any good.  They were not received until after the affair
at Jonesboro' was ended.  But hearing the sound of battle in our front, I rode rapidly forward
to the head of Stanley's column, which was then not advancing, made inquiries for that officer,
and was informed that he was trying to find General Thomas to get orders.  I immediately brought
my infantry of the Twenty-third Corps out of the road occupied by Stanley's corps, moved it
to the front through woods and fields, and endeavored to find a way by which I could reach
the enemy's flank or rear, riding so far ahead with a few staff officers and orderlies that
I escaped very narrowly being captured by the enemy.  Finally, near dark, General Stanley's
troops began to deploy and attack the enemy; and as there were more troops on the ground than
could possibly be used that day, I could do not more than stand and watch their movements,
as I did with intense interest until my medical director, Dr. Hewit, one of the bravest and
coolest men I ever knew, called my attention to the fact that the place was much too hot for
a general and his staff who had nothing to do there.  I believe if General Sherman had been
in our place he would have thought it "more than a skirmish-line" (Vol. II, page 108) in Stanley's
front that gave us that fire both of musketry and artillery which my staff officers have frequently
spoken of as one of the ugliest they ever experienced.  General Stanley's fault was, not that
he deployed his troops, but that he did not put them in at once when he arrived on the ground,
instead of waiting for orders.  But General Stanley, whose gallantry was never questioned,
was a subordinate in experience. He had but recently risen to the command of a corps, and had
been little accustomed to act on his own responsibility.  Feeling overburdened with the responsibility
wrongfully thrust upon him that day, he naturally sought relief from it by reporting for orders
to General Thomas as soon as his corps was reunited to the main army.

The failure at Jonesboro', as at so many other places, was due to that erroneous interpretation
of the law that threw the supreme responsibility at the crisis of battle upon untried and (in
this case) unwilling shoulders, or else left the lawful commander without recognized authority,
to beg in vain of others to "co-operate" with him.

                                                     THE CAPTURE OF ATLANTA

During the night of August 31 others besides General Sherman were too restless and impatient
to sleep (Vol. II, page 108).  The sounds of explosion in Atlanta were distinctly heard, and
the flashes of light distinctly seen.  With the compass for direction and the watch for intervals
of time between flash and sound, there was no difficulty in locating their origin at Atlanta.
An untutored farmer may well have thought "these sounds were just like those of a battle,"
but a practised ear could not have failed to note the difference.  First there would come an
explosion louder and unlike the report of one or several guns, and this would be followed by
numerous smaller, sharper, and perfectly distinct reports, quite unlike that of musketry, which
could not be mistaken for anything but the explosion of shells.  There could be no room for
doubt that these lights and sounds meant the destruction in Atlanta of magazines or carloads
of fixed ammunition, and hence that Hood was abandoning that place.  I reported my observations
and conclusion to General Sherman, but he "still remained in doubt."  The doubt was to me incomprehensible;
but perhaps that was because I had no doubt from the start, whether I was right or wrong, what
the result would be. My period of elation was when we got firm hold of the railroad at Rough
and Ready.  Hood having failed to attack our exposed flank during the movement, the fall of
Atlanta was already an accomplished fact with me when Sherman was still in doubt, as well as
when Thomas thought the news "too good to be true."  But the above is worthy of noting only
as a necessary introduction to something far more important.

Hood's army was now divided and scattered over a distance of thirty miles, one corps below
Jonesboro' being just driven from its ground with considerable loss and in retreat to Lovejoy's,
the main body leaving Atlanta and stretched along the road toward McDonough; while Sherman's
whole army, except Slocum's corps, was in compact order about Jonesboro', nearly in a straight
line between Atlanta and Lovejoy's.  This seemed exactly the opportunity to destroy Hood's
army, if that was the objective of the campaign.  So anxious was I that this be attempted that
I offered to go with two corps, or even with one, and intercept Hood's retreat on the McDonough
road, and hold him until Sherman could dispose of Hardee or interpose his army between him
and Hood.  But more prudent counsels prevailed, and we remained quietly in our camps for five
days, while Hood leisurely marched round us with all his baggage and Georgia militia, and collected
his scattered fragments at Lovejoy's.

Atlanta had become, like Richmond, in popular estimation the real objective of military operations.
The public lost sight of the fact that it was armies in the field, and not fortified places,
which gave strength to the rebellion; and apparently even prominent generals, if they did not
share the popular delusion, at least recognized its value.  The capture of Atlanta was enough
to meet the "political necessity," make "the election of Mr. Lincoln certain," and win rejoicings
and congratulations from all parts of the North!  It was not worth while to run any risk of
trying to do more at that time!  It had to be left for two of Sherman's corps, after the other
four had gone on "the march to the sea," to fight Hood at Columbia and Spring Hill, hurl him
back from Franklin, and then, with reinforcements not equal to half what Sherman had taken
away, to overwhelm him at Nashville.  Why was not this done with a much larger force under
Sherman at Atlanta?  This is one of the questions for the future historian to discuss.

During our rest near Lovejoy's, General Sherman requested me to give him a statement in writing
of my dissent from his decision upon the question of relative rank, which I did.  This he submitted
to the War Department for decision, as a "question of rank that had arisen between Generals
Schofield and Stanley."  At this General Stanley was very indignant, as well as at General
Sherman's censure of his conduct on September 1; for the reason that no question of rank had
been raised by us, and the command was thrust upon him in opposition to his wish and in violation
of the law as he understood it.  In due time came the decision of the War Department, written
by General Halleck, sustaining the view of the law Stanley and I had taken, and reversing that
of General Sherman; also kindly commending my action in waiving the question during active
operations.

It was by virtue of the above decision of the War Department that I, instead of General Stanley,
had command of the force that in the following November, 1864, opposed Hood's advance from
the Tennessee River and repulsed his fierce assault at Franklin.

                                                       ABSENT FROM THE ARMY

As I was absent from the army on business connected with my department during most of Hood's
raid upon the railroad in the rear of Atlanta (Sherman having announced his purpose to let
his army rest during that time), I have little to say in respect to the operations resulting
therefrom.  But some things in Sherman's account seem to require a little elucidation.

Being informed by General Sherman of Hood's movement, I hurried to the front and tried to reach
the army by a special train with a small guard from Cleveland, Tenn., but met, October 13,
the head of Hood's column at Dalton, where several trains of cars with supplies and men without
arms returning from furlough on their way to Sherman had been stopped by the reported approach
of Hood.  I ordered all back to Cleveland, and we barely had time to escape capture by Hood's
cavalry.  On arriving at Cleveland, I reported by telegraph to General Thomas, then at Nashville;
and he desired me to go to Chattanooga, take command of the troops there, and prepare to defend
that place, which it was thought Hood might attempt to take by a coup de main, or to co-operate
with Sherman. As General Sherman says (Vol. II, page 156), "Hood had broken up the telegraph,
and thus had prevented quick communication"; but through my own scouts and spies I was able
to keep track of Hood's movements.  As soon as he turned westward I determined to move with
the troops, when no longer necessary to the defense of Chattanooga, rapidly to Trenton and
Valley Head, seize the passes through the Lookout range, and prevent Hood's escape in that
direction, presuming that Sherman would intercept his retreat down the Chattanooga valley.
I sent a courier to General Sherman informing him of my purpose, and informed General Thomas
by telegraph.  But the latter disapproved my plan, and directed me to move to defend Caperton's
Ferry.  This is what General Sherman refers to in his despatch of October 16:  "Your first
move on Trenton and Valley Head was right; the move to defend Caperton's Ferry is wrong.  Notify
General Thomas of these, my views."  But the difference between right and wrong proved immaterial,
since Hood was left free to escape down the Chattanooga valley.  Why this was done, or why
Sherman did not want to force the enemy east, by Spring Place, into the barren mountains, where
Johnston would have been compelled to go if McPherson's move on Resaca in May had been successful,
seems a mystery.  The explanation is probably to be found in Sherman's wish that Hood would
go where he would not be compelled to follow, and thus would leave him (Sherman) a clear road
for his march to the sea.  Indeed the conviction seems irresistible that Sherman and Hood could
hardly have acted in more perfect concert if they had been under the same commander.  The one
did exactly what the other wanted, and the other took care not to interfere with his movement.

At the close of the Atlanta campaign, I promised General Sherman that I would, as soon as I
should be able to do so, write a full critical history of that campaign as a text-book for
military students.  I have not yet found time to fulfil that promise.  The foregoing pages
were intended, when written, as only a very partial fulfilment of that task, and that almost
entirely of one side of it--far the most difficult side.  The other side is so easy, comparatively,
and is already so familiar to military students, that further elucidation now seems hardly
necessary.  Yet I hope, as a labor of love, if for no other reason, to present my impressions
of those grand tactical evolutions of a compact army of one hundred thousand men, as I witnessed
them with the intense interest of a young commander and student of the great art which has
so often in the history of the world determined the destinies of nations.

                                        HOOD'S OPERATIONS IN SHERMAN'S REAR

After the capture of Atlanta, in September, 1864, General Sherman proposed to give his army
rest for a month while he perfected his plans and preparations for a change of base to some
point on the Atlantic or the gulf, in pursuance of the general plan outlined by General Grant
before the Atlanta campaign was opened in May.  But the Confederate commander took the initiative,
about September 20, by moving his army around Sherman's right, striking his railroad about
Allatoona and toward Chattanooga, doing some damage, and then marching off westward with the
design of transferring the theater of war from Georgia to Alabama, Mississippi, or Tennessee.

Sherman very promptly decided not to accept that challenge to meet Hood upon a field chosen
by the latter, but to continue substantially the original plan for his own operations, having
in view also new ulterior plans opened to him by this erratic movement of his adversary.  An
essential modification of the original plan, to meet the unexpected movement of Hood, was to
send back into Tennessee force enough, in addition to the troops then there and others to be
assembled from the rear, to cope with Hood in the event of his attempting the invasion of Tennessee
and Kentucky, or to pursue and occupy his attention if he should attempt to follow Sherman.
General George H. Thomas, commanding the Department of the Cumberland, whose headquarters were
at Nashville, was already at that place, and was directed by General Sherman to assume command
of all the troops in the three departments under Sherman's command, except those with the latter
in Georgia, and to direct the operations against Hood.

Thomas had in his department at that time only the garrisons and railroad guards which had
been deemed essential during the preceding operations in Georgia; and many of those were soon
to be discharged by expiration of their terms of enlistment, their places to be supplied by
new regiments coming from the rear.  General A. J. Smith's corps, then in Missouri, about ten
thousand strong, was ordered to Tennessee, and Sherman also ordered Stanley, with the Fourth
Corps, about twelve thousand men, to return from Georgia to Tennessee and report to Thomas.
Stanley had started by rail to Tullahoma, and was to march, as he did, from the latter point
to Pulaski, Tennessee, which had been selected as the point of concentration for Thomas's forces.
This was the situation when I returned to the army and reported in person to General Sherman.

Under Sherman's promise of a month's rest for his army, I had gone back to attend to the business
of my department, as General Thomas had also done, and hence was in the rear when Hood made
his raid upon Sherman's railroad.  Upon reporting to General Sherman near the end of October,
I learned for the first time his purpose to march to Savannah, and what troops he had provided
for Thomas in Tennessee.  I told Sherman, with that perfect candor which he always invited,
that in my opinion Thomas's force was much too small; that Hood evidently intended to invade
Tennessee; and that he would not be diverted from his purpose by Sherman's march in the opposite
direction, but would, on the contrary, be encouraged thereby to pursue his own plan.  Hence
I requested Sherman to send me back with the Twenty-third Corps to join Thomas.  Sherman at
first appeared to understand my suggestions as a desire to be left in Tennessee instead of
Thomas, the latter to go with Sherman.  But I explained to him emphatically that such was not
my thought.  I took it for granted that Thomas was to command the army in Tennessee, and I
wanted only to go back and help him because he would, in my opinion, have to do the fighting
while Sherman's march would be unopposed.  Sherman then replied that he must have three grand
divisions, under Slocum, Howard, and myself, to make his army complete, and that he could not
spare me; and he gave no indication of concurrence in my opinion that he ought to send back
more troops.

                                                  SENT BACK TO THOMAS'S AID

After leaving General Sherman that afternoon and returning to my own camp, I wrote him a letter
giving a special reason why my corps, rather than any other, should be sent back to Tennessee
in order that it might be filled up my new regiments which had been ordered from the North.
No answer came to these suggestions until I had made three days' march toward Atlanta, en route
for Savannah. Then I received an order, October 30, to march to the nearest point on the railroad,
and report by telegraph to General Thomas for orders.

At first General Thomas ordered me to move by rail to Tullahoma, and then march across to Pulaski,
as Stanley was doing.  But just then Forrest with his cavalry appeared at Johnsonville, on
the Tennessee River west of Nashville, and destroyed a great quantity of property, General
Thomas not having sufficient force available to oppose him; hence on November 3 Thomas ordered
me to come at once by rail to Nashville with my corps, where I reported to him with the advance
of my troops on November 5.  He then ordered me to go at once with some of my troops to Johnsonville
and dispose of the Confederate cavalry there, and then to return to Nashville and proceed to
Pulaski, to take command of all the troops in the field, which would then include the Fourth
Corps, my own Twenty- third, except the detachment left at Johnsonville, and the cavalry watching
Hood toward Florence.  My duty at Johnsonville, where I left two brigades, was soon disposed
of; and I then returned to Nashville, and went at once by rail to Pulaski, arriving at that
place in the evening of November 13.

Some so-called histories of the Tennessee campaign have been based upon the theory that I was
marching from Georgia to Tennessee, to unite my corps with General Thomas's army at Nashville,
when I encountered Hood at Franklin, and after a sharp contest managed to elude him and continue
my march and unite with the Army of the Cumberland at Nashville.  Hence I wish to point out
clearly that I had been with the entire Twenty-third Corps to Nashville, with a part of it
to Johnsonville and back to Nashville, and thence to Columbia and near Pulaski, all by rail;
that all of the Army of the Cumberland then in Tennessee was the Fourth Corps and the cavalry
at and near Pulaski; that General Thomas placed those troops under my command, and that they
remained so until after the battle of Franklin, November 30, and the retreat to Nashville that
night; and that General Thomas did not have an army at Nashville until December 1.  I had united
with Thomas's troops two weeks before the battle of Franklin, and was commanding his army in
the field as well as my own during that time.  If the historians had read the records ( 1)
they could not possibly have fallen into such a mistake.

                              FAULTY INSTRUCTIONS TO OPPOSE HOOD AT PULASKI

Before reaching Pulaski I was furnished with an order from General Thomas's headquarters assigning
me to the command in the field, by virtue of my rank as a department commander, and a copy
of instructions which had already been telegraphed to General Stanley at Pulaski. I assumed
command in the morning of November 14.  The moment I met Stanley at Pulaski, in the evening
of November 13, he called my attention to the faulty position of the troops and to an error
in General Thomas's instructions, about which I then knew nothing because I was unacquainted
with the geography of the surrounding country.  Upon Stanley's statement, I halted Cox's division
of the Twenty-third Corps a few miles north of Pulaski so that the troops might be the more
readily placed as the situation required when I had time to consider it.  No part of the Twenty-third
Corps actually went to Pulaski, although that was the place to which General Thomas had ordered it.

