Locke reassured the Bishop of Worcester, and was humbly confident that Divine Justice would
find a way of vindicating Itself in spite of human wit. He might have added that if the sin
of Adam could not only be imputed to us juridically but could actually taint our consciousness--as
it certainly does if by Adam we understand our whole material heritage--so surely the sins
done or the habits acquired by the body beyond the scope of consciousness may taint or clarify
this consciousness now. Indeed, the idea we form of ourselves and of our respective experiences
is a figment of vanity, a product of dramatic imagination, without cognitive import save as
a reading of the hidden forces, physical or divine, which have formed us and actually govern us.

VI

Page 19. Mind and body interacted.

The self which acts in a man is itself moved by forces which have long been familiar to common
sense, without being understood except dramatically. These forces are called the passions;
or when the dramatic units distinguished are longish strands rather than striking episodes,
they are called temperament, character, or will; or perhaps, weaving all these strands and
episodes together again into one moral fabric, we call them simply human nature. But in what
does this vague human nature reside, and how does it operate on the non-human world? Certainly
not within the conscious sphere, or in the superficial miscellany of experience. Immediate
experience is the intermittent chaos which human nature, in combination with external circumstances,
is invoked to support and to rationalise. Is human nature, then, resident in each individual
soul? Certainly: but the soul is merely another name for that active principle which we are
looking for, to be the seat of our sensibility and the source of our actions. Is this psychic
power, then, resident in the body? Undoubtedly; since it is hereditary and transmitted by a
seed, and continually aroused and modified by material agencies.

Since this soul or self in the body is so obscure, the temptation is great to dramatise its
energies and to describe them in myths. Myth is the normal means of describing those forces
of nature which we cannot measure or understand; if we could understand or measure them we
should describe them prosaically and analytically, in what is called science. But nothing is
less measurable, or less intelligible to us, in spite of being so near us and familiar, as
the life of this carnal instrument, so soft and so violent, which breeds our sensations and
precipitates our actions. We see today how the Freudian psychology, just because it is not
satisfied with registering the routine of consciousness but endeavours to trace its hidden
mechanism and to unravel its physical causes, is driven to use the most frankly mythological
language. The physiological processes concerned, though presupposed, are not on the scale of
human perception and not traceable in detail; and the moral action, though familiar in snatches,
has to be patched by invented episodes, and largely attributed to daemonic personages that
never come on the stage.

Locke, in his psychology of morals, had at first followed the verbal rationalism by which people
attribute motives to themselves and to one another. Human actions were explained by the alleged
pursuit of the greater prospective pleasure, and avoidance of the greater prospective pain.
But this way of talking, though not so poetical as Freud's, is no less mythical. Eventual goods
and evils have no present existence and no power: they cannot even be discerned prophetically,
save by the vaguest fancy, entirely based on the present impulses and obsessions of the soul.
No future good, no future evil avails to move us, except--as Locke said after examining the
facts more closely--when a certain uneasiness in the soul (or in the body) causes us to turn
to those untried goods and evils with a present and living interest. This actual uneasiness,
with the dream pictures which it evokes, is a mere symptom of the direction in which human
nature in us is already moving, or already disposed to move. Without this prior physical impulse,
heaven may beckon and hell may yawn without causing the least variation in conduct. As in religious
conversion all is due to the call of grace, so in ordinary action all is due to the ripening
of natural impulses and powers within the psyche. The uneasiness observed by Locke is merely
the consciousness of this ripening, before the field of relevant action has been clearly discerned.

When all this is considered, the ostensible interaction between mind and body puts on a new
aspect. There are no purely mental ideas or intentions followed by material effects: there
are no material events followed by a purely mental sensation or idea. Mental events are always
elements in total natural events containing material elements also: material elements form
the organ, the stimulus, and probably also the object for those mental sensations or ideas.
Moreover, the physical strand alone is found to be continuous and traceable; the conscious
strand, the sequence of mental events, flares up and dies down daily, if not hourly; and the
medley of its immediate features--images, words, moods--juxtaposes China and Peru, past and
future, in the most irresponsible confusion. On the other hand, in human life it is a part
of the conscious element--intentions, affections, plans, and reasonings--that explains the
course of action: dispersed temporally, our dominant thoughts contain the reason for our continuous
behaviour, and seem to guide it. They are not so much links in a chain of minute consecutive
causes--an idea or an act of will often takes time to work and works, as it were, only posthumously--as
they are general overarching moral inspirations and resolves, which the machinery of our bodies
executes in its own way, often rendering our thoughts more precise in the process, or totally
transforming them. We do roughly what we meant to do, barring accidents. The reasons lie deep
in our compound nature, being probably inarticulate; and our action in a fragmentary way betrays
our moral disposition: betrays it in both senses of the word betray, now revealing it unawares,
and now sadly disappointing it.

I leave it for the reader's reflection to decide whether we should call such cohabitation of
mind with body interaction, or not rather sympathetic concomitance, self-annotation, and a
partial prophetic awakening to a life which we are leading automatically.

VII

Page 21. To the confusion of common sense.

Berkeley and his followers sometimes maintain that common sense is on their side, that they
have simply analysed the fact of our experience of the material world, and if there is any
paradox in their idealism, it is merely verbal and disappears with familiarity. All the "reality",
they say, all the force, obduracy, and fertility of nature subsist undiminished after we discover
that this reality resides, and can only reside, in the fixed order of our experience.

But no: analysis of immediate experience will never disclose any fixed order in it; the surface
of experience, when not interpreted materialistically, is an inextricable dream. Berkeley and
his followers, when they look in this direction, towards nature and the rationale of experience
and science, are looking away from their own system, and relying instead on the automatic propensity
of human nature to routine, so that we spontaneously prepare for repeating our actions (not
our experience) and even anticipate their occasions; a propensity further biased by the dominant
rhythms of the psyche, so that we assume a future not so much similar to the past, as better.
When developed, this propensity turns into trust in natural or divine laws; but it is contrary
to common sense to expect such laws to operate apart from matter and from the material continuity
of external occasions. This appears clearly in our trust in persons--a radical animal propensity--which
is consonant with common sense when these persons are living bodies, but becomes superstitious,
or at least highly speculative, when these persons are disembodied spirits.

It is a pity that the beautiful system of Berkeley should have appeared in an unspiritual age,
when religion was mundane and perfunctory, and the free spirit, where it stirred, was romantic
and wilful. For that system was essentially religious: it put the spirit face to face with
God, everywhere, always, and in everything it turned experience into a divine language for
the monition and expression of the inner man. Such an instrument, in spiritual hands, might
have served to dispel all natural illusions and affections, and to disinfect the spirit of
worldliness and egotism. But Berkeley and his followers had no such thought. All they wished
was to substitute a social for a material world, precisely because a merely social world might
make worldly interests loom larger and might induce mankind, against the evidence of their
senses and the still small voice in their hearts, to live as if their worldly interests were
absolute and must needs dominate the spirit.

Morally this system thus came to sanction a human servitude to material things such as ancient
materialists would have scorned; and theoretically the system did not escape the dogmatic commitments
of common sense against which it protested. For far from withdrawing into the depths of the
private spirit, it professed to describe universal experience and the evolution of all human
ideas. This notion of "experience" originally presupposed a natural agent or subject to endure
that experience, and to profit by it, by learning to live in better harmony with external circumstances.
Each agent or subject of experience might, at other times, become an object of experience also:
for they all formed part of a material world, which they might envisage in common in their
perceptions. Now the criticism which repudiates this common material medium, like all criticism
or doubt, is secondary and partial: it continues to operate with all the assumptions of common
sense, save the one which it is expressly criticising. So, in repudiating the material world,
this philosophy retains the notion of various agents or subjects gathering experience; and
we are not expected to doubt that there are just as many streams of experience without a world,
as there were people in the world when the world existed. But the number and nature of these
experiences have now become undiscoverable, the material persons having been removed who formerly
were so placed as to gather easily imagined experiences, and to be able to communicate them;
and the very notion of experience has been emptied of its meaning, when no external common
world subsists to impose that same experience on everybody. It was not knowledge of existing
experiences in vacuo that led common sense to assume a material world, but knowledge of an
existing material world led it to assume existing, and regularly reproducible, experiences.

Thus the whole social convention posited by empirical idealism is borrowed without leave, and
rests on the belief in nature for which it is substituted.

VIII

Page 21. The literary psychologist may come very near to the truth of experience.

