A very brief visit at Muir's home near Martinez, California, in the spring of 1883 found him
at what he frankly said was very distasteful work--managing a large fruit ranch. He was doing
the work well and making his orchards pay large dividends; but his heart was in the hills and
woods. Eagerly he questioned me of my travels and of the "progress" of the glaciers and woods
of Alaska. Beyond a few short mountain trips he had seen nothing for two years of his beloved
wilds.

Passionately he voiced his discontent: "I am losing the precious days. I am degenerating into
a machine for making money. I am learning nothing in this trivial world of men. I must break
away and get out into the mountains to learn the news."

In 1888 the ten years' limit which I had set for service in Alaska expired. The educational
necessities of my children and the feeling that was growing upon me like a smothering cloud
that if I remained much longer among the Indians I would lose all power to talk or write good
English, drove me from the Northwest to find a temporary home in Southern California.

I had not notified Muir of my coming, but suddenly appeared in his orchard at Martinez one
day in early summer. It was cherry-picking time and he was out among his trees superintending
a large force of workmen. He saw me as soon as I discovered him, and dropping the basket he
was carrying came running to greet me with both hands outstretched.

"Ah! my friend," he cried, "I have been longing mightily for you. You have come to take me
on a canoe trip to the countries beyond--to Lituya and Yakutat bays and Prince William Sound;
have you not? My weariness of this hum-drum, work-a-day life has grown so heavy it is like
to crush me. I'm ready to break away and go with you whenever you say."

"No," I replied, "I am leaving Alaska."

"Man, man!" protested Muir, "how can you do it? You'll never carry out such a notion as that
in the world. Your heart will cry every day for the North like a lost child; and in your sleep
the snow-banners of your white peaks will beckon to you.

"Why, look at me," he said, "and take warning. I'm a horrible example. I, who have breathed
the mountain air--who have really lived a life of freedom--condemned to penal servitude with
these miserable little bald-heads!" (holding up a bunch of cherries). "Boxing them up; putting
them in prison! And for money! Man! I'm like to die of the shame of it.

"And then you're not safe a day in this sordid world of money-grubbing men. I came near dying
a mean, civilized death, the other day. A Chinaman emptied a bucket of phosphorus over me and
almost burned me up. How different that would have been from a nice white death in the crevasse
of a glacier!

"Gin it were na for my bairnies I'd rin awa' frae a' this tribble an' hale ye back north wi' me."

So Muir would run on, now in English, now in broad Scotch; but through all his raillery there
ran a note of longing for the wilderness. Thus fired, the gun recoiled nearly 4 ft. on the press,
and the carriage ran back on the rails about 50 ft. The projectile had a velocity of 1,685 ft.
per second, and entered about 52 ft. into the butt.

We cannot yet give the pressure, but unquestionably it was a low one. The charges as the firing
continues will be increased in successive rounds up to the full 900 lb. charge.

Figs. 1 and 2 show the mounting of the 110½ ton gun in the barbette towers of the Benbow.
 The itch of the wanderlust in my feet had become a wearisome, nervous
ache, increasing with the years, and the call of the wild more imperative, until the fierce
yearning for the North was at times more than I could bear.

The first of the great northward gold stampedes--that of 1897 to the Klondyke in Northwestern
Canada on the borders of Alaska--afforded me the opportunity for which I was longing to return
to the land of my heart. The latter part of August saw me on The Queen, the largest of that
great fleet of passenger boats that were traversing the thousand miles of wonder and beauty
between Seattle and Skagway. These steamboats were all laden with gold seekers and their goods.
Seattle sprang into prominence and wealth, doubling her population in a few months. From every
community in the United States, from all Canada and from many lands across the oceans came
that strange mob of lawyers, doctors, clerks, merchants, farmers, mechanics, engineers, reporters,
sharpers--all gold-struck--all mad with excitement--all rushing pell-mell into a thousand new
and hard experiences.

As I stood on the upper deck of the vessel, watching the strange scene on the dock, who should
come up the gang-plank but John Muir, wearing the same old gray ulster and Scotch cap! It was
the last place in the world I would have looked for him. But he was not stampeding to the Klondyke.
His being there at that time was really an accident. In company with two other eminent "tree-men"
he had been spending the summer in the study of the forests of Canada and the three were "climaxing,"
as they said, in the forests of Alaska.

Five pleasurable days we had together on board The Queen. Muir was vastly amused by the motley
crowd of excited men, their various outfits, their queer equipment, their ridiculous notions
of camping and life in the wilderness. "A nest of ants," he called them, "taken to a strange
country and stirred up with a stick."

As our steamboat touched at Port Townsend, Muir received a long telegram from a San Francisco
newspaper, offering him a large sum if he would go over the mountains and down the Yukon to
the Klondyke, and write them letters about conditions there. He brought the telegram to me,
laughing heartily at the absurdity of anybody making him such a proposition.

"Do they think I'm daft," he asked, "like a' the lave o' thae puir bodies? When I go into that
wild it will not be in a crowd like this or on such a sordid mission. Ah! my old friend, they'll
be spoiling our grand Alaska."

He offered to secure for me the reporter's job tendered to him. I refused, urging my lack of
training for such work and my more important and responsible position.

"Why, that same paper has a host of reporters on the way to the Klondyke now," I said. "There
is ----" (naming a noted poet and author of the Coast). "He must be half-way down to Dawson
by this time."

"---- doesn't count," replied Muir, "for the patent reason that everybody knows he can't tell
the truth. The poor fellow is not to blame for it. He was just made that way. Use of Small Coal.--Meanwhile,
we may just consider how we ought to deal with solid fuel, whether for the purpose of making
gas from it or for burning it in situ.

The question arises, In what form ought solid fuel to be--ought it to be in lumps or in powder?
Universal practice says lumps, but some theoretical considerations would have suggested powder.
Remember, combustion is a chemical action, and when a chemist wishes to act on a solid easily,
he always pulverizes it as a first step.

"Oh," said Muir, "I shiver it away."

"Explain yourself," said the puzzled doctor.

"We-ll," drawled Muir, "two or three years ago I camped by the Muir Glacier for a week. I had
caught just such a cold as this from the same cause--a stuffy stateroom. So I made me a little
sled out of spruce boughs, put a blanket and some sea biscuit on it and set out up the glacier.
I got into a labyrinth of crevasses and a driving snowstorm, and had to spend the night on
the ice ten miles from land. I sat on the sled all night or thrashed about it, and had a dickens
of a time; I shivered so hard I shook the sled to pieces. When morning came my cold was all
gone. That is my prescription, Doctor. You are welcome to use it in your practice."

"Well," laughed the doctor, "if I had such patients as you in such a country as this I might
try your heroic remedy, but I am afraid it would hardly serve in general practice."

Muir and I made the most of these few days together, and walked the decks till late each night,
for he had much to tell me. He had at last written his story of Stickeen; and was working on
books treating of the Big Trees, the National Parks and the glaciers of Alaska.

At Wrangell, as we went ashore, we were greeted by joyful exclamations from the little company
of old Stickeen Indians we found on the dock. That sharp intaking of the breath which is the
Thlinget's note of surprise and delight, and the words Nuknate Ankow ka Glate Ankow (Priest
Chief and Ice Chief) passed along the line. Death had made many gaps in the old circle of friends,
both white and native, but the welcome from those who remained warmed our hearts.

From Wrangell northward the steamboat followed the route of our canoe voyage of 1880 through
Wrangell Narrows into Prince Frederick Sound, past Norris Glacier and Holkham Bay into Stevens
Passage, past Taku Bay to Juneau and on to Lynn Canal--then on the track of our voyage of 1879
up to Haines and beyond fifteen miles to that new, chaotic camp in the woods called Skagway.

The two or three days which it took The Queen to discharge her load of passengers and cargo
of their outfits were spent by Muir and his scientific companions in roaming the forests and
mountains about Skagway and examining the flora of that region. They kept mostly off the trail
of the struggling, straggling army of Cheechakoes (newcomers) who were blunderingly trying
to get their goods and themselves across the rugged, jagged mountains on their way to the promised
land of gold; but Muir found time to spend some hours with me in my camp under a hemlock, where
he ate again of my cooking over a camp-fire.

"You are going on a strange journey this time, my friend," he admonished me. "I don't envy
you. You'll have a hard time keeping your heart light and simple in the midst of this crowd
of madmen. Instead of the music of the wind among the spruce-tops and the tinkling of the waterfalls,
your ears will be filled with the oaths and groans of these poor, deluded, self-burdened men.
Keep close to Nature's heart, yourself; and break clear away, once in a while, and climb a
mountain or spend a week in the woods. Wash your spirit clean from the earth-stains of this
sordid, gold-seeking crowd in God's pure air. It will help you in your efforts to bring to
these men something better than gold. Don't lose your freedom and your love of the Earth as
God made it."

In 1899 it was my good fortune to have one more Alaska day with John Muir at Skagway. After
a year in the Klondyke I had spent the winter of 1898-99 in the Eastern States arousing the
Christian public to the needs of this newly discovered Empire of the North; and was returning
with other ministers to interior and western Alaska. The White Pass Railroad was completed
only to the summit; and it was a laborious task, requiring a month of very hard work, to get
our goods from Skagway over the thirty miles of mountains to Lake Bennett, where we could load
them on our open boat for the voyage of two thousand miles down the Yukon.

While I was engaged in this task there came to Skagway the steamship George W. Elder, carrying
one of the most remarkable companies of scientific men ever gathered together in one expedition.
Mr. Harriman, the great railroad magnate, had chartered the steamer, and had invited as his
guests many men of world reputation in various branches of natural science. Among them were
John Burroughs, Drs. Merriam and Dahl of the Smithsonian Institute, and, not least, John Muir.
Indeed he was called the Nestor of the expedition and his advice followed as that of no other.

The enticing proposition was made me by Muir, and backed by Mr. Harriman's personal invitation,
that I should join this distinguished company, share Muir's stateroom and spend the summer
cruising along the southern and western coasts of Alaska. However, the new mining camps were
calling with a still more imperative voice, and I had to turn my back to the Coast and face
the great, sun-bathed Interior. But what a joy and inspiration it would have been to climb
Muir, Geicke and Taylor glaciers again with Muir, note the rapid progress God was making in
His work of landscape gardening by means of these great tools, make at last our deferred visits
to Lituya and Yakutat bays and the fine glaciers of Prince William's Sound, and renew my studies
of this good world under my great Master.

A letter from Muir about his summer's cruise, written in November, 1899, reached me at Nome
in June, 1900; for those of us who had reached that bleak, exposed northwestern coast and wintered
there did not get any mail for six months. We were fifteen hundred miles from a post-office.

In his letter Muir wrote: "The voyage was a grand one, and I saw much that was new to me and
packed full of interest and instruction. But, do you know, I longed to break away from the
steamboat and its splendid company, get a dugout canoe and a crew of Indians, and, with you
as my companion, poke into the nooks and crannies of the mountains and glaciers which we could
not reach from the steamer. What great days we have had together, you and I!"

This day at Skagway, in 1899, was the last of my Alaska days with John Muir, except as I bring
them back and live them over in my thoughts. How often in my long voyages, by canoe or steamer,
among the thousand islands of southeastern Alaska, the intricate channels of Prince William's
Sound, the great rivers, and multitudinous lakes of the Interior, and the treeless, windswept
coasts of Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean; or in my tramps in the summer over the mountains
and plains of Alaska, or in the winter with my dogs over the frozen wilderness fighting the
great battle with the fierce cold or spellbound under the magic of the Aurora--how often have
I longed for the presence of Muir to heighten my enjoyment by his higher ecstasy, or reveal
to me what I was too dull to see or understand. I have had inspiring companions, and my life
has been blessed by many friendships inestimably precious and rich; but for me the World has
produced but one John Muir; and to no other man do I feel that I owe so much; for I was blind
and he made me see!

Only once since 1899 did I meet him, and then but for an hour at his temporary home in Los
Angeles in 1910. He was putting the finishing touches on his rich volume, "The Story of My
Boyhood and Youth." I submitted for his review and correction the article which forms the first
two chapters of this book. With that nice regard for absolute verity which always characterized
him he pointed out two or three passages in which his recollection clashed with mine, and I
at once made the changes he suggested. 

For several years he has given a large share of his time and strength to entomology. Nearly every
year he has led scientific excursions to different points in Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona,
etc., where he might reap the best results.
When he was seventy-three he made long trips to South America and Africa, and to the very end
he was exploring, studying, working and enjoying.

