I have so huge a desire to know exactly what you are doing, that I  suppose I should tell you
what I am doing by way of an example.  I  have a room now, a part of the twelve-foot verandah
sparred in, at  the most inaccessible end of the house.  Daily I see the sunrise  out of my
bed, which I still value as a tonic, a perpetual tuning  fork, a look of God's face once in
the day.  At six my breakfast  comes up to me here, and I work till eleven.  If I am quite
well, I  sometimes go out and bathe in the river before lunch, twelve.  In  the afternoon I
generally work again, now alone drafting, now with  Belle dictating.  Dinner is at six, and
I am often in bed by eight.   This is supposing me to stay at home.  But I must often be away,
sometimes all day long, sometimes till twelve, one, or two at  night, when you might see me
coming home to the sleeping house,  sometimes in a trackless darkness, sometimes with a glorious
tropic  moon, everything drenched with dew - unsaddling and creeping to  bed; and you would
no longer be surprised that I live out in this  country, and not in Bournemouth - in bed.

My great recent interruptions have (as you know) come from  politics; not much in my line,
you will say.  But it is impossible  to live here and not feel very sorely the consequences
of the  horrid white mismanagement.  I tried standing by and looking on,  and it became too
much for me.  They are such illogical fools; a  logical fool in an office, with a lot of red
tape, is conceivable.   Furthermore, he is as much as we have any reason to expect of  officials
- a thoroughly common-place, unintellectual lot.  But  these people are wholly on wires; laying
their ears down, skimming  away, pausing as though shot, and presto! full spread on the other
tack.  I observe in the official class mostly an insane jealousy of  the smallest kind, as
compared to which the artist's is of a grave,  modest character - the actor's, even; a desire
to extend his little  authority, and to relish it like a glass of wine, that is  IMPAYABLE.
Sometimes, when I see one of these little kings  strutting over one of his victories - wholly
illegal, perhaps, and  certain to be reversed to his shame if his superiors ever heard of 
it - I could weep.  The strange thing is that they HAVE NOTHING  ELSE.  I auscultate them in
vain; no real sense of duty, no real  comprehension, no real attempt to comprehend, no wish
for  information - you cannot offend one of them more bitterly than by  offering information,
though it is certain that you have MORE, and  obvious that you have OTHER, information than
they have; and  talking of policy, they could not play a better stroke than by  listening to
you, and it need by no means influence their action.   TENEZ, you know what a French post office
or railway official is?   That is the diplomatic card to the life.  Dickens is not in it; 
caricature fails.

All this keeps me from my work, and gives me the unpleasant side of  the world.  When your
letters are disbelieved it makes you angry,  and that is rot; and I wish I could keep out of
it with all my  soul.  But I have just got into it again, and farewell peace!

My work goes along but slowly.  I have got to a crossing place, I  suppose; the present book,
SAINT IVES, is nothing; it is in no  style in particular, a tissue of adventures, the central
character  not very well done, no philosophic pith under the yarn; and, in  short, if people
will read it, that's all I ask; and if they won't,  damn them!  I like doing it though; and
if you ask me why! - after  that I am on WEIR OF HERMISTON and HEATHERCAT, two Scotch stories,
which will either be something different, or I shall have failed.   The first is generally
designed, and is a private story of two or  three characters in a very grim vein.  The second
- alas! the  thought - is an attempt at a real historical novel, to present a  whole field
of time; the race - our own race - the west land and  Clydesdale blue bonnets, under the influence
of their last trial,  when they got to a pitch of organisation in madness that no other  peasantry
has ever made an offer at.  I was going to call it THE  KILLING TIME, but this man Crockett
has forestalled me in that.   Well, it'll be a big smash if I fail in it; but a gallant attempt.
All my weary reading as a boy, which you remember well enough, will  come to bear on it; and
if my mind will keep up to the point it was  in a while back, perhaps I can pull it through.

For two months past, Fanny, Belle, Austin (her child), and I have  been alone; but yesterday,
as I mentioned, Graham Balfour arrived,  and on Wednesday my mother and Lloyd will make up
the party to its  full strength.  I wish you could drop in for a month or a week, or  two hours.
That is my chief want.  On the whole, it is an  unexpectedly pleasant corner I have dropped
into for an end of it,  which I could scarcely have foreseen from Wilson's shop, or the  Princes
Street Gardens, or the Portobello Road.  Still, I would  like to hear what my ALTER EGO thought
of it; and I would sometimes  like to have my old MAITRE ES ARTS express an opinion on what
I do.   I put this very tamely, being on the whole a quiet elderly man; but  it is a strong
passion with me, though intermittent.  Now, try to  follow my example and tell me something
about yourself, Louisa, the  Bab, and your work; and kindly send me some specimens of what
you're about.  I have only seen one thing by you, about Notre Dame  in the WESTMINSTER or ST.
JAMES'S, since I left England, now I  suppose six years ago.

I have looked this trash over, and it is not at all the letter I  wanted to write - not truck
about officials, ancestors, and the  like rancidness - but you have to let your pen go in its
own  broken-down gait, like an old butcher's pony, stop when it pleases,  and go on again as
it will. - Ever, my dear Bob, your affectionate  cousin,

R. L. STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO HENRY JAMES

VAILIMA, JULY 7TH, 1894. 

He needed a woman to take care of him, and who so fitting as his wife's elder sister? So she
had the charge of me from my birth; and for a time I was weakly, as was but natural, and she was
always beside me, night and day watching over me, and my father nearly as anxious as she.
For his land had come down from father to son for more than three hundred years, and he would
have cared for me merely as his flesh and blood that was to inherit the land after him. But he needed
something to love, for all that, to most people, he was a stern, hard man, and he took to me
as, I fancy, he had taken to no human being before--as he might have taken to my mother, if she
had had no former life for him to be jealous of. I loved him back again right heartily. I loved
all around me, I believe, for everybody was kind to me. After a time, I overcame my original
weakness of constitution, and was just a bonny, strong-looking lad
whom every passer-by noticed, when my father took me with him to the
nearest town.

At home I was the darling of my aunt, the tenderly-beloved of my father, the pet and plaything
of the old domestics, the "young master" of the farm-labourers, before whom I played many a
lordly antic, assuming a sort of authority which sat oddly enough, I doubt not, on such a baby as I
was.

Gregory was three years older than I. Aunt Fanny was always kind to him in deed and in action,
but she did not often think about him, she had fallen so completely into the habit of being
engrossed by me, from the fact of my having come into her charge as a delicate baby. My father
never got over his grudging dislike to his stepson, who had so innocently wrestled with him
for the possession of my mother's heart. I mistrust me, too, that my father always considered him
as the cause of my mother's death and my early delicacy; and utterly unreasonable as this
may seem, I believe my father rather cherished his feeling of alienation to my brother as a
duty, than strove to repress it. Yet not for the world would my father have grudged him anything
that money could purchase. That was, as it were, in the bond when he had wedded my mother.
Gregory was lumpish and loutish, awkward and ungainly, marring whatever he meddled in, and
many a hard word and sharp scolding did he get from the people about the farm, who hardly waited
till my father's back was turned before they rated the stepson. I am ashamed--my heart is sore
to think how I fell into the fashion of the family, and slighted my poor orphan step- brother. I don't
think I ever scouted him, or was wilfully ill-natured to him; but the habit of being considered
in all things, and being treated as something uncommon and superior, made me insolent in my prosperity,
and I exacted more than Gregory was always willing to grant, and then, irritated, I sometimes repeated
the disparaging words I had heard others use with regard to him,
without fully understanding their meaning. Whether he did or not I
cannot tell. I am afraid he did.  We had the ward-room mess
on  deck, lit by pink wax tapers, everybody, of course, in uniform but  myself, and the first
lieutenant (who is a rheumaticky body)  wrapped in a boat cloak.  Gradually the sunset faded
out, the  island disappeared from the eye, though it remained menacingly  present to the ear
with the voice of the surf; and then the captain  turned on the searchlight and gave us the
coast, the beach, the  trees, the native houses, and the cliffs by glimpses of daylight, a
kind of deliberate lightning.  About which time, I suppose, we must  have come as far as the
dessert, and were probably drinking our  first glass of port to Her Majesty.  We stayed two
days at the  island, and had, in addition, a very picturesque snapshot at the  native life.
The three islands of Manu'a are independent, and are  ruled over by a little slip of a half-caste
girl about twenty, who  sits all day in a pink gown, in a little white European house with
about a quarter of an acre of roses in front of it, looking at the  palm-trees on the village
street, and listening to the surf.  This,  so far as I could discover, was all she had to do.
'This is a very  dull place,' she said.  It appears she could go to no other village  for fear
of raising the jealousy of her own people in the capital.   And as for going about 'tafatafaoing,'
as we say here, its cost was  too enormous.  A strong able-bodied native must walk in front
of  her and blow the conch shell continuously from the moment she  leaves one house until the
moment she enters another.  Did you ever  blow the conch shell?  I presume not; but the sweat
literally  hailed off that man, and I expected every moment to see him burst a  blood-vessel.
We were entertained to kava in the guest-house with  some very original features.  The young
men who run for the KAVA  have a right to misconduct themselves AD LIBITUM on the way back;
and though they were told to restrain themselves on the occasion of  our visit, there was a
strange hurly-burly at their return, when  they came beating the trees and the posts of the
houses, leaping,  shouting, and yelling like Bacchants.

I tasted on that occasion what it is to be great.  My name was  called next after the captain's,
and several chiefs (a thing quite  new to me, and not at all Samoan practice) drank to me by name.

And now, if you are not sick of the CURACOA and Manu'a, I am, at  least on paper.  And I decline
any longer to give you examples of  how not to write.

By the by, you sent me long ago a work by Anatole France, which I  confess I did not TASTE.
Since then I have made the acquaintance  of the ABBE COIGNARD, and have become a faithful adorer.
I don't  think a better book was ever written.

And I have no idea what I have said, and I have no idea what I  ought to have said, and I am
a total ass, but my heart is in the  right place, and I am, my dear Henry James, yours,

R. L. S.

Letter:  TO MR. MARCEL SCHWOB

VAILIMA, UPOLU, SAMOA, JULY 7, 1894.

DEAR MR. MARCEL SCHWOB, - Thank you for having remembered me in my  exile.  I have read MIMES
twice as a whole; and now, as I write, I  am reading it again as it were by accident, and a
piece at a time,  my eye catching a word and travelling obediently on through the  whole number.
It is a graceful book, essentially graceful, with  its haunting agreeable melancholy, its pleasing
savour of  antiquity.  At the same time, by its merits, it shows itself rather  as the promise
of something else to come than a thing final in  itself.  You have yet to give us - and I am
expecting it with  impatience - something of a larger gait; something daylit, not  twilit;
something with the colours of life, not the flat tints of a  temple illumination; something
that shall be SAID with all the  clearnesses and the trivialities of speech, not SUNG like
a semi- articulate lullaby.  It will not please yourself as well, when you  come to give it
us, but it will please others better.  It will be  more of a whole, more worldly, more nourished,
more commonplace -  and not so pretty, perhaps not even so beautiful.  No man knows  better
than I that, as we go on in life, we must part from  prettiness and the graces.  We but attain
qualities to lose them;  life is a series of farewells, even in art; even our proficiencies
are deciduous and evanescent.  So here with these exquisite pieces  the XVIIth, XVIIIth, and
IVth of the present collection.  You will  perhaps never excel them; I should think the 'Hermes,'
never.   Well, you will do something else, and of that I am in expectation.  - Yours cordially,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO A. ST. GAUDENS

VAILIMA, SAMOA, JULY 8, 1894.

MY DEAR ST. GAUDENS, - This is to tell you that the medallion has  been at last triumphantly
transported up the hill and placed over  my smoking-room mantelpiece.  It is considered by
everybody a  first-rate but flattering portrait.  We have it in a very good  light, which brings
out the artistic merits of the god-like  sculptor to great advantage.  As for my own opinion,
I believe it  to be a speaking likeness, and not flattered at all; possibly a  little the reverse.
The verses (curse the rhyme) look remarkably  well.

Please do not longer delay, but send me an account for the expense  of the gilt letters.

MY DEAR ADELAIDE, - . . . So, at last, you are going into mission  work? where I think your
heart always was.  You will like it in a  way, but remember it is dreary long.  Do you know
the story of the  American tramp who was offered meals and a day's wage to chop with  the back
of an axe on a fallen trunk.  'Damned if I can go on  chopping when I can't see the chips fly!'
You will never see the  chips fly in mission work, never; and be sure you know it  beforehand.
The work is one long dull disappointment, varied by  acute revulsions; and those who are by
nature courageous and  cheerful and have grown old in experience, learn to rub their hands
over infinitesimal successes.  However, as I really believe there  is some good done in the
long run - GUTTA CAVAT LAPIDEM NON VI in  this business - it is a useful and honourable career
in which no  one should be ashamed to embark.  Always remember the fable of the  sun, the storm,
and the traveller's cloak.  Forget wholly and for  ever all small pruderies, and remember that
YOU CANNOT CHANGE  ANCESTRAL FEELINGS OF RIGHT AND WRONG WITHOUT WHAT IS PRACTICALLY  SOUL-MURDER.
Barbarous as the customs may seem, always hear them  with patience, always judge them with
gentleness, always find in  them some seed of good; see that you always develop them; remember
that all you can do is to civilise the man in the line of his own  civilisation, such as it
is.  And never expect, never believe in,  thaumaturgic conversions.  They may do very well
for St. Paul; in  the case of an Andaman islander they mean less than nothing.  In  fact, what
you have to do is to teach the parents in the interests  of their great-grandchildren.

Now, my dear Adelaide, dismiss from your mind the least idea of  fault upon your side; nothing
is further from the fact.  I cannot  forgive you, for I do not know your fault.  My own is
plain enough,  and the name of it is cold-hearted neglect; and you may busy  yourself more
usefully in trying to forgive me.  But ugly as my  fault is, you must not suppose it to mean
more than it does; it  does not mean that we have at all forgotten you, that we have  become
at all indifferent to the thought of you.  See, in my life  of Jenkin, a remark of his, very
well expressed, on the friendships  of men who do not write to each other.  I can honestly
say that I  have not changed to you in any way; though I have behaved thus ill,  thus cruelly.
Evil is done by want of - well, principally by want  of industry.  You can imagine what I would
say (in a novel) of any  one who had behaved as I have done, DETERIORA SEQUOR.  And you must
somehow manage to forgive your old friend; and if you will be so  very good, continue to give
us news of you, and let us share the  knowledge of your adventures, sure that it will be always
followed  with interest - even if it is answered with the silence of  ingratitude.  For I am
not a fool; I know my faults, I know they  are ineluctable, I know they are growing on me.
I know I may  offend again, and I warn you of it.  But the next time I offend,  tell me so
plainly and frankly like a lady, and don't lacerate my  heart and bludgeon my vanity with imaginary
faults of your own and  purely gratuitous penitence.  I might suspect you of irony!

We are all fairly well, though I have been off work and off - as  you know very well - letter-writing.
Yet I have sometimes more  than twenty letters, and sometimes more than thirty, going out each
mail.  And Fanny has had a most distressing bronchitis for some  time, which she is only now
beginning to get over.  I have just  been to see her; she is lying - though she had breakfast
an hour  ago, about seven - in her big cool, mosquito-proof room,  ingloriously asleep.  As
for me, you see that a doom has come upon  me:  I cannot make marks with a pen - witness 'ingloriously'
above;  and my amanuensis not appearing so early in the day, for she is  then immersed in household
affairs, and I can hear her 'steering  the boys' up and down the verandahs - you must decipher
this  unhappy letter for yourself and, I fully admit, with everything  against you.  A letter
should be always well written; how much more  a letter of apology!  Legibility is the politeness
of men of  letters, as punctuality of kings and beggars.  By the punctuality  of my replies,
and the beauty of my hand-writing, judge what a fine  conscience I must have!

Now, my dear gamekeeper, I must really draw to a close.  For I have  much else to write before
the mail goes out three days hence.   Fanny being asleep, it would not be conscientious to
invent a  message from her, so you must just imagine her sentiments.  I find  I have not the
heart to speak of your recent loss.  You remember  perhaps, when my father died, you told me
those ugly images of  sickness, decline, and impaired reason, which then haunted me day  and
night, would pass away and be succeeded by things more happily  characteristic.  I have found
it so.  He now haunts me, strangely  enough, in two guises; as a man of fifty, lying on a hillside
and  carving mottoes on a stick, strong and well; and as a younger man,  running down the sands
into the sea near North Berwick, myself -  AETAT. II - somewhat horrified at finding him so
beautiful when  stripped!  I hand on your own advice to you in case you have  forgotten it,
as I know one is apt to do in seasons of bereavement.  - Ever yours, with much love and sympathy,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO MRS. BAKER

VAILIMA, SAMOA, JULY 16, 1894.

DEAR MRS. BAKER, - I am very much obliged to you for your letter  and the enclosure from Mr.
Skinner.  Mr. Skinner says he 'thinks  Mr. Stevenson must be a very kind man'; he little knows
me.  But I  am very sure of one thing, that you are a very kind woman.  I envy  you - my amanuensis
being called away, I continue in my own hand,  or what is left of it - unusually legible, I
am thankful to see - I  envy you your beautiful choice of an employment.  There must be no
regrets at least for a day so spent; and when the night falls you  need ask no blessing on
your work.

'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of these.' - Yours truly,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO J. M. BARRIE

VAILIMA, JULY 13, 1894.

MY DEAR BARRIE, - This is the last effort of an ulcerated  conscience.  I have been so long
owing you a letter, I have heard  so much of you, fresh from the press, from my mother and
Graham  Balfour, that I have to write a letter no later than to-day, or  perish in my shame.
But the deuce of it is, my dear fellow, that  you write such a very good letter that I am ashamed
to exhibit  myself before my junior (which you are, after all) in the light of  the dreary
idiot I feel.  Understand that there will be nothing  funny in the following pages.  If I can
manage to be rationally  coherent, I shall be more than satisfied.

In the first place, I have had the extreme satisfaction to be shown  that photograph of your
mother.  It bears evident traces of the  hand of an amateur.  How is it that amateurs invariably
take better  photographs than professionals?  I must qualify invariably.  My own  negatives
have always represented a province of chaos and old night  in which you might dimly perceive
fleecy spots of twilight,  representing nothing; so that, if I am right in supposing the  portrait
of your mother to be yours, I must salute you as my  superior.  Is that your mother's breakfast?
Or is it only  afternoon tea?  If the first, do let me recommend to Mrs. Barrie to  add an
egg to her ordinary.  Which, if you please, I will ask her  to eat to the honour of her son,
and I am sure she will live much  longer for it, to enjoy his fresh successes.  I never in
my life  saw anything more deliciously characteristic.  I declare I can hear  her speak.  I
wonder my mother could resist the temptation of your  proposed visit to Kirriemuir, which it
was like your kindness to  propose.  By the way, I was twice in Kirriemuir, I believe in the
year '71, when I was going on a visit to Glenogil.  It was  Kirriemuir, was it not?  I have
a distinct recollection of an inn  at the end - I think the upper end - of an irregular open
place or  square, in which I always see your characters evolve.  But, indeed,  I did not pay
much attention; being all bent upon my visit to a  shooting-box, where I should fish a real
trout-stream, and I  believe preserved.  I did, too, and it was a charming stream, clear  as
crystal, without a trace of peat - a strange thing in Scotland -  and alive with trout; the
name of it I cannot remember, it was  something like the Queen's River, and in some hazy way
connected  with memories of Mary Queen of Scots.  It formed an epoch in my  life, being the
end of all my trout-fishing.  I had always been  accustomed to pause and very laboriously to
kill every fish as I  took it.  But in the Queen's River I took so good a basket that I  forgot
these niceties; and when I sat down, in a hard rain shower,  under a bank, to take my sandwiches
and sherry, lo! and behold,  there was the basketful of trouts still kicking in their agony.
I  had a very unpleasant conversation with my conscience.  All that  afternoon I persevered
in fishing, brought home my basket in  triumph, and sometime that night, 'in the wee sma' hours
ayont the  twal,' I finally forswore the gentle craft of fishing.  I dare say  your local knowledge
may identify this historic river; I wish it  could go farther and identify also that particular
Free kirk in  which I sat and groaned on Sunday.  While my hand is in I must tell  you a story.
At that antique epoch you must not fall into the  vulgar error that I was myself ancient. 
I was, on the contrary,  very young, very green, and (what you will appreciate, Mr. Barrie)
very shy.  There came one day to lunch at the house two very  formidable old ladies - or one
very formidable, and the other what  you please - answering to the honoured and historic name
of the  Miss C- A-'s of Balnamoon.  At table I was exceedingly funny, and  entertained the
company with tales of geese and bubbly-jocks.  I  was great in the expression of my terror
for these bipeds, and  suddenly this horrid, severe, and eminently matronly old lady put  up
a pair of gold eye-glasses, looked at me awhile in silence, and  pronounced in a clangorous
voice her verdict.  'You give me very  much the effect of a coward, Mr. Stevenson!'  I had
very nearly  left two vices behind me at Glenogil - fishing and jesting at  table.  And of
one thing you may be very sure, my lips were no more  opened at that meal.

JULY 29TH

No, Barrie, 'tis in vain they try to alarm me with their bulletins.   No doubt, you're ill,
and unco ill, I believe; but I have been so  often in the same case that I know pleurisy and
pneumonia are in  vain against Scotsmen who can write, (I once could.)  You cannot  imagine
probably how near me this common calamity brings you.  CE  QUE J'AI TOUSSE DANS MA VIE!  How
often and how long have I been on  the rack at night and learned to appreciate that noble passage
in  the Psalms when somebody or other is said to be more set on  something than they 'who dig
for hid treasures - yea, than those  who long for the morning' - for all the world, as you
have been  racked and you have longed.  Keep your heart up, and you'll do.   Tell that to your
mother, if you are still in any danger or  suffering.  And by the way, if you are at all like
me - and I tell  myself you are very like me - be sure there is only one thing good  for you,
and that is the sea in hot climates.  Mount, sir, into 'a  little frigot' of 5000 tons or so,
and steer peremptorily for the  tropics; and what if the ancient mariner, who guides your frigot,
should startle the silence of the ocean with the cry of land ho! -  say, when the day is dawning
- and you should see the turquoise  mountain tops of Upolu coming hand over fist above the
horizon?   Mr. Barrie, sir, 'tis then there would be larks!  And though I  cannot be certain
that our climate would suit you (for it does not  suit some), I am sure as death the voyage
would do you good - would  do you BEST - and if Samoa didn't do, you needn't stay beyond the
month, and I should have had another pleasure in my life, which is  a serious consideration
for me.  I take this as the hand of the  Lord preparing your way to Vailima - in the desert,
certainly - in  the desert of Cough and by the ghoul-haunted woodland of Fever -  but whither
that way points there can be no question - and there  will be a meeting of the twa Hoasting
Scots Makers in spite of  fate, fortune, and the Devil.  ABSIT OMEN!

My dear Barrie, I am a little in the dark about this new work of  yours:  what is to become
of me afterwards?  You say carefully -  methought anxiously - that I was no longer me when
I grew up?  I  cannot bear this suspense:  what is it?  It's no forgery?  And AM I  HANGIT?
These are the elements of a very pretty lawsuit which you  had better come to Samoa to compromise.
I am enjoying a great  pleasure that I had long looked forward to, reading Orme's HISTORY 
OF INDOSTAN; I had been looking out for it everywhere; but at last,  in four volumes, large
quarto, beautiful type and page, and with a  delectable set of maps and plans, and all the
names of the places  wrongly spelled - it came to Samoa, little Barrie.  I tell you  frankly,
you had better come soon.  I am sair failed a'ready; and  what I may be if you continue to
dally, I dread to conceive.  I may  be speechless; already, or at least for a month or so,
I'm little  better than a teetoller - I beg pardon, a teetotaller.  It is not  exactly physical,
for I am in good health, working four or five  hours a day in my plantation, and intending
to ride a paper-chase  next Sunday - ay, man, that's a fact, and I havena had the hert to 
breathe it to my mother yet - the obligation's poleetical, for I am  trying every means to
live well with my German neighbours - and, O  Barrie, but it's no easy!  To be sure, there
are many exceptions.   And the whole of the above must be regarded as private - strictly  private.
Breathe it not in Kirriemuir:  tell it not to the  daughters of Dundee!  What a nice extract
this would make for the  daily papers! and how it would facilitate my position here! . . .

AUGUST 5TH.

This is Sunday, the Lord's Day.  'The hour of attack approaches.'   And it is a singular consideration
what I risk; I may yet be the  subject of a tract, and a good tract too - such as one which
I  remember reading with recreant awe and rising hair in my youth, of  a boy who was a very
good boy, and went to Sunday Schule, and one  day kipped from it, and went and actually bathed,
and was dashed  over a waterfall, and he was the only son of his mother, and she  was a widow.
A dangerous trade, that, and one that I have to  practise.  I'll put in a word when I get home
again, to tell you  whether I'm killed or not.  'Accident in the (Paper) Hunting Field:   death
of a notorious author.  We deeply regret to announce the  death of the most unpopular man in
Samoa, who broke his neck at the  descent of Magagi, from the misconduct of his little raving
lunatic  of an old beast of a pony.  It is proposed to commemorate the  incident by the erection
of a suitable pile.  The design (by our  local architect, Mr. Walker) is highly artificial,
with a rich and  voluminous Crockett at each corner, a small but impervious Barrieer  at the
entrance, an arch at the top, an Archer of a pleasing but  solid character at the bottom; the
colour will be genuine William- Black; and Lang, lang may the ladies sit wi' their fans in
their  hands.'  Well, well, they may sit as they sat for me, and little  they'll reck, the
ungrateful jauds!  Muckle they cared about  Tusitala when they had him!  But now ye can see
the difference;  now, leddies, ye can repent, when ower late, o' your former  cauldness and
what ye'll perhaps allow me to ca' your TEPEEDITY!   He was beautiful as the day, but his day
is done!  And perhaps, as  he was maybe gettin' a wee thing fly-blawn, it's nane too shune.

MONDAY, AUGUST 6TH.

Well, sir, I have escaped the dangerous conjunction of the widow's  only son and the Sabbath
Day.  We had a most enjoyable time, and  Lloyd and I were 3 and 4 to arrive; I will not tell
here what  interval had elapsed between our arrival and the arrival of 1 and  2; the question,
sir, is otiose and malign; it deserves, it shall  have no answer.  And now without further
delay to the main purpose  of this hasty note.  We received and we have already in fact  distributed
the gorgeous fahbrics of Kirriemuir.  Whether from the  splendour of the robes themselves,
or from the direct nature of the  compliments with which you had directed us to accompany the
presentations, one young lady blushed as she received the proofs of  your munificence. . .
. Bad ink, and the dregs of it at that, but  the heart in the right place.  Still very cordially
interested in  my Barrie and wishing him well through his sickness, which is of  the body,
and long defended from mine, which is of the head, and by  the impolite might be described
as idiocy.  The whole head is  useless, and the whole sitting part painful:  reason, the recent
Paper Chase.

There was racing and chasing in Vailile plantation, And vastly we enjoyed it, But, alas! for
the state of my foundation, For it wholly has destroyed it.

Come, my mind is looking up. One day, he gave way to his temper, and cursed and swore at Gregory,
who had got into some mischief, as children will; my mother made some
excuse for him; my father said it was hard enough to have to keep
another man's child, without having it perpetually held up in its
naughtiness by his wife, who ought to be always in the same mind that
he was; and so from little they got to more; and the end of it was,
that my mother took to her bed before her time, and I was born that
very day.



It now remains to inform you that I have taken what we call here  'German offence' at not receiving
cards, and that the only  reparation I will accept is that Mrs. Barrie shall incontinently
upon the receipt of this Take and Bring you to Vailima in order to  apologise and be pardoned
for this offence.  The commentary of  Tamaitai upon the event was brief but pregnant:  'Well,
it's a  comfort our guest-room is furnished for two.'

This letter, about nothing, has already endured too long.  I shall  just present the family
to Mrs. Barrie - Tamaitai, Tamaitai Matua,  Teuila, Palema, Loia, and with an extra low bow, Yours,

TUSITALA.

Letter:  TO DR. BAKEWELL

VAILIMA, AUGUST 7, 1894.

DEAR DR. BAKEWELL, - I am not more than human.  I am more human  than is wholly convenient,
and your anecdote was welcome.  What you  say about UNWILLING WORK, my dear sir, is a consideration
always  present with me, and yet not easy to give its due weight to.  You  grow gradually into
a certain income; without spending a penny  more, with the same sense of restriction as before
when you  painfully scraped two hundred a year together, you find you have  spent, and you
cannot well stop spending, a far larger sum; and  this expense can only be supported by a certain
production.   However, I am off work this month, and occupy myself instead in  weeding my cacao,
paper chases, and the like.  I may tell you, my  average of work in favourable circumstances
is far greater than you  suppose:  from six o'clock till eleven at latest, and often till 
twelve, and again in the afternoon from two to four.  My hand is  quite destroyed, as you may
perceive, to-day to a really unusual  extent.  I can sometimes write a decent fist still; but
I have just  returned with my arms all stung from three hours' work in the  cacao. - Yours, etc.,

R. L. S.

Letter:  TO JAMES PAYN

VAILIMA, UPOLU, SAMOA [AUGUST 11, 1894].

MY DEAR JAMES PAYN, - I hear from Lang that you are unwell, and it  reminds me of two circumstances:
First, that it is a very long  time since you had the exquisite pleasure of hearing from me;
and  second, that I have been very often unwell myself, and sometimes  had to thank you for
a grateful anodyne.

