Her heart was bursting with the thought of what made-up tales of vanity he would spin from
this. "Later than that. Later than that," she told him wildly. "And I have been here since
dear knows when, and there is nobody ready to give me work."

He shot out a finger. "What's that by your machine?"

She noticed that his finger was shaking, and that he too was very pale, and she forgot to feel
rage or anything but immeasurable despair that she should have to live in this world where
everyone was either inscrutably cruel or mad. She murmured levelly, dreamily, "Why, papers
that you have just put down. I will type them at once. I will type them at once."

For a time he stood behind her at the hearth, breathing snortingly, and at times seeming to
laugh; said in a half-voice, "A fire fit to roast an ox!" and for a space was busy moving lumps
of coal down into the grate. A silence followed before he came to the other side of her table
and said, "Stop that noise. I want to speak to you." The gesture was rude, but it was picoteed
with a faint edge of pitifulness. The way he put his hand to his head suggested that he was
in pain, so she shifted her hands from the keys and looked up vigilantly, prepared to be kind
if he had need of it, for of course people in pain did not know what they were doing. But since
there was no sense in letting people think they could just bite one's head off and nothing
to pay, she said with spirit, "But it's ten minutes past nine, and what's this by my machine?"

Mr. Philip bowed his head with an air of meekness; he seemed to sway under the burden of his
extreme humility, to be feeling sick under the strain of his extreme forbearance. He went on
in a voice which implied that he was forgiving her freely for an orgy of impertinence. "Will
you please take a note, Miss Melville, that Mr. Mactavish James wants to speak to you this
afternoon?"

"He usually does," replied Ellen.

"Ah, but this is a special occasion," said Mr. Philip, with so genial an expression that she
stared up at him, her eyebrows knit and her mouth puckering back a smile, her deep hopeful
prepossession, which she held in common with all young people, that things really happened
prettily, making her ready to believe that it was all a mistake and he was about to announce
a treat or a promotion. And he, reading this ridiculous sign of youth, bent over her, prolonging
his kind beam and her response to it, so that afterwards, when he undeceived her, there should
be no doubt at all that she had worn that silly air of expecting something nice to be given
to her, and no doubt that he had seen and understood and jeered at it. Then the wave of his
malice broke and soused her. "Things have come to a head, Miss Melville! There's been a client
complaining!"

She drew herself up. "A client complaining!" she cried, and he hated her still more, for she
had again eluded him. She had forgotten him and the trap he had laid to make a fool of her
in her suspicion that someone had dared to question her efficiency. "Well, what's that to do
with me? Whoever's been complaining--and no doubt if your clients once began at that game they
wouldn't need to stop between now and the one o'clock gun--it's not likely I'm among his troubles.
So far as my work goes I'm practically infallible."

"It's not your work that's been spoken of," said Mr. Philip, laughing. "Perhaps we might call
it your play."

He had begun to speak, as he always did when they were alone, in a thick whisper, as if they
were doing something unlawful together. He had drawn near to her, as he always did, and was
hunching his shoulders and making wriggling recessive movements such as a man might make who
stood in darkness among moving pollutions. But his glee had gone. It had grown indeed to a
grey effervescence that set a tremor working over his features, made him speak in shaken phrases,
and unsteadied everything about him except the gloating stare which he bent on her bowed head
because he was eager to see her face, which surely would look plain with all her colour gone.
"There's just a limit to everything, Miss Melville, a limit to everything. You seem to have
come to it. Ay, long ago, I have been thinking! You'd better know at once that you were seen
late on Saturday night, hanging about with a man. It sounded like yon chemist chap from the
description. You were seen entering a cab and driving away. I won't tell you"--he stepped backwards,
swelled a little, and became the respectable man who has to hem a dry embarrassed cough before
he speaks of evil--"what the client made of it all." And then he bent again in that contracted,
loathing attitude, as if they were standing in an unspacious sewer and she had led him there,
and with that viscous sibilance he said many things which she could not fully understand, but
which seemed to mean that under decent life there was an oozy mud and she had somehow wallowed
in it. "But doubtless you'll be able to give a satisfactory explanation of the incident," he
finished; and as she continued to bow her head, so that he could not see the effects of this
misery which he had so adroitly thrust upon her, he leant over her crying out he hardly knew
what, save that they were persecuting things.

But when she slowly raised her chin he saw with rage that though he had spoilt the colour of
her skin with fear, and made her break up the serene pattern of her features with twitching
efforts to hold back her tears, he had not been able to destroy the secondary meaning of her
face. It had ceased to be pretty; it no longer offered lovely untroubled surfaces to the lips.
But it still proclaimed that she was indubitably precious as a diamond is indubitably hard;
it still calmly declared that if evil had come out of his meeting with her it had been contrived
out of innocence by some dark alchemy of his own soul; it still moved him to a madness of unprofitable
loyalty and tenderness. In every way he was defeated. It seemed now the least of his miseries
that he had failed to destroy his father's persuasion that Ellen was a person of value, for
it was so much worse, it opened the door to so long a procession of noble and undesired desires,
that he had not been able to destroy. That same persuasion in himself. He counted it a fresh
grievance against her, and planned to pay it out with cruelty, that she had made him waste
all his efforts. For though he had certainly made her cry, he could not count that any great
triumph, since under the shower of her weeping her gaiety was dancing like a draggled elf.
"Och me!" she was saying. "You want me to give you an explanation? But when I've got an appointment
to talk the matter over with the head of the firm, what for would I waste my time talking it
over with the junior partner?" And she began to type as if she was playing a jig.

He made a furious movement of the hands. She thought contemptuously, "The wee thing he is!
Even if he struck me I should not be afraid. Now, if it were Yaverland, I should be terrified...."
The idea struck through her like a pleasure, until there fell upon her as the completion of
a misery that had seemed complete, like the last extreme darkness which falls on a dark night
when the last star is found by the clouds, the recollection that Yaverland also was detestable.
Ah, this was a piece of foolishness between Mr. Philip and herself. In a world where misery
was the prevailing climate, where there were men like Yaverland, who could effortlessly deal
out pain right and left by simply being themselves, it was so foolish that one who had surely
had a natural turn for being nice, who had been so very nice that firelit evening when they
had talked secrets, should put himself about to hurt her. Her eyes followed him imploringly
as he went towards the door, and she cried out silently to him, begging him to be kind. But
when he turned and looked over his shoulder she remembered his tyranny, and hardened her piteous
gaze into a stare of loathing. It added to her sense of living in a deep cell of madness, fathoms
below the rays of reason, that she had an illusion that in his eyes she saw just that same
change from piteousness to loathing. For of course it could not be so.

Her quivering lips said gallantly to the banged door: "Well, there is my wurrk. I will forget
my petty pairsonal troubles in my wurrk, just as men do!" And she typed away, squeezing out
such drops of pride of craftsmanship as can be found in that mechanical exercise, making no
mistakes, and ending the lines so that they built up a well-proportioned page, so intently
that she had almost finished before she noticed that it was funny stuff about a divorce such
as Mr. Mactavish James always gave to one of the male clerks to copy. But that was all the
work she had to do that morning, for Mr. Mactavish James was up at the Court of Session and
Mr. Philip did not send for her. She was obliged to sit in her idleness as in a bare cell,
with nothing to look at but her misery, which continued to spin like a top, moving perpetually
without getting any further or changing into anything else. Presently she went and knelt in
the windowseat, drawing patterns on the glass and looking up the side-street at the Castle
Rock, which now glowed with a dark pyritic lustre under the queer autumn day of bright south
sunshine and scudding bruise-coloured clouds, seeing the familiar scene strangely, through
a lens of tears. She fell to thinking out peppered phrases to say of the client who had told
on her. Surely she had as much right in Princes Street as he had? And if it was too late for
her to be there, then it was too late for him also. "It's just a case of one law for the man
and another for the woman. Och, votes for women!" she cried savagely, and flogged the window
with the blindcord. Ten to one it was yon Mr. Grieve, the minister of West Braeburn, who fairly
blew in your face with waggishness when you offered him a chair in the waiting-room, and tee-heed
that "a lawyer's office must be a dull place for a young leddy like you!" Well, she knew what
Mr. Mactavish James thought of him for his dealings with his wife's money....

But the peppered phrases would not come. One cannot do more than one thing at a time fairly
well, and she was certainly crying magnificently. "Such a steady downpour I never did see since
that week mother and I spent at Oban," she thought into her sodden handkerchief. "It was a
shame the way it rained all the time, when we had had to save for months to pay for the trip.
But life is like that...." Ah, what did they think she had been doing with that man Yaverland?
The shocked dipping undertones of Mr. Philip's voice, the ashamed heat of his eyes, were just
the same as grown-up people used when they told mother why they had had to turn the maid away,
and that, so far as she could make out, though they always spoke softly so that she could not
hear, was because the maid had let somebody kiss her. What was the use of having been a quiet
decent girl all her days, of never stopping when students spoke to her, of never wearing emerald
green, though the colour went fine with her hair, when people were ready to believe this awful
thing of her? They must be mad not to see that she would rather die than let any man on earth
touch her in any way, and least of all Yaverland, whom she hated. There came before her eyes
the memory of that bluish bloom on his lips and jaw which she had noticed the first time she
saw him, and she rocked herself to and fro in a passion of tears at the thought she was suspected
of close contact with this loathsome maleness. She felt as if there was buried in her bosom
a harp with many strings, and each string was snapping separately.

"Och, votes for women!" she said wearily; and tried to make herself remember that after all
there were some unstained noble things in the world by singing whisperingly a verse from the
Women's Marseillaise. "There's many singing that song to-day in prison that would be glad to
sit and breathe fresh air and look at a fine view as you're doing, so you ought to be thankful!"
And indeed the view of the Castle did just for that moment distract her from the business of
weeping, for there had been a certain violent alteration of the weather. The autumn sunshine,
which had never been more than a sarcasm on the part of a thoroughly unpleasant day, had failed
altogether, and Edinburgh had become a series of corridors through which there rushed a trampling
wind. It set the dead leaves rising from the pavement in an exasperated, seditious way, and
let them ride dispersedly through the eddying air far above the heads of the clambering figures
that, up and down the side-street, stood arrested and, it seemed, flattened, as if they had
been spatchcocked by the advancing wind and found great difficulty in folding themselves up
again. She looked at their struggles with contempt. They were funny wee men. They were not
like Yaverland. Now, he was a fine man. She thought proudly of the enormousness of his chest
and shoulders, and imagined the tremendous thudding thing the heartbeat must be that infused
with blood such hugeness. He must be one of the most glorious men who ever lived. It surely
was not often that a man was perfect in every way physically and mentally.

She turned away and hid her face against the shutters, weeping bitterly. But her mind had to
follow him in a kind of dream, as he walked on, masterfully, as one who knows he has the right
to come and go, out of that wet grey street of which she was a part, to wander as he chose
in strange continents, in exotic weathers, through time sequined with extravagant dawns and
sunsets, through space jewelled with towns running red with blood of revolutions or multi-coloured
with carnival. In every way he was richer than she was, for he had more joy in travelling than
she would have had, since over the scenic world she saw there was cast for him a nexus of romance
which she could not have perceived.

Everywhere he would meet men whom he had captained on desperate adventures, who over wine would
point ringed fingers at mountain ranges and whisper of forgotten mines and tempt him to adventures
that would take him away from her for ever so long. Everywhere he would meet women, hateful
feminine women of the sort who are opposed to Woman Suffrage, who, because of some past courtesy
of his, would throw him roses and try to make him watch their dancing feet. She sobbed with
rage as she perceived how different from her the possession of this past made him. When he
reached Rio he would not stand by the quiet bay as she would have stood, enraptured by the
several noble darknesses of the sky, the mountains, and the ship-starred sea, but would go
quickly to his house on the hill, not hurrying, but showing by a lightness in his walk, by
a furtive vivacity of his body, that he was involved in some private system of exciting memories.
He would open the wrought-iron gates with a key which she had not known he possessed, which
had lain close to him in one of those innumerable pockets that men have in their clothes. With
perfect knowledge of the path, he would step silently through the garden, where flowers run
wild had lost their delicacy and grew as monstrous candelabra of coarsened blooms in soil greenly
feculent with weeds; she rejoiced in its devastation. He would enter the hall and pick his
steps between the pools of wine that lay black on the marble floor; he would tread on the rosettes
of corruption that had once been garlands of roses hung about the bronze whale's neck; he would
look down on the white limbs of the shattered Venus, and look up and listen to the creaking
flight of the birds of prey that were nesting under the broken roof; and he would smile as
if he shared a secret with the ruin and dissipation. His smile was the sun, but in it there
was always a dark ray of secrecy. All his experience was a mockery of her inexperience. Her
clenched fist beat her brow, which had become hot....

All that day her mind had painfully enacted such fantasies of hatred or had waited blankly
for this moment which the old man's shuffling step was now bringing towards her. She braced
herself, though she did not look up from the table.

"Nelly, I've brought you a bit rock from Ferguson's."

She gazed cannily at the white paper parcel. It was the largest box he had ever given her;
he always gave her sweeties when Mr. Philip had been talking against her. Ought she therefore
to deduce from the unusual size that he had been saying something unusually cruel? But, on
the other hand, surely no one could ever give sweeties to a girl if they thought she had let
herself be kissed. "You're just too kind, Mr. James," she said mournfully.

"Take out a stick and give me one. What for did I have false teeth put in at great expense
if it was not that I might eat rock with my Nelly? I'll take a bit of the peppermint. My wife
is a leddy and will not let me eat peppermint in my ain hoose." He always spoke to Ellen, he
did not know why, in the same rough, soft, broad Scots tongue that he had talked with his mother
and father when he was a wee boy in the carter's cottage on the Lang Whang of the Old Lanark
Road, that he still talked to his cat in his little study at the back of his square, decent
residence. "Ay, that's right. But lassie, what ails ye? You're looking at the box as though
you'd taken a turn at the genteel and become an Episcopalian and it was Lent. If you've lost
that fine sweet tooth of yours ye must be sickening for something."

"Och, me. I'm all right," said Ellen drearily, and picked a ginger stick, and bit it joylessly;
and laid it down again, and pressed her hand to her heart. She hearkened to the racing beat
of her agony with eyes grown remote and lips drawn down at the corner with disgust, like a
woman feeling the movements of an unwanted child. And Mr. Mactavish James, was so wrung with
pity for the wee thing, and the mature dignity with which she wore her misery, and the next
moment so glowing with pleasure at himself for this generous emotion, that he beamed on her
and purred silently, "Ech, the poor bairn! I will go straight to the point and make her mind
easy." He wriggled into an easier position in his chair, readjusted his glasses, and settled
down to enjoy this pleasant occupation of lifting the lid off her distress, stirring it up,
and distilling from it and the drying juices of his heart more of this creditable pity.

"Nelly," he said jocosely, "I've been hearing tales about you."

She answered, "I know it. Mr. Philip has told me."

"Ay, I thought he would," said Mr. Mactavish James comfortably. He could also make a pretty
good guess at the temper his son Philip had put into the telling. For he was an old man, and
knew that a young man in love may not be the quiet, religious lover pondering how a minute's
kissing under the moon can sanctify all the next day's daylight that the poets describe him.
He may be inflamed out of youth's semblance by jealousy, and decide that since he has no claws
to tear the female flesh as it deserves, he will do what he can with cruel words and treachery.
It is just luck, the kind of man one happens to be born. Well, it was just luck....

"He's tremendous excited about seeing you and Mr. Yaverland, Nelly."

Her eyes were blue fire. "Och, 'twas him that saw me! He said it was a client."

He covered his mouth with his hand, but decided to give his son away. All his life he had been
rejecting the claims of beauty and gentle things, and he could be sure that his well-brought-up
family would go on doing it after he was in his grave. Over this one little point, which did
not really matter, he could afford to be handsome. "Aye, 'twas Mr. Philip that saw you," he
owned easily, and swerved his head before the long look, pansy-soft with gratitude, that she
now turned on him. The girl was so inveterately inclined to dilate on the pleasant things of
life that his generosity in admitting that his son was a liar, and thus assuring her that her
shame had not been as public as she had supposed, quite wiped out all her other emotions. She
fairly glowed about it; and at that the old man felt curiously ashamed, as if he had gained
a child's prattling thanks by giving it a bad sixpence, although he could not see what he had
done that was not all right. He rubbed his hands and tried to kindle a jollity by crying, "Well,
what would I do but tell you? If I hadn't, ye'd have been running about distributing black
eyes among my clients just on suspicion, ye fierce wee randy!"

"Och, you make fun of me--!" She smiled, palely, and gnawed the ginger stick, her jaw being
so impeded by her desire to cry that she could not bite it.

"Poor bairn! Poor bairn!" he sighed, and his pity for the little thing seemed to him so moving,
so completely in the vein of the best Scottish pathos, that he continued to gaze at her and
enjoy his own emotion, until a wryness of her mouth made him fear that unless he hurried up
and got to the point she would rush from the room and leave him without this delicious occupation.
So he went on, speaking cosily. "I thought little of it. You are a good lassie, Nelly, and
I can trust you. I know that fine. Sometimes I think it is a great peety that Philip was not
born a wee girl, for he would have grown up into a fine maiden aunt. He is that particular
about his sisters you would not believe. Though losh! he has no call for anxiety, for they're
none of them bonny."

Ellen was pulling herself together, trying to take his lack of censure as a matter of course
and choking back the tears of relief. "I'd not say that," she said in a strangled voice. "Miss
Chrissie isn't so bad, though with those teeth I think she would be wiser to avoid looking
arch. Och, Mr. James, what's come to you?" For he was rolling with a great groundswell of merriment,
and slapping his thigh and chuckling. "The things the simplest woman can say! No need for practice
in boodwars and draring-rooms! It comes natural!" She looked at him with wrinkled brows and
smiling mouth, sure that he was not being unkind, but wondering why he laughed, and murmured,
"Mr. James, Mr. James!" It flashed on her suddenly what he meant, and she jumped up from her
seat and cried through exasperated laughter, "Och, men are mean things! I see what's in your
mind! But indeed I did not intend to be catty! You must admit, though she's your own daughter,
that Miss Chrissie's teeth are on the long side! That's all I meant. Och, Mr. James, I wish
you would not be such a tease!" However, he continued to laugh bellyingly, and she started
to run round the table as if to assail him with childish tuggings and shakings, but to leave
her hands free she popped the ginger stick into her mouth like a cigarette, and was immediately
distracted to gravity by important considerations. "What am I doing, eating ginger when I hate
the stuff? I'll nip off the end I've been at and put it back for mother. She just loves it,
dear knows why, the nasty hot thing. I'll have one of the pink ones. They've no great flavour,
but I like the colour...."

While she bent over the box, her mind and fingers busy among the layers, the old man turned
his bleared eyes upon her and wondered at her, and rejoiced in her variousness as he had not
thought he would rejoice over a useless thing. For she had altered utterly in the last few
seconds. When he had come into the room she had been a tiny cowering thing of soft piteous
gazes and miserable silences, like a sick puppy, too sick to whimper; now she was almost soulless
in her beauty and well-being, and as little a matter for pity as a daffodil in sunshine. She
was completely, absorbedly young and greedy and happy. The fear that life was really horrid
had obscured her bright colours like a cobweb, but now she was radiant again; it was as if
a wind had blown through her hair, which always changed with her moods as a cat's coat changes
with the weather, and had been lank since morning. He was not used to variable women. His two
wives, Annie and Christian, had always looked much the same. He remembered that when he went
in to see Aggie as she lay in her coffin he had examined her face very carefully because he
had heard that people's faces altered when they were dead and fell into expressions that revealed
the truth about their inner lives; but she did not seem to have changed at all, and was still
looking sensible.

To keep the situation moving he drawled teasingly, "Och, you women, you women! Born with the
tongues of cats you are, every one of ye, and with the advawnce of ceevilisation ye're developing
the claws! There was a fine piece in the Scotsman this morning about one of your Suffragettes
standing on the roof of a town hall and behaving as a wild cat would think shame to, skirling
at Mr. Asquith through a skylight and throwing slates at the polis that came to fetch her.
Aw, verra nice, verra ladylike, I'm sure."

"Well, why shouldn't she? Yon miserable Asquith--"

"Asquith's not miserable. He's a good man. He's an Englishman, but he sits for Fife."

"Anyway, it was Charlotte Marsh that did it. And if she's not a lady, who is? Her photograph's
given away with this week's Votes for Women. She's a beautiful girl."

"I doubt it, Nelly."

"I'll bring the photo then!"

"Beautiful girls get married," said Mr. Mactavish James guilefully, watching for her temper
to send up rockets. "What for is she not married if she is so beautiful?"

"Because she's more particular than your wife was!" barked Ellen, admitting reluctantly as
he gasped and chuckled, "Yon's not my own. I heard Mary Gawthorpe say that at an open-air meeting.
She is a wonder, yon wee thing. She has such a power of repartee that the interrupters have
to be carried out on stretchers."

"Ah, ye're all impudent wee besoms thegither," said Mr. Mactavish James, and set his eyes wide
on her face. From something throbbing in her speech he hoped that the spring of her distress
had not yet run dry.

"Why are you not more respectful to the Suffragettes? You're polite enough to the Covenanters,
and yet they fought and killed people, while we haven't killed even a policeman, though there's
a constable in the Grange district whose jugular vein I would like fine to sever with my teeth
for what he said to me when I was chalking pavements. If you don't admire us you shouldn't
admire the Covenanters."

"The Covenanters were fighting for religion," he murmured, keeping his eyes on her face.

"So's this religion, and it's of some practical use, moreover," she answered listlessly. She
drew her hands down her face, threw up her arms, and breathed a fatigued, shuddering sigh.
The conversation had begun to seem to her intolerably insipid because they were not talking
of Yaverland.

She rose to her feet, moved distractedly about the room, and then, with a purposefulness that
put into his stare that terrified cold enmity with which the sane look upon even the beloved
mad, she swept two rulers off her desk on to the floor. But she knelt down and set them cross-wise,
and then straightened herself and crooked her arms above her head, and began to dance a sword-dance.
Even her filial relations to him hardly justified such a puncture of office discipline, and
he sat blowing at it until he saw that this was a new phase of her so entertaining misery.
It is always absurd when that pert and ferocious dance, invented by an unsensuous race inordinately
and mistakenly vain of its knees, is performed by a graceful girl; and Ellen added to that
incongruity by dancing languorously, passionately. It was like hearing the wrong words sung
to a familiar tune. And her face was at discord with both the dance and her performance of
it, for she was fixedly regarding someone who was not there. "She is fey!" he thought tolerantly,
and gloated over this fresh display of her unhappiness and his pity, though a corner of his
mind was busy hoping that Mr. Morrison would not come in. It was unusual in Edinburgh for a
solicitor (at any rate in a sound firm) to sit and watch his typist dancing.

But soon she stopped dancing. Her need to speak of Yaverland took away her breath.

She slouched across the room to the window, laid her cheek to the glass, and said rapidly,
"It is bad weather. It is bad weather here an awful lot of the time. Mr. Yaverland says there
is a place in Peru where it is always spring. That would be bonny." She felt relieved and warmed
as soon as she had mentioned his name, and sat down easily in the window-seat and smiled back
at the old man.

"Ehem! So this Mr. Yaverland has surveyed mankind from China to Peru, as the great Dr. Johnson
says."

But she could not speak of Yaverland again so soon. She tried to make time by wrangling. "Why
do you call him the great Dr. Johnson? He was just a rude old thing."

"He was a man of sense, lassie, a man of sense."

"What's sense?" she cried, and flung wide her arms. Her body pricked with a general emotion
that was not relevant to the words she spoke, and indeed she was not quite aware what those
were. "Sense isn't sitting in your chair all day and ruining the coats of your--of your digestion
drinking too much tea and contradicting everybody and being rude to Mrs. Thrale when the poor
body married again."

"It was a fule's marriage," said Mr. Mactavish James; "the widow of a substantial man taking
up wi' an Italian fiddler."

"Marriage with one man's no worse than marriage with another, the way they all are," said Ellen
darkly, and got back to her argument. "And hating the Scotch and democracy, and saying blunt
foolish things as if they were blunt wise ones--that's not sense. And if it were, what's the
good of living to be sensible? It's like living to have five fingers on your hand. And life's
so short! Mr. James, does it never worry you dreadfully that life is so short? I wonder how
we all bear up about it. One ought to live for adventure. I want to go away, right away. There
are such lots of lovely places where there are palms, and people get romantically shot, and
there's a town somewhere where poppies grow on the roofs of mosques. I would like to see that.
And queer people--masked Touaregs--"

"Lassie, you are blethering," said Mr. Mactavish James, "this is a pairfect salad of foreign
pairts."

It had to come out. "Mr. Yaverland says Peru is lovely. He has been both sides of the Andes.
He liked Peru. There are silver mines at Iquique and etairnal spring at the place whose name
I have forgotten. Funny that I should forget the name of the one place on airth where there
is etairnal spring! If I had all the money in the world I would not be able to go there because
I have forgotten its name!" She laughed sobbingly, and went on. "And he's been in Brazil. He
lived for a time in Rio de Janeiro." She stared fixedly at her mental image of the fateful
house where there was a broken statue on a bier, shook herself, and went on. "And he's travelled
in the forest. He's seen streams covered with the big leaves of Victoria Regia like they have
it in the Botanical Gardens, and egrets standing on the bank, and better there than in ladies'
hats. I wonder if I would be a fool if I had the money?--if I would wear dead things on my
head? But indeed there are ways I think I would always be nice, however rich I was--ways that
don't affect me very much, so that they're no sacrifice. And he's seen lots of things. Sloths,
which I always thought were just metaphors. And ant-eaters, and alligators, and jaguars. And--"

"If you go to London," said Mr. Mactavish James, "you'll be losing your heart to a keeper at
the Zoo."

"Who's losing their heart to anybody?" she asked peevishly. "And you needn't sneer. He's done
lots else besides just seeing animals. Once he steered a ship in the South Seas for two days
and two nights when the crew were down with the New Guinea fever. And another time he was working
at a mine in Andalusia. The miners went on strike. He and some other men put up barricades
and took guns. They defended the place. He is the first man I have ever known who did such
things. And they come natural to him. He thinks no more of them than your son," she said nastily,
"thinks of playing a round on the Gullane links."

"Imphm. I wonder what he's been doing traiking about like this. Rolling stones gather no moss,
I've heard."

Her eyes blazed, then narrowed. "Oh, make no mistake! He earns a lot of money. He can beat
you even at your own game."

Mr. Mactavish James tee-heed, but did not like it, for she was looking round the room as if
it were a hated prison and all that was done in it contemptible; and these things were his
life. "Well, you know best. And what's this paragon like? I've not seen the fellow."

"He's a lovely pairson," she said sullenly.

He began to loathe these two young people, who were all that he and his stock could not be,
who were going to do the things his age could not do. "Ah, well! Ah, well!" he sighed, with
a spurious shrewd melancholy. "He'll be like me when he's old, Ellen; all old men are alike."

She looked at him coldly and said, "He will not."

Her brows were heavy and the hand she held at her bosom was clenched. The rain was beating
on the window-panes. The fire seemed diluted by the day's dampness; and there was a chill spreading
through his mind as if they had been debating fundamental things and the argument had turned
unanswerably to his disadvantage. He twisted in his seat and looked sharply at her, and though
the mirror of his mind was apt to tilt away from the disagreeable, he perceived that she was
regarding him and the prudent destiny he had chosen with a scorn more unappeasable than any
appetite; and that the destiny she was choosing with this snarling intensity was so glorious
that it justified her scorn. He felt a conviction, which had the vague quality of melancholy,
that he was morally insolvent, and a suspicion, which had the acute quality of pain, that his
financial solvency was not such a great thing after all. For Ellen looked like an angry queen
as well as an angry angel. It seemed possible that these young people were not only going to
have a mansion in heaven, but would have a large house on earth as well, and these two establishments
made his single establishment in Moray Place seem not so satisfactory as he had always thought
it. These people were going to take their fill of beauty and delight and all the unchafferable
things he had denied himself that he might pursue success, and they were going to take their
fill of success too! It was not fair. He thought of their good fortune in being born strong
and triumphant as if it were a piece of rapacity, and tried to wriggle out of this moment which
compelled him to regard them with respect by reversing the intentional, enjoyed purity of relationship
with her and finding a lewd amusement in the fierceness which was so plainly an aspect of desire.
But that meant moving outside the orbit of dignity; and he knew that when a man does that he
gives himself for ever into the hands of those who behold him. So he worked back to the position
of the rich, kind old man stooping to protect the little helpless working-girl.

He pushed the box of sweets across the table, and said in a tender and offended voice, "You're
not eating your sweets, Nelly. I hoped to give you pleasure when I bought them."

One would always get her that way.

Someone was being hurt. Immediately she had the soft breast of the dove. "Oh, Mr. James!"

"I wish I could give you more pleasure," he went on. "But there! I've been able to do little
enough for you. Well do I know it"

"You've done a lot for me. You've been so good."

"It's a pity we should have fallen out over a stranger. But I know I am too free with my tongue."

"Oh, Mr. James!"

"Never mind, lassie. I'm only an old man, and you're young; you must go your own way--"

"Oh, Mr. James!" She rose and ran round the table to his side; and at the close sight of her,
excited and yet muted with pity, brilliant as sunset but soft as light rain, the honest thing
in him forgot the spurious scene he was carpentering. He exclaimed solemnly, "Nelly, you are
very beautiful."

She was startled. "Me, beautiful?"

"Aye," he said, "beautiful."

For a moment she pondered over it almost stupidly. Then she put her hand on Mr. James's shoulder
and shook him; now that her sexual feelings were focussed on one man she treated all other
men with a sexless familiarity that to those who did not understand might have seemed shameless
and a little mad. "Am I beautiful?" she asked searchingly.

"How many times do you want me to say it?" he said.

"But how beautiful?" she pursued. "Like a picture in the National Gallery? Or like one of those
actresses? Now isn't that a queer thing? I'm all for art as a general thing, but I'd much rather
be like an actress. Tell me, which am I like?"

"You're like both. That's where you score."

She caught her breath with a sob. "You're not laughing at me?"

"Get up on your chair and look in the glass over the mantelpiece."

She stepped up, and with a flush and a raising of the chin as if she were doing something much
more radical than looking in a mirror, as if, indeed, she were stripping herself quite naked,
she faced her image.

"You've never looked at yourself before," said the old man.

"'Deed I have," she snapped. "How do you think I put my hat on straight?"

"It never is," he retorted, and repeated grimly and exultingly, "You've never looked at yourself
before."

She looked obliquely at her reflection and ran her hands ashamedly up and down her body, and
tried for a word and failed.

"Are you not beautiful?" he said.

"Imphm. There's no denying I'm effective," she admitted tartly, and stepped down and stood
for a moment shivering as if she had done something distasteful. And then climbed on to the
chair again. "In evening dress, like the one Sarah Bernhardt wore in La Dame aux Camélias,
I dare say I could look all right with a fan--a big fan of ostrich feathers." This time she
faced the image directly and almost gloatingly, as if it were food. "But considering my circumstances,
that is a wild hypothesis. I suppose ... I ... am ... all right. But I suppose I'm just good-looking
for a private person. I'd look the plainest of the plain beside Zena or Phyllis Dare. Would
I not? Would I not?"

"You'd look plain beside no one but Venus," said Mr. Mactavish James, "and her you'd better
with your tongue."

"Ah!" She breathed deeply, as if at last she drank. "So it doesn't matter my chin being so
wee? I've always hankered after a chin like Carson's. I think it makes one looked up to, irrespective
of one's merits. But if what you say is true I've no call to worry. I'll do as I am." She shot
an intense scowling glance at the old man. "You're sure I'll do?"

"Ay, lass, you'll do," he answered gravely.

She burst into a light peal of laughter, as different from her usual mirth as if she had been
changed from gold to silver. "Oh dear! Oh dear!" she cried, her voice suddenly high-pitched
and femininely gay. "What nonsense we're talking! Do--for what? It's all pairfectly ridiculous--as
if looks mattered one way or another!" An animation of so physical a nature had come on her
that her heart was beating almost too quickly for speech, and her body, being uncontrolled
by her spirit, abandoned itself to entirely uncharacteristic gestures which were but abstract
designs drawn by her womanhood. She lifted her face towards the mirror and pouted her lips
mockingly, as if she knew that some spirit buried in its glassy depths desired to kiss them
and could not. She stood on her toes on the hard wooden seat, so that it looked as if she were
wearing high heels, and her hands, which were less like paws than they had ever been before,
because she was holding them with consciousness of her fingers' extreme length, took the skirt
of her frock and pulled it into panniers. She wished that she were clad in silk! But that lent
no wistfulness to her face, which now glittered with a solemn and joyful rapacity, for her
unconscious being had divined that there were before her many victories to be gained wholly
without sweat of the will. "Ah!" she sighed, and wondered at her over-contentment; and then
went on with her delicate shrill chatter, glowing and holding herself with a fine frivolity
that made it seem almost as if she were clad in silk, and passing from flowerlike loveliness
to loveliness.

"It's a pity Mr. Yaverland cannot see you now," said the old man, half from honest jocosity
and half from an itch to bring the creature back to this interesting suffering of hers.

Gasping with laughter, though she kept her eyes gravely and steadily on her beauty, she answered,
"Yes, it is a pity! It is a great pity! He's very handsome too, you know. We'd make a bonny
pair! Oh dear, oh dear!"

Mr. James sat up. "What's that? What is it you're saying? Hec, you're talking of making a pair,
are you?" Amusement always made his voice sound gross. "Has he asked you to marry him then,
ye shy wee besom?"

She swung round on her toes, her face magic with passion and mischief. "Give me time, Mr. James,
give me time!" she cried, and her head fell back on her long white throat, while her laughter
jetted in shaking, shy, thin gusts like a blackbird's song. And then she ceased. Her head fell
forward. Her gown dropped from her outstretched hands, which she pressed against her bosom.
A second past she had filled with spring this office damp with autumn; now she made it more
asperous and grey than had November, for her season had changed to the extremest winter. She
pressed her hands so hard against her breast and in a voice weak as if she were very cold she
said, "Oh, God! Oh, God!"

"Eh!" gaped Mr. James.

She had made a fool of herself. She had said dreadful things. She had boasted about something
that could not come true, that would be horrible if it did. Her face became chalk white with
such agony as only the young can feel.

Mr. James's gouty leg crackled out pains as he tried to rise, and he had to sink back in his
chair and look up at her through the vibrating silence, whispering, "Nelly, my dear lass."

At that she shot at him such a cold sidelong glance as one might shoot at a stranger who has
let one know that he has overheard an intimacy, and with movements at once clumsy and precise
she got down from her chair and put it back at the table. She stood quite still, with her hands
resting on it, her face assuming a mean and shrewish expression. She was remembering a woman
who had been rude to her mother, a schoolfellow of Mrs. Melville's, who had married as well
as she had married badly, and had allowed consciousness of that fact to colour her manner when
they had run against each other in Princes Street. Ellen was trying to imitate the expression
by which this bourgeoise had given her mother to understand that the interview need not long
be continued. She caught it, she thought, but it did not really help. There was still this
pressure of a flood of tears behind her eyes. She looked out of the window and exclaimed, "It's
getting dark!" She said it peevishly, as if the sun's descent was the last piece of carelessness
on the part of a negligent universe. And as her eye explored the dusk and saw that the bright
spheres round the lamps were infested by wandering ghosts of wind-blown humidity she thought
of her walk home up the Mound and what it would be like on this night of gusts and damp. "That
puts the lid on!" her heart said bitterly, and the first tears oozed. Somehow she must go at
once. She said thinly and quaveringly, "It's getting dark. Surely it's time I was away home?"

There was a clock on the mantelpiece which told it was not yet half-past four, but they both
looked away from it. "Ay," said Mr. Mactavish James cheerfully, "you must run away home. I'll
not have it said I drive a bairn to death with late hours. Good evening, lassie." He was so
terrified by the intensity of her emotion that he had given up playing his fish. There stabbed
a question through his heart. Had Isabella Kingan suffered thus?

"Good evening, Mr. James," she said brightly, and went out into the hall letting the door swing
to, and pulled on her coat and tam-o'-shanter in the darkness. Now that it did not matter if
she cried, she did not feel nearly so much like crying. "That's the way things always are,"
she snorted, and began to hum the Marseillaise defiantly as she buttoned up her coat. But though
she was not seen here, she was not alone. There pressed against her the unexpungeable fact
of her disgrace. Her eyes, mad with distress, with too much weeping, printed on the blackness
the figure of the man with whom she had associated herself in this awful way by that idiot
capering before the glass, by those maniac words. With rapture and horror she saw his dark-lidded
eyes with their brilliant yet secretive gaze, the lips that were parted yet not loose, that
his reserve would not permit to close lest by their setting strangers should see whether he
was smiling or moody; she remembered the bluish bloom that had been on his chin the first night
she ever saw him. At that she brought her clenched fist down on her other palm and sobbed with
hate. He had brought all this upon her.

And hearing that, Mr. Mactavish James hobbled towards the door, purring endearments. He was
better now. That anguished melody of speculation as to Isabella Kingan's heart he had played
over again with the tempo rubato and the pressed loud pedal of sentimentality, and it was now
no more than agreeably affecting as a Scotch song ... being kind to the wean for the sake of
her who was my sweethairt in auld lang syne....

She was so blind with hate of Yaverland that she was not aware of his presence till he bent
over her, whinneying in the slow, complacent accents of Scottish sentiment, "Nelly, Nelly,
what ails ye, lassie? Nothing's happened! I'll put it all right."

"Yes, of course nothing's happened!" she snapped, her hand on the doorknob. "Who said it had?"
And then his words, "I'll put it all right," began to torment her. They threatened her that
her disgrace was not to end here, that he might talk about it, that the thing might well be
with her to her grave, that she had done for herself, that now and forever she had made her
life not worth living. Spoken language appeals by the same process, but with very different
effect.

No one can understand a language which he has not previously learned,
word by word; and the verbal appeal, however imaginative or spiritual,
comes in concrete form--that is, in the nature of information.

Spoken words inform the emotional side of our nature, through the intellectual; whereas music,
operating outwardly in the same manner, speaks over the head of intellect to an inborn sense which
ceases not to receive as a little child. And herein lies its mystery.

For the music thus impassively anatomised by Science is a voice from the Unseen, pregnant with meaning
beyond translation. A mere ripple of sound-vibration, called into existence by human touch;
a creation, vanishing from its birth, elusive, irreclaimable as a departing soul, yet strong to
sway heart and hand as the tornado sways the pliant pine. It is a language peculiar to no period,
race, or caste. Ageless and universal, it raises to highest daring, or suffuses with tenderness,
to-day and here, as once on Argo's deck, or in the halls of Persepolis. Purely material in origin
and analysis, easily explicable in mere physical operation, its influence is one of the things
that are not dreamt of in the philosophy of Science. Why should a certain psychological effect
ensue upon certain untranslatable sounds being placed in a given relation to each other, and
not when the same sounds are placed in another relation?--and why should that effect be always
upward? Why should the composer be perforce a prophet of the sphere above earth's murky horizon--the
musician his interpreter-- charged with embassy of peace, and fortitude, and new-born ardour,
to the troubled, and weary, and heavy-laden? Has ingenuity never distilled from music any
spirit of evil?

None. Euterpe alone of the Muses defies seduction. Harmony is intrinsically chaste. There is no
secular music; all music is sacred. Whatever the song the Sirens sang, its music was pure;
and no less pure were the notes which breathed from Nero's lute,
whilst the blaze of ten thousand homes glutted his Imperial lust for
spectacle.

Divorce the unworthy song, stay the voluptuous dance, and the music suffers no clinging defilement;
the redeemed melodies, stainless as fresh-fallen snow, may be wedded to songs of gallant aspiration
or angelic sympathy, which shall raise the soul awhile above earth's sordid infection, disclosing
the inextinguishable affinity of the divine part of man's dual nature with the dream-like possibility
of Eden--purity, and fearless faith, and love unspeakable.

The story of the Thracian lyre soothing the horrors of the underworld, and melting to relentment
its gloomy king--the story of the shepherd-minstrel's harp chasing the shapeless penumbra of
looming insanity from the first Hebrew brow crowned in Jehovah's despite--the story of the
mighty prophet Elisha, fettered to earth by wrath and scorn till, at his own command, the music
swelled, and his enfranchised spirit rose on its viewless wings to behold the veiled Future already
woven from the tangled skein of the troubled Present--the thousand-fold story of music's magic and
mystery, stretches back into the forgotten Past, and onward into the imagined Future.

Onward into the fathomless eternity; for though 'the heaven of each is but what each desires'--though
the Aryan heaven be a place of gradation and precedence, a realm
to reign in--though the heaven of the Jewish apostle-seer burn with
the gold and sparkle with the gems dear to his race-- though the paradise
of the sun-scorched Arab be dark with shade of evergreen trees, and
cool with ripple of never-failing streams--yet is the universal art
so intertwined with ideal bliss that no heaven of conscious enjoyment
has been pictured by belated humanity but music rings for ever there.

For alas! what else of mundane achievement can fancy conceive as reproduced in regions of eternal
perfection, or transplanted thither? Science is of the earth; ever bearing sad penalty, in toil
of mind and body--and what art, save music, has man dedicated to Deity-worship, without disappointment
and loss? Doubtfully, Architecture; and for such consecration we have found no more expressive
name than 'frozen music.'

This unknown anchorite's playing was both a mystery and a revelation. I had never before heard
anything to compare with it, nor do I expect ever to hear the like again. Talent, taste, feeling,
were there, all in superlative degree, and disclosed with the unassuming confidence of power;
whilst long and loving practice in solitude had averted a certain artificiality which, in the
judgment of the uninitiated, generally accompanies musical skill. His was no triumphant mastery
of a complicated and perplexing score; he was a sympathetic interpreter, a life-breathing,
magic-lending exponent of his composer's revelations, now his own. Solitary practice, with no
one but himself to please, would unavoidably give a distinct character to his performance,
and this character was evident from the first; it was melancholy--a weary, wistful melancholy,
beyond repining or tears, beyond impatience or passion; it was the involuntary record of a gentle
heart breaking slowly under discipline untempered by one ray of earthly
hope.

My own incompetence to identify by name a tune which I spiritually recognise is, perhaps, the
most disgraceful manifestation of my neglected musical education--at all events, it is the one which
causes me most uneasiness. Experience has warned me never to ask a player for the 'Marseillaise,'
or 'Croppies Lie Down,' or what not; for he is pretty sure to say, 'Why, that's just what
I've been giving you,' or words to similar effect. Alf at last grew tired of my non-committal remarks
and replies, and, with a tact which impressed me more afterward than at the time, named each tune
before and after playing it. For instance, the yearning tenderness of an exquisitely rendered air would
seem to bring back some lost consciousness of an earlier and happier existence, suffusing
my whole being with a pensive sadness not to be exchanged for any joy. I would feel the notes
familiar, but whether of five years or five million years before, or whether in the body or
out of the body, I could n't tell. Alf, on concluding, would simply murmur, "Home, Sweet Home,"
and all would be explained. Then, perhaps, he would say, "The Last Rose of Summer"; and I would
be able to follow him intelligently right through.

But he did n't confine himself to the comfortable vulgarity of popular
airs.

He played selections from Handel, Mozart, Wagner, and I don't know whom; while the time passed
unnoticed by both of us. At length he laid the violin across his knees, and, after a pause, his
voice rose in one of the sweetest songs ever woven from words. And such a voice!--rich, soft,
transcendent, yet suggesting ungauged resources of enchantment unconsciously held in reserve.
I sat entranced as verse after verse flowed slowly on, every syllable clear and distinct as in
speech; the subtle tyranny of vocal harmony admitting no intruding thought beyond a regretful
sense that the song must end.

But sorrow's sel' wears past, Jean, And joy's a-comin' fast, Jean, The joy that's aye to last,
I' the land o' the leal.

A' our freens are gane, Jean, We've lang been left alane, Jean. We'll
a' meet again I' the land o' the leal.

"How happy Jean Armour must have been to be with poor Burns, while this cold world seemed to slip away
from his feet, and leave him to rest with his forgiving Saviour," murmured the boundary man,
laying his violin on the table, whilst he gazed absently into the expiring fire. "That song
was composed by Burns, on his death-bed. Is n't it beautiful?"

"It is one of the most beautiful songs in the language," I replied; "but Burns is not the author.
The song was composed by a woman-- Baroness Nairne. It is not for men to write in that strain.
As for Jean Armour--well, she had a good deal to forgive, too."

"Ah! do you think a woman loves less because she has much to forgive?" returned Alf sadly, and then
added, with sudden interest, "But what difference do you notice between
the poetry of men and women?

What is the mark of women's work?"

"Sincerity," I replied.

"Notwithstanding Mrs. Hemans, and others, you will find that, as
a rule, men's poetry is superior to women's, not only in vigour, but
in grace.

This is not strange, for grace is, after all, a display of force,
an aspect of strength.

But in the quality of sincerity, woman is a good first. Take an illustration, while I think
of it: Compare the verses of my ancestor, Collins, 'On the Grave
of Thompson,' with Eliza Cook's verses, 'On the Grave of Good'"----

"But
Collins was never married," interposed Alf.

"True," I replied pleasantly. "But our family is aristocratic, and a baton-sinister only sets
us off. However, in the two poems I was speaking of, the subject matter is similar; the pieces
are about the same length and the writers have adopted the same iambic octo-syllable, with alternate
rhymes. Now, my ancestor's poem is not excelled in grace by anything within the range of our
literature; but there's nothing else in it whatever.

Eliza Cook's versification is, in a measure, forced and imperfect, her language occasionally homely
and rugged, but the strong beating of a sincere, sympathetic heart is audible in every line."

"But
your ancestor is the most artificial writer of an artificial school, and Eliza Cook is the
most spontaneous writer of a spontaneous school," replied Alf, with the contradictive impulse
which amusingly accompanied his teachableness. "Of course," he added deprecatingly, "I would
n't presume to criticise such a poet as Collins; but you said, yourself"----

"Oh,
that's all right," said I generously.

"However, though your argument blunts the force of my illustration, it does n't weaken my
contention. You'll find the distinction I've pointed-out hold good in a greater or less degree
throughout literature; you'll find examples by the thousand, and of course, exceptions by the dozen.
But sing again, Alf, please. Every minute you're silent, is a minute wasted. Sing anything you
like-- only sing."

"I wanted to have a talk," remonstrated Alf. "You were speaking of the difference between men
and women in their literary work. I believe you're right, though it never struck me before.
Now there's another question that might be worth comparing notes upon. Your remark just brought
it into my mind. Here it is"--he hesitated a moment, then went on, with a certain constraint
in his voice; the constraint we are apt to feel when forced to plump out the word 'love,'
in its narrower sense--"When women love, they don't know why they love; they just love because
they do--so they say, and we're bound to believe them.

But when we love women, why do we love them? Being more logical, we ought to know. Do we love
a woman for her beauty?-- or for her virtues?--or for her accomplishments?--or for what? I fancy,
if we understood ourselves, we should be able to say we loved her for some particular quality;
and the others are--as you might say--Oh, you know! What quality is it, then, that we love a
woman for? There's a problem for you!"

"I can solve it with mathematical certainty, Alf--that is to say, in such a manner as to convey
the impossibility of the solution being otherwise than according
to my finding.

When I'm allowed to work-out these things in my own circuitous way--which is seldom the case--there
are few questions in moral or psychological philosophy which the commission of my years and
art can to no issue of true honour bring. But you have to sing six songs first. I'll leave the
choice of them to yourself."

"Very well," replied Alf readily. "I'll sing the songs as they come to my mind. Remember your
promise, now."

Then, rich, soft, and sweet, rose that exquisite voice in easy volume, flooding with new and vivid
meaning old familiar verses. Here was my opportunity. I was interested in this boundary man,
and resolved to know his history. Rejecting Alf Jones as an assumed name, Nomenology would
be at fault here; yet knowing already, by a kind of incommunicable intuition, that he was a
Sydney-sider, and had been in some way connected with the drapery-business, I expected to have
my knowledge so supplemented by the character of his songs, that--counting reasonably on a
little further information, to be gathered before my departure--I should be able to work-out his
biography at least as correctly as biographies are generally worked-out.

For the esoteric side of his history, I counted much on his spontaneous choice of songs. Man
is but a lyre (in both senses of the phonetically-taken word, unfortunately); and some salient
experience, some fire-graven thought, some clinging hope, is the
plectrum which strikes the passive chords.

An old truism will bear expansion here, till it embraces the rule that, whatever else a man
may sing, he always sings himself. But you must know how to interpret.

I have said that melancholy was the key-note of Alf's playing. Fused with this, and deeply coloured
by it, the tendency of his songs was toward love, and love alone--chaste, supersensuous, but
purely human and exclusive love. No suggestion of national inspiration; no broad human sympathies;
no echo of the oppressed ones' cry; no stern challenge of wrong; only a hopeless, undying love,
and an unspeakable self-pity. He wasn't even a lyre; he was a pipe for Fortune's finger to
sound what stop she pleased; and, judging from the tone of his playing, and the selection
of his songs, it had pleased that irresponsible goddess to attune the chords of his being to
a love, pure as heaven, sad as earth, and hopeless as the other place.

Who is she? thought I.

Silence again sank on the faint yellow lamplight of the hut, as the
last syllables of the sixth song died mournfully away--'She is far
from the Land where Her Young Hero Sleeps.' Then the boundary rider
lit his pipe, and slightly moved his seat, placing himself in an easy
listening attitude, with his elbow on the table, and his hand across
his face.

"Alf," said I impressively; "you'll certainly find yourself shot into outer darkness, if you don't
alter your hand. You're recklessly transgressing the lesson set forth in the parable of the
Talents. Don't you know it's wrong to bury yourself here, eating your own life away with melancholia,
seeing that you're gifted as you are? Maestros, and highclass critics, and other unwholesomely
cultured people, might possibly sit on you, or damn you with faint praise; but you could afford
to take chance of that, for beyond all doubt, the million would idolise you. I'm not looking at
the business aspect of the thing; I'm thinking of the humanising influence you would exercise,
and the happiness you would confer, and, altogether, of the unmixed good that would lie to
your credit, if you made the intended use of your Lord's money. And here you are, burying it
in the earth."

"O, I would n't be here, I suppose, only for the disfigurement of my face," he replied, swallowing
a sob.

"That's nothing," I interjected, deeply pained by his allusion, and inwardly soliciting forgiveness
without repentance whilst I spoke. "Did the British think less of Nelson--Did Lady Hamilton
think less of him, if it comes to that--for the loss of his arm and his eye? Why, even the conceited
German students value scars on the face more than academic honours. Believe me, Alf, while a
man merely conducts himself as a man, his scars need n't cost him a thought; but if he's an artist,
as you are, what might otherwise be a disfigurement becomes the highest claim to respect and
sympathy. It's pure effeminancy to brood over such things, for that's just where we have the
advantage of women. 'A woman's first duty,' says the proverb, 'is to be beautiful.' If Lady
Hamilton had been minus an eye and an arm, she would scarcely have
attained her unfortunate celebrity."

The boundary man laid down his pipe, rested his forehead on his arm
upon the table, and for a minute or two sobbed like a child.

It was dreadful to see him. He was worse than Ida, in an argument with Mrs. Beaudesart; he was
as bad as an Australian judge, passing mitigated sentence on some
well-connected criminal.

Presently he rose, and walked unsteadily
to the other end of the hut; his dog, with a low, pathetic whine,
following him. Perceiving that he was off again, I turned up the flame
of the lamp, with a view to neutralising the effect of the moonlight.

"Are
you not well, Alf? "

No answer. He was lying on his back on the bed,
one arm across his face, and the other hanging down; whilst his dog,
crouched at the bedside, was silently licking the brown fingers. Then
my eye happened to fall on the American clock over the fire-place.
Not that time, surely! But my watch had beaten the clock by ten minutes.

"I
say, Alf; I don't know how to apologise for keeping you up till this
time. It's half-past eleven."

Still no answer. I brought in my possum-rug,
and began to spread it on the floor. Alf had risen, and rolled his
blankets back off the bed. He now took out the mattress of dried grass,
and laid it on the floor, then re-arranged his blankets.

"But I certainly
won't rob you of your tick," said I. "One characteristic of childhood
I still retain is the ability to sleep anywhere, like a dog."

"You
must take it, if you sleep in this hut," he replied curtly. "Take
that too." He handed me his feather pillow.

"Do you shut your door
at nights?" I asked. "Because, if you do, I'll chain Pup to the fence.
He likes to go in and out at his own pleasure; and, if he found himself
shut-out, he might get lost."

"It can stay open to-night," replied
Alf.

"Right," said I; and I began to disrobe, as I always do when
circumstances permit. Sleeping with your clothes on is slovenly; sleeping
with your spurs on is, in addition, ruinously destructive to even
the strongest bed-clothes.

"By-the-way, Alf," I remarked, as I pulled
off my socks; "I was forgetting your problem. People love God nowadays as much as the temperaments they
were born with tell them to. He has grown too old for miracles. After two thousand years he
has no longer the force to turn water into wine. Ellen, I love your dear prim smile. But always,
everywhere, I have found the love of men and women doing that. Sometimes the love of places
does something very like it. A man may land on a strange island, and abandon the journey on
which he set out, and the home he set out from, to live there for ever. But there his soul
has just sunk to sleep. It hasn't been changed. But love changes people. I've seen the dirtiest
little greasers clean themselves up and become capable of decency and courage, because there
was some woman about. And oh, my darling! that happened with quite ordinary women. Vin Ordinaire.
Pieces cut from the roll of ordinary female stuff. But how will the magic word act when you
are part of the spell--you who are the most wonderful thing in the whole world, who are the
flower of the earth's crop of beauty, who have such a genius for just being! Oh, it will be
a tremendous thing."

He paused, marvelling at his own exultation, which marked, he knew, so great a change in him.
For always before it had been his chief care that nothing at all should happen to him emotionally,
and especially had he feared this alchemy of passion. He had been unable to pray for purity,
since he felt it an ideal ridiculously not indigenous to this richly-coloured three-dimensional
universe, and he had observed that it made men liable to infatuations in later life; but he
had prayed for lust, which he knew to be the most drastic preventive of love. But it had evaded
him as virtue evades other men. Never had he been able to look on women with the single eye
of desire; always in the middle of his lust, like the dark stamen in a bright flower, there
appeared his inveterate concern for people's souls. Every woman to whom he wanted to make love
was certain to be engaged in some defensive struggle against fate, for that is the condition
of strong personality, and his quick sense would soon detect its nature; and since there is
nothing more lovable than the sight of a soul standing up against fate, looking so little under
the dome of the indifferent sky, he would find himself nearly in love. And because that meant,
as he had observed, this magic change of the self, he would turn his back on the adventure,
for all his life he had disliked profound emotional processes with exactly the same revulsion
that a decent man feels for some operation which, though within the law, is outside the dictates
of honesty. He knew there was no reason that could be formulated why he should not become a
real lover; but nevertheless he had always felt as if for him it would be an act of disloyalty
to some fair standard.

He quaked at his own oddness, until there struck home to his heart, as an immense reassurance,
the expression on Ellen's face. It had been blank with the joy of being loved, a romantic mask,
lit steadily with a severe receptive passion; but the abstraction in his voice and an accompanying
failure of invention in his compliments had not escaped unnoticed by her, and there was playing
about her dear obstinate mouth and fierce-coloured eyebrows the most delicious look of shrewdness,
as if she had his secret by the coat-tail and would deliver it up to justice; and over all
there was the sweetest, most playful smile, which showed that she would make a jest of his
negligence, that she was one of those who exclude ugliness from their lives by imposing beautiful
interpretations on all that happened to her; and behind these lovely things she did shone the
still lovelier thing she was. It struck home to him the immense degree to which brooding on
so perfect and adventurous a thing would change him, and once more he was not afraid. Taking
her again in his arms, he cried out: "Ellen! Ellen! You mean so much to me! I love you as a
child loves its mother, partly for real, disinterested love and partly for the thing you give
me! You are going to do such a lot for me! You will put an end to this damned misery! And just
the sight of you about my home, you slip of light, you dear miracle!"

She put her hand across his mouth, blushing at the familiarity of her gesture yet urgently
impelled to it. "That'll do," she said. "I know you think I'm nice. But what were you saying
about being miserable? You're not miserable, are you?"

"Sometimes. I have been lately."

"You miserable!" she softly exclaimed. "You so big and strong--and victorious! But why?"

"Oh, no reason. It's a mood that comes on me."

"I have them myself. It's proof of our superior delicacy of organisation," she gravely told him.

"Oh, I don't know. The feeling that comes on you when you've taken particular care to turn
up for an important appointment, and you get to the place ten minutes before the time, and
find there's nobody there, and wait about, and suddenly find you've come a day late. And still
you go on hanging round, feeling there must be something you can do, although you know you
can't. It stays months sometimes. A sense of having missed some opportunity that won't come
again. I don't know what it means. But it turns life sour. It seems to take the power out of
one's fingers, to make one's brainstuff hot and thick and dark. It makes one's work seem not
worth doing. But that's all over. It won't come again now I have you!" He sat down on the basket
chair and drew her on to his knee, giving her light caresses to correct the heavy things he
had just been saying. She received them abstractedly, as if she were thinking silent vows.
"Ellen, I don't know what your eyes are like. The sea never looks kind like that, and they
are wittier than flowers. You're not really like a flower at all, you know, though I believe
that in our circumstances it's considered the proper thing for me to tell you that you are.
You're too important, and you wouldn't like growing in a garden, which even wild flowers seem
to want to do. I'll tell you what you're like. You're like an olive tree. They're slim like
you, and their branches go up like arms, as if they were asking for a vote, and they grow dangerously
(just as you would if you were a tree) on the very edge of cliffs; and one looks past them
at the blue sea, just as I look past you at the glorious life I'm going to have now I've got
you. Dearest, when can we get married?"

"Oh!" exclaimed Ellen, greatly pleased. "Are you in a position to keep a wife?"

He burst out laughing. "You darling! Do you know, I believe I could keep two."

She did not laugh. "It's wicked to think that if you did I couldn't divorce you. You'd have
to be cruel as well. I heard Brynhild Ormiston say so."

He went on laughing. "Well, don't let that hold you back. I dare say I could, rise to being
cruel as well. Let's look on the bright side of things. Tell me, darling, when will you marry me?"

"Those iniquitous marriage-laws," she murmured. "It makes one think...." She looked down, weighing
grave things.

"My dearest, you can forget the marriage-laws. I will adore you so, I will be so faithful,
I will work my fingers to the bone so gladly to make you kind to me, that there is no divorce
law in the world will let you get rid of me." Shy at his own sincerity, he kissed her hair,
and whispered in her ear, "I mean it, Ellen."

She raised her head with that bravery he loved so much, and gave him her lips to kiss, but
her eyes were still wide and set with reluctance.

"What can be worrying her?" he wondered. "Can it be that she isn't sure about my money? Of
course she hasn't the least idea how much I've got. Wise little thing, if she dreads transplantation
to some little hole worse than this." He looked distastefully at the age-cracked walls, stained
with patches of damp that seemed like a material form of disgrace. That she should have grown
to beauty in these infect surroundings made him feel, as he had often done before, that she
was not all human and corruptible, but that her flesh was mixed with precious substance not
subject to decay, her blood interpenetrated with the material of jewels. Perhaps some sorcerer
had confusioned it of organic and inorganic beauty and chosen some ancestress of Ellen for
his human ingredient; he remembered an African story of a woman fertilised by a sacred horn
of ivory; an Indian story of a princess who had lain with her narrow brown body straight and
still all night before the altar of a quiet temple, that the rays of a holy ruby might make
her quick; surely their children had met and bred the stock that had at last, in the wise age
of the world, made this thing of rubies and ivory that lay in his arms. He liked making fantasies
about her that were stiff as brocade with fantastic imagery, that were more worshipful of her
loveliness than anything he yet dared say to her. Absent-mindedly he went on reassuring her.
"You know, I've got quite enough money. Fortunately the branch of chemistry I'm interested
in is of great commercial use, so I get well paid. Iniquitously well paid, when one considers
how badly pure scientific work is paid; and of course pure science ought to be rewarded a hundred
times better than applied science. We ought to be able to manage quite decently. My mother's
got her own money, so my income will be all ours. There's no reason of that sort why we shouldn't
get married at once. We'll have to live in Essex at first. I've got to go and work on Kerith
Island."

She wriggled on his lap. "What's that you were saying about science?" she asked, her voice
dipping and soaring with affected interest. "Why isn't pure science to be rewarded better than
applied science?"

"Why is she trying to put me off?" he speculated. "It isn't a matter of being sure of a decent
home. In fact, she hated my talking about money. I wonder what it is." To let her do what she
wanted with the conversation he said aloud, "Oh, because applied science is a mug's game. Pure
science is a kind of marriage with knowledge--the same kind of marriage that ours is going
to be, when you find out all about a person by being with them all the time and loving them
very much. Applied science is the other sort of marriage. In it you go through the pockets
of knowledge when he's asleep and take out what you want. But, dear, I don't want to talk of
that. I want to know when you're going to marry me."

"I hope," she said quaveringly, "that all your people won't think I am marrying you for your
money. But then ... if they know you ... they will know that you are so glorious ... that any
woman would marry you ... if you were a beggar, or the ideal equivalent of that."

"Oh, you dear absurd thing!" he cried, feeling intensely moved. "Haven't you the least idea
how far beyond price you are, how worthless I am! Anyway ... I've no people, except my mother."
He paused and wondered if he would tell her about his mother now; but seeing that her brows
were still knitted by her private trouble about their marriage, the nature of which he could
not guess, he thought he would not do it just now. In any case, he did not want to. "And she
will know how lucky I am to get you, how little I deserve you."

"I'd have married you," said Ellen, not without bitterness, "if you'd been an anti-Suffragist."
The situation was so plainly presenting itself to her as being in some way dreadful that he
anxiously held her with his eyes. She stammered, folding and refolding her hands. "It'll be
queer, living in a house with you, won't it?"

He had held her eyes, and thus forced her to tell him what was troubling her, on the assumption
that he could deal with her answer. But this was outside his experience. He did not know anything
about girls; he had hardly believed in the positive reality of girlhood; it had seemed to him
rather a negative thing, the state of not being a woman. But in the light of her gentle, palpitant
distress, he saw that it was indeed so real a state that passing from it to the state of womanhood
would be as terrible as if she had to give birth to herself.... It was such a helpless state,
too. She was, he said to himself again--for he knew she did not like him to say it!--such a
little thing. He remembered, with a sudden sweat of horror, the conversation in the lawyer's
office that had sent him sweating up here, keeping himself so hot with curses at the human
world that he had not felt the coldness of the weather. God, how he had hated that office from
the moment he set foot in it! He had hated Mr. Mactavish James at sight as much as he had hated
his young son; for the solicitor had surveyed him with that lewd look that old men sometimes
give to strong young men. He had perceived at once, from the way Mr. James was sucking the
occasion, that he had been sent for some special purpose, and he did not believe, from the
repetition of that lewd look, that it related to his property in Rio or that it was clean.
He was prepared for the drawled comment, "I hear ye're making fren's wi' our wee Nelly," and
he was ready with a hard stare. It was enraging to see that the old man had expected his haughtiness
and that it was evidently fuel for his lewd jest. "I am fond of wee Nelly. She's just a world's
wonder. You sit there saying nothing, maybe it doesn't interest you, but you would feel as
I do if you had seen her the way I did thon day a year ago in June. Ay!" He threw his eyes
up and exclaimed succulently, "The wee bairn!" with an air of giving a handsome present.

Yaverland, who had not come much in contact with Scotch sentimentality, felt very sick, and
increasingly so as the old man told how he had met her up at the Sheriff's Court. "Sixteen,
and making her appearance in the Sheriff's Court!" Yaverland had a vision of a court of obscure
old men all gloating impotently and imaginatively on Ellen's red and white. "What was she doing
there?" he asked in exasperation, forgetting his vow to appear indifferent about Ellen, and
was enraged to see Mr. Mactavish James chuckle at the perceived implications of his interested
enquiry. "Well, it was this way. Her mither, who was Ellen Forbes, whom I knew well when I
was young, had the wee house in Hume Park Square. You'll have been there? Hev' ye not? Imphm.
I thought so. Well, they'd had thought difficulty in paying the rent...." The story droned
on perpetually, breaking off into croonings of sensual pity; and Yaverland sat listening to
it with such rage, that, as he soon knew from the narrator's waggish look, the vein in his
forehead began to swell.

It appeared that the poor little draggled bird had in the summer of its days been known as
Ellen Forbes had got into arrears with the rent; as some cheque had been greatly delayed, and
that when the cheque had arrived she had been taken away to the fever hospital with typhoid
fever, and that, since she had to lie on her back for three weeks, Ellen, who was left alone
in that wee house--he rolled his tongue round the loneliness repellently--had neither sent
the cheque on to her nor asked her to write a cheque for the rent. The landlord, "a man called
Inglis, wi' offices up in Clark Street, who does a deal of that class of property"--it was
evident that he admired such--saw a prospect of getting tenants to take on the house at a higher
rental. So, "knowing well that Ellen was a wean and no' kenning what manner of wean she was,"
and hearing from some source that they were exceptionally friendless and alone, served her
with a notice that he was about to apply for an eviction order. But Ellen had attended the
court and told her story.

"By the greatest luck in the world I happened to be in court that day, looking after the interests
of a client of mine, a most respectable unmarried lady, a pillar of St. Giles, who had been
horrified to find out that her property was being used as a bad house. Hee hee." He was abashed
to perceive that this young man was not overcome with mirth and geniality at the mention of
a brothel. "The minute I saw the wee thing standing there in the well of the court, saying
what was what--she called him 'the man Inglis,' she did!--I kenned there was not her like under
the sun." She had won her case; but Mr. James had intercepted her on the way out, and had stopped
her to congratulate her, and had been amazed to find the tears running down her cheeks. "I
took the wee thing aside." It turned out that to defend her home, and keep it ready for her
mother coming out from the hospital, she had to come down to the court on the very day that
she should have sat for the examination by which she had hoped to win a University scholarship.
"The wee thing was that keen on her buiks!" he said, with caressing contempt, "and she was
like to cry her heart out. So I put it all right." "What did you do?" Yaverland had asked,
expecting to hear of some generous offer to pay her fees, and remembering that he had heard
that the Scotch were passionate about affairs of education. "I offered her a situation as typist
here, as my typist had just left," said Mr. Mactavish James, with an ineffable air of self-satisfaction.
Yaverland had been about to burst into angry laughter, when the old man had gone on, "Ay, and
I thought I had found a nest for the wee lassie. But a face as bonnie as hers brings its troubles
with it! Ay, ay! I'm sorry to have to say it."

Oh! it went slower and smoother like a dragged-out song at a ballad concert. "There's one in
the office will not leave the puir lassie alone...." Yaverland had fumed with rage at the idea;
and then had been overcome with a greater loathing of this false and theatrical old man. Inglis
and the man who wanted her were at least slaves of some passion that was the fruit of their
affairs. But this man was both of them. He had not wished this girl well. He had rejoiced in
her poverty because it stimulated the flow of the juices of pity; he had rejoiced in her disappointment;
he had rejoiced in Inglis's villainy because he could pity her; he had rejoiced in the unknown
man's lust because he could step protectively in front of Ellen; and, worse than this, hadn't
he savoured in the story vices that he himself had had to sacrifice for the sake of standing
well with the world? Had he not felt how lovely it must be to be Inglis and hunt little weak
slips of girls and make more money? Had he not felt himself revisited by the warm fires of
lust in thinking of this unknown man's pursuit of Ellen and wallowed in it? Yaverland had risen
quickly, and said haltingly, trying to speak and not to strike because the man was old and
his offence indefinite. "No doubt you've been very good to Miss Melville." Mr. Mactavish James
had been amazed by the grim construction of the speech, the lack of any response matching his
"crack" in floridity. He had expected comment on his generosity. Positive resentment had stolen
into his face as Yaverland had turned his back on him and rushed up the wet streets to rescue
Ellen from the world.

Alas, that it should turn out that he too was something from which her delicate little soul
asked to be rescued! He could not bear the thought of altering her. The prospect of taking
her as his wife, of making her live in close contact with his masculinity, dangerous both in
its primitive sense of something vast and rough, and also as something more experienced than
her, seemed as iniquitous as the trampling of some fine white wild flower. But then, she was
beautiful, not only lovely: destiny had marked her for a high career; to leave her as she was
would be to miscast one who deserved to play the great tragic part, which cannot be played
without the actress's heart beating at the prospect of so great a rôle. Oh, there was no going
back! But he perceived he must be very clever about it. He must make it all as easy as possible
for her. His heart contracted with tenderness as he took vows that could not have been more
religious if they had been made concerning celibacy instead of concerning marriage. He regretted
he was an Atheist. He had felt this before in moments of urgency, for blasphemy abhors a vacuum,
but now he wanted some white high thing to swear by; something armed with powers of eternal
punishment to chastise him if he broke his oath. He found that his eyes were swimming with
tears. Yes, tears! Oh, she had extended life to limits he had not dreamed of! He had never
thought he would laugh out loud as he had done to-night. He had never thought his eyes would
grow wet as they were doing now. And it was good. He looked at her in gratitude, and found
her looking at him.

"Fancy you being miserable! And me," she reproached herself, "thinking that everybody was happy
but myself! Dear...." She rose to it, walking down to the cold water. "Let's marry soon."

The sequence of thought was to be followed easily. She was willing to take this step, which
for reasons she did not understand made her flesh goose-grained with horror, because she thought
she could prevent him from being unhappy. "Oh, Ellen!" he cried out, and buried his head on
her bosom. "I want--I want to deserve you. I will work all my life to be good enough for you."
He felt the happiness of a man who has found a religion.

They heard a key turning in the front door. Ellen slipped off his knee and stood, first one
foot behind the other, balanced on the ball of one foot, a finger to her lips, in the attitude
of a frightened nymph. Then she recovered herself, and stood sturdily on both feet with her
hands behind her. How he adored her, this nymph who wanted to look like Mr. Gladstone!

Mrs. Melville, pitifully blown about, a most ruffled little bird, appeared at the door. She
was amazed. "Mr. Yaverland! In the kitchen! And, Ellen, what are you doing in your stocking
feet? Away and take Mr. Yaverland into the parlour!"

"He came in here himself," said Ellen. She had become a little girl, a guilty little girl.

Yaverland caught Mrs. Melville's eye and held it for a fraction of an instant. She mustn't
know they had talked of it before. That would never do, for a modern woman. "Mrs. Melville,"
he said, "I've asked Ellen to marry me."

Her eyes twinkled. "You never say so!" she said, with exquisite malice at the expense of her
clever daughter. "I am surprised!" She sat down at the head of the kitchen table, setting a
string bag full of parcels on the table in front of her. She was breathing heavily, and her
voice, he noticed, was very hoarse. Poor little thing! Yet she was glad. Wonderful to see her
so glad about anything; pathetic to see how, though all her life had gone shipwrecked, she
cheered her daughter to voyage. "She must live near us in Essex," he thought rapidly. "I must
give her a decent allowance." "Well, well!" she said happily.

Ellen, feeling that things were being taken too much for granted, so far as she was concerned,
remarked suddenly, "And I think I'll take him."

Her eyes twinkled again at Yaverland. Wasn't there something very sweet about her? She was,
in effect, glad that he loved her daughter, because now she had somebody who could laugh at
this wonderful daughter!

"Let me marry her soon," he said.

She became doubtful. Her face contracted, as it had done when she had said, "Let her bide;
she's only a bairn."

"We must live in Essex," he said, to get her past the moment.

She became tragic.

"You'd like, I think, to come and live near us? If there isn't a house at Roothing, there are
plenty at Prittlebay. It would be good for you. Obviously you can't stand this climate."

She looked up at him and said, the thought of them living together having obviously presented
itself to her for the first time, "Ah, well. I hope you'll both be happy. Happier than I was."
She receded back into memory, and found first of all that ancient loyalty that she had always
practised in his life. "Not but what John Melville was a better man than anyone has allowed."

They didn't say anything, but stood silent, giving the moment its honour. Then Ellen stepped
to her mother's side and said chidingly, "Mother, what's wrong with your throat? You had a
cold when you went out, but nothing like this. It's terrible."

"It's nothing, dear. Take Mr. Yaverland--maircy me, what shall I call you now?"

"Richard. That's what my mother calls me."

"Oh," she cried flutteringly, "it's like having a son again. No one would think I was your
mother, though, and you such a great thing! Though Ronnie if he had lived would have been tall.
As tall as you, I wouldn't wonder," she said, with a tinge of jealousy. "Well, Ellen, take
Richard into the parlour and light the fire. I'll see to the supper."

"You will not," said Ellen, whom shyness was making deliriously surly. It was like seeing her
in a false beard. "R--Richard, will you take her into the parlour yourself? She's got a terrible
throat. Can you not hear?"

"Ellen dear!"

"Away now!"

"I will not away. Ellen, don't worry. You don't know where I put the best tablecloth after
the mending--and there's nothing but cod-roes, and you know well that in cooking your mother
beats you. Run away, dear--you'll make Richard feel awkward--"

Ellen shrugged her shoulders. She knew that she ought to insist, but she knew too that it would
be lovely lighting the fire for Richard.

IV

He had not been able to see Ellen for three days. But he had written to her three times.

"I'm missing another day of you, Ellen. And I'm greedy for every minute of you. There you are,
away from me, and moving about and doing all the sweet things you do, and saying all the things
you do say, and your red hair catching the light and your voice full of exquisite sweet sounds,
and I just have to get along seeing and hearing nothing of it. I am the most insatiable of
lovers. Life is thirst without you. I grudge every moment we have been alive on the same world
and not together. What a waste! What a waste! I've never wanted an immortal soul before, but
now I do--that I may go on with you and go on with you, you darlingissima, you endlessly lovely
human thing. I'd go through all the ages with you; we'd be like two children reading a wonderful
book together, and you'd light even the darkest passage of time for me with your wit and your
beauty. Tell me everything you are doing, tell me every little thing, my lovely red-haired
Ellen...."

And she had written to him twice....

"And in the evening I went out shopping. I wish you would tell me what you like to eat. It
would give shopping an interest. Then I went to the library and got a trashy novel for mother
to read, as I am still keeping her in bed. For myself, I wanted to read something about love,
as hitherto I have not taken much interest in it and have read practically nothing on the subject,
so I got out the works of Shelley and Byron. But their love poems are very superficial. I do
wish you were here. Please come soon. When mother is well I will be able to make cakes for
you. Did you see the sunset yesterday? I am surprised to find how much feeling there is arising
out of what is, after all, quite an ordinary event of life. For after all, this happens to
nearly everybody. But I do not believe it can happen quite like this to other people. I am
sure there must be something quite out of the ordinary about our feelings for one another.
Do please come soon...."

Well, he had come, his arms full of flowers and illustrated papers for the invalid, and neither
his soft first knock, designed to spare Mrs. Melville's susceptibilities, nor his more vigorous
second, had brought Ellen to the door. He stepped back some paces and looked up at the three
dwarfish storeys of the silent little house, and alarm fell on him as he saw that all the windows
were dark. The reasoning portion of his mind deliberated whether there could conceivably be
any bedrooms looking out to the back, but with the crazed imagination of a lover he saw extravagant
visions of the evils that might befall two fragile women living alone. He pictured Ellen sitting
up in bed, blinking at the lanterns of masked men. Then it struck him as probable that Mrs.
Melville's sore throat might have developed into diphtheria, and that Ellen had caught it,
and the two women were even now lying helpless and unattended in the dark house, and he brought
down the knocker on the door like a hammer. The little square, which a moment ago had seemed
an amusing setting for Ellen's quaintness, now seemed like a malignant hunchback in its darkness
and its leaning angles, and the branches of the trees in the park beyond the railings swayed
in the easy wind of a fine night with that ironical air nature always assumes to persons convulsed
by human passion. But presently he heard the crazy staircase creak under somebody's feet, and
the next moment Ellen's face looked out at him. She held a candle in her hand, and in its light
he saw that her face was marked with fatigue as by a blow and that her hair fell in lank, curved
strands about her shoulders.

She nearly sobbed when she saw him, but opened the door no wider than a crack. "Oh, Richard!
It's lovely to see you, but you mustn't come in. They've taken poor mother away to the fever
hospital with diphtheria."

"Diphtheria!" he exclaimed. "That's rum! It flashed through my mind as I knocked that it was
diphtheria she had."

"Isn't that curious!" she murmured, her eyes growing large and soft with wonder. But her rationalism
asserted itself and her glance grew shrewd again. "Of course that's all nonsense. What more
likely for you to think, when you knew it was her throat that ailed her?" Seeing that in her
enthusiasm for a materialist conception of the universe she loosed her grip of the doorhandle,
he pushed past her, and took her candlestick away from her and set it down with his flowers
and papers on the staircase. "Oh, you mustn't, you mustn't!" she cried under his kisses. "Do
you not know it's catching? I may have it on me now."

"Oh, God, I hope you haven't, you precious thing...."

"I don't expect so. I've had an anti-diphtheritic serum injected. Science is a wonderful thing.
But you might get it."

"That be damned."

"Och, you great swearing thing!" she crooned delightedly, and nuzzled into his chest. "Ah,
how I like you to like kissing me!" she whispered in a woman's voice. "More than I like it
myself. Is that not strange?" Then her face puckered and she was young again, hardly less young
than any new-born thing "It's a mild case, the doctor said, but it hurt her so! And oh, Richard,
when the ambulance man carried her away she looked so wee!"

"Why did you let her go?" he asked with sudden impatience. He loved her so much that her swimming
eyes turned a knife in his heart, and his maleness resented the pain her female sensitiveness
was bringing on him, and wanted to prove that all this could have been avoided by the use of
the male attribute of common sense, and therefore she deserved no sympathy at all. "I would
have stood you nurses. I'm one of the family now. You might have let me do that!"

"Dear, I thought of asking you for that," she said timidly, "but, you see, nurses are ill to
deal with in a wee house like this where there's no servant. If I had sickened for it myself
where would we all have been? Worse than in the hospital." Of course she had been wise; it
was her constant quality. He shook with rage at the thought of the extreme poverty of the poor,
whom the world pretends are robbed only of luxury but who are denied such necessities as the
right to watch beside the beloved sick. "But I've been reckless!" she boasted with a smile.
"I've told them to put her in a private ward. She was so pleased! She was six weeks in the
general ward when she had typhoid, and it was dreadful, all the women from the Canongate and
the Pleasance...." It brought painful tears to his eyes to hear this queen, who ought to have
had first call on the world's riches, rejoicing because by a stroke of good fortune her mother
need not lie in her sickness side by side with women of the slums. "Oh, my dear, I'm so glad
I can look after you!" he muttered, and gathered her closely to him.

"Oh dear, and me in my dressing-gown!" she breathed.

"You look very beautiful."

"I wasn't thinking of beauty; I was thinking of decency."

"Nobody would call a dressing-gown of grey flannel fastened at the neck with a large horn button
anything but decent."

"Yes, it's cairtainly sober," said Ellen placidly. "Beauty, indeed! I'm past thinking of beauty,
after having been up all night giving mother her medicine and encouraging her, and getting
her ready in the morning for the ambulance, and going away over to the doctor at Church Hill
for my injection this afternoon. I fear to think what I'm looking like, though doubtless it
would do me good to know."

"You must be tired out. Run along to bed. I'll go away now and come back the first thing in
the morning."

"Who's talking of bed?" she complained with a smiling peevishness. ("Ye've got--ye've got remarkable
eyebrows. The way they grow makes me feel all--all desperate.") "I've had a lie-down since
four. You woke me up with your knocking. Dear, I've never been woken up so beautifully before.
Now I want my supper. I never lose my appetite even when the Liberals win a by-election, which
considering the way our women work against them is one of those things that disprove all idea
of a just Providence. Dear, but it'll be such a poor supper to set before you! There's not
a thing in the house but a tin of salmon. It is a mercy that mother isn't here, for this is
the kind of thing that upsets her terribly. She wakes me up sometimes dreaming of the time
the milk was sour when Mr. Kelman came on his parish visit, though that's five years ago now.
Oh, Richard, mother is such a wee sensitive thing, you cannot think! I cannot bear her to be
ill! But indeed she is not very ill. The doctor said she was not very ill. He said I would
be a fule to worry. She would be at me for letting you stand out in the hall like this. You
go into the parlour. I'll light the fire, and then I'll away to the kitchen and get the supper.
We must just make the best of it, and I have heard that some people prefer tinned salmon to fresh."

"It's the distinguishing mark of connoisseurs in all the capitals of Europe," said Richard.
"But darling, don't light a fire for me. I'll go off as soon as you've had supper, so that
you can turn in."

"But as soon as supper's eaten I have to away out. Ah, will you come with me? I like walking
through the streets with you. It's somehow like a procession. You're awful like a king, Richard.
Not the present Royal Family."

"But why must you go out?"

"To see how mother is. Do you not know? When the ambulance men come they give you a number.
Mother's is ninety-three. Then every morning and every evening they put a board in the window
up at the Public Health Office in the High Street, with headings on it: 'Very dangerously ill,
friends requested to come at once.' 'Very ill, but no immediate danger,' 'Getting on well,'
and the numbers grouped against them. She'll be amongst the 'Getting on wells.' The doctor
said there was no cause for worry at all. He is a splendid doctor."

"But, my God, can't you telephone?"

"No, of course not. They can't do that in these institutions. They'd have to keep someone to
do nothing but answer the telephone all day. But it doesn't really matter. Hardly anybody dies
of fevers, do they? I never heard of anybody dying of diphtheria, did you? They used to in
the old days, but it's all different now. This serum's such a wonderful thing. But they did
hurt so when they injected it. She cried, although she is awful brave as a usual thing. Oh,
let's get on with this supper!" She passed into the kitchen and began preparations for a meal,
banging down the saucepans, while he brought in his gifts and laid them on the table. "I'm
taking it for granted that you like your cocoa done with milk. What's all this? Oh, did you
bring those flowers for her? Oh, that was kind of you! Pink flowers, too, and she loves pink.
It's her great grief that all her life she wanted a pink dress, and what with one thing and
another, first having a younger sister so sallow that a pink dress in the neighbourhood spoilt
all her chances, and afterwards father just wincing if there seemed any chance of her having
anything she liked, she never got one. Illustrated papers, too! She likes a read, though nothing
intellectual. Richard, I do believe you're thoughtful. That'll be a great help in our married
life." She turned over the glossy pages, clicking her tongue with disapproval. "Anti-Suffragists
to a woman, I expect," adding honestly, "but pairfect teeth."

Her little face, seen now in repose, unlit by the light that glowed in her eyes when she looked
at him, was piteous with fatigue. "Ellen, can't I go and look at this board?"

"No. I want to go myself."

"Then come and do it now, and then we'll go on and have supper at some place in Princes Street."

"No. I want to leave it as late as possible. Then it'll seem like saying good-night to Mother."

They ate but little. She tasted a few mouthfuls, and then clambered on to his knee and lay
in his arms, burying her face against his shoulder. She might have been asleep but that she
sometimes put up her hand and stroked his hair and traced his eyebrows and made a little purring
noise; and once she cried a little and exclaimed pettishly, "It's just lack of sleep. I'm not
anxious. I'm not a bit anxious." And presently she looked up at the alarum clock and said,
"That's never nine? We must go. Richard, you are great company!" She ran upstairs to dress,
singing in the sweetest little voice, wild yet low and docile, such as a bird might have if
it were christened. When she came down she faced him with gentle defiance and said, "I know
I'm awful plain to-night. I suppose you'll not love me any more?" He answered, "Be downright
ugly if you can. It won't matter to me. I love you anyhow." She lifted her hand to turn out
the gas and smiled at him over her shoulder. "If that's not handsome!" she drawled mockingly,
but in her glance, though she dropped her lids, there burned a flame of earnestness, and just
as he was going to open the front door she slipped into his arms and rested there, shaken with
some deep emotion, with words she felt too young to say.

"What is it? What is it you want to say? Tell me."

"Do you think we can do it, Richard? Love each other always. Now, it's easy. We're young. It's
easier to be nice when you're young.... But mother and father must have cared for each other
once. She kept his letters. After everything she kept his letters.... It's when one gets old
... old people quarrel and are mean. Ah, do you think we will be able to keep it up?"

She was remembering, he could see, the later married life of her parents, and conceiving it
for the first time not with the harsh Puritan moral vision of the young, as the inevitable
result of deliberate ill-conduct, but as the decay of an intention for which the persons involved
were hardly more to blame than is an industrious gardener for the death of a plant whose habit
he has not understood. It was, to one newly possessed of happiness, a terrifying conception.

He muttered, low-voiced and ashamed as those are who speak of things much more sacred than
the common tenor of their lives: "Of course it'll be difficult after the first few years. But
it's hard to be a saint. Yet there have been saints. All that they do for their religion I'll
do for you. I will keep clear of evil things lest they spoil the feelings I have for you. I....
There are thoughts like prayers.... And, darling ... I do not believe in God ... yet I know
that through you I shall find ... something the same as God...." He could not say it all. But
it communicated itself in their long unpassionate kiss.

They crept out of the dark house that had heard them as out of a church. He was very happy
as they went through the high, wide streets that to-night were broad rivers of slow wind. He
was being of use to her; she was leaning on his arm and sometimes shutting her tired eyes and
trusting to his guidance. The very coldness of the air he found pleasing, because it told him
that he was in the North, the cruel-kind region of the world which sows seeds from the South
in ice-bound earth in which it would seem that they must perish, yet rears them to such fruit
and flower as in their own rich soil they never knew.

At the first, he reflected, it must have appeared that the faith they made in Rome would lose
all its justifications of beauty when it travelled to those barren lands where the Holy Wafer
and the images of Our Lord and Our Lady must be content with a lodging built not of coloured
marble but of grey stone. Yet here the Northmen won. Since there were no quarries of coloured
marble they had to quarry in their minds, and there they found the Gothic style, which made
every church like the holiest moment of a holy soul's aspiration to God, and which is doubtless
more pleasing to Him, if He exists to be pleased, than precious stones.

So was it with love. A man returning from the South, where all women are full of physical wisdom,
might think as he looked on these Northern women, with their straight sexless eyes and their
long limbs innocent of languor, that he had turned his back on love. But here again the North
was victor. Since these women could not be wise about life with their bodies, they were wise
about love with their souls. They can give such sacramental kisses as the one that still lay
on his lips, committing him for ever to nobility. Ah, how much she had done for him by being
so sweetly militarist! For it had always been his fear that the supreme passion of his life
would be for some woman who, by her passivity, would provoke him to develop those tyrannous
and brutish qualities which he had inherited from his father. He had seen that that might easily
happen during his affair with Mariquita de Rojas; in those years he had been, he knew, more
quarrelsome and less friendly to mild and civilising things than he was ordinarily. But henceforward
he was safe, for Ellen would fiercely forbid him to be anything but gentle. Now that he realised
how good their relationship was he wanted it to be perfect, and therefore he felt vexed that
he had not yet made it perfectly honest by telling her about his mother. He resolved to do
so there and then, for he felt that that kiss had sealed the evening to a serenity in which
pain surely could not live.

"You're walking slower than you were," said Ellen sharply. "What was it you were thinking of
saying?"

He answered slowly, "I was thinking of something that I ought to tell you about myself."

She looked sideways at him as they passed under a lamp, and wrote in her heart, "When the vein
stands out in the middle of his forehead I will know that he is worried," then said aloud,
"Och, if it's anything disagreeable, don't bother to tell me. I'll just take it for granted
that till you met me you were a bad character."

"It's nothing that I've done. It's something that was done to my mother and myself." He found
that after all he could not bear to speak of it, and began to hurry on, saying loudly, "Oh,
it doesn't matter! You poor little thing, why should I bother you when you're dog-tired with
an old story that can't affect us in the least! It's all over; it's done with. We've got our
own lives to lead, thank God!"

She would not let him hurry on. "What was it, Richard?" she insisted, and added timidly, "I
see I'm vexing you, but I know well it's something that you ought to tell me!"

He walked on a pace or two, staring at the pavement. "Ellen, I'm illegitimate." She said nothing,
and he exclaimed to himself, "Oh, God, it's ten to one that the poor child can't make head
or tail of it! She probably knows nothing, absolutely nothing about these things!" Into his
deep concern lest he had troubled the clear waters of her innocence there was creeping unaccountably
a feeling of irritation, which made him want to shout at her. But he mumbled, "My father and
mother weren't married to each other...."

"Yes, I understand," she said rather indignantly; and after a moment's silence remarked conversationally,
"So that's all, is it?" Then her hand gripped his and she cried, "Oh, Richard, when you were
wee, did the others twit you with it?"

Oh, God, was she going to take it sentimentally? "No. At least, when they did I hammered them.
But it was awful for my mother."

"Ah, poor thing," she murmured, "isn't it a shame! Mrs. Ormiston is always very strong on the
unmarried mother in her speeches."

He had a sudden furious vision of how glibly these women at the Suffrage meeting would have
talked of Marion's case and how utterly incapable they would have been to conceive its tragedy;
how that abominable woman in sky-blue would have spoken gloatingly of man's sensuality while
she herself was bloomed over with the sensual passivity that provokes men to cruel and extravagant
demands. That nobody but himself ever seemed to have one inkling of the cruelty of her fate
he took as evidence that everybody was tacitly in league with the forces that had worked towards
it, and he found himself unable to exempt Ellen from this suspicion. If she began to chatter
about Marion, if she talked about her without that solemnity which should visit the lips of
those who talk of martyred saints, there would begin a battle between his loves, the issue
of which was not known to him. He said with some exasperation: "I'm not talking of the unmarried
mother; I am talking of my mother, who was not married to my father...."

But she did not hear him. The news, though it had roused that high pitch of trembling apprehension
which it now knew at any mention of the sequel of love, had not shocked her. In order to feel
that quick reaction of physical loathing to the story of an irregular relationship before hearing
its details, which is known as being shocked, one must be either not quite innocent and have
ugly associations with sex, or have had reason to conceive woman's life as a market where there
are few buyers, and a woman who is willing to live with a lover outside marriage as a merchant
who undersells her competitors; and Ellen was innocent and undefeated. It seemed to her, indeed,
just such a story as she might have expected to hear about his birth. It was natural that to
find so wonderful a child one would have to go to the end of the earth. There appeared before
her mind's eye a very bright and clean picture, perhaps the frontispiece of some forgotten
book read in her childhood, which represented a peasant girl clambering on to a ledge half-way
up a cliff and holding back a thorny branch to look down on a baby that, clad in a little shirt,
lay crowing and kicking in a huge bird's nest. She wondered what manner of woman it was that
had so recklessly gone forth and found this world's wonder. "What is your mother like? Tell
me, what is she like?"

"What is she like?" he repeated stiffly. He was not quite sure that she was asking in the right
spirit, that she was not moved by such curiosity as makes people study the photographs of murdered
people in the Sunday papers. "She is very beautiful...." But he should not have said that.
Now when he brought Ellen to Marion he would hear her say to herself, as tourists do when they
see a Leonardo da Vinci, "Well, that's not my idea of beauty, I must say!" and he would stop
loving her. But Ellen was saying, "I thought she would be. You know, Richard, you are quite
uncommon-looking. But tell me, what is she like?" Of course he might have known she was trying
to get at the story. He had better tell her at once, so that he was not vexed by these anglings.
He dragged it out of himself. "She was young, very young. My father was the squire of the Essex
village that is our home...." It was useless. He could not tell her of that tragedy. How black
a tragedy it was! How, it existing, he could be so crass as to eat and drink and be merry with
love? He turned his face away from Ellen and wished her arm was not in his, yet felt himself
bound to go on with his story lest she might make a vulgar reading of the facts and imagine
that his mother had given herself to his father without being married for sheer easiness. "They
could not marry because he had a wife. They loved each other very much. At least, on her side
it was love! On his ... on his...."

"Ah, hush!" she said. She gripped his arm and he felt that she was trembling violently. "Dear,
the way you're speaking of it ... somehow it's making it happen all over again...."

This was strange. He looked down on her with sudden respect. For she was using almost the same
words that his mother had spoken often enough when he had sat beside her bed on those nights
when she could not sleep for the argument of phantom passions in her room, and she opened her
eyes suddenly after having lain with them closed for a time, and found him grieving for her.
"Dear, you must not be so sorry for me. Hold my hand, but do not feel too sorry for me. It
only makes it worse for me. Truly, I ask for my own sake, not for yours. Do you not see? When
all the ripples have gone from the pond I shall forget I ever threw that stone...." Was it
not strange that this girl, on whose mind the dew was not yet dry, should speak the same wise
words that had been found fittest by a woman who had been educated by a tragic destiny? But
of course she was as wise as she was beautiful. His thought of Marion became fatigued and resentful
because it had made him forget the marvel of his Ellen.

"Forgive me," he murmured.

"Of course I forgive you."

"What, before I have told you what it is I want forgiveness for?"

"I have it in my mind I will always forgive you for anything you do."

"That's a brave undertaking!"

They laughed into each other's faces through the dusk. "Well, I've always hankered after a
chance to show I'm brave. When I was a wee thing I used to cry because I couldn't be a soldier.
I had the finest collection of tin soldiers you can imagine. A pairfect army. Mother used to
stint herself to buy them for me.... Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" He felt her tremble again. "Well,
we've come to the end of George the Fourth Bridge. Is it not awful inappropriate to call a
street after George the Fourth when it is nearly all bookshops?"

She did not name the street which they were entering. Indeed, though her breathing was tense,
lethargy seemed to have fallen on her, and she slackened her pace and made him halt with her
at the kerb, where they were necessarily jostled by the press of squalid people, lurching with
drink or merely with rough manners, that streamed up and down this street of topless houses
whose visible lower storeys were blear-eyed with windows broken or hung with rags.

"Isn't this the High Street?"

"Yes. And I wish we were here any time but this. Think if this was a fine Saturday morning
now, and we were going up to the Castle to see the Highlanders drilling."

"Didn't you say the Public Health Office was opposite the Cathedral?"

"I did so. But dear knows it was ridiculous of me to drag you here. Most likely her number
will not be there at all. After all, she was only taken away this morning, and the doctor said
there'd be no change. He said I would be just a fule to worry."

He guided her across the road and looked for the office among the shops that faced the dark
shape of the Cathedral, while she hung on his arm. "You will be angry with me for dragging
you for nothing out into this awful part."

"Is this it?"

"Yes, you must look, my eyes ache," she said peevishly. "Besides, her number will not be there.
Richard, did ever you see a white dog like yon in the gutter. Is it not a most peculiar-looking
animal?"

After a moment's silence he said steadily, "What did you say your mother's number was?"

"Ninety-three. I told you it would not be there. Richard, look at that white dog!"

His arm slipped round her. "My little Ellen," he whispered, "Ellen!"

V

A turn of the long dark avenue brought them alongside the city of the sick, which till then
had been only a stain of light on the sky, and they looked through the railings at the hospital
blocks which lay spaced over the level ground like battleships in a harbour. She reproached
her being as inadequate because no intuition told her in which block her mother was. After
a further stretch of avenue they came to a sandstone arch with lit rooms on either side, which
diffused a grudging brightness through half-frosted Windows on some beds of laurel bushes and
a gravel drive. These things were so ugly in such a familiar way, so much of a piece with the
red suburban streets which she knew stretched from the gates of this place through Morningside
past Blackford Hill to Newington, and which had always seemed to her to shelter only the residue
of life, strained of all events, that she took them as good omens.

When they went into the room on the left, and found a little office with ink-spattered walls
and a clerk sitting on a high stool, she told herself, while a quarter of her mind listened
to Richard explaining their errand and thought how nice it was to have a man to speak for one,
that it was impossible for such an ordinary place to be the setting of an event so extraordinary,
so unprecedented as death. It was true that her father was dead, but it had happened when he
was abroad, and so had seemed just his last extreme indulgence of his habit of staying away
from home. But the clerk sprang to his feet and, thrusting his pen behind his ear as if he
were shouldering arms, said in a loud consequential voice: "Ay, I sent a messenger along to
your residence the same time I 'phoned up to the Head Office to hev' the patient put on the
danger list! Everything possible is done in the way of consideration for the feelings of friends
and relations!" Yes, this was a hospital, and of course people sometimes died in hospitals.
But she pushed away that fact and set her eyes steadily on the clerk's face, her mind on the
words he had just spoken, and nearly laughed aloud to see that here was that happy and comic
thing a Dogberry, a simple soul who gilds employment in some mean and tedious capacity by conceiving
it as a position of power over great issues. He took a large key down from a nail on the wall
and exclaimed, "I'll take you myself!" and she perceived that he was going to do something
which he should have delegated to a porter, so that he might continue to display himself and
his office to these two strangers.

As they passed under the arch into the hospital grounds she kept her arm in Richard's because
the warmth of his body made it seem impossible that the flesh could ever grow quite cold, and
fixed her attention on the little clerk, because he offered a proof that the character of life
was definitely comic. But these frail assurances, that were but conceits made by the mind while
it marked time before charging the dreaded truth, were overcome by the strangeness of this
place. The paved corridor that followed on and on was built with waist-high walls, and between
the pillars that held up the gabled wooden roof the light streamed out on lawns of coarse grass
pricking rain-gleaming sod; at intervals they passed the immense swing doors of the wards,
glaringly bright with brass and highly polished gravy-coloured wood; at times another corridor
ran into it, and at their meeting-place there blew a swift unnatural wind, private to this
place and laden with the scentless scent of damp stone; down one such they saw a group of women
walking, wrapped in cloaks of different colours, flushed and cheered from some night meal,
making among themselves the infantile merriment that nuns and nurses know.

This was a city unlike any other. It was set apart for the sick; and some sick people died;
and of course there was no reason that people should not die merely because they were greatly
beloved. She sobbed; and the clerk, who was walking on ahead of them with the gait of one who
carries a standard, turned round and, waving the key, which there could be no occasion for
him to use, as all the doors were open, said kindly: "You know you mustn't be downhearted.
I've seen folk who came down on the verra same errand as yourselves go away in the morning
with fine an' happy faces." But after half a minute the intense intellectual honesty without
which he could not have been so marked a character reasserted itself, and he turned again and
added reluctantly, "But I've known more that didn't." She laughed on to Richard's shoulder
and crammed the speeches greedily into her memory, that some night soon by the hearth in the
sitting-room at Hume Park Square she might repeat them to her mother, whom she figured sitting
in the armchair, looking remarkably well and wearing the moiré blouse that she had given her
for her birthday.

"She's here," said the clerk dramatically; and they stared at a door that looked like all the
others. It admitted them to a rectilinear place of white doors and distempered walls. "She's
upstairs!" said the clerk, and they followed him. But as he reached the top he bent double
with a prodigiously respectful gesture, and cried to someone they could not see, "Good evening,
sir, I've brought the friends of Ninety-three," and turned and left them with some haste, impelled,
Ellen thought, as she still amusedly centred her imagination upon him, by a fear of being rebuked
for officiousness. But as she came to the landing and saw the four people who were standing
there, having evidently just come through the door, which one of them was softly closing, everything
left her mind but the knowledge that mother was dying. They forced it on her by their appearance
alone, for they said nothing. They stood quite still, looking at her and Richard as if in her
red hair and his tall swarthiness they saw something that, like the rainbow, laid on the eye
a duty of devout absorbent sight; and on them fell a stream of harsh electric light that displayed
their individual characters and the common quality that now convinced her that mother was dying.

There were two men in white coats, one sprucely middled aged, whose vitality was bubbling in
him like a pot of soup--good soup made of meat and bones, with none of the gristle of the spirit
in it; the other tall and fair and young, who turned a stethoscope in his long hands and looked
from the lines on his pale face to be a martyr to thought; there was a grey-haired sister with
large earnest spectacles and a ninepin body; there was a young nurse whose bare forearm, as
she drew the door to, was not less destitute of signs of mental activity than her broad, comely
face. And it was plain from their air of indifference and gravity, of uninterested yet strained
attention, that they were newly come from a scene which, though almost tediously familiar to
them, yet struck them as solemn. They were banishing their impression of it from their consciousness,
since they would not be able to carry on their work if they began to be excited about such
every-day events. They seemed to be practising a deliberate stockishness as if they were urging
the flesh to resist its quickened pulses; but their solemnity had fled down to that place beneath
the consciousness where the soul debates of its being, and there, as could be seen from the
droop of the shoulders and the nervous contraction of the hand that was common to all, was
raising doubt and fear. The nature of this scene was disclosed as a nurse at the end of the
passage passed through a swing door, and they looked for one moment into the long cavern of
a ward, lit with the dreadful light which dwells in hospitals while the healthy lie in darkness,
that dreadful light which throbs like a headache and frets like fever, the very colour of pain.
This light is diffused all over the world in these inhuman parallelogrammic cities of the sick,
and sometimes it comes to a focus. It had come to a focus now, in the room which they had just
left, where mother was lying.

She ran forward to the middle-aged doctor, whom she knew would be the better one. "Can you
do nothing for her?" she stammered appealingly. She wrung her hands in what she knew to be
a distortion of ordinary movement, because it seemed suitable that to draw attention to the
extraordinary urgency of her plea she should do extraordinary things. "Mother--mother's a most
remarkable woman...."

The doctor pulled his moustache and said that there was always hope, in a tone that left none,
and then, as if he were ashamed of his impotence and were trying to turn the moment into something
else, spoke in medical terms of Mrs. Melville's case and translated them into ordinary language,
so that he sounded like a construing schoolboy. "Pulmonary dyspnoea--settled on her chest--heart
too weak to do a tracheotomy--run a tube down...." They opened the door of the room and told
her to go into it. She paused at the threshold and wept, though she could not see her mother,
because the room was so like her mother's life. There was hardly anything in it at all. There
were grey distempered walls, a large window covered by a black union blind, polished floors,
two cane chairs, and a screen of an impure green colour. The roadside would have been a richer
death-chamber, for among the grass there would have been several sorts of weed; yet this was
appropriate enough for a woman who had known neither the hazards of being a rogue's wife, which
she would have rather enjoyed, nor the close-pressed society of extreme poverty, in which she
would have triumphed, for her birdlike spirits would have made her popular in any alley, but
had been locked by her husband's innumerable but never quite criminal failings into an existence
just as decently and minimally furnished as this room.

Her daughter clenched her fists with anger at it. But hearing a sound of stertorous breathing,
she tiptoed across the room and looked behind the screen. There Mrs. Melville was lying on
her back in a narrow iron bedstead. Her head was turned away, so that nothing of it could be
seen but a thin grey plait trailing across the pillow, but her body seemed to have shrunk,
and hardly raised the bedclothes. Ellen went to the side of the bed and knelt so that she might
look into the hidden face, and was for a second terrified to find herself caught in the wide
beam of two glaring open eyes that seemed much larger than her mother's had ever been. All
that dear face was changed. The skin was glazed and pink, and about the gaping mouth, out of
which they had taken the false teeth, there was a wandering blueness which seemed to come and
go with the slow, roaring breath. Ellen fell back in a sitting posture and looked for Richard,
whom she had forgotten, and who was now standing at the end of the bed. She stretched out her
hands to him and moaned; and at that sound recognition stirred in the centre of Mrs. Melville's
immense glazed gaze, like a small waking bird ruffling its feathers on some inmost branch of
a large tree.

"Oh, mother dear! Mother dear!"

From that roaring throat came a tortured, happy noise; and she tried to make her lips meet,
and speak.

"My wee lamb, don't try to speak. Just lie quiet. It's heaven just to be with you. You needn't
speak."

But Mrs. Melville fought to say it. Something had struck her as so remarkable that she was
willing to spend one of her last breaths commenting on it. They both bent forward eagerly to
hear it. She whispered: "Nice to have a room of one's own."

Richard made some slight exclamation, and she rolled those vast eyes towards him, and fixed
him with what might have been an accusing stare. At first he covered his mouth with his hand
and looked at her under his lids as if the accusation were just, and then he remembered it
was not, and squared his shoulders, and went to the other side of the bed and knelt down. Her
eyes followed him implacably, but there he met them. He said, "Truly ... I am all right. I
will look after her. She can't be poor, whatever happens. Trust me, mother, she'll be all right,"
and under the bedclothes he found her hand, and raised it to his lips. Instantly the taut stare
slackened, her puckered lids fell, and she dozed. Tears ran down Ellen's face, because her
mother was paying no attention to her during the last few moments they were ever to be together,
and was spending them in talk she could not understand with Richard, whom she had thought loved
her too well to play this trick upon her. She could have cried aloud at her mother's unkind
way of dying. It struck her that there had always been a vein of selfishness and inconsiderateness
running through her mother's character, which had come to a climax when she indulged in this
preposterous death just when the stage was set for their complete happiness. She had almost
succeeded in fleeing from her grief into an aggrieved feeling, when those poor loose wrinkled
lids lifted again, and the fluttering knowledge in those great glazed eyes probed the room
for her and leapt up when it found her.

There was a jerk of the head and a whisper, "I'm going!" It was, though attenuated by the frailty
of the dying body, the exact movement, the exact gesture that she had used when, on her husband's
death, she had greeted the news that she and her daughter had been left with seventy pounds
a year. Just like she had said, "Well, we must just economise!" She was going to be just as
brave about death as she had been about life, and this, considering the guarantees Time had
given her concerning the nature of Eternity, was a high kind of faith. "Mother dear! Mother
dear!" Ellen cried, and though she remembered that outside the door they had told her she must
not, she kissed her mother on the lips. "Mother dear! ... it's been so ... enjoyable being
with you!" Mrs. Melville made a pleased noise, and by a weary nod of the head made it understood
that she would prefer not to speak again; but her hand, which was in Ellen's, patted it.

All through the night that followed they pressed each other's hands, and spoke. "Are you dead?"
Ellen's quickened breath would ask; and the faint pressure would answer, "No. I have still
a little life, and I am using it all to think of you, my darling." And sometimes that faint
pressure would ask, "Are you thinking of me, Ellen? These last few moments I want all of you,"
and Ellen's fingers would say passionately, "I am all yours, mother." In these moments the
forgotten wisdom of the body, freed from the tyranny of the mind and its continual running
hither and thither at the call of speculation, told them consoling things. The mother's flesh,
touching the daughter's, remembered a faint pulse felt long ago and marvelled at this splendid
sequel, and lost fear. Since the past held such a miracle the future mattered nothing. Existence
had justified itself. The watchers were surprised to hear her sigh of rapture. The daughter's
flesh, touching the mother's, remembered life in the womb, that loving organ that by night
and day does not cease to embrace its beloved, and was the stronger for tasting again that
first best draught of love that the spirit has not yet excelled.

There were footsteps in the corridor, a scuffle and a freshet of giggling; the nurses were
going downstairs after the early morning cup of tea in the ward kitchen. This laughter that
sounded so strange because it was so late reminded Ellen of the first New Year's Eve that she
and her mother had spent in Edinburgh. They had had no friends to first foot them, but they
had kept it up very well. Mrs. Melville had played the piano, and Ellen and she had sung half
through the Student's Song Book, and they had had several glasses of Stone's Ginger Ale, and
there really had been a glow of firelight and holly berry brightness, for Mrs. Melville, birdlike
in everything, had a wonderful faculty for bursts of gaiety, pure in tone like a blackbird's
song, which brought out whatever gladness might be latent in any person or occasion. As twelve
chimed out they had stood in front of the chimneypiece mirror and raised their glasses above
their heads, singing, "Auld Lang Syne" in time with the dancers on the other side of the wall,
who were making such a night of it that several times the house had seemed likely to fall in.

When they had given three cheers and were sipping from their glasses, Mrs. Melville had said
drolly: "Did ye happen to notice my arm when I was lifting it? Ye did not, ye vain wee thing,
ye were looking at yourself all the time. But I'll give ye one more chance." And she had held
it up so that her loose sleeve (she was wearing a very handsome mauve tea-gown bought by Mr.
Melville in the temporary delirium of his honeymoon, from which he had so completely recovered
that she never got another) fell back to her shoulder. "Mother, I never knew you had arms like
that!" She had never before seen them except when they were covered by an ill-fitting sleeve
or, if they had been bare to the elbow, uninvitingly terminating in a pair of housemaid's gloves
or hands steamy with dishwashing. "Mother, they're bonny, bonny!" Mrs. Melville had been greatly
pleased, but had made light of it. "Och, they're nothing. We all have them in our family. Ye
have them yourself. Ye must always remember ye got them from your great-grandmother Jeanie
Napier, who was so much admired by Sir Walter Scott at her first ball. And talking of dancing
...." and she had lifted up her skirts and set her feet waggishly twinkling in a burlesque
dance, which she followed up with a travesty of an opera, a form of art she had met with in
her youth and about which, since she was the kind of woman who could have written songs and
ballads if she had lived in the age when wood fires and general plenty made the hearth a home
for poetry, she could be passionately witty as artists are about work that springs from æsthetic
principles different from their own. It had been a lovely performance. They had ended in a
tempest of laughter, which had been brought to a sudden check when they had looked at the clock
and seen that it was actually twenty-five to one, which was somehow so much worse than half-past
twelve! It was that moment that had been recalled to Ellen by the sudden interruption of the
pulses of the night by the nurses' laughter. That had been a beautiful party.

She would never be at another, and looked down lovingly on her mother's face, and was horrified
by its extreme ugliness. There was no longer any gallant Tom Thumb wit strutting about her
eyes and mouth, no little tender cheeping voice to distract the attention from the hideous
ruin time had worked in her. Age diffused through her substance, spoiling every atom, attacking
its contribution to the scheme of form and colour. It had pitted her skin with round pores
and made lie from nose to mouth thick folds such as coarse and valueless material might fall
into, and on her lids it was puckered like silk on the lid of a workbox; but if she had opened
them they would only have shown whites that had gone yellow and were reticulated with tiny
veins. It had turned her nose into a beak and had set about the nostrils little red tendril-like
lines. Her lips were fissured with purple cracks and showed a few tall, narrow teeth standing
on the pale gleaming gum like sea-eroded rocks when the tide is out. The tendons of her neck
were like thick, taut string, and the loose arras of flesh that hung between them would not
be nice to kiss, even though one loved her so much.

Really she was very ugly, and it was dreadful, for she had been very beautiful. Always at those
tea-parties to which people were invited whom Ellen had known all her life from her mother's
anecdotes as spirited girls of her own age, but which nobody came to except middle-aged women
in shabby mantles, though all the invitations were accepted, someone was sure to say: "You
know, my dear, your mother was far the prettiest girl in Edinburgh. Oh, Christina, you were!..."
It was true, too, a French artist who had come to Scotland to decorate Lord Rosebery's ballroom
at Dalmeny had pestered Mrs. Melville to sit to him, and had painted a portrait of her which
had been bought by the Metropolitan Museum in New York. Ellen had never had a clear idea of
what the picture was like, for though she had often asked her mother, she had never got anything
more out of her than a vexed, deprecating murmur: "Och, it's me, and standing at a ballroom
door as if I was swithering if I would go in, and no doubt I'd a funny look on my face, for
when your grannie and me went down to his studio we never thought he really meant to do it.
And I was wearing that dress that's hanging up in the attic cupboard. Yes, ye can bring it
down if ye put it back as ye find it." It was a dress of white ribbed Lille silk, with thick
lace that ran in an upstanding frill round the tiny bodice and fell in flounces, held here
and there with very pink roses, over a pert little scalloped bustle; she visualised it as she
had often held it up for her mother to look at, who would go on knitting and say, with an affectation
of a coldly critical air, "Mhm. You may laugh at those old fashions, but I say yon's not a
bad dress."

It was, Ellen reflected, just such a dress as the women wore in those strange worldly and passionate
and self-controlled pictures of Alfred Stevens, the Belgian, of whose works there had once
been a loan collection in the National Gallery. Her imagination, which was working with excited
power because of her grief and because her young body was intoxicated with lack of sleep, assumed
for a moment pictorial genius, and set on the blank wall opposite the portrait of her mother
as Alfred Stevens would have painted it. Oh, she was lovely standing there in the shadow, with
her red-gold hair and her white skin, on which there was a diffused radiance which might have
been a reflection of her hair, and her little body springing slim and arched from the confusion
of her skirts! The sound of the "Blue Danube" was making her eyes bright and setting her small
head acock, and a proud but modest knowledge of how more than one man was waiting for her in
there and would be pleased and confused by her kind mockery, twisted her mouth with the crooked
smile of the Campbells. The first who gave renown to this soldiery was Alberigo da Conio,(*)
the Romagnian. From the school of this man sprang, among others, Braccio and Sforza, who in
their time were the arbiters of Italy. After these came all the other captains who till now
have directed the arms of Italy; and the end of all their valour
has been, that she has been overrun by Charles, robbed by Louis, ravaged
by Ferdinand, and insulted by the Switzers.

The principle that has guided them has been, first, to lower the credit of infantry so that they might
increase their own. They did this because, subsisting on their pay and without territory, they
were unable to support many soldiers, and a few infantry did not give them any authority; so
they were led to employ cavalry, with a moderate force of which they were maintained and honoured;
and affairs were brought to such a pass that, in an army of twenty thousand soldiers, there
were not to be found two thousand foot soldiers. They had, besides this, used every art to lessen fatigue
and danger to themselves and their soldiers, not killing in the fray, but taking prisoners and
liberating without ransom. They did not attack towns at night, nor did the garrisons of the towns
attack encampments at night; they did not surround the camp either with stockade or ditch,
nor did they campaign in the winter. All these things were permitted by their military rules,
and devised by them to avoid, as I have said, both fatigue and dangers; thus they have brought
Italy to slavery and contempt.

(*) Alberigo da Conio. Alberico da Barbiano, Count of Cunio in Romagna. He was the leader of
the famous "Company of St George," composed entirely of Italian soldiers. He died in 1409.

CHAPTER
XIII -- CONCERNING AUXILIARIES, MIXED SOLDIERY, AND ONE'S OWN

Auxiliaries, which are the other useless arm, are employed when a prince is called in with his
forces to aid and defend, as was done by Pope Julius in the most recent times; for he, having,
in the enterprise against Ferrara, had poor proof of his mercenaries, turned to auxiliaries,
and stipulated with Ferdinand, King of Spain,(*) for his assistance with men and arms. These
arms may be useful and good in themselves, but for him who calls them in they are always disadvantageous;
for losing, one is undone, and winning, one is their captive.

(*) Ferdinand V (F. II of Aragon and Sicily, F. III of Naples), surnamed "The Catholic," born
1542, died 1516.

And although ancient histories may be full of examples, I do not wish to leave this recent one of
Pope Julius the Second, the peril of which cannot fail to be perceived; for he, wishing to get
Ferrara, threw himself entirely into the hands of the foreigner. But his good fortune brought
about a third event, so that he did not reap the fruit of his rash choice; because, having
his auxiliaries routed at Ravenna, and the Switzers having risen and driven out the conquerors
(against all expectation, both his and others), it so came to pass that he did not become prisoner
to his enemies, they having fled, nor to his auxiliaries, he having conquered by other arms than
theirs.

The Florentines, being entirely without arms, sent ten thousand Frenchmen to take Pisa, whereby they
ran more danger than at any other time of their troubles.

The Emperor of Constantinople,(*) to oppose his neighbours, sent ten thousand Turks into Greece,
who, on the war being finished, were not willing to quit; this was the beginning of the servitude
of Greece to the infidels.

(*) Joannes Cantacuzenus, born 1300, died 1383.

Therefore, let him who has no desire to conquer make use of these arms, for they are much more
hazardous than mercenaries, because with them the ruin is ready made; they are all united, all
yield obedience to others; but with mercenaries, when they have conquered, more time and better
opportunities are needed to injure you; they are not all of one community, they are found and
paid by you, and a third party, which you have made their head, is not able all at once to assume
enough authority to injure you. In conclusion, in mercenaries dastardy is most dangerous; in
auxiliaries, valour. The wise prince, therefore, has always avoided these arms and turned
to his own; and has been willing rather to lose with them than to conquer with the others, not
deeming that a real victory which is gained with the arms of others.

I shall never hesitate to cite Cesare Borgia and his actions. This duke entered the Romagna with
auxiliaries, taking there only French soldiers, and with them he captured Imola and Forli; but
afterwards, such forces not appearing to him reliable, he turned to mercenaries, discerning less
danger in them, and enlisted the Orsini and Vitelli; whom presently, on handling and finding
them doubtful, unfaithful, and dangerous, he destroyed and turned to his own men. And the difference
between one and the other of these forces can easily be seen when one considers the difference
there was in the reputation of the duke, when he had the French, when he had the Orsini and
Vitelli, and when he relied on his own soldiers, on whose fidelity he could always count and
found it ever increasing; he was never esteemed more highly than when every one saw that he
was complete master of his own forces.

I was not intending to go beyond Italian and recent examples, but I am unwilling to leave out
Hiero, the Syracusan, he being one of those I have named above.

This man, as I have said, made head of the army by the Syracusans, soon found out that a mercenary
soldiery, constituted like our Italian condottieri, was of no use; and it appearing to him that
he could neither keep them not let them go, he had them all cut to pieces, and afterwards made
war with his own forces and not with aliens.

I wish also to recall to memory an instance from the Old Testament
applicable to this subject.

David offered himself to Saul to fight with Goliath, the Philistine champion, and, to give
him courage, Saul armed him with his own weapons; which David rejected as soon as he had them
on his back, saying he could make no use of them, and that he wished to meet the enemy with
his sling and his knife. In conclusion, the arms of others either fall from your back, or they
weigh you down, or they bind you fast.

Charles the Seventh,(*) the father of King Louis the Eleventh,(+) having by good fortune and valour
liberated France from the English, recognized the necessity of being armed with forces of his
own, and he established in his kingdom ordinances concerning men-at-arms and infantry. Afterwards
his son, King Louis, abolished the infantry and began to enlist the Switzers, which mistake,
followed by others, is, as is now seen, a source of peril to that kingdom; because, having
raised the reputation of the Switzers, he has entirely diminished the value of his own arms,
for he has destroyed the infantry altogether; and his men-at-arms he has subordinated to others, for,
being as they are so accustomed to fight along with Switzers, it does not appear that they can
now conquer without them.

Hence it arises that the French cannot stand against the Switzers, and without the Switzers
they do not come off well against others. The armies of the French have thus become mixed, partly
mercenary and partly national, both of which arms together are much better than mercenaries
alone or auxiliaries alone, but much inferior to one's own forces. And this example proves it, for
the kingdom of France would be unconquerable if the ordinance of Charles had been enlarged
or maintained.

(*) Charles VII of France, surnamed "The Victorious," born 1403, died 1461.

(+) Louis XI, son of the above, born 1423, died 1483.

But the scanty wisdom of man, on entering into an affair which looks
well at first, cannot discern the poison that is hidden in it, as
I have said above of hectic fevers.

Therefore, if he who rules a principality cannot recognize evils until they are upon him, he
is not truly wise; and this insight is given to few. And if the first disaster to the Roman
Empire(*) should be examined, it will be found to have commenced only with the enlisting of the Goths;
because from that time the vigour of the Roman Empire began to decline, and all that valour
which had raised it passed away to others.

(*) "Many speakers to the House the other night in the debate on the reduction of armaments seemed
to show a most lamentable ignorance of the conditions under which
the British Empire maintains its existence.

When Mr Balfour replied to the allegations that the Roman Empire sank under the weight of its
military obligations, he said that this was 'wholly unhistorical.' He might well have added
that the Roman power was at its zenith when every citizen acknowledged his liability to fight
for the State, but that it began to decline as soon as this obligation was no longer recognized."--Pall
Mall Gazette, 15th May 1906.

I conclude, therefore, that no principality is secure without having its own forces; on the
contrary, it is entirely dependent on good fortune, not having the valour which in adversity
would defend it. And it has always been the opinion and judgment of wise men that nothing can
be so uncertain or unstable as fame or power not founded on its own strength. And one's own
forces are those which are composed either of subjects, citizens, or dependents; all others
are mercenaries or auxiliaries. And the way to make ready one's own forces will be easily found
if the rules suggested by me shall be reflected upon, and if one will consider how Philip,
the father of Alexander the Great, and many republics and princes have armed and organized
themselves, to which rules I entirely commit myself.

CHAPTER XIV -- THAT WHICH CONCERNS A PRINCE ON THE SUBJECT OF THE ART OF WAR

A prince ought to have no other aim or thought, nor select anything else for his study, than
war and its rules and discipline; for this is the sole art that belongs to him who rules, and
it is of such force that it not only upholds those who are born princes, but it often enables
men to rise from a private station to that rank. And, on the contrary, it is seen that when
princes have thought more of ease than of arms they have lost their states. And the first cause of
your losing it is to neglect this art; and what enables you to acquire a state is to be master of the
art. Francesco Sforza, through being martial, from a private person became Duke of Milan; and
the sons, through avoiding the hardships and troubles of arms, from
dukes became private persons.

For among other evils which being unarmed brings you, it causes you to be despised, and this
is one of those ignominies against which a prince ought to guard himself, as is shown later
on. Because there is nothing proportionate between the armed and the unarmed; and it is not
reasonable that he who is armed should yield obedience willingly to him who is unarmed, or
that the unarmed man should be secure among armed servants. Because, there being in the one disdain
and in the other suspicion, it is not possible for them to work well together. And therefore
a prince who does not understand the art of war, over and above the other misfortunes already
mentioned, cannot be respected by his soldiers, nor can he rely on them. He ought never, therefore,
to have out of his thoughts this subject of war, and in peace he should addict himself more to
its exercise than in war; this he can do in two ways, the one by action, the other by study.

As
regards action, he ought above all things to keep his men well organized and drilled, to follow
incessantly the chase, by which he accustoms his body to hardships, and learns something of the nature
of localities, and gets to find out how the mountains rise, how the valleys open out, how the
plains lie, and to understand the nature of rivers and marshes, and in all this to take the
greatest care. Which knowledge is useful in two ways. Firstly, he learns to know his country, and is better
able to undertake its defence; afterwards, by means of the knowledge and observation of that
locality, he understands with ease any other which it may be necessary for him to study hereafter;
because the hills, valleys, and plains, and rivers and marshes that are, for instance, in Tuscany,
have a certain resemblance to those of other countries, so that with a knowledge of the aspect
of one country one can easily arrive at a knowledge of others. And the prince that lacks this
skill lacks the essential which it is desirable that a captain should
possess, for it teaches him to surprise his enemy, to select quarters,
to lead armies, to array the battle, to besiege towns to advantage.

Philopoemen,(*) Prince of the Achaeans, among other praises which writers have bestowed on him,
is commended because in time of peace he never had anything in his mind but the rules of war;
and when he was in the country with friends, he often stopped and
reasoned with them: "If the enemy should be upon that hill, and we
should find ourselves here with our army, with whom would be the advantage?

How should one best advance to meet him, keeping the ranks? If we should wish to retreat, how ought we
to pursue?" And he would set forth to them, as he went, all the chances that could befall an army;
he would listen to their opinion and state his, confirming it with reasons, so that by these
continual discussions there could never arise, in time of war, any unexpected circumstances
that he could not deal with. A wise prince ought to observe some such rules, and never in peaceful
times stand idle, but increase his resources with industry in such a way that they may be available
to him in adversity, so that if fortune chances it may find him prepared to resist her blows.

CHAPTER
XV -- CONCERNING THINGS FOR WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIALLY PRINCES, ARE
PRAISED OR BLAMED

It remains now to see what ought to be the rules
of conduct for a prince towards subject and friends.

And as I know that many have written on this point, I expect I shall be considered presumptuous
in mentioning it again, especially as in discussing it I shall depart from the methods of other
people. But, it being my intention to write a thing which shall be useful to him who apprehends it,
it appears to me more appropriate to follow up the real truth of the matter than the imagination
of it; for many have pictured republics and principalities which in fact have never been known
or seen, because how one lives is so far distant from how one ought to live, that he who neglects
what is done for what ought to be done, sooner effects his ruin than
his preservation; for a man who wishes to act entirely up to his professions
of virtue soon meets with what destroys him among so much that is
evil.

Hence it is necessary for a prince wishing to hold his own to know how to do wrong, and to make
use of it or not according to necessity. Therefore, putting on one side imaginary things concerning
a prince, and discussing those which are real, I say that all men when they are spoken of, and
chiefly princes for being more highly placed, are remarkable for some of those qualities which
bring them either blame or praise; and thus it is that one is reputed liberal, another miserly,
using a Tuscan term (because an avaricious person in our language is still he who desires
to possess by robbery, whilst we call one miserly who deprives himself too much of the use of
his own); one is reputed generous, one rapacious; one cruel, one compassionate; one faithless,
another faithful; one effeminate and cowardly, another bold and brave; one affable, another haughty;
one lascivious, another chaste; one sincere, another cunning; one hard, another easy; one
grave, another frivolous; one religious, another unbelieving, and the like. And I know that
every one will confess that it would be most praiseworthy in a prince to exhibit all the above
qualities that are considered good; but because they can neither be entirely possessed nor observed,
for human conditions do not permit it, it is necessary for him to be sufficiently prudent
that he may know how to avoid the reproach of those vices which would lose him his state; and
also to keep himself, if it be possible, from those which would not lose him it; but this not
being possible, he may with less hesitation abandon himself to them.

And again, he need not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without
which the state can only be saved with difficulty, for if everything is considered carefully,
it will be found that something which looks like virtue, if followed, would be his ruin; whilst
something else, which looks like vice, yet followed brings him security and prosperity.

CHAPTER XVI -- CONCERNING LIBERALITY AND MEANNESS

Commencing then with the first of the above-named characteristics,
I say that it would be well to be reputed liberal.

Nevertheless, liberality exercised in a way that does not bring you the reputation for it,
injures you; for if one exercises it honestly and as it should be
exercised, it may not become known, and you will not avoid the reproach
of its opposite.

Therefore, any one wishing to maintain among men the name of liberal
is obliged to avoid no attribute of magnificence; so that a prince
thus inclined will consume in such acts all his property, and will
be compelled in the end, if he wish to maintain the name of liberal,
to unduly weigh down his people, and tax them, and do everything he
can to get money.

This will soon make him odious to his subjects, and becoming poor he will be little valued by
any one; thus, with his liberality, having offended many and rewarded
few, he is affected by the very first trouble and imperilled by whatever
may be the first danger; recognizing this himself, and wishing to
draw back from it, he runs at once into the reproach of being miserly.

Therefore, a prince, not being able to exercise this virtue of liberality in such a way that it
is recognized, except to his cost, if he is wise he ought not to fear the reputation of being
mean, for in time he will come to be more considered than if liberal, seeing that with his economy
his revenues are enough, that he can defend himself against all attacks,
and is able to engage in enterprises without burdening his people;
thus it comes to pass that he exercises liberality towards all from
whom he does not take, who are numberless, and meanness towards those
to whom he does not give, who are few.

We have not seen great things done in our time except by those who have been considered mean; the rest
have failed. The present King of Spain would not have undertaken or conquered in so many enterprises
if he had been reputed liberal. A prince, therefore, provided that he has not to rob his subjects,
that he can defend himself, that he does not become poor and abject, that he is not forced
to become rapacious, ought to hold of little account a reputation for being mean, for it is one
of those vices which will enable him to govern.

And if any one should say: Caesar obtained empire by liberality, and many others have reached
the highest positions by having been liberal, and by being considered
so, I answer: Either you are a prince in fact, or in a way to become
one.

In the first case this liberality is dangerous, in the second it is very necessary to be considered
liberal; and Caesar was one of those who wished to become pre-eminent
in Rome; but if he had survived after becoming so, and had not moderated
his expenses, he would have destroyed his government.

And if any one should reply: Many have been princes, and have done
great things with armies, who have been considered very liberal, I
reply: Either a prince spends that which is his own or his subjects'
or else that of others.

In the first case he ought to be sparing, in the second he ought
not to neglect any opportunity for liberality.

And to the prince who goes forth with his army, supporting it by
pillage, sack, and extortion, handling that which belongs to others,
this liberality is necessary, otherwise he would not be followed by
soldiers.

And of that which is neither yours nor your subjects' you can be
a ready giver, as were Cyrus, Caesar, and Alexander; because it does
not take away your reputation if you squander that of others, but
adds to it; it is only squandering your own that injures you.

And there is nothing wastes so rapidly as liberality, for even whilst you exercise it you lose
the power to do so, and so become either poor or despised, or else, in avoiding poverty, rapacious
and hated.

And a prince should guard himself, above all things, against being despised and hated; and liberality
leads you to both. Therefore it is wiser to have a reputation for meanness which brings reproach
without hatred, than to be compelled through seeking a reputation for liberality to incur a
name for rapacity which begets reproach with hatred.

CHAPTER XVII -- CONCERNING CRUELTY AND CLEMENCY, AND WHETHER IT IS BETTER TO BE LOVED THAN FEARED

Coming
now to the other qualities mentioned above, I say that every prince ought to desire to be
considered clement and not cruel. Nevertheless he ought to take care not to misuse this clemency.
Cesare Borgia was considered cruel; notwithstanding, his cruelty reconciled the Romagna, unified
it, and restored it to peace and loyalty. And if this be rightly considered, he will be seen
to have been much more merciful than the Florentine people, who, to avoid a reputation for cruelty,
permitted Pistoia to be destroyed.(*) Therefore a prince, so long as he keeps his subjects united
and loyal, ought not to mind the reproach of cruelty; because with a few examples he will
be more merciful than those who, through too much mercy, allow disorders to arise, from which
follow murders or robberies; for these are wont to injure the whole people, whilst those executions
which originate with a prince offend the individual only.

(*) During the rioting between the Cancellieri and Panciatichi factions
in 1502 and 1503.

(*) . . . against my will, my fate A throne unsettled, and an infant state, Bid me defend my
realms with all my pow'rs, And guard with these severities my shores.

Christopher Pitt.

Upon this a question arises: whether it be better to be loved than
feared or feared than loved?

It may be answered that one should wish to be both, but, because
it is difficult to unite them in one person, it is much safer to be
feared than loved, when, of the two, either must be dispensed with.

And that prince who, relying entirely on their promises, has neglected
other precautions, is ruined; because friendships that are obtained
by payments, and not by greatness or nobility of mind, may indeed
be earned, but they are not secured, and in time of need cannot be
relied upon; and men have less scruple in offending one who is beloved
than one who is feared, for love is preserved by the link of obligation
which, owing to the baseness of men, is broken at every opportunity
for their advantage; but fear preserves you by a dread of punishment
which never fails.

Nevertheless a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that, if
he does not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can endure very
well being feared whilst he is not hated, which will always be as
long as he abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects
and from their women. But when it is necessary for him to proceed
against the life of someone, he must do it on proper justification
and for manifest cause, but above all things he must keep his hands
off the property of others, because men more quickly forget the death
of their father than the loss of their patrimony. Besides, pretexts
for taking away the property are never wanting; for he who has once
begun to live by robbery will always find pretexts for seizing what
belongs to others; but reasons for taking life, on the contrary, are
more difficult to find and sooner lapse. There a fat, pasty young man
had got in and taken the seat opposite her, and had sat with his pale grey eyes dwelling on
the flying landscape with a slightly sick, devotional expression, while his lips moved and
his plump hands played with a small cross inscribed "All for Jesus" which hung from his watch-chain.
Presently he had settled down to rest with his hands folded on his lap, but had shortly been
visited with a distressing hiccup, which shook his waistcoat so violently that the little cross
was sent flying up into the air. "Mother will laugh when I tell her about that," she said to
herself, and did not remember for a second that her mother had been dead six weeks.

This sharp reminder of the way they had conspired together to cover the blank wall of daily
life with a trellis of trivial laughter made her stare under knitted brows at the companionship
that was to be hers henceforward. It could not be as good as that. Indeed, from such slender
intimations as she had received, it was not going to be good at all. Her inflexibly honest
æsthetic sense had made her lay by Mrs. Yaverland's letters with the few trinkets and papers
she desired to keep for ever, because they were written in such an exquisite script, each black
word written so finely and placed so fastidiously on the thick, rough, white paper, and she
felt it a duty to do honour to all lovely things. But their contents had increased her sense
of bereavement. They had come like a north wind blowing into a room that is already cold. She
had not wished to find them so, for she disliked becoming so nearly the subject of a comic
song as a woman who hates her mother-in-law. But it was really the fact that they had the air
of letters written by someone who was sceptical of the very existence of the addressee and
had sent them merely to humour some third person. And where the expressions were strong she
felt that they were qualified by their own terseness. Old people, she felt, ought to write
fluently kind things in a running Italian hand. She was annoyed too by the way Richard always
spoke of her as Marion. Even the anecdotes he recounted to show how brave and wise his mother
was left Ellen a little tight-lipped. He said she was in favour of Woman's Suffrage, but it
was almost as bad as being against it to have such gifts and never to have done anything with
them, and to have been economically independent all the days of her life.

It became evident from the way that a kind of heated physical ill-breeding seemed to fall on
everybody in the carriage, and the way they began to lurch against each other and pull packages
off the rack and from under the seat with disregard for each other's comfort, that they were
approaching the end of the journey; and she began to think of Marion with terror and vindictiveness,
and this abstinence from a career became a sinister manifestation of that lack of spiritual
sinew which had made her succumb to a bad man and handicap Richard with illegitimacy. She prefigured
her swarthy and obese.

She got out and stood quite still on the platform, as she had been told to do. The station
was fine, with its immense windless vaults through which the engine smoke rose slowly through
discoloured light and tarnished darkness. She liked the people, who all looked darkly dressed
and meek as they hurried along into the layer of shadow that lay along the ground, and who
seemed to be seeking so urgently for cabs and porters because their meagre lives had convinced
them that here was never enough of anything to go round. If she and her mother had ever come
to London on the trip they had always planned, she would have been swinging off now to look
for a taxi, just like a man; and when she came back her mother would have said, "Why, Ellen,
I never would have thought you could have got one so quickly." Well, that would not happen
now. She would have grieved over it; but a train far down the line pulled out of the station
and disclosed a knot of red and green signal lights that warmed the eye and thence the heart
as jewels do, and at that she was as happy as if she were turning over private jewels that
she could wear on her body and secrete in her own casket. She was absorbed in the sight when
she heard a checked soft exclamation, and turning about had the illusion that she looked into
Richard's eyes.

"I am Richard's mother. You are Richard's wife?"

Ellen repeated, "I am Richard's wife," feeling distressed that she had said it, since they
were not yet married, but aware that to correct it would be trivial.

It was strange to look down instead of up at those dark eyes, those brows which lay straight
black bars save for that slight piratical twist, with no intervening arch between them and
the dusky eyelids. It was strange to hear Richard's voice coming from a figure blurred with
soft, rich, feminine clothes. It was strange to see her passing through just such a moment
of impeded tenderness as Richard often underwent. Plainly she wanted to kiss Ellen, but was
prevented by an intense physical reserve, and did not want to shake hands, since that was inadequate,
and this conflict gave her for a minute a stiff queerness of attitude. She compromised by taking
Ellen's left hand in her own left hand, and giving it what was evidently a sincere, but not
spontaneous pressure. Then, turning away, she asked, "What about your luggage?"

"I've just this suitcase. I sent the rest in advance. Do you not think that's the most sensible
way?" said Ellen, in a tone intended to convey that she was not above taking advice from an
older woman.

Mrs. Yaverland made a vague, purring noise, which seemed to imply that she found material consideration
too puzzling for discussion, and commanded the porter with one of those slow, imperative gestures
that Richard made when he wanted people to do things. Walking down the platform, Ellen wondered
why Richard always called her a little thing. His mother was far smaller than she was, and
broad-shouldered too, which made her look dumpy. Her resemblance to Richard became marked again
when they got into the taxi, and she dealt with the porter and the driver with just such quiet
murmured commands and dippings into pockets of loose change as Richard on these occasions,
but Ellen did not find it in the least endearing. She was angry that Richard was like that,
not because he was himself, but because he was this woman's son. When Mrs. Yaverland asked
in that beautiful voice which was annoyingly qualified by terseness as her letters had been,
"And how's Richard?" she replied consequentially, with the air of a person describing his garden
to a person who has not one. But Mrs. Yaverland was too distracting to allow her to pursue
this line with any satisfaction. For she listened with murmurs that were surely contented;
and, having drawn off her very thick, very soft leather gloves, she began to polish her nails,
which were already brighter than any Ellen had ever seen, against the palms of her hands, staring
meanwhile out of absent eyes at the sapphire London night about them, which Ellen was feeling
far too upset to enjoy.

There was a tormenting incongruity about this woman: those lacquered nails shown on hands that
were broad and strong like a man's; and the head that rose from the specifically dark fur was
massive and vigilant and serene, like the head of a great man. Moreover, she was not in the
least what one expects an old person to be. Old persons ought to take up the position of audience.
They ought, above all things, to give a rest to the minds of young people, who, goodness knows,
have enough to worry them, by being easily comprehensible. With mother one knew exactly where
one was; one knew everything that had happened to her and how she had felt about it, and there
was no question of anything fresh ever happening to her. But from the deep, slow breaths this
woman drew, from the warmth that seemed to radiate from her, from those purring murmurs which
were evidently the sounds of a powerful mental engine running slow, it was plain that she was
still possessed of that vitality which makes people perform dramas. And everything about her
threatened that her performances would be too strange.

She had a proof of that when the taxi turned out of a busy street into a brilliantly lit courtyard
and halted behind another cab, suspending her in a scene that deserved to be gaped at because
it was so definitely not Edinburgh. The air of the little quadrangle was fairly dense with
the yellowed rays of extravagant light, and the walls were divided not into shops and houses,
but into allegorical panels representing pleasure. They had stopped outside a florist's, in
whose dismantled window a girl in black stretched out a long arm towards the last vase of chrysanthemums,
which pressed against the glass great curled polls almost as large as her own head. It was
impossible to imagine a Scotswoman practising so felinely elastic an attitude before the open
street, or possessing a face so ecstatic with pertness, or finding herself inside a dress which,
though black, disclaimed all intention of being mourning and sought rather, in its clinging
economy, to be an occasion of public rejoicing.

Inconceivable, too, in Edinburgh, the place beside it, where behind plate glass walls, curtained
with flimsy brise-bises that were as a ground mist, men and women ate and drank under strong
lights with a divine shamelessness. It couldn't happen up there. There were simply not the
people to do it. It might be tried at first; but because middle-aged men would constantly turn
to middle-aged women and say, "Catch me bringing you here again, Elspeth. It's a nice thing
to have your dinner with every Tom, Dick and Harry in the street watching every mouthful you
take," and because young men would as constantly have turned to young women with the gasp,
"I'm sure I saw father passing," it would have been a failure. But here it was a success. The
sight was like loud, frivolous music. And on the other side there was a theatre with steps
leading up to a glittering bow-front, and a dark wall spattered with the white squares of playbills,
under which a queue of people watched with happy and indifferent faces a ragged reciter whose
burlesque extravagance of gesture showed that one was now in a country more tolerant of nonsense
than the North.

She wanted to sit there quietly, savouring the scene. But Mrs. Yaverland said in her terse
voice: "I've taken rooms at the Hapsburg for to-night. I thought you'd like it. I do myself,
because it's near the river. You know, we're near the river at Roothing." Ellen could not longer
turn her attention to the spectacle for wondering why Mrs. Yaverland should speak of the Thames
as if it were an interesting and important relative. It could not possibly be that Mrs. Yaverland
felt about the river as she felt about the Pentlands, for elderly people did not feel things
like that. They liked a day's outing, but they always sat against the breakwater with the newspaper
and the sandwich-basket while one went exploring; at least, mother always did. Trying to insert
some sense into the conversation, she asked politely, "Do you do much boating?" and was again
baffled by the mutter, "No, it's too far away." Well, if it was too far away it could not be
near. She was tired by the long day's travel.

But the hotel, when they alighted, pleased her. The vast entrance hall, with its prodigality
of tender rosy light, the people belonging to the very best families who sat about in monstrously
large armchairs set at vast intervals on the lawny carpets, were not in the least embarrassed
by the publicity of their position and shone physically with well-being and the expectation
of pleasure; the grandiose marble corridors, the splendid version of a lift, and the number
of storeys that flashed past them, all very much the same, but justifying their monotony by
their stateliness, like modern blank verse, made her remember solemnly her inner conviction
that she would some day find herself amid surroundings of luxury.

The necessity of looking as if she were used to and even wearied by this sort of thing weighed
heavily on her, for she felt that it was almost dishonour not to express the solemn joy this
magnificence was giving her. So she stood in the fine room to which Mrs. Yaverland took her,
and after having resolved that the minute she was left alone she would touch the magnificent
crimson velvet roses that stood out in high relief all over the wallpaper, she felt that she
could not graciously withhold praise from this which was to be her own special share of the
splendour. She moved shyly towards Mrs. Yaverland, who had gone to the window and was looking
down in the night, and said shyly, "This is a very fine room," but, she knew, too softly to
reach such markedly inattentive ears. She stood there awkwardly, feeling herself suspended
till this woman should take notice of her. If her mother had been with her they would have
had a room with two beds, and would have talked before they went to sleep of the day and its
wonderful ending in this grand place. She sighed. Mrs. Yaverland turned round.

"Come and look at your view," she said, and raised the sash so that they could lean out.

Beneath there was a deep drop of the windless, scentless darkness that night brings to modern
cities; then a narrow trench of unlit gardens obscured by the threadbare texture of leafless
tree-tops, then a broad luminous channel of roadway, lined with trees whose natural substance
was so changed by the unnatural light that they looked like toy trees made of some brittle
composition, and traversed by tramcars glowing orange and twanging white sparks from invisible
wires with their invisible arms; at its further edge a long procession of lights stood with
a certain pomp along a dark margin, beyond which were black flowing waters. To the left, from
behind tall cliffs of masonry pierced with innumerable windows that were not lit, yet gleamed
like the eyes of a blind dog, there jutted out the last spans of a bridge, set thickly with
large lights whose images bobbed on the current beneath like vast yellow water-flowers. On
another bridge to the right a train was casting down on the stream a redness that was fire
rather than light. On the opposite bank of the river, at the base of black towers, barges softly
dark like melancholy lay on the different harsher darkness of the water, and showed, so sparsely
that they looked the richer, a few ruby and emerald lights. Above, stars crackled frostily,
close to earth, as stars do in winter.

"That is the river," said Mrs. Yaverland.

She said it as if she desired to be out of this warmth, standing over there by the dark parapet
marked by the line of lamps close to the flowing waters; as if she would have liked all the
beautiful bright lights to be extinguished, so that there would be nothing left but the dark
waters.

Ellen went and sat down on the bed. There was a standard lamp beside it, whose light, curbed
to a small rosy cloud by a silken shade like a fairy's frock, seemed much the best thing for
her eyes in the room. She was sad that in this new life in England, which had seemed so promising,
one still had to turn for comfort from persons to things. She was aware that wildness such
as this, such preferences for walking abroad in the chill night rather than sitting in warm
rooms, for sterile swift water rather than the solid earth that bears the crops and supports
the cities, are the processes of poetry working in the soul. But it did not please her in an
older woman. She felt that Mrs. Melville, who would have been trotting about crying out at
the magnificence of the room, would have been behaving not only more conveniently, but more
decently, than this woman who was now crossing the room and not bringing peace with her. Her
open coat slipped backwards on her shoulders so that it stood out on each side like a cloak
worn by a romantic actor striding across the stage to the play's climax. The ultimate meaning
of her expression could be no other than insolence, for it gave sign of some preoccupation
so strong that the only force which could hold her back from speaking of it could be contempt
for her hearer. Her face was shadowed with a suggestion of strong feeling, which was as unsuitable
on cheeks so worn as paint would have been.

Ellen drooped her head so that she need not look at her as she sat down on the bed beside her
with neither word nor gesture that said it was a movement towards intimacy, and said, "I hope
you're not very tired." When Ellen went into the bathroom she wept in her bath, because the
words could not have been said more indifferently, and it was dreadful to suspect, as she had
to later, that someone so like Richard was either affected or hypocritical. For if that wildness
were sincere, and not some Southern affectation (and she had always heard that the English
were very affected), then the nice but ordinary things she said when she was doing up Ellen's
black taffeta frock must be all hypocrisy and condescension.

It was a pity that she was so very like Richard. When they had gone downstairs and taken a
table in that same glittering room behind the plate glass walls, Ellen forgot her uncomfortable
feeling that as she crossed the room everyone had stared at her feet in a nasty sort of way
in her resentful recognition of that likeness. She was not, of course, so handsome as Richard,
though she was certainly what people call "very striking-looking." Ellen felt pleased that
the description should be at once so appropriate and so common. She did not allow herself to
translate it from commonness and admit that it is a phrase that common people use when they
want to say a woman's face is the point of departure for a fair journey of the imagination.
It was true that a certain rough imperfection was as definitely a part of her quality as perfection
was of his, and that there ran from her nose to her mouth certain heavy lines that could never
at any age befall his flesh with its bias towards beauty. But everything that so wonderfully
made its appearance a reference to romance was here also: that dark skin in which it seemed
as if the customary pigment had been blended with mystery; that extravagance of certain features,
the largeness of the eye, the luxury of lashes; that manner at once languid and alert, which
might have been acquired by residence in some country where molten excess of fine weather was
corrected by gales of adventure. But though so close in blood and in seeming to the most beloved,
this woman could not be loved. She could not possibly be liked. But this was an irrational
emotion, and Ellen hated such, and she watched her for signs of some quality that would justify it.

It was there. Strong intimations of a passion for the trivial were brought forth by movement.
As she bent over the menu, and gave orders that trembled on the edge of audibility to a waiter
whom she appeared not to see, she repeatedly raised her right hand and with a swift, automatic
sweep of the forefinger, on which her pink nail flashed like a polished shell, she smoothed
her thick eyebrows. It was evidently a habitual gesture and used for something more than its
apparent purpose, for when she had finished and leaned back in her chair she repeated it, although
the brows were still sleek. She did it, Ellen told herself with a tightening of her lips, as
a person who would like to spend the afternoon playing the piano but is obliged to receive
a visitor instead and strums on her knee. It was the only expression the occasion allowed for
that passionate care for her own person which accounted for the inordinate beauty of her clothes.
They were, she said to herself, using a phrase which she had always previously disliked, fair
ridiculous for a woman of that age. They were, almost sinisterly, not accidental. The very
dark brown hat on her head was just sufficiently like in shape to the crowns that Russian empresses
wear in pictures to heighten the effect of majesty, which, Ellen supposed without approval,
was what she was aiming at by her manner, and yet plain enough to heighten that effect in another
way by suggesting that the wearer was a woman so conscious of advantage other than physical
that she could afford to accept her middle age. And its colour was cunningly chosen to change
her colour from mere swarthiness to something brown that holds the light like amber. Ellen
felt pleased at her own acumen in discovering the various fraudulent designs of this hat, and
at the back of her mind she wondered not unhopefully if this meant that she too would be clever
about clothes. They must, moreover, have cost what, again using a phrase that had always before
seemed quite horrid, she called to herself a pretty penny, for the materials had been made
to satisfy some last refinement of exigence which demanded textures which should keep their
own qualities yet ape their opposites, and the dark fur on her coat seemed a weightless softness
like tulle, and the chestnut-coloured stuff of the coat and the dress beneath it was thick
and rough like fur and yet as supple as the yellow silk of her fichu, which itself was sensually
heavy with its own richness.

And as Ellen looked, the forefinger swept again the sleek eyebrows. Really, it was terrible
that Richard's mother should be so deep in crime as to be guilty of offences that are denounced
at two separate sorts of public meetings. She was a squaw who was all that men bitterly say
women are, not loving life and the way of serving it, undesirous of power, content against
all reason with her corruptible body and the clothing and adorning of it. She was an economic
parasite, setting wage-slaves to produce luxuries for her to enjoy in idleness while millions
of honest, hard-working people have to exist without the bare necessities of life. And now
she was leaning forward, insolently untroubled by guilt, and saying in that voice that was
too lazy to articulate:

"You won't like anchovies; those things they're helping you to now."

Ellen made a confused noise as if she were committing an indiscretion, and was furious at having
made it, and then furious that she had betrayed the fact that she did not know an anchovy when
she saw it; and then furious when the next moment Marion let the waiter put the limp bronze
things on her own plate. Why shouldn't she like them if Marion did? Did Marion think she was
a child who liked nothing but sugar-cakes? When another waiter came and Marion murmured tentatively,
"Wine?" she answered with passionate assumption of self-possession, "Yes, please." She almost
wavered when Marion, not raising her eyes, asked, "Red or white?" It brought her back to that
night in the office when Mr. Philip had made her drink that Burgundy and then had come towards
her, looking almost hump-back with strangeness, while all the shadows in the corners had seemed
to leap a little and then stand still in expectation. Fear travelled through all her veins,
weakening the blood; she pressed her lips together and braced her shoulders, living the occasion
over again till all the evil things dissolved at Richard's knock upon the door. Because of
him, how immune from fear she had become! She lifted her eyes to Marion and said confidently,
"Red, please."

The blankness of the gaze that met her had, she felt sure, been substituted but the second
before for a gaze richly complicated with observation and speculation. She scowled and remembered
that she was disliking this woman on the highest grounds, and as she ate she sent her eyes
round the restaurant, knowing quite well the line of the thought she expected it to arouse
in her. She was not, in fact, seeing things with any acuteness. There was a woman at a table
close by wearing a dress of a very beautiful blue, the colour of the lower flowers of the darkest
delphiniums, but the sight of it gave her none of the pleasant physical sensations, the pricking
of the skin, the desire to rub the palms of the hands together quickly that she usually experienced
when she saw an intense, clear colour. But she saw, though all the images seemed to refuse
to travel from her eyes to the nerves, many people in bright clothes, the women showing their
arms and shoulders as she had always heard rich women do, the men with glossy faces which reminded
her in their brilliance and their blankness of the nails on Marion's hands; pretty food, like
the things to eat in Keat's St. Agnes' Eve, being carried about on gleaming dishes by waiters
whose bodies seemed deformed with obsequiousness; jewel-coloured wines hanging suspended over
the white cloths in glasses invisible save where they glittered; bottles with gold necks lolling
in pails among lumps of ice like tipsy gnomes overcome by sleep on some Alpine pass; innumerable
fairy frocks and vessels of alabaster patterned like a cloud invested strong lights with the
colour of romance. It would have roused her fatigued imagination had she not remembered that
she had other business in hand. She organised her face to look on the spectacle with innocent
pleasure, and then to darken at some serious reflection, and finally to assume the expression
which she had always thought Socialist leaders ought to wear, though at public meetings she
had noticed they do not.

She coughed to attract attention, and then sighed. "It's terrible," she declared, taking good
care that her voice should travel across the table, "to see all these people being happy like
this when there are millions in want."

Marion set down her wine-glass with a movement that, though her hands were clever, seemed clumsy,
so indifferent was she to the thing she handled and the place she put it in, and looked round
the restaurant with eyes that were very like Richard's, though they shone from bloodshot whites
and were not so bright as his, nor so kind; nor so capable, Ellen felt sure, of losing all
brilliance and becoming contemplative, passionate darkness. She said in her rapid, inarticulate
murmur, "They don't strike me as being particularly happy."

Ellen was taken aback, and said in the tones of a popular preacher, "Then what are they doing
here--feasting?"

"I suppose they're here because it's on the map and so are they," she answered almost querulously.
"They'd go anywhere else if one told them it was where they ought to be. Good children, most
people. Anxious to do the right thing. Don't you think?"

Ellen was unprepared for anything but agreement or reactionary argument from the old, and this
was neither, but a subtlety that she left matched in degree her own though it was probably
unsound; and to cover her emotions she lifted her glass to her lips. But really wine was very
horrid. Her young mouth was convulsed. And then she reminded herself that it could not be horrid,
for all grown-up people like it, and that there had never been any occasion when it was more
necessary for her to be grown-up, so she continued to drink. Even after several mouthfuls she
did not like it, but she was then interrupted by a soft exclamation from Mrs. Yaverland.

"My dear, this wine is abominable. Don't you find it terribly sour?"

"Well, I was thinking so," said Ellen, "but I didn't like to say."

"It's dreadful. It must be corked."

"Yes, I think it must," said Ellen knowingly.

She called a waiter. "Would you like to try some other wine? I don't think I will. This has
put me off for the night. No? Good. Two lemon squashes, one very sweet."

That was a good idea of Mrs. Yaverland's. The lemon squash was lovely when it came, and Ellen
had time to drink it while they were eating the chicken, so that there was no competitive flavour
to spoil the ice pudding. While they were waiting for that Mrs. Yaverland smoothed her eyebrows
once again, and gave her nails one more perfunctory polish, and opened her mouth to speak,
but caught her breath and shut it again; and said, after a moment's silence, "I hope I've ordered
the right sort of pudding. It's so hard to remember all these irrelevant French names. I wanted
you to have the one with crystallised cherries. Richard used to be very fond of it." She looked
round the restaurant more lovingly. "He liked this place when he was a boy. We used to come
here once or twice every holiday and go to a theatre afterwards."

But Ellen knew what it meant when Richard did that: when he opened his mouth and then shut
it again and was silent, and then said very quickly, "Darling, I do love you." He had done
it the very night before, in Grand-Aunt Jeannie's parlour at Liberton Brae, when he had wanted
to tell her that his mother had been married to someone who was not his father before he was
born. "It was not her fault. My father didn't stand by her. He was all right about money. But
when he heard about the child, he was playing the fool as an aide-de-camp with a royal tour
round the Colonies. And he didn't come back. So she lost her nerve"; and that he had a younger
stepbrother, but that the marriage had not been a success, and that she was always known as
Mrs. Yaverland. She was dying to know what Richard was like in his school-days, and she was
willing to admit that Mrs. Yaverland, when she took him out for treats, had probably shown
a better side of her nature that was not so bad, but because of this knowledge she leaned forward
and asked penetratingly, "Now, what is it you are really wanting to say?"

The older woman dropped her eyelids guiltily, and then raised them full of an extraordinary
laughing light, as if she was beyond all reason delighted to have her secret thoughts discovered.
"How you see through me, dear!" she said in a voice that was rallying and affectionate, charged
with an astringent form of love. "All that I wanted to say was simply that I am so very glad
you have come. Perhaps for reasons that you'll consider tiresome of me. But Richard has been
so much away, and even when he's at home he is out at the works laboratory so much of the time,
that I've often wanted someone nice to come and live in the house, who'd talk to me occasionally
and be a companion. Perhaps you'll think it is absurd of me to look on you as a companion,
because I am much older. But then I reckon things concerning age in rather a curious way. You're
eighteen, aren't you?"

"Eighteen past," Ellen agreed, in a tone that implied she felt a certain compunction in leaving
it like that, so near was she to nineteen. But her birthday had been a fortnight ago.

"And I was nineteen when Richard was born. So you see to me a girl of eighteen is a woman,
capable of understanding everything and feeling everything. So I hope you won't mind if I treat
you as an equal." She raised her wineglass and looked over its brim at the girl's proud, solemn
gaze, limpid with intentions of being worthy of this honour, bright with the discovery that
perhaps she did not dislike the other woman as much as she had thought, and she flushed deeply
and set the wineglass down again, and, leaning forward, spoke in a forced, wooden tone. "I
meant, you know, to say that to you, anyhow, whether I felt it or not. I knew you'd like it.
You see, you get very evasive if you've ever been in a position like mine. You have to make
servants like you so that they won't give notice when they hear the village gossip, because
you must have a well-run house for your child. You have to make people like you so that they
will let the children play with yours. So one gets into a habit of saying a thing that will
be found pleasant, without particularly worrying whether it's sincere. But this I find I really
mean."

As always, the suspicion that she was in the presence of somebody who had the singular bad
luck to be unhappy changed Ellen on the instant to something soft as a kitten, incapable of
resentment as an angel. "Well, I've got a habit of saying the things that will be found unpleasant,"
she said hopefully, in tones tremulous with kindness. "I'm just as likely to say something
that'll rouse a person's dander as you are to say something that'll quiet it down. We ought
to be awful good for one another."

Mrs. Yaverland turned on Ellen a glance which recognised her quality as queer and precious,
yet was not endearing and helped her nothing in the girl's heart. For she was considering Ellen
for what she would give Richard, what she would bring to satisfy that craving for living beauty
which was so avid in him and because of his fastidiousness and his unwilling loyalty to the
soul so unsatisfied. She wondered too whether Ellen could lighten those of his days which were
sunless with doubt. And for that reason her appreciation brought her no nearer the girl than
a courtier comes to the jewel he thinks fair enough to purchase as a present to his king. She
became aware of the obstinate duration of their distance, and, trying to buy intimacy with
honesty, because that was for her the highest price that could be paid, she said in the same
forced voice, "You know, you're ever so much better than I thought you'd be."

"Am I now? What way?" Like all young people, she loved to talk about herself. "My looks, do
you mean? Now, I was sure Richard was funning me when he told me I was nice. He talks so much
of my hair that I was afraid he thought little of the rest of me. I'm sure he told you that
I'm plain. And I am. Am I not?"

"No, you're beautiful. I expected you to be beautiful." There was a hint of coldness in her
voice, as if she disliked the implication that her son might be lacking in taste. "It's the
other things I'm surprised at: that you're clever, that you're reflective, that you feel deeply."

"As a matter of fact," said Ellen, confidentially, leaning across the table, "since we're being
honest, I don't mind saying that I think you're not over-stating it. But how do you know all
that? I'm sure I've been most petty and disagreeable ever since I arrived. I've just been hoping
it's not the climate that's doing it, for that'd be hard on Richard and you."

The other woman became almost confused. "Oh, that was me! That was me!" she said earnestly.
"I told you I was evasive. One form it takes is that when I meet people I'm very much interested
in, I can't show my interest directly; I take cover behind a pretence of abstraction. I polish
my nails and do silly things like that, and people think I'm cold, and stupid about the particular
point they want me to see, and they try to attract my attention by behaving wildly, and that
usually means behaving badly. It was my fault, it was my fault!"

"Indeed, it was my own ill nature," said Ellen stoutly. "But let us cease this moral babble,
as Milton says. I wish you'd tell me why you're surprised that I should be clever, though you
were quite cairtain that he would have chosen a good-looking gairl?"

Mrs. Yaverland explained hesitantly, delicately. "Richard has tried to fall in love before,
you know. And he has always chosen such stupid women."

Ellen was puzzled and displeased, though of course it was not the notion that he had tried
to fall in love with stupid women that distressed her, and not merely the notion of his trying
to fall in love with other women. Thank goodness she was modern and therefore without jealousy.
"Why did he do that? Why did he do that?"

There appeared on Marion's face something that was like the ashes of archness. Her heart said
jubilantly to itself: "Why, because he loves me, his mother, so far beyond all reason! Because
he thinks me perfect, the queen of all women who have brains and passions, and all other women
who pretend to these things seem pretenders to my throne, on whom he can bestow no favour without
suspicion of disloyalty to me. So he went to the other women, who plainly weren't competing
with me; those who were specialising in those arts that turn them from women into birds with
bright feathers and a cheeping song and lightness unweighted by the soul. He went to them more
readily, I do believe, because he knew that their lack of all he loved in me would send him
back to me the sooner. I will not believe that any son ever had for his mother a more absurd
infatuation. I am the happiest woman in the world. And yet I know it was not right it should
be so. What is to happen to him when I die? And he takes all my troubles on himself and feels
as if they were his own. But I can see that you, my dear, are going to break the spell that,
so much against my will, I've thrown over my son. And no other woman in the world could have
done it. You have all the qualities he loves in me, but they are put together in such a different
mode from mine that there cannot possibly be any question of competition between us. You are
hardly more than a child, and I am an elderly woman; you are red and fiery, I am dark and slow;
your passion grows out of your character like a flower out of the earth, while Heaven knows
that I have hardly any character outside my capacity for feeling. So he feels free to love
you. Oh, my dear, I am so grateful to you." But because for many years she had been sealed
in reserve to all but Richard, she listened to free speech coming from her lips as amazedly
as a man cured of muteness in late life might listen to his own first uncouth noises. So she
said none of these things, but murmured, smiling coldly, "Oh, there's a reason.... I'll tell
you some time...."

The girl was hurt. Marion bit her lip while she watched her crossly pick up her spoon and eat
her ice pudding as if it was a duty. "This is like old times," she essayed feebly. "I've so
often watched Richard eat it. He went through various stages with this pudding. When he was
quite small he used to leave the crystallised cherries to the very last, because they were
nicest, arranged in a row along the rim of his plate, openly and shamelessly. When he went
to school he began to be afraid that people would think that babyish if they noticed it, and
he used to leave them among the ice, though somehow they always did get left to the last. Then
later on he began to side with public opinion himself, and think that perhaps there was something
soft and unmanly about caring so much for anything to eat, so he used to gobble them first
of all, trying not to taste them very much. Then there came an awful holiday when he wouldn't
have any at all. That was just before he insisted on going to sea. But then he came back--and
ever since he's had it every time we come here, and now he always leaves the cherries to the
last." She was now immersed in the story she told; she was seeing again the slow magical increase
of the small thing she had brought into the world, and the variations through which it passed
in the different seasons of its youth, changing from brown candid gracefulness to a time of
sulky clumsiness and perpetually abraded knees, and back again to gracefulness and willingness
to share all laughter, yet ever remaining the small thing she had brought into the world. With
eyes cast down, trying to dissemble her pride, lest the gods should envy, she added harshly,
"He was quite interesting ... but I suppose all boys go through these phases.... I've had no
other experiences...."

Ellen was longing to hear what Richard was like when he was a boy, but she had been stung by
that insolent, smiling murmur, and she could do nothing with any statement made by this woman
but snarl at her. "No other experience?" she questioned peevishly. "I thought Richard said
he had a half-brother."

There was no longer any pride in Marion's eyes to dissemble. She stared at Ellen, and said
heavily, as one who speaks concerning the violation of a secret, "Did Richard tell you that?"
Before the girl had time to answer cruelly, "Yes, he tells me everything," she had remembered
certain things which made her stiffen in her chair and keep her chin up and use her eyes as
if there still flashed in them the pride which had utterly vanished. "Oh, yes," she asserted,
in that forced voice, but very loudly and deliberately. "I have another son. He's a good boy.
His name is Roger Peacey. You must meet him one day. I hope you will like him." She paused
and recollected why they were speaking of this other son, and continued, "But, you see, I had
nothing to do with him when he was a boy."

This struck Ellen as very strange. She went on eating her ice pudding, but she cogitated on
this matter. Why had this second son been brought up away from his mother? Surely that hardly
ever happened except when there had been a divorce, and a husband whose wife had run away with
another man was awarded by the courts "the custody of the child." Had she not talked of this
son in the over-bluff tone in which people talk of those to whom they have done a wrong? She
was possessed of the fierce monogamous passion which accompanies first and unachieved love,
that loathing of all who are not content with the single sacramental draught which is the blood
of God, but go heating the body with unblessed fermented wines; and she glared sharply under
her brows at this woman, who after losing Richard's father married another man and then, as
it appeared, had loved yet another man, as she might at someone whom she suspected of being
drunk. It was true that Richard adored her, but then no doubt this kind of woman knew well
how to deceive men. Softly she made to herself the Scottish manifestation of incredulity, "Mhm...."
And Marion, for thirty years vigilant for sounds of scorn, heard and perfectly understood.

She remained, however, massively and unattractively immobile. There came to her neither word
nor expression to remove the girl's dubiety. Since she had heard such sounds of scorn over
so lengthy a period they no longer came to her as trumpet calls to action, but rather as imperatives
to silence, for above all things she desired that evil things should come to an end, and she
had learned that an ugly speech ricochetting from the hard wall of a just answer may fly further
and do worse. She knew it was necessary that she should dispel Ellen's suspicion, because they
must work together to make a serene home for Richard, and she desired to do so for her son's
sake, because she herself was possessed by the far fiercer monogamous passion of achieved and
final love, which is disillusioned concerning mystical draughts, but knows that to take the
bread of the beloved and cast it to the dogs is sin. She had acquired that knowledge, which
is the only valuable kind of chastity worth having, that night when she had been forced to
commit that profanation. Shading her eyes while there rushed over her the recollection of a
pallid face looking yellow as it bent over the lamp, she reflected that even if she conquered
this life-long indisposition to reply, the story was too monstrous to be told. It would not
be believed. This girl would look at her under her brows and make that Scotch noise again and
think her a liar as well as loose. So she sat silent, letting Ellen dislike her.

She said at length, "Let's go and have coffee in the lounge."

"I'm sure we don't need it," murmured Ellen, as a tribute to the magnificence of the meal.

Crossing the room was a terrible business. She hoped people were not staring at her because
she was with a woman whom they could perhaps see had once been bad. No doubt there were signs
by which experienced people could tell. Richard's presence seemed all at once to have set behind
the rim of the earth.

They sat down at last on a kind of wide marble platform, which looked down on another restaurant
where there dined even more glorious people, none of whom wore hats, who seemed indeed to have
stripped for their fray with appetite. They were nice-looking, some of them, but not like Richard.
She looked proudly round just for the pleasure of seeing that there was not his like anywhere
here, and found herself under the gaze of Richard's eyes, set in Richard's mother's face. Doubt
left her. Here was beauty and generosity and courage and brilliance. Here was the quality of
life she loved. She found herself saying eagerly, that she might hear that adorable voice and
hoping that it would speak such strong words as he used: "Yes, Marion?"

"Ellen, when will you marry Richard?"

"We've talked it over," said Ellen, with a certain solemn fear. "We think we'll wait. Six months.
Out of respect for mother."

"But, my dear, your mother won't get any pleasure out of Richard being kept waiting. She'd
like you to settle down and be happy."

Ellen looked before her with blue eyes that seemed as if she saw an altar, and as if Marion
were insisting on talking loud in church. "I feel I'd like to wait," she murmured.

The older woman understood. In such fear of life had she once dallied, one night long before,
at the edge of woods, looking across the clearing at the belvedere, and the light in the room
behind its pediment, which sent a fan of coarse brightness out through the skylight into the
pale clotted starshine. With one arm she clasped a sapling as if it were a lover, and she murmured,
"He is there, he is waiting for me. But I will not go. Another night...." She had been so glad
that there was no moon, so that he would not see her from his window. She had forgotten that
her white frock would gleam among the hazel thickets like a ghost! So he had stepped suddenly
from between the columns and come towards her across the clearing. It was strange that though
she wanted to run away she could make no motion save with her hands, which fluttered about
her like doves, and that when he took her in his arms her feet had moved with his towards the
belvedere, though her lips had cried faintly but sincerely, "No ... no...." Such a fear of
life was of good augury for her son. Those only feared life who were conscious of powers within
themselves that would make their living a tremendous thing. She was exhilarated by the conviction
that this girl was almost good enough for her son, but her sense of the prevailing darkness
of fate's climate caused her to desire to make the promise of his happiness a certainty, and
she exclaimed urgently, "Oh, Ellen, marry Richard soon!"

Ellen turned a timid, obstinate face on this insistent woman, who would not leave her alone
with her delightful fears. "After all, this is my life," she seemed to be saying, "and you
have had yours to do what you willed with. Let me have mine."

But there had come on Marion the tribulation that falls on unhappy people when they see before
them a gleam of happiness. She had to lay hold of it. Although she knew that she was irritating
the girl, she said: "But, Ellen, really you ought to marry Richard soon!" She forced herself
to speak glibly and without reserve, though it seemed to her that in doing so she was somehow
participating in the glittering vulgarity of the place where they sat. "I want Richard's happiness
to be assured. I want to see him certainly, finally happy. I may die soon. I'm fifty, and my
heart is bad. I want him to be so happy that when I die he won't grieve too much. For, you
see, he is far too fond of me--quite unreasonably fond. And even if I live for quite a long
time I still will be miserable if he doesn't find happiness with someone else. You see, I've
had various troubles in my life. Some day I will tell you what they are. I can't now. I don't
mean in the least that I'm trying to shut you out from our lives. But if I started talking
about them my throat would close. I suppose I've been quiet about it for so many years that
I've lost the way of speaking out everything but small talk. But the point is that Richard
frets about these troubles far too much. He lives them all over again every time he sees they
are worrying me. I want you to give him a fresh, unspoiled life to look after, which will give
him pleasure to share as my life has given him pain. Do this for him. Please do it. Forgive
me if I'm being a nuisance to you. But, you see, I feel so responsible for Richard." She looked
across the restaurant, as if on the great wall at its other end there hung a vast mirror in
which there was reflected the reality behind all these appearances. She seemed, with her contracted
brows and compressed lips, to be watching its image of her destiny and checking it with her
reason's estimate of the case. "Yes!" she sighed, and shivered and stiffened her back as if
there had fallen on her something magnificent and onerous. "I am twice as responsible for Richard
as most mothers are for their sons."

She would have left it cryptically at that if she had not seen that Ellen would have disliked
her as a mystificator. She drew her hand across her brow, and immediately perceived that the
gesture had so evidently expressed dislike of this obligation to confide that the girl was
again alienated, and in desperation she cried out all she meant. "I'm responsible for him in
the usual way. By loving his father. Much more than the usual way, most people would tell me,
because of course I knew it wasn't lawful. But there's something more than that. I was so very
ill before he was born that the doctor wanted to operate and take him away from me long before
there was any chance of his living. I knew he would be illegitimate and that there would be
much trouble for us both, but I wanted him so much that I couldn't bear them to kill him. So
I risked it, and struggled through till he was born. So you see it's twice instead of once
that I have willed him into the world. I must see to it that now he is here he is happy."

Ellen said in a little voice, "That was very brave of you," and soared into an amazed exaltation
from which she dipped suddenly to some practical consideration that she must settle at once.
Her eyes hovered about Marion's and met them shyly, and she stammered softly, "Does having
a baby hurt very much?" She did not feel at all disturbed when Marion answered, "Yes," though
that was the word she had been dreading, for the speech she added, "If the child is going to
be worth while it always hurts, but one does not care," seemed to her one of those sombre and
heartening things like "King Lear," or the black line of the Pentland Hills against the sky,
which she felt took fear from life, since they showed it black and barren of comfort and yet
more than ever beautiful. It settled her practical consideration: she had known that she would
have to have children, because all married people did, but now she would look forward to it
without cowardice and without regret. Now she could soar again to her amazed exaltation and
contemplate the woman who had given her Richard.

Even yet she was not clear concerning the processes of birth. But in her mind's eye she saw
Marion lying on a narrow bed, her body clenched under the blankets; and her face pale and concave
at cheek and temple with sickness and persecuted resolution, holding at bay with her will a
crowd of doctors pressing round her with scalpels in their hands, preserving by her tensity
the miracle of life that was to be Richard. If she had relaxed, the world would not have been
habitable, existence would have rolled through few and inferior phases. When she stood at the
windows of Grand-Aunt's house on Liberton Brae every evening after mother's death she would
have seen nothing but dark glass patterned with uncheering suns of reflecting gaslight, and
beyond a white roadway climbed by anonymous travellers. She would have wept: not waited, as
she did, for the sound of the motorcycle that was driven with the dearest recklessness and
would bring joy with it. She would never have had occasion to run to the door and open it impetuously
to life. Her sensibility would have strayed on the dreary level of controlled grief. It would
not have sank under her, deliciously and dangerously, leaving her to stand quite paralysed
while he flung off his cap and coat and gauntlets with those indolent, violent gestures, and
whispered to her till his arms were free and he could stop her heart for a second with his
long first kiss.

She would have sat all evening in the front parlour with Grand-Aunt and Miss McGinnis and helped
with their sewing for the St. Giles's bazaar, instead of appearing among them for five minutes
to let them have a look at her great splendid man, who had to bend to come in at the doorway
and give Miss McGinnis an opportunity to cry, "Dear me, Mr. Yaverland, you mind me so extraordinary
of my own cousin Hendry who was drowned at Prestonpans. He was just your height and he had
the verra look of you," and to allow Grand-Aunt to declare, "Elspeth, I wonder at you. There
was never a McGinnis stood more than five feet five, and I do not remember that Hendry escaped
the family misfortune--mind you, I know it's no a fault--of a squint." There would not have
been those hours in the dining-room when life was lifted to a strange and interesting plane
where the flesh became as thoughtful as the spirit, and each meeting of lips was as individual
as an idea and as much a comment on life, and the pressing of a finger across the skin could
be watched like the unfolding of a theory.

But those were the fair-weather uses of love. It was in the foul weather she would have missed
him most. If this woman had not given her Richard she would have walked home from the hospital
alone and wept by the unmade bed whose pillow was still dented by mother's head; she would
have had to go to the cemetery with only Mr. Mactavish James and Uncle John Watson from Glasgow,
who would have said "Hush!" when she waved her hand at the coffin as it was lowered into the
grave and cried, "Good-bye, my wee lamb!" Life was so terrible it would not be supportable
without love. She laid her hand on Marion's where it lay on the table, and stuttered, "Oh,
it was brave of you!"

The intimate contact was faintly disgusting to the other. She answered impatiently, "Not brave
at all; I loved him so much that I would have done anything rather than lose him."

"You loved him--even then?"

"In a sense they are as much to one then as they ever are."

"Ah...." Ellen continued to pat the other woman's hand and looked up wonderingly into her eyes,
and was dismayed to see there that this fondling meant nothing to her. She was not ungrateful,
but for such things her austerity had no use. All that she wanted was that assurance for which
she had already asked. Ellen was proud, and she was a little hurt that the way in which she
had proposed to pay the debt of gratitude was not acceptable, so she held up her hand and said
coolly, "I'll marry your son when you like, Mrs. Yaverland."

The other said nothing more than "Thank you." Realising that she had said it even more than
usually indifferently, she put out her hand towards Ellen in imitation of the girl's own movement,
but did it with so marked a lack of spontaneity that it must, as she instantly perceived, give
an impression of insincerity. "How I fail!" she thought, but not too sadly, for at any rate
she had got her son what he wanted. A man came and stood a little way behind her, looking here
and there for someone whom he expected to find in the assembly, and she turned sharply to see
if it were Richard; for always when he was away, if the shadows fell across her path or there
came a knock at the door, she hoped that it was him.

"I am stupid about him," she admitted, settling down in her chair, "but if he had come it would
have been lovely. What would he think if he came now and found us two whom he loves most sitting
here silent, almost sulky, because we have fixed the time of his marriage? He would not understand,
of course. When a man is in love marriage loses all importance. He thinks that he could wait
for ever. He never realises, as women do, that it is not love that matters but what we do with
it. Why do I say as women do? Only women like me who have through making all possible mistakes
found out the truth by the process of elimination. This girl is as unprovident as Richard is.
So unprovident that I am afraid she is angry with me for insisting that she should put her
capital of passion to good uses." And indeed Ellen was sitting there very stiffly, turning
her hands together and looking down on them as if she despised them for their cantrips. She
wished her marriage had not been decided quite like this. Of course she wanted to be married,
because, whatever the marriage-laws were like, there was no other way by which she and Richard
could tell everybody what they were to each other. But she had wanted the ceremony as secret
as possible, as little overlooked by any other human being, and she fancifully desired it to
take place in some high mountain chapel where there was no congregation but casqued marble
men and the faith professed was so mystical that the priest was as inhuman as a prayer. Thus
their vows would, though recorded, have had the sweet quality of unwritten melodies that are
sung only for the beloved who has inspired them. But now this marriage was to be performed
with the extremest publicity before a crowd of issues, if not of persons. It was to be a subordinate
episode in a pageant the plot of which she did not know.

Marion, watching her face, saw the faint twitches of resentment playing about her mouth and
felt some remorse. "She would be so happy just being Richard's sweetheart, if I did not interfere,"
she thought. "Ah, how the old tyrannise over the young...." And there came on her a sudden
chill as she remembered of what character that tyranny could be. She remembered one day, when
she was nineteen, waking from sleep to find old people round her. She had been having such
a lovely dream. On her lover's arm, she had been walking across the fields in innocent sunshiny
weather, and he had been laughing and full of a far greater joy in impersonal things than she
had ever known him. When he saw gorse in life he would repeat the country catch, "When the
gorse is out of bloom then kissing's out of fashion," but in her dream he laughed to see fire
and water meet where the gorse grew on the sheep-pond's broken lip. He had liked the white
cloths bleaching on the grass, and the song the lark in the sky twirled like a lad throwing
and catching a coin, and the spinney on the field's slope's heights, where the tide of spring
broke in a green surf of budding undergrowth at the feet of black bare trees.

During all the months her child was moving in her body she was visited by dreams of spring.
This was the best of dreams: it was real. The lark's song and Harry's happy laughter were loud
in her ears; and she rolled over in her bed and opened her eyes on Grandmother and Aunt Alphonsine.
She looked away from them, but saw only things that reminded her how ill she was; the tumbler
of milk she had not been able to drink, set in a circle of its own wetness on a plate among
fingers of bread-and-butter left from the morning; they had been told to tempt her appetite,
but they were betraying that they felt she had had more than enough temptation lately; the
bottles of medicine ranged along the mantelpiece, high-shouldered like the facades of chapels
and pasted with labels that one desired to read as little as chapel notice-boards, and with
contents just as ineffectual at their business of establishing the right; the jug filled with
a bunch of flowers left by some kindly neighbour who did not know what was the matter with her.

That raised difficult issues. She turned her eyes back to the old people. They looked terrible:
Grandmother sitting among her spreading skirts, her face trembling with a weak forgiving sweetness,
her hands clasped on her stick-handle with a strength which showed that if she was not allowed
to forgive she would be merciless; Aunt Alphonsine, covering her bosom with those arms which
looked so preternaturally and rapaciously long in the tight sleeves that Frenchwomen always
love, and fingering now and then the scar that crossed her oval face as if it were an amulet
the touch of which inspired her to be righteous and malign. Marion looked away from them again
at the flowers, and tried to forget that they had been given by someone who would not have
given them if she had known the truth, and to perceive simply that they were snapdragons, the
velvet homes of elfs--reds and terra-cottas and yellows that even in sunlight had the melting
mystery, the harmony with serious passion, that colours have commonly only in twilight.

But the old people began to speak, and the flowers lost their power over her. She had to listen
while they proposed that she should marry her lover's butler. He had made the offer most handsomely,
it appeared, and was willing to do it at once and treat the child as if it were his own. "What,
Peacey?" she had cried, raising herself up on her elbow, "Peacey? Ah, if Harry were here you
would not dare to tell me this!" And Aunt Alphonsine had said "Hush!" at the squire's name,
being to the core of her soul a dame de compagnie; and Grandmother had said, with that use
of the truth as an offensive weapon which seems the highest form of truthfulness to many, "Well,
Sir Harry seems in no great haste to come back to protect you. He could come back if he liked,
you know, dear."

That was, of course, quite true. He could have come back. It was true that his return from
the Royal tour would have meant the end of his career at Court; but that consideration should
have seemed fatuous compared with his duty to stand beside his woman when she was going to
have his child. She covered her face with the sheet and lay so still that they left her. Till
the evening fell she remained so, keeping the linen close to her drawn about brow and chin
like an integument for her agony which prevented it from breaking out into physical convulsions
and shrieked lamentations. It seemed a symbol of her utter desolation that such a proposal
should have been made to her when she should have been sacred to her child: but there was not
the least fear in her heart that it would ever come to pass. She had not known how often the
old people would come and sit by her bed, looking terrible.

Yes, they had looked terrible, but not, seen across the years, inexplicable. Grandmother had
spent all her life being the good wife of Edward Yaverland, and she had not liked him, for
in the days when she had ransacked her memory for pretty tales to tell her little grandchild
she had never spoken of any place she had visited with him; and indeed the daguerreotype on
the parlour wall showed a man teased by developing prosperity as by an inward growth, whose
eye would change pink apple-blossom to a computable promise of cider. It is not in the nature
of any human being to admit that they have wasted their whole life, and since she had certainly
gained no treasure of love from her forty years with her husband it was necessary that she
should invent some good purpose which that tedious companionship had served. The theory of
the sanctity of marriage came in handy; it comforted her to believe that by merely being a
wife she had fulfilled a function pleasing to God and necessary to the existence of society.
But she had so often been assailed by moments when it had seemed that during all her living
life had not begun, that she had to believe it passionately to quiet those doubts. To have
asked her to stay away from the bedside would have been to ask her to admit that her life was
useless, and that it would have been better if she had not been born. "Lord have mercy on us
all!" thought Marion, and forgave her.

It was not so easy to forgive Aunt Alphonsine, for her voice had been as sharp as it could
be without being honestly angry, like bad wine instead of good vinegar, and had run indefatigably
up the switchbacks on which the voices of Frenchwomen travel eternally. She was the most responsible
for the defeat of Marion's life. And yet Aunt Alphonsine too was not malignant of intent. The
worst of illicit relationships is the provocation they give to the minds that hear of them.
When it is said of a man and woman that they are married, the imagination sees the public ceremony
before the altar, the shared house, the children, and all the sober external results of marriage;
but when it is said of a man and woman that they are lovers, the imagination is confronted
with the fact of their love. The thought of her niece night after night shut up with love in
the white belvedere all the long time the moon required to rise from the open sea, fill all
the creeks with silver, and drain them dry again as she sunk westwards, must have been torment
to one whose left cheek, from the long pale ear to the inhibited mouth, was one scar. That
scar was an epitome of all that was pathetic and mischievous about the poor faint woman, this
being formed to be a nun who had not been blessed with any religion and so had to dedicate
herself to the ridiculous god of decorum. "Your aunt," Marion's mother had said to her, "burned
her face cleaning a pair of white shoes with benzine for me to wear at my first Communion.
It was a pity she did it. And a pity for me too, since I have had to obey her ever since in
everything, though I wanted neither the white shoes nor the Communion." In that speech were
all the elements of Alphonsine's tragedy, and therefore most of the causes of Marion's. The
French thrift that had made her clean the shoes at home, and thereby maim herself into something
that desired to assassinate love whenever she saw it, made her terribly exercised at the possibility
that the family might have to support a fatherless baby. The affection for her sister Pamela
which had made her perform these services had enabled her to bring up that lovely child through
all the dangers of a poverty-stricken childhood in Paris, in spite of a certain wildness in
her beauty which might, if unchecked, have been a summons to disorder; and her triumph in that
respect had made it the most heartbreaking disappointment when the temptations she thought
she had baulked for ever in Paris twenty years before returned and claimed so easily Pamela's
child, whom she thought quite safe, since to her French eyes Marion's dark brows, perpetually
knit in preoccupation with the movements of her nature, were not likely to be attractive to men.

That must have added to her bitterness. It must have seemed very cruel to Alphonsine that she,
with her smooth brown hair which she coiffed perfectly, her long white hands, and her slender
body with its hour-glass waist, which had a strange air of having been filleted of all grossness,
could never know the joy that could be obtained even by this black untidy girl. That would
account for the passion with which she forced Marion to do the thing she did not want to; and
any suspicion that she was actuated by a desire to punish the girl for her happiness she would
be able to dismiss by recollecting that certainly she had served her little sister's welfare
by crossing her will. Oh, there was much to be said for Alphonsine. But all the same, it was
a pity that the old people had interfered. She had loved Richard so much that it would not
have mattered to her or to him that he was fatherless, since from the inexhaustible treasure
of her passion for him she could give him far more than other children receive from both parents.
They might have been so happy together if the old people had not made her marry Peacey.

"But this is different," she said to herself. "They compelled me to unhappiness. I am forcing
happiness on Richard and Ellen. It is quite different."

But she looked anxiously at the girl. They smiled at each other with their eyes, as if they
were friends in eternity. But their lips smiled guardedly, for it might be that they were enemies
in time.

CHAPTER II

The land, which from the time they left London had been so ugly as to be almost invisible,
suddenly took form and colour. To the south, beyond a creek whose further bank was a raw edge
of gleaming mud hummocks tufted with dark spriggy heaths and veined with waterways that shone
white under the cold sky, there stretched a great quiet plain. It stretched illimitably, and
though there were dotted over it red barns and grey houses and knots of trees growing in fellowship
as they do round steadings, and though its colour was a deep wet fertile green, it did not
seem as if it could be a human territory. It could be regarded only as a place for the feet
of the clouds which, half as tall as the sky, stood on the far horizon. They passed a station,
built high above the marsh on piles, and looked down on a ford that crossed the mud bed of
the creek to a white road that drove southwards into the plain. A tongue of the creek ran inwards
beside it for a hundred yards or so; above its humpy mud banks the road protected itself by
white wooden railings, and on its other side a line of telegraph poles ran towards the skyline.

This was the beauty of bleakness, but not as she had known it on the Pentlands. That was like
tragedy. Storms broke on the hills, spread snow or filled the freshets as with tears, and then
departed, leaving the curlews drilling holes with their cries in the sphere of catharised clear
air; and the people there, men resting on their staves, women at their but-and-ben doors, spoke
with magnificent calm, as if they had exhausted all their violence on certain specific occasions.
But this plain was like a realist mind with an intense consciousness of cause and effect. There
would blow a warning wind before the storm. It would be visible afar off in its coming, as
a darkness, a flaw on the horizon; and when it had scourged the plain it would be seen for
long travelling on towards the mainland. There would be no illusion that anything happens suddenly
or that anything disappears. Here the long preparation of earth's events and their endurance
would be evident. It would breed people like Marion, in whom a sense of the bearing of the
past on the present was so powerful that it was often difficult to know of what she was speaking,
and whether the tale she was telling of Richard referred to yesterday or his boyhood; that
it was impossible to say whether she smiled because of memory or hope when she leaned forward
and said, "This is Kerith Island."

"Mhm," said Ellen, since it was not her own country; "it's verra flat." And then, realising
that she was belittling beauty, she exclaimed, "I must have said that for the sake of being
disagreeable. I think it's fine, though very different from Scotland. But after all, why should
everything be like Scotland? There's no real reason. I don't see where Richard's going to work,
though."

"Three miles along the road and two to the right. You can see the works from our windows."

"Of course you could," said Ellen sourly; and explained, "When I couldn't see the works I made
up a sort of story for myself, about the works being new ones, and the firm not being able
to get them finished in time for Richard to start work, so that we had him hanging about the
house all to ourselves. That was silly. Of course. But I am silly about him. I suppose I will
soon get over it."

"I will hate you if you do," answered Marion, "for I never have."

The island and its creek fell away to the south. The train ran now across the marshes, flat
and green, chequered with dykes, confined to the right by the steep brim of a sea-wall. To
the left a line of little hills gained height. They fell back in an amphitheatre, and a farmhouse
turned to the sun a garden more austere with the salt air than farmhouse gardens commonly are,
and behind it, in the shelter of the curved green escarpment, some tall trees stood among the
pastures. The hills rose again to an overhanging steepness and broke down to a gap full of
the purples of bare woods, before which stood the cathedralesque ruins of a brick-kiln, with
its tall tower and apse-like ovens, on a green platform of levelled ground scored with the
red of rusted trolley-lines. The hill grew higher and stood sheer like a turfed cliff, and
was surmounted by four tall towers of grey stone. It would have been impressive if the fall
of the cliff had not been disfigured by a large shed of pink corrugated iron with "Hallelujah
Army" painted on its roof, which was built on a shelf where some hawthorn trees and bramble
bushes found a footing.

Then for a time, after an oblique valley had cleft the range, an elm-hedge ran along the crest,
till there looked down a grey church with a squinting spire and grey-black yews set about it,
and something white like a monument standing up on a mound beside it. Woods appeared and receded,
leaving the hilltop bare, and returned; there was a broken hedge of hawthorn; a downward line
of trees scored the gentler slope of the escarpment, and from a square red brick house on the
skyline there fell an orchard.

"That is our house up there. That is Yaverland's End," said Marion; "and look on the other
window, that is Roothing Harbour." But all Ellen could see was a forest of slim straight poles
leaning everywhere above the sea-wall. "Those are the masts of the fishing-boats," said Marion
indifferently, even grumbling, as was her way when she spoke of the things she loved. "Don't
laugh at this place, though it is all mud. I can tell you the Elizabethan adventures drew most
of their seamen from here and Tilbury." The sea-wall stopped, and beyond a foreshore of coal-dust
and soiled shingle and tarred huts, such as is found always where men go down to the sea in
ships, lay a bare harbour basin in which fishing-boats lolled on their sides in silver mud.
Further out, smaller boats lay tidily on a bar of coarse grass that ran out from a sea-walled
island that lay alongside the marsh the train had just crossed, with a farm and its orchard
lying at the end it thrust into the harbour.

Now the train ran slower, and it could be seen that the line had been driven violently through
the high street with no decent clearance, for to its left it could be seen that it was overhung
by the backs of cottages, and on its right was the cobbled roadway on which walked bearded
men in jerseys and top boots and women with that look of brine rather than bloom which is characteristic
of fishing-villages. It was a fairly continuous street of huddled houses and drysalters' shops,
with their stock of thigh-long boots and lanthorns and sou'-westers heaped behind small dark
panes, and here and there came quays, with whitened cottages and trim gardens facing dingy
wharf-offices over paved squares set about the edge with capstans, and beyond a Thames barge
showing its furled red sail against a vista of shining mud-flats and the vast sky that belonged
to this district. This hard, bright, clouded day, which dwelt on the grey in all things, even
in the rough grass, made all look brittle and trivial and, however old, still unhistoric. It
could be imagined that the people who lived under this immense sky might come to lose the common
human sense of their own supreme importance, and to suspect themselves as being of no more
account than the fishes which lie at the bottom of the channel; and might look up at the great
cloud galleons floating above and wonder if these had not for ship's company beings that would
be to them as men are to fishes. It was a place, Ellen saw, that might well have engendered
such a curious vigorous lethargy as Marion's. Its breezes were clean enough to nourish strength,
but there was something about the proportions of the scene that would breed scepticism concerning
the value of all activities.

To see things in terms of Marion was weak, and a distraction from delight. She could neither
behold things for their own sake, as she had up till this autumn, nor for Richard's sake, as
she had till yesterday evening. But she was forced to wonder about this woman who had been
able to be Richard's mother and who was yet so little what one approved of, and who yet again
was so picturesque that one had to watch her with pleasant intensity that was not usually associated
with dislike. Even when she looked on the astonishing scene that lay before her when they stepped
on to the platform at Roothing station she was distracted from her astonishment by a sense
that she would afterwards maintain an argument on the subject with Marion. The surroundings
were ignobly ugly, as eggshells and scraps of newspaper trodden into waste ground are ugly.
She was prepared to tell Marion so, though it was her own town. There had not been sufficient
space to build a station with the up and down platforms facing each other, so the up platform
was further back, facing the harbour, and this down platform was overshadowed on its landward
side by smoke-grimed cottages and tenements which rose on high ground in a peak of squalor.
Seawards one looked over a goods-siding, where there stood a few wagons of cockle-shells and
a cinderpath esplanade on to a vast plain of mud.

It could not be beautiful. A plain of mud could not be beautiful. Yet the mind could dwell
contentedly on this new and curious estate of nature, this substance that was neither earth
nor water, this place that was neither land nor sea. It had its own colours: in the shadow
of the great couchant cloud whose mane was brassy with sunshine that had lodged in the upper
air it was purple; otherwise it was brown; and where the light lay it was as bright as polished
steel, yet giving in its brightness some indication of its sucking softness. It had its own
strange scenery; it had its undulations and its fissures, and between deep, rounded, shining
banks, a course marked here and there by the stripped white ghosts of sapling trees, a winding
river flowed out to the far-off channel of the estuary which lay a grey bar under the dark
line of the Kentish hills.

It supported its own life; hundreds of black fishing-boats and some large vessels leaned this
way and that, high and dry on the mud, like flies stuck on a window-pane, and up on the river,
whose waters were now flowing from the sea to the land, men came in dingeys, not rowing, but
bending their bodies indolently and without effort, because they were back-watering with the
tide, so that their swift advance looked as if it were made easy by sorcery. They slackened
speed before they came to the wharf, which just here by the station jutted out in a grey bastion
surmounted by the minatory finger of a derrick, and some of them climbed out and put round
baskets full of shining fish upon their heads, and, walking struttingly to brake their heavy
boots on the slippery mud, followed a wet track up to the cinderpath. They looked stunted and
fantastic like Oriental chessmen. It was strange, but this place had the quality of beauty.
It laid a finger on the heart. Moreover, it had a solemn quality of importance. It was as if
this was the primeval ooze from which the first life stirred and crawled landwards to begin
to make this a memorable star.

Again the place seemed curiously like Marion. It might well have been that to make her a god
had modelled a figure in this estuary mud and breathed on it, so much, in her sallow colouring
and the heavy impassivity which was the equivalent of the plain's monotony, did she partake
of its qualities. Her behaviour, too, was grand like the plain and yet composed of material
that, as stuff for grandeur, was almost as uncompromising as mud.

She took the girl to the railings and made her look out to the sea, saying, "It is rather fine
in a queer way, isn't it? When I was a girl I could run dryshod to the very end of the channel,
and I daresay Richard could still."

Ellen shivered. "Is it not terribly lonely out there, just under the sky?"

"Oh, no, it's pleasant to be on innocent territory, with no human beings living on it. There
was a feeling, so far as I can remember it, of extraordinary freedom and lightness." She spoke
with a sincere cynicism, an easy grimness that appeared quite dreadful to Ellen. The girl looked
appealingly at her, asking her not to give the sanction of her impressive personality to such
hopelessness about life, but had the ill luck to catch her in the act of a practical demonstration
of her dislike for her fellow-creatures. Now that the train had puffed out of the station the
station-master, a silver-haired old man with a red face on which amiability clung like a lather,
had come to Marion's side and was saying that he had not seen her for a long time, and asking
how Richard was and when he was coming back. Ellen thought this was very kind of him, but Marion
evidently found it tiresome, and hardly troubled to conceal the fact, walking rather more quickly
along the platform than the old man could manage and giving no more answer to his questions
than a vague smiling "Hum." Ellen hoped that the poor old man was not offended.

She found something dubious, too, about the lack of apology with which Marion led her into
the squalor outside the station, over the level crossing, with its cobblestones veined with
coal-dust, past the fish-shop hung with the horrid bleeding frills of skate, and the barber's
shop that also sold journals, which stood with unreluctant posters at the exact point where
newspapers and flypapers meet; and up the winding road, which sent a trail of square red villas
with broken prams standing in unplanted or unweeded gardens up the hill in the direction of
the church and the castle they had passed in the train. But surely she ought to have apologised
for bringing a girl reared in Edinburgh to a place like this. On one of the gates they passed
was written "Hiemath," and there was something very characteristic of the jerry-built and decaying
place in the cheap sentiment that had been too slovenly to spell its own name correctly. Yet
to the left, over the housetops of foul black streets running upwards from the railway-lines,
there shone the great silver plain, and afar off a channel set with white sailing-ships and
steamers, and dark majestic hills. But because of the quality of the place, and perhaps of
her guide, she did not want to recognise its beauty.

When they came to a cross-roads that followed westward along the crest of the hill she would
hardly admit to herself that this was better, that this was indeed right in a unique way, and
that the dignified houses of white marl and oak on one side of the road and the public lawns
on the other were quite good for England. She was not softened by Marion's proud mutter: "It's
jolly in spring, seeing the blue sea through the gap in the may hedge. And on the other side
of the hedge there's one of those old grass roads. They used to say they were Roman, but they're
far older. Older than Stonehenge. This used to run all the way to Canfleet--that's where Kerith
Island touches the mainland--but it's all gone but this part here...." She disliked the road
when it took a disclaiming twist and left the houses out of sight and travelled between low
oaks, because it was the road home, and she would never have chosen a home in this strange
place, whose lack of meaning for herself could be measured by its plentitude of meaning for
this woman who was so unlike her.

Certainly she would never have chosen this home. Very thick, trim hedges gave the long garden
the look of a pound; the standard rose-trees which grew in round flower-beds on the lawn, which
was of that excessively deep green that grass takes on in gardens with a north aspect, had
the air of being detained in custody, and the borders on each side of the broad gravel path
showed that extreme neatness which is found in places of detention. The red brick farmhouse
at its end was very small, and its windows such mere square peep-holes among a strong growth
of ivy that one conceived its inhabitants as being able to see the light only by pressing their
faces close against the glass.

"Oh, I know it's ugly!" muttered Marion, holding back the gate for her. "I should have had
it pulled down when I built on the new rooms. But it's been here two hundred years, and there
are some of the beams of the house that was here before in it, and we have lived here all the
time, so it was too great a responsibility to destroy it." She looked sideways at the girl's
clouded face, and explained desperately, "I couldn't, you know. When people don't understand
why you did things, and say you did them because you had no respect for good old established
decencies of life, you become most carefully conservative!"

But confidence could not be maintained for long at this awkward pitch, and she went on to the
front door. "You'll like our roses," she said hopefully, as they waited for it to open; "they
grow wonderfully on this Essex clay." But although there was evident in that an amiable desire
to please, Ellen was again alienated by the cool smile with which Marion greeted the maid who
opened the door, the uninterested "Good morning, Mabel." The girl looked so pleased to see
them. Marion returned, too, to this curious idea of hers about not being able to destroy ugly
things just because they are old, although of course it is one's plain duty to replace ugly
things with beautiful whatever the circumstances, when they stepped in, through no intervening
hall or passage, to a little dark room furnished, as farm parlours are, with a grandfather
clock, an oak settle, a dresser, a gate-leg table with a patchwork cloth over it, and samplers
hanging on wallpaper of a trivial rosebud pattern. "I hate this English farmhouse stuff," she
said. "Heavy and uninventive. The Yaverlands have been well-to-do for at least four hundred
years, and they never took the trouble to have a single thing made with any particular appositeness
to themselves. But I have left this room as it was. To have it disturbed would have been like
turning my grandmother's ghost out of doors, and I troubled her enough in her lifetime. But
look! It's all right in the rooms I've built on." She held back a door, and they looked into
a shining room lined with white panels and lit by wide windows that admitted much of the vast
sky. "But I'll take you to your room. It's in the old part of the house. But I think you will
like it. It's a room I'm fond of...."

They climbed a steep dark staircase, and Marion opened a low thatched door in which the light,
obscured by drawn chintz curtains, fell on cream walls and a bed, with its high headpiece made
of fine wood painted green, and a great press made of the same. "There's a step down," she
said, "and the floor rakes, but I'm fond of the room. I slept here when I was a girl; but all
the things are new--I got them down from London; and I had the walls done. So you have a fresh
start." She went to the chintz curtains and pulled them back, disclosing a very large window
that came down to within two feet of the floor and looked on to a farmyard. "It's a good-sized
window, isn't it?" she said. "There's a story about that. They say my great-grandfather, William
Yaverland, was as mean as he was jealous, and as jealous as he was mean, and in middle life
he was crippled by a kick from a horse and bedridden ever after. He'd a very pretty young wife,
and a handsome overseer who was a very capable chap and worth hundreds a year to the farm,
and it struck him that in his new state he'd probably not be able to keep the one without losing
the other. So he had this window knocked out so that he could lie in his bed and keep his eye
on the dairy where his wife worked and see who went in and came out. Well, now it'll let the
morning sun in on you."

She sat down on the windowseat, and with a sense of fulfilment watched the girl move delightedly
among the new things, touching the little white wreaths on the embroidered bedspread and tracing
the delicate grain with her forefinger, and coming to a stop before the mirror and looking
at her face with a solemn respectful vanity because it had pleased her beloved. Marion found
this very right and fitting, because to her, in spite of the story of this window, this room
had always been sacred to the spirit of young love. She turned her head and looked out into
the farmyard. When the land had been let out to neighbouring cultivators the byres and outhouses
had all been pulled down, and the yard was now only a quadrangle of grey trodden earth, having
on its further side a wall-less shed in which there were stacked all the billets that had been
cut from the spinneys on the land they retained, bound neatly with the black branches fluting
together and a fuzz of purple twigs at each end.

But she could remember another day, more than thirty years before, when it was brown and oozy
underfoot and there was nothing neat about it at all, and the mellow cry of well-fed cattle
came from the dark doors of tumble-down sheds, and she was standing in the sunshine with two
of the Berkshire piglets in her arms. She had brought them out of the stye to have a better
sight of their pretty twitching noses and their silken bristles and their playfulness, which
was unclouded, as it is in the puppy by a genuine fear of life, or in the kitten by a minxish
affectation of the same; and Goodtart, the cattleman, had drawn near with a "Wunnerful, ain't
they, Miss Marion?--and them not born at four o'clock this morning," when she heard the clear
voice that was sweet and yet hard, like silver ringing on steel, calling to the dogs out in
the roadway, "Lesbia! Catullus! Come out of it!" The greyhounds had, as usual, got in among
the sheep on the glebe land opposite. She ran forward into the darkness of the stye and put
down the two piglets among the sucking tide of life that washed the flanks of the great old
sow, but she could not stay there for ever. Goodtart, who, being in the sunlight, could not
see that she was looking out at him from the shadow, turned an undisguised face towards the
doorway, and she perceived that the dung-brown eyes under his forelocks were almost alive and
that his long upper lip was twitching from side to side.

She walked stiffly out, hearing the voice still calling "Catullus! Lesbia!" and went in to
the house. But Peggy was baking in the kitchen and Grandmother was reading the Prittlebay Gazette
in the parlour, and she went upstairs and threw herself on the bed. She thought of nothing.
Her heart seemed by its slogging beat to be urging some argument upon her. Presently she realised
that he was no longer calling to his dogs, and she turned on her pillow and looked out of the
big window into the farmyard. He was there. Cousin Tom Stallybrass, who had been managing the
farm ever since Grandfather's death, had come out and was talking to him, and from his gestures
was evidently telling him of the recent collapse of the dairy wall, but he was not interested,
for he did not point his stick at it, and in him almost every mental movement was immediately
followed by some physical sign. There was something else he wanted. When the greyhounds licked
up at him he thrust them away with the petulance of a baulked man, and whenever Tom turned
his head away to point at the dairy he cast quick glances at the farm door, at the gate into
the road, at the other gate into the fields. She could see his face, and it was dark, and the
lips drawn down at the corners. What could it be that he wanted?

She rose from her bed and went to the window, and knelt down by it, pressing her face and the
white bib of her apron close to the glass. Instantly he saw her, and his face was filled with
worship and happiness as with light. At last she knew that she was loved, that the things he
said when they met on the marshes were not said as they had been when she was a child, and
that there had lately been solemnity throned in his eyes' levity. He made no motion for her
to come down, nor when Tom turned his head again did he throw any furtive look at the window.
It was enough for him to have seen her; and soon he went away with bent head followed by his
forgotten dogs.

Well, now this girl should sleep here, and the place should be revisited by a love as sacred
as that, and one which would not commit sacrilege upon itself. She gave a soft laugh, and in
a haze of satisfaction that prevented her seeing that Ellen was beginning to tell her how much
she liked the furniture she went out and passed to her own room. For a moment she stood at
the side windows, looking out on the show of sky and sea and green islands that lay sealed
in the embankments from the grey flood which was now running across the silver plain and trying
at them treacherously through the creeks that lay loverlike beside them. Then she turned approvingly
to the litter which betokened that this was a bedroom visited by insomnia more often than by
sleep: the half-dozen boxes of different sorts of cigarettes, the plate of apples and figs,
the pile of books, the portfolio of prints. It had been dreadful, that night at the hotel,
with nothing to read. She was very glad to come home.

It would not have seemed credible to Ellen that anyone should feel like this about this house.
The things in her room were very pretty, but it was spoiled for her by that large window, not
because she was afraid that anyone would look in, but because Marion had told her that someone
had once looked out. Since that person had been kin to this woman who was dark with unspent
energy, she figured him as being not quite extinguishable by death and therefore still a tenant
of the apartment. The jealousy of one of his stock would probably have more dynamic power than
her most exalted passions, so she would not be able to evict him. She thought these things
quite passionately and desperately while at the same time she was placidly brushing her hair
and thinking how nice everything was here. Her mind continued to perform this duet of emotions
when they went downstairs and had lunch. It was very pretty, this white room with the few etchings
set sparsely on the gleaming panels, each with a fair field of space for its black-and-white
assertion; the deep, bright blue carpet, soft as sleep, on the mirror-shining parquet; the
long low bookcases with their glass doors; the few perfect flowers, with their reflection floating
on polished walnut surfaces as if drowned in sherry.

The meal itself pleased as being in some sense classical, though she could not see why that
adjective should occur to her. There was no white cloth, and the bright silver and delicate
wineglasses, and the little dishes of coloured glass piled with wet green olives, stood among
their images on a gleaming table. The food was all either very hot or very cold. She had two
helps of everything, but at the same time she was being appalled by the bareness of the room.
Her intuition informed that if a violent soul became terrified lest its own violence should
provoke disorder it would probably make a violent effort towards order by throwing nearly everything
out of the window, and that its habitation would look very much like this. She knitted her
brows and said "Imphm" to herself; and her doubts were confirmed by Marion's vehement exclamation,
"Oh, when will Richard come! I wish he would come soon." Her perfect, her so rightly old mother
would have said, "It'll be nice for you, dear, when Richard comes," and would not have clouded
her dreams of his coming with the threat of passionate competition for his notice.

She said stiffly, looking down on her plate, "We're awful reactionary, letting our whole lives
revolve round a man."

"Reactionary?" repeated Marion. It had always been Ellen's complaint that grown-up people took
what the young say contemptuously, but to have her remarks treated with quite such earnest
consideration filled her for some reason with uneasiness. "I don't think so. If I had a daughter
who was as wonderful as Richard I would let my life revolve round her. But I don't know. Perhaps
I'm reactionary. Because I don't really believe that any woman could be as wonderful as Richard;
do you?"

Ellen had always suspected that this woman was not quite sound on the Feminist question. "Maybe
not as wonderful as Richard is," she said stoutly, "but as wonderful as any other man."

"Do you really think so?" asked Marion. "Women are such dependent things. They're dependent
on their weak frames and their personal relationships. Illness can make a woman's sun go out
so easily. And then, since personal relationships are the most imperfect things in the world,
she is so liable to be unhappy. These are handicaps most women don't get over. And then, since
men don't love us nearly as much as we love them, that leaves them much more spare vitality
to be wonderful with."

Ellen sat in a polite silence, not wishing to make this woman who had failed in love feel small
by telling her that she herself was loved by Richard just as much as she loved him.

"I don't know. I don't know. It's annoying the way that one comes to the end of life knowing
less than one did at the beginning." She stood up petulantly. "Let's go upstairs." Ellen followed
Marion up to the big sitting-room with a sense that, though she had not seen it, she would
not like it. She was as disquieted by hearing a middle-aged woman speak about life with this
agnostic despair as a child might if it was out for a walk with its nurse and discovered this
being whom it had regarded as all-knowing and all-powerful was in tears because she had lost
the way. She had always hoped that the old really did know best; that one learned the meaning
of life as one lived it.

So she was shaken and distressed by the fine face, which looked discontented with thinking
as another face might look flushed with drinking, and by the powerful yet inert body which
lay in the great armchair limply but uneasily, as if she desired to ask a question but was
restrained by a belief that nobody could answer, but for lack of that answer was unable to
commit herself to any action. Her expression was not, as Ellen had at first thought, blank.
Nor was it trivial, though she still sometimes raised those hands with the flashing nails and
smoothed her eyebrows. It showed plainly enough that doubt was wandering from chamber to chamber
of her being, blowing out such candles of certitude as the hopefulness natural to all human
beings had enabled her to light. The fact of Richard streamed in like sunshine through the
windows of her soul, and when she spoke of him she was evidently utterly happy; but there were
some parts of her life with which he had nothing to do, as there are north rooms in a house
which the sun cannot touch, and these the breath of doubt left to utter darkness. "You're imagining
all this, Ellen," she said to herself; "how can you possibly know all this about her?" "It's
true," herself answered. "Well, it's not true in the sense that it's true that she's dark and
her name's Mrs. Yaverland, is it?" "Ellen, have you nothing of an artist in you?" herself enquired
with pain. "You might be a business body, or one of the mistresses in John Square, the crude
way you're talking. It's not a fact that ye can look up in a directory. But it's perfectly
true that this woman's queer and warselled and unhappy. But you're losing your head terribly
on your first encounter with tragedy, and you fancying yourself a cut above the ordinary because
you enjoyed a good read of 'King Lear' and 'Macbeth.'" "Well, I never said I wanted to take
rooms with Lady Macbeth," she objected.

But Marion was asking her now if she liked this room, or if she found it, as many people did,
more like a lighthouse than a home, and because she spoke with passionate concern lest the
girl should not be at ease in the place where she was to spend her future life, Ellen immediately
answered with a kind of secondary sincerity that she liked it very much. Yet the room was convincing
her of something she was too young and too poor ever to have proved before, and that was the
possibility of excess. All her delights had been so sparse and in character so simple that
no cloying of after-taste had ever changed them from being finally and unquestionably delights;
they stood like a knot of poplars on the edge of a large garden whose close resemblance to
golden flame could be enjoyed quite without dubiety because there was no fear that the lawns
or flowers would be robbed of sunlight by their spear-thin shadows. She did not know that one
could eat too many ices, for she had never been able to afford more than one at a time; in
rainy Edinburgh the stories of men whose minds became sick at dwelling under immutably blue
skies had seemed one of the belittling lies about fair things that grown-up people like to
tell; and since she had had hardly anybody to talk to till Richard came, and had never had
enough books to read, it had seemed quite impossible that one could feel or think past the
point where feeling and thinking were happy embarkations of the soul on bracing seas.

Yet here in this room the inconceivable had happened, and she recognised that there was present
an excess of beauty and an excess of being. For indeed the room was too like a lighthouse in
the way that all who sat within were forced to look out on the windy firmament and see the
earth spread far below as the pavement of the clouds on which their shadows trod like gliding
feet. The walls it turned to the south and west were almost entirely composed of windows of
extravagant dimensions, beginning below the cornice and stopping only a couple of feet above
the floor, so that as the two women sat by the wood fire they looked over their shoulders at
the leaning ships in the harbour and the tide that hurried to it over the silver plain, and
the little house with its orchard at the island's end, not a stone's throw from the boats and
nets, so marine in its situation that one could conceive it farmed by a merman and see him
working his scaly tail up the straight path that drove through the garden to the door, a sheep-fish
wriggling at his heels. They saw too the pastures of the rest of the island, of a rougher brine-qualified
green, and the one black tree that stood against them like the ace of clubs; and past them
lay the channel where the white sail of a frigate curtseyed to the rust-red rag of a barge,
and the round dark hills beyond mothering a storm. And if they looked towards the window in
the right-hand wall they saw a line of elms going down the escarpment to the marshes like women
going down to a well; and between their slim purple statures, the green floor of Kerith Island
stretched illimitably to the west. And everywhere there were colours, clear though unsunned,
as if the lens of the air had been washed very clean by the sea winds.

She had never before been in a room so freely ventilated by beauty, and yet she knew that she
would find living on the ledge of this view quite intolerable. All that existed within the
room was dwarfed by the immensity that the glass let in upon it, like the private life of a
man dominated by some great general idea. Because the clouds were grey with a load of rain
and were running swiftly before an east wind the flesh became inattentive to the heat of the
fire and participated in the chill of the open air, and though it is well to walk abroad on
cold days, one wants to be warm when one sits by the hearth. Behind the glass doors of the
bookcases were many books, with bindings that showed they were the inaccessible sort, modern
and right, that one cannot get out of the public library. But one would never be able to sit
and read with concentration here, where if the eye strayed ever so little over the margin it
saw the river and the plain changing aspects at each change of the wind like passionate people
hearing news; yet there are discoveries made by humanity that are as fair as the passage of
a cloud-riving spot of sunlight from sea to marsh and from marsh to creek, and more necessary
for the human being to observe. But when Ellen tried to rescue her mind from mersion into this
excess of beauty and to fix it on the small, warmly-coloured pattern of the domestic life within
the room it was lost as completely and disastrously, so far as following its own ends went,
in the not less excessive view of the spiritual world presented by this woman's face.

Marion should not have lived in a room so full of light. The tragic point of her was pressed
home too well. The spectator must forget his own fate in looking on this fine ravaged landscape
and wondering what extremities of weather had made it what it was, and how such a noble atmosphere
should hang over conformations not of the simple kind associated with nobility but subtle as
villainy. Ellen knew that she would never have a life of her own here. She would all the time
be trying to think out what had happened to Marion. She would never be able to look at events
for what they were in themselves and in relation to the destiny she was going to make with
Richard; but would wonder, if they were delights, whether their delightfulness would not seem
heartless as laughter in a house of mourning to this woman whose delight lay in a grave, and
if they were sorrows, whether coming to a woman who had wept so much they would not extort
some last secretion more agonising than a common tear.

"But she is old! She will die!" she thought, aghast at this tragic tyranny. "Mother died!"
she assured herself hopefully. Instantly she was appalled at her thoughts. She was ashamed
at having had such an ill wish about this middle-aged woman who was sitting there rather lumpishly
in an armchair and evidently, from her vague wandering glance and the twist of her eyebrows
and her mouth, trying to think of something nice to say and regretting that she failed. And
as she looked at her and her repentance changed into a marvel that this stunned and stubborn
woman should be the wonderful Marion of whom Richard spoke, she realised that her death was
the event that she had to fear above all others possible in life. For she did not know what
would happen to Richard if his mother died. He cared for her inordinately. When he spoke of
her, black fire would burn in his eyes, and after a few sentences he would fall silent and
look away from Ellen and, she was sure, forget her, for he would then stretch out for her hand
and give it an insincere and mechanical patting which, though at any other time his touch refreshed
her veins, she found irritating. If his mother died his grief would of course be as inordinate.
He would turn on her a face hostile with preoccupation and would go out to wander on some stupendous
mountain system of vast and complicated sorrows. Not even death would stop this woman's habit
of excessive living.

Ellen shivered, and rose and looked at the bookcases. The violent order characteristic of the
household had polished the glass doors so brightly that between her and the books there floated
those intrusive clouds, the aggressive marshes. She went and stood by the fire.

"You look tired," said Marion timidly.

"Yes, I'm tired. Do you know, I'm feeling quite fanciful.... It's just tiredness."

"You'd better go and lie down."

"Oh no, I would just lie and think. I feel awful restless."

"Then let's go for a walk." She shot a furtive, comprehending look at the girl. "This really
isn't such a bad place," she told her wistfully.

They separated to dress, smiling at each other kindly and uneasily. Ellen went into her room,
and stood about, thinking how romantic it all was, but wondering what was the termination of
a romance where curtains do not fall at the act's end, until her eyes fell upon her reflection
in the mirror. She was standing with her head bowed and her cheek resting on her clasped hands,
and she wished somebody would snapshot her like that, for though of course it would be affected
to take such a pose in front of a camera, she would like Richard to have a photograph of her
looking like that. Suddenly she remembered how Richard delighted in her, and what pretty things
he found to say about her without putting himself out, and how he was always sorry to leave
her and sometimes came back for another kiss, and she felt enormously proud of being the dispenser
of such satisfactions, and began to put on her hat and coat with peacocking gestures and recklessly
light-minded glances in the mirror. The reflection of a crumpled face-towel thrown into a wisp
over the rail of the washstand reminded her in some way of the white-faced wee thing Mr. Philip
had been during the last few days when she had gone back to the office, and this added to her
exhilaration, though she did not see why. She was suddenly relieved from her fear of being
dispossessed of her own life.

CHAPTER III

They went out of the house by the French window of the dining-room, and crossed a garden whose
swept lawns and grass walks and flower-beds, in which the golden aconite, January's sole floral
dividend, was laid out to the thriftiest advantage. It showed, Ellen thought, the same wild
orderliness as the house. Through a wicket-gate they passed into an orchard, and followed a
downward path among the whitened trunks. "This is all the land I've kept of the old farm,"
said Marion. "The rest is let. I let it years ago. Richard never wanted to be a farmer. It
was always science he was keen on, from the time he was a boy of ten."

"Then why did he go to sea?" asked Ellen. The path they were following was so narrow that they
had to walk singly, so when Marion did not answer Ellen's question she thought it must be because
she had not spoken loudly enough. She repeated it. "Why did he go to sea, if he was so keen
on science?"

But Marion still took some seconds to reply, and then her words were patently edited by reserve.
"Oh, he was sixteen ... boys need adventure...."

"I do not believe he needed adventure so much," disputed Ellen, moved half by interest in the
point she was discussing and half by the desire to assert that she had as much right as anybody
to talk about Richard, and maybe knew as much about him as anybody. "It's not possible that
Richard could ever have been at his ease in a life of action. He'd be miserable if he wasn't
always the leader, and he couldn't always be the leader when he was sixteen. And then he'd
not be happy when he was the leader because he thinks so poorly of most people that he doesn't
feel there's any point in leading them anywhere, so there couldn't have been any pleasure in
it even when he was older. Isn't that so?"

"I suppose so," muttered Marion uncommunicatively.

"Then why did he go to sea?" persisted Ellen.

"I don't know, I don't know," murmured the other, but her face, as she paused at a gate in
the orchard hedge, was amused and meditative. She knew quite well.

It was one of those days of east wind that are clear and bright and yet at enmity with the
appearances they so definitely disclose. The sea, which had now covered all the mud and had
run into the harbour and was lifting the ships on to an even keel, was the colour of a sharpened
pencil-point. The green of the grass was acid. Under the grey glare of the sky the soft purples
of the bare trees and hedges became a rough darkness without quality. Yet as they walked down
the field-path to the floor of the marshes Ellen was well content. This, like the Pentlands,
was far more than a place. It was a mental state, a revisitable peace, a country on whose soil
the people and passions of imagination lived more intensely than on other earth. There was
a wind blowing that was as salt as sea-winds are, yet travelled more mildly over the estuary
land than it would have over the waves, like some old captain who from old age had come to
live ashore and keeps the roll and bluster of his calling though he does no more than tell
children tales of storms.

And through this clear, unstagnant yet unturbulent air there rose the wild yet gentle cry of
a multitude of birds. It was not the coarse brave cry of the gull that can breast tempests
and dive deep for unfastidious food. It was not the austere cry of the curlew who dwells on
moors when they are unvisitable by men. This was the voice of some bird appropriate to the
place. It was unhurried. Whatever lived on the plain saw when the sun rose on its edge shadows
as long as living things ever see them, and watched them shrink till noon, and lengthen out
again till sundown; and time must have seemed the slower for being so visible. It had the sound
of water in it. Whatever lived here spent half its life expecting the running of waveless but
briny tides up the creeks, through mud-paved culverts into the dykes that fed the wet marshes
with fresh wetness; and the other half deploring their slow, sluggish sucking back to the sea.
Sorrow or any other intemperance of feeling seemed a discourteous disturbance of an atmosphere
filled with this resigned harmony.

Her mind, thus liberated from its own burdens, ran here and there over the landscape, inventing
a romantic situation for each pictorial spot. Under the black tree on the island she said good-bye
to a lover whom she made not in the least like Richard, because she thought it probable later
in the story he would meet a violent death. A man fled over the marsh before an avenger who,
when the quarry tripped on the dyke's edge, buried a knife between his shoulders; and, as he
struck, a woman lit the lamp in the window of the island farm, to tell the murdered man that
it was safe to come. Indeed, that farm was a red rag to the imagination. Perhaps a sailor's
widow with some sorceress blood had gone to live there, so that the ghost of her drowned husband
might have less far to travel when he obeyed her nightly evocations.

"Who lives in that little house on the island?" she called out to Marion.

"The one on the Saltings? No one. It has been empty for forty years. But when I was a child
George Luck still lived there. George Luck, the last great wizard in England."

"A wizard forty years ago! Well, I suppose parts of England are very backward. You've got such
a miserable system of education. What sort of magic did he do?"

"Oh, he gave charms to cure sick cattle, and sailors' wives used to come to him for news of
their absent husbands, and he used to make them look in a full tub of water, and they used
to see little pictures of what the men were doing at the time." She laughed over her shoulder
at Ellen. "You see, other women before us have been reactionary."

"Reactionary?" repeated Ellen.

"They have let their lives revolve round men," said Marion teasingly, and Ellen returned her
laughter. They were both in high spirits because of this wind that was salt and cold and yet
not savage. Their glowing bodies reminded them that the prime necessities of life are earth
and air, and the chance to eat well as they had eaten, and that in being in love they were
the victims of a classic predicament, the current participators in the perpetual imbroglio
with spiritual things that makes man the most ridiculous of animals.

They were walking on the level now, on a path beside the railway-line, again in the great green
platter of the marshes. The sea-wall, which ran in wide crimps a field's width away on the
other side of the line, might have been the rim of the world had it not been for the forest
of masts showing above it. The clouds declared themselves the inhabitants of the sky and not
its stuff by casting separate shadows, and the space they moved in seemed a reservoir of salt
light, of fluid silence, under which it was good to live. Yet it was not silence, for there
came perpetually that leisurely, wet cry.

"What are those birds? They make a lovely sound," asked Ellen, dancing.

"Those are the redshanks. They're wading-birds. When Richard comes he will take you on the
sea-wall and show you the redshanks in the little streams among the mud. They are such queer
streams. Up towards Canfleet there's a waterfall in the mud, with a fall of several feet. It
looks queer. These marshes are queer. And they're so lonely. Nobody ever comes here now except
the men to see to the cattle. Even though the railway runs through, they're quite lonely. The
trains carry clerks and shop-assistants down from their work in London to their houses at New
Roothing and Bestcliffe and Prittlebay at night; and they leave in the morning as soon as they've
had breakfast. On Sundays they're too tired to do anything but sit on the cliff and listen
to the band playing. During the week the children are all at school or too young to go further
than the recreation grounds. There's nothing to bring these people here, and they never come."

She again struck Ellen as terrifying. She spoke of the gulf between these joyless lives and
the beauty through which they hurled physically night and morning, to the conditions which
debarred them from ever visiting it spiritually, with exhilaration and a will that it should
continue to exist as long as she could help it. "But, Ellen, you like lonely country yourself,"
she addressed herself. "You liked the Pentlands for being so lonely. There's no difference
between you really...." But indeed there was a difference. She had liked places to be destitute
of any trace of human society because then a lovelier life of the imagination rushed in to
fill the vacuum. Since the engineer had erred who built the reservoirs over by Carlops and
had made them useless for that purpose, better things than water came along the stone waterways;
meadowsweet choking the disused channel looked like a faery army defiling down to the plains,
and locks were empty and dry and white, like chambers of a castle keep, or squares of dark
green waters from which at any moment a knight would rise with a weed-hung harp in his arms
and a tale of a hundred years in faery-land.

But to this woman the liked thing about loneliness was simply that nobody was there. Unpeopled
earth seemed to her desirable as unadulterated food; the speech of man among the cries of the
redshanks would have been to her like sand in the sugar. They came presently to a knot of trees,
round which some boys wrangled in some acting game in which a wigwam built between the shining
roots that one of the trees lifted high out of earth evidently played an important part. Ellen
would have liked to walk slowly as they passed them, so as to hear as much as possible of the
game, for it looked rather nice, but Marion began to hurry, and broke her serene silence in
an affectation of earnest and excited speech so that she need pay as little response to the
boys' doffing of their caps. There was something at once absurd and menacing about the effect
of her disinclination to return these children's greetings; to Ellen, who was so young that
all mature persons seemed to have a vast capital of self-possession, it was like seeing someone
rich expressing serious indignation at having to give a beggar a penny.

To break the critical current of her thoughts she asked, "What's that church up there?"

"It's Roothing Church. It's very old. It's a famous landmark."

"But what's that white thing beside it?"

"Oh, that!" said Marion, looking seawards. "That is the tomb of Richard's father."

"Indeed," breathed Ellen uncomfortably. "He must," she said, determined not to be daunted by
an awkward situation, "have been well thought of in the neighbourhood."

"Why?" asked Marion.

"It has the look of something raised by public subscription; Was it not?"

"No, but you are right. It has the look of something raised by public subscription." She shot
an appreciative glance at the girl, then flung back her head and looked at the monument and
laughed. Really, Richard had chosen very well. Always before she had averted her eyes from
that white public tomb, because she knew that it had been erected not so much to commemorate
the dead as to establish the wifehood of the widow who seized this opportunity to prison him
in marble as she had never been able to prison him in her arms. Now that this girl had expressed
its architectural quality in a phrase, the sight of it would cause amusement and not, as it
had done before, anger that a woman of such quality should have occupied the place that by
right belonged to her. That secondary and injurious emotion would now disappear, and far from
remembering what Ellen had said, and how young and pretty and funny she had looked when she
said it, she would pass on to thoughts of the time when she was young like that, and how in
those days she had lived for the love of the man who was under that marble; and her mind would
dwell on the beauty of those days and not on the long, the interminable horror that followed
them. Even now she knew a more generous form of grief than hitherto, and was sorrowing because
he who had liked nothing better than to walk on the marshes and listen to the cry of the marsh
birds and smile into the blue marsh distances, lay deaf in darkness, and was not to be brought
back to life by any sacrifice. Her love ran up the hillside and stood by his tomb, and in some
way the fair thing that had been between them was recreated. She had turned smilingly to Ellen,
and found the girl fixing a level but alarmed stare. She was facing the situation gallantly,
but found it distasteful. "What is this?" Marion asked herself angrily, with the resentment
of the elderly against the unnecessary excitements of the young. "What is this fuss? Ah, she
thinks it is dreadful of me to look at Richard's father's tomb and laugh." There was nothing
she could say to explain it, though for a moment she tried to find the clarifying word, and
looked, she knew, disagreeable with the effort. "Let's come on. Round this bend of the bank
there's a bed of young osiers. How fortunate that the sun has just come out! They'll look fine....
You know what osiers are like in the winter? Or don't they grow up North?..."

They came, when the path had run past a swelling of the bank, to the neck of a little valley
that cleft the escarpment and ran obliquely inland for half a mile or so. The further slope
was defaced by a geometric planting of fruit-trees, and ranged in such stiff lines, and even
from that distance so evidently sickly, that they looked like orphan fruit-trees that were
being brought up in a Poor Law orchard. Among them stood two or three raw-boned bungalows painted
those colours which are liked by plumbers. But the floor of the valley was an osier-bed, and
the burst of sunshine had set alight the coarse orange hair of the young plants.

"Oh, they are lovely!" cried Ellen; "but yon hillside is just an insult to them."

Marion replied, walking slowly and keeping her eye on the osiers with a look that was at once
appreciative and furtive, as if she was afraid of letting the world know that she liked certain
things in case it should go and defile them, that it was the Labour Colony of the Hallelujah
Army, and that they had bought nearly all the land round Roothing and made it squalid with
tin huts.

"But don't they do a lot of good?" asked Ellen, who hated people to laugh at any movement whose
followers had stood up in the streets and had things thrown at them.

It was evident that Marion considered the question crude. "They even own Roothing Castle, which
is where we're going now, and at the entrance to it they've put up a notice, 'Visitors are
requested to assist the Hallelujah Army in keeping the Castle select.' ... Intolerable people...."

"All the same," said Ellen sturdily, "they may do good."

But to that Marion replied, grumblingly and indistinctly, that style was the only test of value,
and that the fools who put up that notice could never do any good to anybody, and then her
eyes roved to the path that ran down the green shoulder of the escarpment on the other side
of the valley's neck. "Ah, here's Mrs. Winter. Ellen, you are going to come in contact with
the social life of Roothing. This is the vicar's wife."

"Is she our sort of pairson?" asked Ellen doubtfully.

"For the purpose of social intercourse we pretend that she is," answered Marion without enthusiasm.

They met her on the plank bridge that crossed the stream by which the osier beds were nourished,
and Ellen liked her before they had come within hailing distance because she was such a little
nosegay of an old lady. Though her colours were those of age they were bright as flowers. Her
hair was white, but it shone like travellers' joy, and her peering old eyes were blue as speedwell,
and her shrivelled cheeks were pink as apple-blossom. She bobbed when she walked like a ripe
apple on its stem, and her voice when she called out to them was such a happy fluting as might
come from some bird with a safe nest. "Why, it's Mrs. Yaverland. I heard that you'd gone up
to town."

"I came back this morning. This is Miss Melville, whom I went to meet. She is going to marry
Richard very soon." Marion did not, Ellen noticed with exasperation, make any adequate response
to this generous little trill of greeting. The best she seemed able to do was to speak slowly,
as if to disclaim any desire to hurry on.

"Oh, how do you do? I am pleased I met you on the very first day." The old lady smiled into
Ellen's eyes and shook her hand as if she meant to lay at her disposal all this amiability
that had been reared by tranquil years on the leeward side of life. "This will be a surprise
for Roothing. We all thought Mr. Yaverland would never look at any woman but his mother. Such
a son he is!" Ellen was annoyed that Marion smiled only vaguely in answer to this mention of
her astonishing good fortune in being Richard's mother. "I hope Mr. Winter will have the pleasure
of marrying you."

"I'm afraid not," said Ellen with concern. "I'm Presbyterian, and Episcopalianism does not
attract me."

"Oh dear! Oh dear! That's a pity," said the old lady, with a pretty flight of hilarity. "Still,
I hope you'll ask us to the wedding. I've known Richard since he was a week old. Haven't I,
Mrs. Yaverland? He was the loveliest baby I've ever seen, and later on I think the handsomest
boy. Nobody ever looked at my Billy or George when Richard was about. And now--well, I needn't
tell you, young lady, what he's like now. I'm glad I've met you. I've just been up at Mrs. More's."

"Who is Mrs. More?" asked Marion heavily.

"The new people who have the small-holding at Coltsfoot the Brights had before. I think he
used to be a clerk, and came into a little money and bought the holding, and now they're finding
it very difficult to get along."

"This small-holding business ought to be stopped."

"Why?" asked Ellen peevishly. Marion seemed to reject everything, and she was sure that she
had seen small-holdings recommended in Labour Party literature. "I thought it was sound."

"Not here. Speculators buy up big farms and cut them into small-holdings and sell them to townspeople,
who starve on them or sell them at a loss. The land's wasted for good, and all because it can't
be farmed again once it's been cut up. To all intents and purposes it's wiped off the map.
It's a scandal."

"It is a shame," agreed the old lady. "I often say that something ought to be done. Well, the
poor woman's lost her baby."

"Bad business," said Marion.

"Such a pretty little girl. Six months. I've been up seeing them putting her in the coffin.
The mother was so upset. I was with her all day yesterday."

"I've seen the place," said Marion. "As ugly as one of the Hallelujah Army shanties. What this
bit of country's coming to! And Coltsfoot was a good farm when I was a girl."

"It isn't very nice now certainly. You see, now that the other people have failed and gone
away, it's difficult for them to get loads taken down as there isn't a proper road. Before,
they did it co-operatively among themselves. But this winter they say they've been without
coal quite often, and the baby's been ill all the time. I think Mrs. More's been terribly lonely.
Poor little woman, she's got no friends here. All her people live in the Midlands, she tells
me. I don't think they can afford a holiday, so the next few months will be hard for her, I'm
afraid."

"Incompetent people, I should think, from what you can see of the garden. Annoying to think
that that used to be good wheat-land."

"They've never liked the place. They were terrified of losing the child because of the damp
from the moment it came. She's quite broken by it all, poor thing."

Marion began to draw on the ground with the point of her stick.

"Ah, well, you'll be wanting to get on," said the old lady. "Now, do bring your future daughter-in-law
to tea with us some day. I've got a daughter-in-law staying with me now. I should like you
to meet Rose. She plays the violin very nicely. And we have a garden we're rather proud of,
though of course this is the wrong time of the year to see it. Yet I'm sure things are looking
very nice just now. Just look at it! Could anything," she asked, looking round with happy eyes,
"be prettier than this? Look at the sunlight travelling over that hill!" She cast a shy glance
at Marion, who was continuing to watch the point of her stick, and bravery came into her soft
gay glance. "It's passing over the earth," she said tremulously but distinctly, "like the kindness
of God."

A silence fell. "The wee thing has courage," thought Ellen to herself. "It's plain to see what's
happened. Marion's often sneered at her religion, and she's just letting her see that she doesn't
mind. I like people who believe in something. Of course it might Le something more useful than
Christianity, but if she believes it...."

Marion lifted her head, stared at the hillside, and said, "Yes. And look. It is followed by
the shadow, like His indifference."

Tears came into the old lady's eyes. "Good-bye. We must settle on an afternoon for tea. I'll
send somebody round with a note. Good-bye." She pushed past them, a grieved and ruffled little
figure, a peony-spot of shock on each cheek, and then she looked back at Ellen. "We'll all
look forward to seeing you, my dear," she called kindly; but feared, Ellen saw, to meet the
hard eyes of this terrible woman, who was staring after her with a look of hostility that,
directed on this little affirmation of love and amiability, was as barbarous as some ponderous
snare laid for a small, precious bird.

"Let's get on," said Marion.

They climbed the hill and went along a path that followed the skyline of the ridge, over which
the sea-borne wind slid like water over a sluice. To be here should have brought such a stinging
happiness as bathing. It should have been wonderful to walk in such comradeship with the clouds,
and to mark that those which rode above the estuary seemed on no higher level than this path,
while beneath stretched the farm-flecked green pavement of Kerith Island, and ahead, where
the ridge mounted to a crouching summit, stood the four grey towers of the Castle. But the
quality of none of these things reached Ellen because she was wrapped in fear of this unloving
woman who was walking on ahead of her, her stick dragging on the ground. She was whistling
through her teeth like an angry man; and once she laughed disagreeably to herself.

They came to a broken iron railing whose few standing divisions ran askew alongside the footpath
and down the hillside towards the marshes, rusted and prohibitive and futile.

"Look at them! Look at them!" exclaimed Marion in a sudden space of fury. "The Hallelujah Army
put them up. It's like them. Some idea of raising money for the funds by charging Bank Holiday
trippers twopence to see the Castle. It was a fool's idea. They know nothing. The East End
trippers that come here can't climb. They're too dog-tired. They go straight from the railway-station
to Prittlebay or Bestcliffe sands and lie down with handkerchiefs over their faces. Those that
push as far as Roothing lie don on the slope of the sea-wall and stay there for the day." She
kicked a fallen railing as she stepped over it into the enclosed land. "The waste of good iron!
You're not a farmer's daughter, Ellen; you don't know how precious stuff like this is. And
look at the thistle and the couch-grass. This used to be a good sheep-feed. The land going
sick all round us, with these Hallelujah Armies and small holdings and such-like. In ten years
it'll be a scare-crow of a countryside. I wish one could clear them up and burn them in heaps
as one does the dead leaves in autumn." Fatigue fell upon her. She seemed exhausted by the
manufacture of so much malice. With an abrupt and listless gesture she pointed her stick at
the Castle. "It isn't much, you see," she said apologetically. And indeed there was little
enough. There were just the two towers on the summit and the two on the slope of the hill whose
bases were set on grassy mounds so that they stood level with the others, and these had been
built of such stockish material that they had not had features given them by ruin. "I'm afraid
it's not a fair exchange for Edinburgh Castle, Ellen. But there's a good view up there between
the two upper towers. Where the fools have put a flagstaff. I won't come. I'm tired...."

She watched the girl walk off towards the towers and said to herself, "She is glad to go, half
because she wants to see the view, and half because she wants to get away from me. I was a
fool to frighten her by losing my temper with Mrs. Winter. But the blasphemy, the silly blasphemy
of coming from a woman who has just lost her baby and talking of the kindness of God!..." The
tears she had held back since they had parted with the vicar's wife ran down her cheeks. It
must, she thought, be the worst thing in the world to lose an only child. Surely there could
be nothing worse in all the range of human experience than having to let them take away the
thing that belongs to one's arms and put it in a coffin. There would be a pain of the body
as unparalleled, as unlike any other physical feeling, as the pains of birth, and there would
be tormenting fundamental miseries that would eat at the root of peace. A woman whose only
child has died has failed for the time being in that work of giving life which is her only
justification for existence, and so her unconscious mind would try to pretend that it had not
happened and she would find herself unable to believe that the baby was really dead, and she
would feel as if she had let them bury it alive. All this Marion knew, because for one instant
she had tried to imagine what it would have been like if Richard had died when he was little,
and now this knowledge made her feel ashamed because she was the mother of a living and unsurpassable
son and there existed so close at hand a woman who was having to spend the day in a house in
one room of which lay a baby's coffin.

And it was such a horrid house too. Sorrow there would take a sickly and undignified form.
For the Coltsfoot bungalow was unusually ugly even for an Essex small-holding. A broken balustrade
round the verandah, heavy wooden gables, and an ingeniously large amount of inferior stained
timbering gave it an air of having been built in order to find a last fraudulent use for a
suite of furniture that had been worn out by a long succession of purchasers who failed to
complete agreement under the hire system. There were Nottingham lace curtains in the windows,
the gate was never latched and swung on its hinges, nagging the paint off the gate-post, at
each gust of wind. If one passed in the rain there was always some tool lying out in the wet.
Ugliness was the order of the day there, and it was impossible to believe that the owners were
anything but weak-eyed, plain people.

The baby had not really been pretty at all. Mrs. Winter's tribute to it had only been the automatic
response to all aspects of child life which is cultivated by the wives of the clergy. And the
parents would take the tragedy ungracefully. The woman would look out from her kitchen window
at her husband as he pottered ineffectively with the goat and the fowls and all the gloomy
fauna of the small-holding, which had, as one would not have thought that animals could have,
the look of being underpaid. Perhaps he would kneel down among those glass bells which, when
they are bogged in Essex clay on a winter afternoon, are grimly symbolical of the end that
comes to the counter-meteorological hopes of the small-holder. The fairness and weedy slenderness
which during their courtship she had frequently held out to her friends as proof of his unusual
refinement, would now seem to her the outward and visible signs of the lack of pigment and
substance which had left him at the mercy of a speculator's lying prospectus. When he came
in to the carelessly cooked meal there would be a quarrel. "Why did you ever bring me to this
wretched place?" She would rise from the table and run towards the bedroom, but before she
got to the door she would remember the coffin, and she would have to remain in the sitting-room
to weep. She would not look pretty when she wept, for she was worn out by child-birth and nursing
and grief and lean living on this damp and disappointing place. Presently he would go out,
leaving the situation as it was, to potter once more among the glass bells, and she would sit
and think ragingly of his futile occupation, while an inner region of her heart that kept the
climate of her youth grieved because he had gone out to work after having eaten so small a meal.

Marion rose to her feet that she might start at once for these poor souls and tell them that
they must not quarrel, and warn the woman that all human beings when they are hurt try to rid
themselves of the pain by passing it on to another, and help her by comprehension of what she
was feeling about the loss of the child. But immediately she laughed aloud at the thought of
herself, of all women in the world, going on such an errand. If she went to Coltsfoot now the
anticipation of meeting strangers would turn her to lead as soon as she saw the house, and
the woman would wonder apprehensively who this sullen-faced stranger coming up the path might
be; when she gained admittance she would be able to speak only of trivial things and her voice
would sound insolent, and they would take her for some kind of district visitor who intruded
without even the justification of being a church worker and therefore having official intelligence
about immortality. Her lips were sealed with inexpressiveness when she talked to anyone except
Richard. She could not talk to strangers. She could not even talk to Ellen, with whom she ought
to have been linked with intimacy by their common love for Richard, with whom she must become
intimate if Richard's future was to be happy.

Her eyes sought for Ellen in the ruins, but she was not visible. Probably she had gone into
one of the towers where her dreams could not be overseen and was imagining how lovely it would
be to come here with Richard. It must be wonderful to be Richard's sweetheart. Marion had seen
him often before as the lover of women, but he had never believed in his own passion for any
of them, and therefore there had always been something desperate about his courtship of them,
like the temper of a sermon against unbelief delivered by a priest who is haunted by sceptical
arguments. But to a woman whom he really loved he would be as dignified as befitted one who
came as an ambassador from life itself, and gay as was allowed to one who received guarantees
that the fair outward show of the world is no lie; in all the trivialities of courtship he
would show his perfect quality without embarrassment. She was angered that she would not be
able to see him thus. There struck through her an insane regret that being his mother she could
not also be his wife. But this was greed, for she had had her own good times, and Harry had
been the most wonderful of sweethearts.

There had been a June day on this very hill.... She had been standing by the towers talking
to Bob Girvan for a few minutes, and when she had left him she had felt so happy at the show
of flowering hawthorn trees that stood red and white all the way down the inland slope of the
ridge that she began to run and leap down the hill. But before she had gone far, Harry had
walked out towards her from one of the hawthorns. She had felt confused because he had seen
her running, and began to walk stiffly and to scowl. "Good morning, Marion," he had said. "Good
morning," she had answered, feeling very grown-up because she had no longer bobbed to the squire.
He told her, looking intently at her and speaking in a queer, strained voice, that he had found
a great split in the trunk of the white hawthorn, and asked her if she would like to see it.
She said, "Yes." It struck her that she had said it too loudly and in an inexpressibly foolish
way. Indeed, she came to the conclusion as she followed him down the hillside that nobody since
the world began had ever done anything so idiotic as saying "Yes" in that particular manner,
and she became scarlet with shame.

When they came to the dazzling tree he advanced to it as if he cared nothing for its beauty,
and showed her with a gruff and business-like air a split in the trunk. She could not understand
how he had not seen it before, as it had been there for the last four months. Then he had pointed
up to the towers with his stick. "Who's that you were talking to up there?" "Bob Girvan," she
had answered; "did you want to speak to him, sir?" He seemed, she thought, cross about something.
"No, no," he answered impatiently, "but he's a silly fellow. Why do you want to talk to him?"
She told him that Bob had stopped to ask if his father could come over and look at the calf
her grandmother wanted to sell, and that seemed to please him, and after that they had talked
a little about how the farm had got on since Grandfather's death. Then he said suddenly, "I
suppose that if you don't go about with Bob Girvan there's some boy who does take you out.
Isn't there?" She whispered, "No." But he had gone on in a strange, insistent tone, "But you're
getting-quite a big girl now. Seventeen, aren't you, Marion? There'll be somebody soon."

At that, paralysis fell on her. She stared out of the scented shadow in which they stood together
at the masts of Roothing Harbour far away, wavering like upright serpents in the heated air.
Her heart seemed about to burst. Then she heard a creaking sound, and looked about for its
cause. He had put up his arm and was shaking the branch which hung over her head so that the
blossom was settling on her hair. When she looked at him he stopped and muttered, "Well, good-bye.
It's time I was getting along," and walked away. From the shadow she had watched him with an
inexplicable sense of victory rising in her heart, coupled with a disposition to run to someone
old and familiar and of authority. A year later they had stood once more under that hawthorn
tree, and again he had shaken the mayblossom down on her, but this time he had laughed. He
murmured teasingly, "Maid Marion! Maid Marion!" and laughed, and she had looked up into his
eyes. Like many rakes, he had bright, innocent grey eyes; and indeed, again like many rakes,
he was in truth innocent. It was because he had remained as ignorant as a child of the nature
of passion that he had experimented with it so recklessly.

With her he had delightedly discovered love. Indeed, she had had such a courtship that she
need envy no other woman hers. For all about her days with Harry there had been the last quality
the world would have believed it possible could pervade the seduction of a farmer's daughter
of seventeen by a squire who was something of a rip: the quality of a fair dawn seen through
the windows of a church, of a generous spring-time that synchronised with the beginning of
some noble course of action. She should have been well pleased. Yet she knew now that the occasion
would have been more beautiful if, standing under that may-tree, she had looked up into Richard's
eyes. They would not have been innocent, they would not have sparkled like waters running swiftly
under sunshine. But they would have told her that here was the genius who would choose good
with the vehemence with which wicked men choose evil, who would follow the aims of virtue with
the dynamic power that sinners have, who would pour into faithfulness the craft and virility
that Don Juan spent on all his adventures. Besides, Richard's eyes were so marvellously black....
She reminded herself in vain that Harry had possessed far beyond all other human beings the
faculty of joy, that uninvited there had dwelt about him always that spirit which men labour
to evoke in carnival, that there had been a confidence about his gaiety as if the gods had
told him that laughter was the just final comment on life. But she knew quite well that the
woman who was chosen by Richard would be loved more beautifully than she had ever been.

She started to her feet and looked urgently towards the ruins to see if Ellen was returning,
because she felt that if she did not commit herself to affection by making some affectionate
demonstration from which she could not withdraw she might find herself hating this unfortunate
girl. Having once known the bitterness of moral defeat, she dreaded base passions as cripples
dread pain, and she knew that this irrational hatred would be especially base, a hunchback
among the emotions. It would be treason against Richard not to love anything he loved; and
besides, it would be most wrong to hate this girl, who deserved it as little as a flower. Yet
the emotion seemed independent of her and now nearly immanent, and to escape from it she hurried
across the sloping broken ground, calling out, "Ellen, Ellen!"

She could see that there was no one on the level platform by the flagstaff, so she took the
footpath where it fell below the two lower towers, and as soon as she had passed the first
and could look along the hillside to the second she stopped. Now she could see Ellen. The girl
was standing on the very top of the grassy mound that supported the tower, her back resting
against the wall, her feet on a shelf that had formed where the earth had been washed away
from the masonry foundations by the dripping from a ledge above. It was the very place where
Marion had been standing ever so long ago at the moment when Richard had first moved within
her. She had dragged herself up the hill to escape from the bickerings at Yaverland's End,
and had been resting there, looking down on the peace of the marshes and listening to the unargumentative
cry of the redshanks, and wishing that she might dwell during this time among such quiet things;
and suddenly there came a wind from the sea, and it was as if a little naked child had been
blown into her soul. All that she felt was a tremor feeble as the first fluttering of some
tiny bird, and yet it changed the world. In that instant she conceived Richard's spirit as
three months before she had conceived his body, and her mind became subject to the duty of
awaiting him with adoration as her flesh and blood were subject to the duty of nourishing him.
Harry, who had been lord of her life, receded rushingly to a place of secondary importance,
and she transferred her allegiance to this invisible presence who was possessed of such power
over her that even now, when it could not be seen or touched or heard or imagined, it could
make itself loved. She had stood there in an ecstasy of passion until the sun had fallen beyond
Kerith Island. Then her cold hands had told her that she must go home for the child's sake;
and as if in recognition of this act of cherishing there had come as she climbed the hill another
tremor that made her cry out with joy.

Ellen must not stand there, or she was bound to hate her. It was intolerable that this girl
who was going to be Richard's wife should intrude into the sacred places of the woman who had
to be content with being his mother. "Ellen, Ellen!" she shouted, and waved her stick. The
girl clambered down and came towards her with steps that became slower as she came nearer.
She was, Marion saw, looking at her again under faintly contracted brows, and she realised
that because she wept about the child at Coltsfoot her eyes were small and red, and that had
added to her face a last touch of ruin which made it an unfavourable place for the struggles
of an unspontaneous expression of amiability. Of course the girl was alarmed at being called
down from her serene thoughts of Richard by grotesque wavings of a woman whose face was such
a queer mask. But there was nothing to be said that would explain it all. She took refuge in
silence; and knew as they walked home that that also was sinister.

CHAPTER IV

It struck Marion that it was very beautiful in this room that night. The white walls were bloomed
with shadows and reflections, and the curtains of gold and orange Florentine brocade were only
partly drawn, so that at each window there showed between them an oblong of that mysterious
blue which the night assumes to those who look on it from lit rooms. On the gleaming table,
under the dim light of a shaded lacquer lamp, dark roses in a bowl had the air of brooding
and passionate captives. Different from these soft richnesses as silk is from velvet, the clear
flame of the wood fire danced again in the glass doors of one of the bookcases: and at the
other, choosing a book in which to read herself to sleep, stood Ellen, her head a burning bush
of beauty, her body exquisitely at odds with the constrictions of the product of the Liberton
dressmaker. She held a volume in one hand and rested the other on her hip, so that there was
visible the red patch on her elbow that bespeaks the recent schoolgirl, and all that could
be seen of her face was her nose, which seemed to be refusing to be overawed by the reputation
of the author whose work she studied. In the swinging glass door beside her there was a diffusion
of reflected hues that made Marion able to imagine what she herself looked like, in her gown
of copper-coloured velvet, sitting in the high-backed chair by the fire. She was glad that
sometimes, by night, her beauty crawled out of the pit age had dug for it, and, orienting her
thoughts as she always did, she rejoiced that Richard would find such an interior on his return.

"Have you found a book you like?"

"No. There's lots of lovely ones. But none I just fancy. I'm inclined to be disagreeable and
far too particular this evening. Are these your books or Richard's?"

"Nearly all mine."

"You must be intellectual then. Now mother was different. No one could have called her an intellectual,
though she could always take a point if you put it to her. Do you know, you're not like an
elderly pairson at all. Usually one thinks of a lady of your age as just a buddy in a bonnet.
But you've got such an active mind, not like a young pairson's. I'll take Froude's 'Life of
Jane Welsh Carlyle.' That ought to do."

"I shouldn't take it if I were you. It's too interesting. It'll keep you awake."

"Oh, I'll not sleep in any case. I feel awful wakeful. But it'll be all right as soon as Richard
comes."

Her tone, betraying so unreproachfully that she quite expected that till then things would
be all wrong, reminded Marion what evenings of aborted intimacies and passages of slow liking
truncated by moments of swift dislike, had passed in this room whose appearance she had been
watching with such satisfaction. I found I couldn't invent anything with the proper ring of truth
about it; so, the evening before the disclosure, when Jack the Shellback was in the store getting
some things to take out with him, I asked him what was the most blackguardly prank he ever got
off with; and that was the yarn he told me. Of course, I altered it a bit to suit you."

"And Mrs. Beaudesart believes it?" I queried hopefully.

"I don't see what else she can do, considering the way the thing came-off. She would have to
be like one of the ancient prophets."

"And you think it has the proper effect?"

"No effect at all," replied the nuncio decidedly. "Her manner's just the same when she hears you
talked about promiscuously; and she does n't take it any way ill to overhear a quiet joke about
the thing that's supposed to be coming-off some time soon. It's a
failure so far as that goes.

Certain as life."

"Well, Moriarty, if dishonour has no effect, we must try disgrace."

"Why, they're the same. You better go back to school, Collins."

"They're entirely independent of each other--if you insist on bringing me back to school, to
waste my time over one barren pupil. Poverty, for instance, is disgrace without dishonour; Michael-and-Georgeship
is dishonour without disgrace. In cases like mine, the dishonour lies in the fact, and the
disgrace in the publicity. You must set the whole station commenting on your scandal."

"That's just what the whole station is doing at the present time," replied my legate unctuously.
"Surprising how these things spread of themselves, when they 're once fairly started. And everybody
believes the yarn; bar Mooney, and Nelson, and myself; and you can depend your life on us to
keep it jigging.

No, I'm wrong; Montgomery's got the inside crook on us."

"Montgomery?" said I inquiringly.

"Yes. I got a fright over that,"
explained the diplomatist. "The other morning, I was at some correspondence
here, and I heard a quick step, and when I looked up, who should I
see but Montgomery, as black as thunder.

"'Moriarty!' says he, in
a voice that made me jump; 'what is this story I hear of Collins?
Now, no shuffling,' says he; 'I've traced it home to you, and I want
your authority. I always looked upon Collins as a decent sort of oddity,'
says he; 'and I'm determined to sift this matter thoroughly.' Frightened
me out of a year's growth." Moriarty paused, and drew a long breath.

"Well?"
said I, hazily; wondering whether this piteous wreckage of plot was
owing to some defect in my own strategy, or to bad lieutenantry in
the working out.

"So I had to make a clean breast of it," continued
the plenipotentiary, in a reluctant and apologetic tone. "No use talking.


"I forgot--I forgot to take some medicine. I must go and take it now. And I don't think I'd
better come back. I'm sure you'll brush your hair better yourself. I'm sure I tugged. You're
so tired, you ought to go to bed at once. Good-night. Good-night." By the slow shutting of
the door she tried to correct the queer impression of her sudden flight, but knew as she did
so that it sounded merely furtive.

In her own room she undressed with frantic haste so that she could turn out the light and retreat
into the darkness as into a burrow. But everywhere in the blackness, even on the inside of
the sheet she drew over her face as she lay in bed, were pictures of the aspects of evil the
world had turned to her that day: thirty years before, when she was stoned down the High Street
of Roothing. She was in the grip of one of her recurrent madnesses of memory. There was no
Richard to sit by her side and comfort her, not by what he said, for she had kept so much from
him that he could say nothing that was really relevant, but by his beauty and his dearness,
which convinced her that all was well since she had given birth to him; so her agony must go
on until the dawn.

She must get used to that, because when he was married to Ellen she would no longer be able
to sit up in her bed and call "Richard, Richard!" and strike the bell that rang in his room--that
rang, as it seemed, in his mind, since no other sound but it ever wakened him in the night.
Not again would he stand at the door, his dark hair damp and rumpled, his eyes blinking at
the strong light, while his voice spoke hoarsely out of undispersed sleep. "Mother, darling
mother, are you having bad dreams?" Not again would she answer moaningly, "Oh, Richard, yes!"
and tremble with delight in the midst of her agony to see how, when this big man was dazed
and half awake, he held his arms upwards to her as if he were still a little boy and she a
tall overshadowing presence. In the future he must be left undisturbed to sleep in Ellen's
arms. That thought caused her inexplicable desolation. Rather than think it she gave up the
struggle and allowed herself to be possessed by memory, and to smart again under the humiliation
of that afternoon when life had made a fool of her. For what had hurt her most was that she
had gone out into the world, the afternoon it stoned her, in a mood of the tenderest love towards
it.

She had risen late, she remembered, that day. All night long she had been ill, and had not
slept until the first wrangling of the birds. Then suddenly she had opened her eyes, and after
remembering, as she always did when she woke, that she was going to have a child, she had looked
out of her wide window into the mature and undoubtful sunshine of a fine afternoon. She had
felt wonderfully well and terribly hungry, and had hastened at her washing and dressing so
that she could run downstairs and get something to eat. When she went into the kitchen she
saw that dinner was over, for the plates were drying in the rack and Peggy, the maid, was not
there. It was incredible that she had not known why Peggy had gone out, that she should fatuously
have told herself that the girl was probably working in the dairy; but in those days her mind
was often half asleep with love for the unborn.

She rejoiced that she had missed the family meal, for it was not easy to sit at the table with
Grandmother and Cousin Tom and Aunt Alphonsine, unspoken comments on her position hanging from
each face like stalactites. In the larder she found the cold roast beef, magnificently marbled
with veins of fat, and the cherry pie, with its globes of imperial purple and its dark juice
streaked on the surface with richness exuded from the broken vault-of the pastry, and she ate
largely, with the solemn greed of pregnancy. Afterwards she washed the dishes, in that state
of bland, featureless contentment that comes to one whose being knows that it is perfectly
fulfilling its function and that it is earning its keep in the universe without having to attempt
any performance on that vexing instrument, the mind.

When she had finished, she wandered out of the kitchen aimlessly, benevolently wishing that
her baby was born so that she could spend the afternoon playing with it. 

In our times, during the rule of Alexander the Sixth, Oliverotto da Fermo, having been left an orphan
many years before, was brought up by his maternal uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, and in the early days
of his youth sent to fight under Pagolo Vitelli, that, being trained under his discipline, he
might attain some high position in the military profession. After Pagolo died, he fought under
his brother Vitellozzo, and in a very short time, being endowed with wit and a vigorous body and
mind, he became the first man in his profession. But it appearing a paltry thing to serve under
others, he resolved, with the aid of some citizens of Fermo, to whom the slavery of their country
was dearer than its liberty, and with the help of the Vitelleschi,
to seize Fermo. The children would be back at school, the men would
be at work, and the women still busy cleaning up after their midday meal. She was afraid now
to walk on the Yaverland lands for fear of finding Goodtart, the cattleman, standing quite
still in some shadowed place where she would not see him till it was too late to avoid touching
him as she passed, and turning on her those dung-brown eyes in which thoughts about her and
her state swam like dead cats in a canal; and though she desired to revisit the woods where
she had walked with Harry, she had never gone there since that afternoon when Peacey had stepped
out on her suddenly from behind one of the pillars of the belvedere. The marshes too she could
not visit, for she could not now go so far. But there remained for her the wood across the
lane, which ran from the glebe land opposite Yaverland's End and stretched towards the village
High Street. No one ever went there at this time of day.

Her pink sunbonnet was lying on the dresser in the front parlour, and she put it on to save
the trouble of going upstairs for a hat, though she knew it must look unsuitable with her dark,
full gown. Stealing out very quietly so that she should not disturb Grandmother, she went down
the garden, smiling at the robust scents and colours of the flowers. She had a feeling in those
days that nature was on her side. The purplish cabbage roses seemed to be regarding her with
clucking approval and reassurance that a group of matrons might give to a young wife. The Dolly
Perkins looked at her like a young girl wondering. The Crimson Ramblers understood all that
had happened to her. She loved to imagine it so, for thus would people have looked at her if
she had been married, and she slightly resented for her child's sake that she was not receiving
that homage. Humming with contentment, she crossed the lane to the wood, whose sun-dappled
vistas, framed by the noble aspirant oak-trunks, stretched before her like a promise of happiness
made by some wise, far-sighted person.

It made Marion laugh angrily, as she lay there in the bed where she had slept so badly in the
thirty years that had passed since that afternoon, to remember how she had walked in those
woods in a passion of good-will to the world. She dreamed complimentary dreams of life, pretending
that it was not always malign. She imagined that Harry would come back before the child was
born and would cloak her in protective passion, and his pride in her would make him take her
away somewhere so that everyone would see that he really loved her and that he did not think
lightly of her. Freely and honestly she forgave him for his present failure to come to her.
It was his mother's fault. She had made him marry when he was twenty-one, so that he had been
led to commit a physical forgery of the spiritual fact of fatherhood by begetting children
who, being born of a woman whom he did not love, were not the children of his soul. With aching
tenderness she recalled the extreme poverty of the emotion that showed in his eyes when he
spoke of his daughters, or when, as had happened once or twice, they had looked out of the
belvedere window and seen the little girls running by on the brow of the hill, white leggy
figures against the frieze of the distant shining waters.

