THE LONG RUN

By Edith Wharton

Copyright, 1916, By Charles Scribner's Sons

The shade of those our days that had no tongue.

I

It was last winter, after a twelve years' absence from New York, that I saw again, at one of
the Jim Cumnors' dinners, my old friend Halston Merrick.

The Cumnors' house is one of the few where, even after such a lapse of time, one can be sure
of finding familiar faces and picking up old threads; where for a moment one can abandon one's
self to the illusion that New York humanity is a shade less unstable than its bricks and mortar.
And that evening in particular I remember feeling that there could be no pleasanter way of
re-entering the confused and careless world to which I was returning than through the quiet
softly-lit diningroom in which Mrs. Cumnor, with a characteristic sense of my needing to be
broken in gradually, had contrived to assemble so many friendly faces.

I was glad to see them all, including the three or four I did not know, or failed to recognize,
but had no difficulty in passing as in the tradition and of the group; but I was most of all
glad--as I rather wonderingly found--to set eyes again on Halston Merrick.

He and I had been at Harvard together, for one thing, and had shared there curiosities and
ardours a little outside the current tendencies: had, on the whole, been more critical than
our comrades, and less amenable to the accepted. Then, for the next following years, Merrick
had been a vivid and promising figure in young American life. Handsome, careless, and free,
he had wandered and tasted and compared. After leaving Harvard he had spent two years at Oxford;
then he had accepted a private secretaryship to our Ambassador in England, and had come back
from this adventure with a fresh curiosity about public affairs at home, and the conviction
that men of his kind should play a larger part in them. This led, first, to his running for
a State Senatorship which he failed to get, and ultimately to a few months of intelligent activity
in a municipal office. Soon after being deprived of this post by a change of party he had published
a small volume of delicate verse, and, a year later, an odd uneven brilliant book on Municipal
Government. After that one hardly knew where to look for his next appearance; but chance rather
disappointingly solved the problem by killing off his father and placing Halston at the head
of the Merrick Iron Foundry at Yonkers.

His friends had gathered that, whenever this regrettable contingency should occur, he meant
to dispose of the business and continue his life of free experiment. As often happens in just
such cases, however, it was not the moment for a sale, and Merrick had to take over the management
of the foundry. Some two years later he had a chance to free himself; but when it came he did
not choose to take it. This tame sequel to an inspiriting start was disappointing to some of
us, and I was among those disposed to regret Merrick's drop to the level of the prosperous.
Then I went away to a big engineering job in China, and from there to Africa, and spent the
next twelve years out of sight and sound of New York doings.

During that long interval I heard of no new phase in Merrick's evolution, but this did not
surprise me, as I had never expected from him actions resonant enough to cross the globe. All
I knew--and this did surprise me--was that he had not married, and that he was still in the
iron business. All through those years, however, I never ceased to wish, in certain situations
and at certain turns of thought, that Merrick were in reach, that I could tell this or that
to Merrick. I had never, in the interval, found any one with just his quickness of perception
and just his sureness of response.

