"Two nights ago men came upon us," Aurelius said, in his thin and nervous voice. "They come,
men say, from Gaul, driven thence by Attila the Hun, and seek safety among their kinsfolk who
are already here. No man can tell how the trouble first began. The first that we in the palace
knew, a soldier of the watch came and warned the guard that there was fighting in the lower
quarters of the city. For long no one could tell what was the trouble; it was dark, and there
was much confusion. I sent out milites stationarii to quell the tumult; these reported that
the insurgents, who have given much trouble of late, had joined openly with the barbarians;
had overthrown the temple of Jupiter and slain the Flamen Dialis. Two hours before midnight,
that night, the public baths were blown up in their own steam, and fire broke out in various
parts of the city. The barbarians, inflamed with wine and the example of the insurgents, began
to plunder. Thou knowest my forces have been steadily diminished these last three years, and
together the barbarians and the insurgents outnumbered the Augustans five to one. My colleague
in office, Titus Honius the Abulcian, going out to pacify the people, was slain. I and my companions
fled just before daybreak yesterday. Many people have taken to the forest. The city is now
a very hell of drunkenness, rapine, fire, and smoke. And this, it seems to me, is but the beginning.
Those barbarians who have long been settled here, upon the Eastern Shore, and those who still
keep coming, will together outnumber us, insurgents and Augustans both. It is in my mind to
propose that we, the lords of the cities, send again to Ætius, proconsul in Gaul, for help,
even as we did two years ago."

"I fear that is what it must come to," said Eudemius, thoughtfully. He turned to Marius. "Think
you that Ætius can spare us a legion again?"

Marius shrugged his shoulders.

"It is hard to say," he answered. "I think it likely that he will, if he be not himself too
hard pressed."

"Marcus Pomponius and Quintus Fabius are here, with many others of the lords," said Eudemius.
"We celebrate this day the betrothal feast of my daughter and Marius here,--" he laid a hand
on the young tribune's shoulder,--"and in three days the marriage. If you will stay, we may
talk of this together."

"I feel scarce in humor for marriage feasts and gaiety," said Aurelius. "My people are dead,
my city falling to ashes. But I will stay at least long enough to discuss what plans we may
think of for relief. If aught is to be done it should be done quickly."

"Rest now," Eudemius said, "and to-night, if you will, join us at the feasting." He clapped
his hands, and when slaves came, ordered that his new guests be taken to rooms and baths prepared
for them. They went away, a weary and dejected set of men. Eudemius and Marius paced the gallery
together.

"If Ætius cannot send help--" said Eudemius, following his own train of thought.

"Have you arms in the house and slaves who can use them?" said Marius, following his. "Anderida
is but sixty miles away, and if these barbarians be, as Aurelius thinks, inflamed with wine
and blood, they will not stop to think whether or not they attack those who have attacked them."

Eudemius stopped in his stride.

"You think--that?" he said with worried brows. "It had not occurred to me. There have been
uprisings, of course, but for the most part the Saxons have been peaceful. It is the insurgents
who have given most trouble. But you are right; no man can foresee what may happen these days.
I will call Hito and bid him number the slaves who are capable of bearing arms."

Hito received his orders, and in turn called Wardo, and bade him release all prisoners sentenced
to the mines save those suspected of anti-Augustan sympathies. These, it was considered, would
be most likely to take sides with the barbarians, as the insurgents had done at Anderida, and
it would be as well to get them out of the way. The villa, being some miles off both the Noviomagus
road and the Bibracte road, might remain unmolested; the fury of barbarians and insurgents
might spend itself on the towns nearer the coast,--Regnum, Portus Magnus, and the like. Still,
their lord had decided that they must be prepared for whatever might come to pass, and prepared
they must be. Wardo said little during Hito's peroration, smiled once or twice at its commencement,
and at its close expressed his willingness to obey. He stated that he knew of but a half dozen
of those sentenced to punishment who might be suspected of sympathy with the insurgents, and
declared that two men would be quite sufficient to act as guard. He was given full permission
to arrange the matter as he chose,--Hito stipulating only that he and his men should return
as promptly as possible,--and went off whistling softly between his teeth. That day there was
much activity in the armory and in the slaves' quarters; and rumors flew darkly, and men believed
all that they were told.

Toward evening, Aurelius, unable to rest for the burden of apprehension that was on him, begged
that the lords might meet in council without delay, that measures should be taken for the relief
of the harassed island. Therefore, while slaves were busy in the Hall of Columns, where the
betrothal feast was to be held, while Varia, amid stormy tears, was arrayed by her servants
for the ceremonies, and the women guests were absorbed in toilet mysteries, those of the men
who were governors or who were possessed of greatest power in their own cities, were summoned
to the library of their host.

Eudemius spoke first, gravely, with Aurelius, pale and silent, on his right hand, and on his
left Marius, thin-lipped and alert, all the soldier in him roused. And Marius, of all the men
present, was the youngest.

"Friends," said Eudemius, "I have gathered you here together on a matter of much moment. You
all know Aurelius Menotus, governor of Anderida. He hath a tale to tell you, which I doubt
not will prove startling. When it is told, we should take counsel together, those of us who
are here, without waiting for the lords and governors who for one reason and another are not
with us. With some of these we are, as you know, not on good terms. There hath been jealousy
and strife, much rivalry and more ill-feeling, between the cities. Now, if we hope to save
ourselves, all this must be forgotten. If we never agreed before, we must agree now, for a
common foe threatens us, against whom nothing short of our united strength will avail."

He ceased; and Aurelius rose and faced a silent room, standing beside the table, with nervous
fingers feeling at a scroll which lay there.

"Friends," he began, and cleared his throat and hesitated, "I am here before ye, a man without
a home, a governor without a city. Two nights ago Saxons landed on our coasts, among the marshes,
and entered Anderida. The details of the whole I have not yet learned; whether they assaulted
first, or were provoked by some real or fancied injury of the citizens. However this may be,
they set upon us, and slew us, and were joined by certain of the insurgents, who, it seems,
have only awaited a chance to rise in open revolt against the Empire, as represented in us.
United, they outnumbered those who were loyal to me by ten to one, and I and mine, being all
unprepared, were forced to flee. We fought our way out of the city, and fled with others into
the forest, leaving the barbarians and the insurgents in possession. The temple of Jupiter
is destroyed and his priests are killed; the statues of the Emperor in the Forum are wantonly
shattered. One of the flamens who escaped joined our party as we fled, and said that those
who have committed these outrages are not Goths nor Vandals, nor yet Saxons in revolt, but
Romans, men of our own blood, who should be of our religion. They it was who destroyed, and
incited the barbarians to greater excesses. Now I am come to you to plead for help. We stand
on the brink of great danger, and we are in no position to help ourselves. It is to others
that we must look. Where are our troops? We have none, or next to none. Daily these barbarians
encroach upon us; our seas swarm with pirates, and we cannot resist."

Marcus Pomponius, the Count of the Saxon Shore, raised his head and looked at him.

"You are right, but you have not told all,--not so much as the half of it," he said. His voice
was low and deep, and resonant as a trumpet. "You, living here in the South, in Britannia Prima,
can have no idea of how things are in Maxima Cæsariensis, in Flavia Cæsariensis, or on the
Eastern Shore. One month ago, Constantine, my son, came from Deva. He says that these provinces
are no longer Roman, but Saxon, and that for the most part without force or bloodshed. As for
me and those who were before me, year by year we have seen our power weakening, our troops
drawn off, cohort by cohort, until our ward of the Eastern Marches is but an empty mockery.
It is simply that, as we have retreated, Saxons have advanced, inch by inch, until now they
have gained a foothold from which I believe no power that we may bring can dislodge them. They
have settled in our towns, mingled with us, married our women, obeyed our laws--but they are
here; and they are not of us, but alien, and they will stay. I hold that this, the beginning
of the end, began twenty-seven years ago, when Fabian Procinus, the consul, abandoned Eboracum
and moved to the southern provinces with his forces. We can all remember that day, I think.
What happened? Saxons entered that deserted city and established themselves there. When they
became crowded, they moved, not back to their northern fastnesses, but down to other cities
and towns of ours. And they are there still. The towns which we destroyed, hoping thus to stay
them, they rebuilt. It is true that for the most part they have been peaceable and orderly;
but it is also true that when fresh bands have come upon us, these settled ones have sided
with them against us. This is where blood is spilled. They may be trying to find peace for
themselves, and a land to rest in, but slowly and surely they are either absorbing us or driving
us into the sea. This is what we must face to-day."

Two or three nodded, half reluctantly, as though they recognized a fact long known, and held
aloof so far as might be. Pomponius glanced from grave face to grave face. His voice dropped
a note lower. Not for nothing had he been trained to speak in the Forum before men.

"Friends, the fault of the whole matter lieth with us, in Roman hands. If Romans lose Britain,
and if Saxons win it, it will be the fault of none but Romans."

A murmur went through the room, wordless, speaking more plainly than words. Pomponius raised
his hand.

"Have patience, I pray you, and hear me! What I shall say is, in a manner, treason against
our divinity, our lord Emperor, yet before now truth hath been found in treason. The crux of
the whole matter lieth in the fact that we, Romans, lords paramount of Britain, have divided
ourselves into two sects--religious, if you will; but when was not religion used for State
purposes, or State purposes for religion? You cannot divide the two. We are polytheists, worshipping
the ancient gods of our fathers, or we are Augustans, worshipping the divinity of our lord
Emperor. And of the two, which is the true faith hath nothing at all to do with the matter.
The point lieth in the fact that there are two. Beset as we are by outer dangers, it needs
small wit to see that our sole hope is in unity of thought and purpose. This division, for
ourselves, was bad enough. It was worse when we found pitted against us two other religions,
of two separate peoples here with whom we had to deal. One, the religion of the ancient Gaels,
which we found here, and which was druidical and wholly abhorrent in our eyes; the other, the
religion of the Goths and Saxons, which, like our own elder faith, was polytheistic.

"You know that Rome's policy hath ever been to absorb, to make bone of her bone and flesh of
her flesh what she hath taken for her own. And herein lies her true greatness. But Gaelic or
British gods would never unite with Roman gods; it was an alien creed, with no single point
in common. Gothic gods would so unite,--mark you that,--for Gothic religion differed from Roman
only in the names of its gods and in a coarser fibre which with us had been refined away. What
did we, therefore,--we, that is the Romans our fathers,--for the furthering of our purposes
and for the glory which was Rome's? We took the Goths unto ourselves and gave them our religion.
We taught them that their Hesus was none but Bacchus, their Freya our Venus, their Thor our
Jupiter Tonans. But could we do this with the Gaels, who had nothing in common with us, whose
meaningless rites could have no part in the beliefs of the commonwealth? No. Did we therefore
give them the privileges of citizenship, the right to hold offices of priesthood and State,
which we gave to those Goths and Saxons who came among us peaceably? No. We made Saxons our
allies against alien gods, and we did wisely. They fought side by side with us, they tilled
our lands, and were our equals. And so long as the old faith was among us, all was well. For
to my mind, what I shall tell you, and nothing else, is the secret of Rome's power. Armies
alone can hold a captive people for no longer than steel is bared, and Rome knew this. But
her religion took up the work where her armies had left it. Being eclectic, it embraced all
gods,--although this is not to say that every Roman worshipped all of these,--and those peoples
whom she conquered were not ravished with violence from their creeds and forced to kneel at
unlike altars. Each nation might find a parallel for its gods in Rome's pantheon, and so might
be brought without shock into Rome's fold. For, take a man's gods from him, whatsoever they
may be that he worships, and give him nothing in return to which he can hold, and at once you
take from him all that anchors him to the rationalities of life.

"Therefore I say that so long as the old faith endured, it was well with us. But the worship
of the Emperor's divinity was instituted; and it was something in which these people could
find no parallel to their own gods. They said: 'Why should we worship one of whose powers we
know nothing? Your gods, which it seems after all are our gods under new names, are well enough.
We want no other, who is no god of ours. How may this Emperor of yours be god as well as man?'
But we Romans upheld this new religion, with powers of government, with grants of land, with
the erection of new temples, with all manner of benefices, for those who would think as we
thought. To those who would not, we said: 'Worship as we worship, or it will be the worse for
you.' Who reaped the benefits of this change? We, the Augustans, who had conformed to it. Who
paid the penalty? Those who clung to the old order, and so defied us, becoming insurgent. Romans
became divided even as Goths, taking part with them against their own people. And herein were
we in grave error, for we needed all our strength, not to fight each other, but to fight our
common foes. Now it is our turn to pay the penalty for this, and it shall be a heavy one.

"The insurgents, few in number as they were, and not powerful, bribed the Saxon chieftains,
who would else have lived peaceably enough among us, by promises of plunder if they would join
with them. And the chieftains were the more readily persuaded to this, since it was a righteous
thing to uphold the old gods, and if there was reward for doing it, in the way of booty, so
much the better. The Romans who set them on were pleased; the gods were pleased; the chieftains
were pleased. So here you have it, friends, the prime cause of our undoing. It is our own people,
of our blood and our speech, who, rebelling against law and order, are stirring these Saxons
against us. It is they who have razed Augustan temples, destroyed holy relics, and slain Augustan
priests--they, and not the Saxons. I say again: when Britain passes from our hands, it will
not be by Saxon means, but primarily by Roman treachery. And Saxons, profiting by our internal
strife and their own position, will reap the benefits."

He ceased; and his words hung in the silence of the room. They looked at him, grave bearded
men; and the truth of what he said was in their faces.

"You speak as though we were in fault," said an old man, querulously, far down the room. "Our
fathers, not we, have done these things."

"Our fathers were Romans, and we are Romans, and their mistakes are our heritage," said Pomponius,
sternly.

"Let us have care that we leave no such heritage to those who shall call us fathers."

"Britain is not out of our hands yet," said Aurelius. "And it is for us to keep her there.--How?"

Again there fell a silence. Out of it a musing voice spoke.

"No troops in Britain; Gaul, our nearest help, beset by Huns.... But Gaul is our only hope.
We must ask Ætius for a legion as we did two years ago."

A shrug went around the assembly. Plainly it said: "There is no other thing to do."

"If we could but agree to act together in this!" said the old man. Men called him Paulus Atropus,
and bore with his senility for sake of what he had been. "It would seem that in this matter
there can be no room for argument; we all must think alike for once. But should we not wait
to hear from those of our colleagues who are absent, before we move?"

"What need?" Aurelius asked feverishly. "As you say, they can but think as we do. There is
nothing else to be done; and if we wait to hear from them, and to discuss pro and con, we shall
gain nothing and lose time. It is for their safety, as well as ours."

"I think we should wait until they can join with us," said Paulus stubbornly. The talk eddied
over his head.

"Who will go?" said Caius Valens; and men turned their eyes to Marius. He was the only man
in active service there, though not the only one who had seen it. "It needs one swift and sure."

"Why not Marius?" Pomponius said, with a friendly glance at Marius. "Once before he hath come
from Gaul to our aid; he can win to Ætius quicker than any of us; he is a soldier, and knows
conditions, and what to ask for."

Eudemius made a gesture of protest.

"Friends, believe that I, too, have the best interests of our country at heart," he said quickly.
"But Marius, who shortly becomes my son, is the one hope of my old age. I would not call him
back from what is his duty; if this mission falls to him I shall be the first to speed him.
But what need is there for such frantic haste? There have been attacks before, as severe as
this one. Also this is not the first time we have thought of appealing for help. The need is
no more imperative now than many times before. Therefore, if he be chosen, I pray you a little
time. To-day is his betrothal; in three days his marriage. Until then, leave him to me!"

Few of the lords present but knew Eudemius's story and the conditions under which his daughter's
marriage would take place; and none who knew did not sympathize.

"A week would be time," said Pomponius, and one or two nodded. But Aurelius struck his clenched
fist upon the table.

"Nay!" he shouted. "I say that he should start this day! It is my city that burns!"

"I am ready," said Marius. "You all know that I shall start this night if you will it so. But
I promise you that this delay shall harm us nothing, since I shall send ahead at once to post
relays to the coast, and give command for a vessel to be in waiting at Rutupiæ. As to whether
I shall be successful, that is another question. It seems to me that Ætius will have need of
all his men for himself. They are none too many."

"Do the best you can, and it will be all we ask," said Pomponius.

Old Paulus, at his end of the table, leaned his face forward upon his hand.

"Friends, this is the first time in the history of the world that Rome hath withheld aid from
her sons who needed it, and cast them off to shift as best they could. And I have lived to
see it! I have indeed lived too long!"

Again heads nodded, gravely and sombrely. Paulus was not alone in his bitterness. For the first
time in the history of the world men stood aside and watched their country falling into ruins
before their eyes with a swiftness greater in proportion to its mighty length of life than
ever country had fallen before; and it was a bitter sight.

Pomponius, courtly, ever mindful of others, was first to shake off the gloom to which Paulus
had given voice.

"Friends, we must not make this a solemn betrothal feast!" he said. "We have agreed--the most
of us--that the danger is not over pressing. Let us then set aside care while we may, for these
few days, at least. Our host did not bring us together to see long faces. While we live, let
us live!" He turned to Marius. "For sake of thee and thy bride, friend, we will forget as we
may the clouds which threaten us. Look to it that when shortly we call on you, we find no cause
to regret it."

"You shall find no cause," said Marius.

That afternoon Aurelius departed with his people. He would see for himself what damage had
been wrought upon his city, and whether or not it was still in the hands of the insurgents
and barbarians. He was in no humor for betrothal feasts and merrymaking when his city was lost.
He had come there hoping to obtain help and prompt concerted action on the part of his colleagues.
He could not get it; so he would go away again.

But he left behind him Felix, his pale-eyed son, who was wounded and wore his arm in a sling,
and for doing so gave no man his reasons.

V

Wardo, the tall Saxon, sword-girt and muffled in his cloak, lighted his torch at the cresset
which burned at the head of the passage behind the storerooms, and started down the slimy steps
leading to the dungeon levels. Evening had fallen, fragrant with warm earth-scents and the
odors of flowers; a silent night of Spring, when Earth slept and gathered strength for the
new life she should bring forth.

All that could be heard of the high feasting going on in the great house was a haunting snatch
of music drifting now and again into the night on the soft air. Yet Wardo knew that in the
Hall of Columns, with its rare frescoes, its lights and perfumes and flowers, men and women,
robed in the splendor of their wealth and station, were drinking the health of the betrothed
pair from cups which each had cost ten times its weight in gold; that wrestlers, brought from
the arena at Uriconium, were striving with sweat and strain for the purse of twenty sestertii
offered to the winner; and dancing girls from far Arabia were posing to the plaintive wail
of reeds and the thin tinkle of cymbals. But of all this the rear courts knew nothing. Here
was only hurrying to and fro of jaded slaves laden with amphoræ of wine and oil and honey;
the smell of roasting meats, the clash of pots and kettles. Here, behind the scenes, were the
ropes and pulleys which set the stage that the actors might strut through their lordly parts;
here was no relaxation and luxurious ease, but labor stern and unremitting, since always pleasure
must be paid for by toil.

But Wardo, on his special mission, was exempt from menial tasks. He descended the steps, from
level to level, in a stone-bound stillness, the nails in his sandals striking at times faint
sparks of light from the uneven flagging he trod. Near the door of Nicanor's cell he paused.

His light, flung upon rough-hewn walls, showed down three steps the grated doors of the wine-cellars.
Away to his right, down a narrow pitch-black tunnel, were the walls of the hypocausts behind
which fires roared and ravened. Through these tunnels, in Summer, the furnaces were approached
to be repaired and cleaned.

"If the light fall upon him too suddenly, it may blind him," said Wardo. "And perhaps he sleeps.
I will go softly and make sure."

He thrust his torch into an iron socket in the wall, and went to the door of Nicanor's prison
hole. Here he felt with stealthy hands for the small wicket, to be shut or opened only from
the outside, built in every cell-door that a warder might hear or see what his prisoner did
within. This he pushed back an inch, carefully, without noise, and bent his ear to the opening.

So he heard a voice issuing out of the eternal darkness within; a voice steady and resonant,
and sustained as though it had been speaking for some time. Out of the darkness it reached
his ears as a thing disembodied, seeming scarcely of the earth or of human lips. In it was
a thrill born of the pure joy of creation; prisoned, it yet was free with a freedom whose limits
were the limits of earth and sky and thought, unchained, recking not of dripping walls nor
aching darkness, for these things were nothing.

"Out of the East three Kings came riding, on padded camels with harness of gold. One was lord
of the kingdom of life, and one of the kingdom of love, and one of the kingdom of death, and
each one had said: 'Behold me! I am supreme.' But they heard that there lived one mightier
than they; and first they scoffed, and next they marvelled, and then they came to see. People
ran to watch them as they passed upon their journey, and called them great and mighty; and
to himself each said: 'They speak of me.' Each wore about his neck a torques of gold; and in
the first was set a diamond, and in the second was set a ruby, hot as passion, and in the third
was set a pearl. Slaves walked behind them, bearing hampers filled with gifts for that one
who was mightier than they; forty and four were the slaves that walked behind them, and the
hampers were covered with cloth of gold.

"So came they to their journey's end at nightfall, when the weary earth was sinking into rest;
and they looked about them for a palace more splendid than their own, fitting for that one
who was mightier than they. But there were only the houses of the town, and stables. They asked
of strangers where such a palace might be, and none could tell them. Then asked they if a very
great and mighty king had been there, and folk shook their heads and answered nay. There were
many strangers, and all the inns were full, but there was no mighty king that they had seen.
One said: 'It may be that he goeth in disguise,' and the others answered: 'That may be so.'
So they alighted and went into an inn; and across the courtyard of the inn, in the stalls under
the house where cattle stood, they saw a group of people, three or four.

"And in the centre of the group a bearded man was kneeling, and beside him, upon clean straw,
lay a Woman and her Child. The Kings stood within the stable, and their greatness was as a
glory of light upon the place. Chains of gold they wore upon their necks, and rings upon their
hands, and the crowns upon their heads were bright with jewels. They looked at the Woman that
lay upon the straw against her man's knees; and she was fair and young and tender, and her
eyes were full of joy and pain. And one whispered to them: 'Behold, but now she hath brought
a man-child into the world, here in this place, among sweet-breathing oxen and lowing kine.'
So they looked upon the Child that lay on his Mother's arm."

The voice stopped short, and silence reeled down upon the world once more. Before Wardo could
move or speak it came again, changed this time and strained, all the thrill gone out of it
and only weariness left, the voice of one again in chains.

"Eh, thou little Christus, thou hast been brother and comrade both to me in this my loneliness!
But now am I indeed fast stuck in a quagmire of uncertainty. Wherein did lie thy power? This
I must know or ever the tale can end. I have the Kings, their might and majesty, their robes,
and the gifts they bring. I have thy Mother, young and fair and tender, with holy eyes. I have
her man, who was not sire to thee, his care for her, his human doubt and questionings. I have
the servants of the inn, the shepherds.--Thou great bully Rag, thou hast stood model more often
than thou knowest!--I have the cattle dozing in the stalls, the tumult and the shouting of
the inn. All this I can paint so that it shall stand forth quick with life; for give me a word,
a thought, an action, and I can find the tale in it. But on my life I cannot find why men should
worship thee, thou little helpless Child. And until I can, I have no motive for my tale; a
thing eludes me which I cannot catch. What power didst hold over men that they should bow to
thee? Wherein did lie thy strength? For men will worship only that which is stronger than they--and
how wert thou stronger? Was it through fear?--who would fear a babe?--A child, little and ugly
and very red, as I have seen babes in the arms of slave-women in the mart at Londinium, with
a crumpled mouth wet with his mother's milk--in the name of the high gods, what should men
see in such a thing to worship? Thus ever do I question, and until I find my answer the tale
is not complete."

There was a restless movement in the dark, a soft shuffle of sandalled feet pacing up and down,
endlessly up and down. The voice dropped to a broken mutter in which but a word now and then
was to be caught.

"Oh, for a ray of sun or moon to tell if it be day or night! The darkness beats upon mine eyelids
like a thousand hammers, until my brain is sick and reeling.... Hath one ever made of this
a tale before me, I wonder? The girl did not say. Where is she now, that black-haired love
of Hito's? Is she caught and brought back like a rabbit to the kennels of the hounds? That
is quite likely, and will be no fault of mine."

Again the voice stopped, and with it the pacing footsteps.

"Thou here, Momus?" Nicanor said suddenly. "So then; it must be time for food. Thou canst tell
that, graybeard; if thou couldst tell whether day or night time, I'd carve an ivory figure
of thee and hold all thy kind in honor. Maybe they will forget us again, as they have forgot
us before. If so, soon I must eat thee, friend, and this will grieve me, less for thy sake
than for mine own."

"Who hath he here?" Wardo muttered in perplexity. He placed his lips to the slit and spoke aloud.

"Nicanor!"

Instant silence fell, while one might have counted ten. Then Nicanor's voice, keen and quiet, said:

"Who calls?"

"I, Wardo," answered Wardo, feeling for his eight-inch-long key. "I will get my light and enter,
for I have news for thee."

He got his torch, unlocked the door, and entered, locking it behind him, for his orders were
strict. The light fell upon Nicanor, sitting on the floor, back against the wall, hands clasping
his knees, and glistened in his eyes, untamed beneath their shaggy thatch of brow. He was leaner
than ever, and his face was gaunt. He blinked uncertainly at the flare and turned his head from it.

"I begged Hito that he let me be the one to bring thy food," said Wardo, and spoke as one in
self-excuse. "But not until to-day could I win him to it. Now I have come to tell thee--" He
hesitated; started again with a rush of words. "Thou art sentenced to the mines, with certain
others, and I am ordered to convey thee thither."

"So?" said Nicanor.

"It seems to hold scant interest for thee!" said Wardo curiously, half piqued.

"At this moment, little man, bread and a bone hold more of interest for me than all the mines
in Britain," said Nicanor, with a laugh. "Give me these, and I'll show thee how much I have
of interest."

Wardo found himself falling into the half ironic raillery of his prisoner's mood.

"There should be plenty of both when this night's feasting is over. I'll see thou hast thy share--"

"What feasting? Is it night?" Nicanor asked.

"True; I forgot thou couldst not know," said Wardo. "To-night is held the betrothal feast of
our lady and the lord Marius."

The careless figure on the floor stiffened, as it seemed, into stone as it sat. Nicanor turned
his head, slowly, and looked up at his gaoler. The movement had in it something of the stealthiness
of an animal crouching to spring.

"Betrothed--to-night?" he muttered. The hands about his knees tightened until their muscles
strained under the brown skin; but the light was bad, and Wardo's eyes were not over keen to
see what he was not looking for.

"Why, yes," said Wardo. "It is held in the Hall of Columns. By this time, without doubt, the
kiss is given and taken, the pledge is passed, and our little lady by rights is in another's
keeping. It wants only the marriage three days hence."

Nicanor rose lithely to his feet, pressing back his mane of hair with both hands.

"Wardo, we two have been friends, have we not, ever since we put each the other to sleep with
blows over the baker's black-eyed daughter?"

Wardo looked at him.

"Ay, that is so," he said sincerely.

"Then I shall ask of thee a thing which will put all thy friendship to the test," said Nicanor.
His voice was rapid and tense, and Wardo began to look at him in surprise. "Let me go free
and unhindered from here for two hours. I give my word that when that time is over I will be
at any place thou shalt name, to go with thee willingly thy prisoner. If aught untoward befall,
no blame shall come to thee. It will be easily done; the stewards are busy, and I shall have
care not to be seen."

"But--body of me!--this is impossible!" Wardo cried, confounded. "I am friend to thee, but
I am my lord's gaoler, for the time, and it would betray my lord for me to do this. Wherefore
dost desire it? What will it avail thee--freedom for two hours?"

"It will avail me much," Nicanor answered. "Have I ever broken faith with thee or any man?"

"Nay," said Wardo. "Thou wilt steal, as I have known, but thou wilt not lie, and I would have
thy word as soon as another's bond. Sure never was there such a strange fellow--"

"Then believe that I will not break faith now. How may our lord be the worse for it? Thou hast
ever been friend to me, man; we have drunk together and feasted together and starved together;
we have fought together and clasped hands together. Dost remember a day of freedom we two spent
together, in the wine-shop to which I took thee, on the island in the fords, when we and the
five drunken gladiators fought until the watch fell upon us, and how we escaped, both battered
and bloody, and left the gladiators in their hands?"

Wardo grinned regretfully.

"Eh, that was a great day! I have the scars yet. We have seen good days together, thou and I."

"And they are gone over now, and done with. Here we part, I to the mines, thou to the arms
of thy fat Hito, I wish thee joy of him! Comrade, dost remember that when we say farewell here
it will not be for to-day, nor to-morrow, but for all long time to come? I to the mines, and
who enters there comes not forth again."

Wardo clenched his fists.

