'He has been making me read him a whole heap of letters; indeed, as you know, I have been doing
that all along, when he could not get Nuttie. There were some from Mr. Bulfinch.  Do you know
that bailiff of his must be next door to a swindler?'

'Bulfinch is coming up to see him to-morrow.'

'And, Mark, do you know, he has been putting out feelers as if to discover whether we would
do--what he asked us to do five years ago.'

'Would you?'

'If it were not for the children, and--and sometimes the extreme pinch, I should say it was
more like life to work yourself up as a City man,' said Annaple.  'If you were the Squire,
with all his opportunities, it would be a different thing, but there's no outlet there, and
I have often admired the wisdom of the Apocryphal saying, "Make not thyself an underling to
a foolish man."'

'Well, it is lucky you think so, Nannie, for though Dutton is certainly not a foolish man,
he will not want an underling.  And what do you say to my mother's proposal of having poor
Poole to stay at Redcastle, and borrowing baby to comfort her till she goes out again.

'I hate it,' said Annaple energetically.  'It is very horrid, but it is awfully good of the
Canoness; and I suppose we shall have to let it come to pass, and miss all that most charming
time of babyhood which is coming.  But most likely it will quite set the little woman up, and
be a real kindness to poor Poole.'

'If we could only keep her for good.'

'Yes, and then our children would not be half so much our own.  I do want to be away with them
in our own quarters.  I wonder when Nuttie can spare us, but I should like to see her through
the great crisis with her father.'

That crisis was to involve more than Annaple in the least expected. Nuttie found that the momentous
confession could not possibly take place before the interview with Mr. Bulfinch, at which her
presence was needed to help her father with his papers.  The principal concern was to show
the full enormity of the bailiff, and decide upon the steps to be taken, the solicitor being
anxious for a prosecution, while a certain tenderness for poor Gregorio's memory, or perhaps
for the exposure of his own carelessness, made Mr. Egremont reluctant. There was also a proposal,
brought forward with much diffidence from Mr. Condamine's mother, to rent Bridgefield House,
but on this, as well as respecting a successor to the bailiff, Mr. Egremont was to give his
answer the next day, when Mr. Bulfinch would call again.

Nuttie was thankful for the business that had filled up the hour after luncheon, when Alwyn
used to play in the drawing-room and delight his father; but she was feeling desperate to have
the crisis over, and resolved to speak when she went out driving with him.  It was he, however,
who began.  'I sounded Mark's wife yesterday, Ursula.  She is a nice little thing enough, and
a good wife in her way.'

'A very good wife.'

'Except when she persuaded him to turn up his nose at the agency. D'ye think he would take
it now, since he has tasted the sweets of his umbrella business?' then, as Nuttie paused, taken
by surprise; 'Five hundred a year and the Home Farm would be better than, what is it, a hundred
and fifty and a floor over a warehouse!  I don't like to see old Will's son wearing himself
out there, and the lad is a good honest lad, with business habits, who would do justice to
you after I am gone.'

'Father,' said Nuttie, trembling with the effort, 'I want you to do something better than that.
I want you to let Mark take the agency with a view to himself--not me.  Let him be as he would
have been if he had never hunted us up at Micklethwayte, and put me in his place.'

'Eh!' said Mr. Egremont.  'It is not entailed--worse luck; if it had been, I should not have
been bound to dance attendance at the heels of such an old sinner as the General.'

'No, but it ought to go to the heir male, and keep in the old name. Think--there have been
Egremonts at Bridgefield for four hundred years!'

'Very pretty talk, but how will it be with you, Miss.  We shall have Fane, and I don't know
how many more, coming after the scent of Bridgefield now,' he said with a heavy sigh, ending
with a bitter 'Hang them all!'

'And welcome,' said Nuttie, answering the thought rather than the words.  'Father, I wanted
to tell you--'

'You don't mean that any one has been after you at such a time as this!' he cried.

'It was before--I mean it was the evening when we were all so glad, before we began to be afraid.'

'The umbrella man!  By Jove!'

'And now,' went on Nuttie, in spite of the explosion, 'he would hardly have ventured to go
on with it but for this--I mean,' as her father gave a little laugh of his unpleasant sort,
'he said it would be the greatest possible relief, and make it all right for the property to
go to the heir male.'

'Hein!  You think so, do you?  See how it will be when I come to talk to him!  A shrewd fellow
like that who got out of the Micklethwayte concern just in time.  Catch him giving up a place
like that, though he may humbug you.'

'Then you will see him, father?'

'If you turn him in on me, I can't help it.  Bless me! umbrellas everywhere!  And here you
mean to turn me over to the mercies of that solemn idiot, Edsall.  I should have been better
off with poor Gregorio.'

'No, father; Mr. Dutton would not take me from you.  We would both try all we could to make
you comfortable.'

'Convert the old reprobate?  Is that his dodge?'

'Don't, father,' for the sneering tone returned.

'Come now,' he added in a much more fatherly manner, for her voice had struck him.  'You don't
mean that a well-looking girl like you, who could have her pick of all the swells in town,
can really be smitten with a priggish old retired umbrella-monger like that.  Why, he might
be your father.'

'He has been getting younger ever since I knew him,' said Nuttie.

'Well.  He plays as good a game of whist as any man in England,' muttered Mr. Egremont, leaving
his daughter in actual doubt whether he meant this as a recommendation, or as expressing a
distrust of him, as one likely to play his cards to the best advantage.  She had to remain
in doubt, for they overtook Clarence Fane, who came and spoke to them in a very friendly and
solicitous manner, and showed himself willing to accept a lift in the carriage.  Mr. Egremont,
willing to escape from perplexities as well as to endeavour to drive away if possible the oppression
of his grief, invited him in, and he had some gossip to impart, which at first seemed to amuse
the hearer after this time of seclusion, but the sick and sore heart soon wearied of it, and
long before the drive was over, Mr. Egremont was as much bored as his daughter had been from
the first.

When Mr. Fane got out, he paused a moment to hold Ursula's hand in a tender manner, while he
told her that he had not ventured to intrude (he had left a card of inquiry every day), but
that if ever he could be of the least use in amusing Mr. Egremont, he was at her service, and
would give up any engagement.

'Hein! my fine fellow!  No doubt you would!' said Mr. Egremont, when his daughter had uttered
her cold thanks, and they had driven on.  'I see your little game, but it is soon to begin
it.  We may as well let them know that she is booked before the running begins.'

It was a remarkable intimation of his acceptance of her engagement, but Ursula was contented
to take it as such, and be thankful.

Mr. Dutton had his interview as soon as Mr. Egremont had rested after his drive, and the result
was satisfactory.

No doubt much was due to the Egremont indolence and want of energy, which always preferred
to let things take their course.  And now that Gregorio was no longer present to amuse, and
take all trouble off his hands, Mr. Egremont could hardly have borne to part with his daughter;
and, despite of umbrellas and religion, was not sorry to have a perfectly trustworthy son-in-law
in the house, able to play at cards with him, manage his household, and obviate all trouble
about suitors for the heiress.  Moreover, his better feelings were stirred by gratitude on
his poor little son's account, and he knew very well that a more brilliant match for his daughter
would not have secured for his old age the care and attention he could rely upon here.  He
was obliged likewise to believe in the disinterestedness, which disclaimed all desire for the
estate, as involving cares and duties for which there had been no training; and he was actually
glad to keep the property in the direct line.  The old liking for Mark, and sense of the hardship
of his exclusion, revived, strengthened now by regard for Annaple; together with the present
relief from care obtained by making him manager of the estate.

When once brought to a point, Mr. Egremont was always sudden and impetuous, chiefly for the
sake of having it over and being unmolested and at rest again.  So that very evening, while
Nuttie only ventured on sharing with Annaple the glad tidings that Mr. Dutton was accepted,
and in his marvellous goodness, undertook to make his home with her father. Mark was almost
stunned by the news, confirmed to him by Mr. Dutton as well as his uncle, that he was to be
acknowledged as heir of Bridgefield Egremont, and in the meantime manage the estate with an
income suitable to an oldest son.

Presently he came upstairs by himself, and beckoned to Nuttie, rather to the alarm of his wife.

'Ursula,' he said, and took both her hands, 'I cannot have you do this for me.'

'Can't you, Mark?  You can't prevent it, you see.  And don't you know it is the beginning of
all my happiness?'

'But indeed, I cannot feel it right.  It is a strained sense of justice.  Come and tell her
so, Nannie.'

'What?' said Annaple coming forward.

They both paused a moment, then Nuttie said, 'Only that the estate ought to go in the male line.'

'Oh, is that all?' said Annaple, 'I was afraid Mr. Egremont had a fit!'

'Ah!  Don't you see what it means,' said Mark.  'They want it to be as if there were an entail--to
begin treating me as an eldest son at once. It is Ursula's doing, putting herself out of the
succession.'

'I always hated being an heiress,' said Nuttie.

'It would be more dreadful than ever now.  Annaple, do be sensible! Don't you see it is the
only right thing to do?'

'Billy!' was the one word Annaple said.

'Yes, Billy and Jenny and all,' said Nuttie, 'before you've all died of your horrid place--Oh!
you haven't heard that part of it.  Of course Mark will have to go down to Bridgefield and
look after the place, and live like a gentleman.'

'Eight hundred a year,' murmured Mark, 'and the house at the Home Farm.'

'Oh! dear,' gasped Annaple, 'I wanted you to be Lord Mayor, and now you'll only be a stupid
old country squire.  No, no, Nuttie, it's--it's--it's the sort of thing that one only laughs
at because otherwise one would have to do the other thing!'

And she gripped Nuttie tight round the waist, and laid her head on her shoulder, shaking with
a few little sobs, which might be one thing or the other.

'It will save her youth, perhaps her life,' whispered Mark, lifting Nuttie's hand to his lips
for a moment, and then vanishing, while Annaple recovered enough to say, 'I'm tougher than
that, sir.  But little Jenny!  Oh, Nuttie, I believe it has come in time.  I've known all along
that one straw more might break the camel's back.  We've been very happy, but I am glad it
is over before Mark got worn down before his time.  Grinding is very wholesome, but one may
have too much; and I haven't Mark's scruples, Nuttie dear, for I do think the place is more
in his line than yours or Mr. Dutton's.'

'Yes,' said Ursula, 'you see he was always happy there, and I never was.'

The next thing was for Mr. Dutton and Ursula to keep Mr. Egremont up to the point of making
his long deferred will; nor did they find this so difficult as they expected, for having once
made up his mind, he wished to have the matter concluded, and he gave his instructions to Bulfinch
the next day.  Of course Mark had to give full notice to his employers; but the allowance was
to begin at once, so that Annaple only went back to the warehouse to pack up, since she was
to occupy No. 5, while Mr. Egremont and his daughter were going under Mr. Dutton's escort to
the baths in Dauphine, an entirely new resort, free from the associations he dreaded, for he
could not yet bear the sight of little Willy--the rival 'boy of Egremont.'  But the will was
safely signed before he went, to the great relief of Nuttie, who, according to the experience
of fiction, could hardly believe his life safe till what she called justice had been done.

After all Mr. Egremont became so dependent on Mr. Dutton, during this journey, that he did
not like the separation at its close, and pressed on the marriage even sooner than either of
the lovers felt quite reverent towards the recent sorrow.  He insisted on Bulfinch having the
settlements ready for them on their return, and only let them wait long enough to keep their
residence, before there was a very quiet wedding in their parish church, with the cousins for
bridesmaids.  Then Mark and Annaple took care of Mr. Egremont for the fortnight while Mr. Dutton
showed his wife his old haunts in France, returning to Springfield House, where there was plenty
of room for Mr. Egremont to make his home with them.

Said Annaple to Miss Nugent, 'I never saw Nuttie so youthful and bright.  She is more like
a girl than I ever saw her since the first.'

'Yes,' said Mary, 'she has some one to rest on now.'

Mr. Egremont lived between three and four years, more contented and peaceful than he had ever
been, though frequently suffering, and sometimes giving way to temper and impatience.  But
Mr. Dutton understood how to manage on these occasions, and without giving up his own extensive
usefulness, could give him such care, attention, and amusement as beguiled his discomforts,
and made his daughter's task an easier one.

How far the sluggish enfeebled nature was capable of a touch of better things, or whether his
low spirits were repentance, no one could judge. At any rate sneers had ended, and when he
was laid beside his wife and boy at Bridgefield, Ursula stood by the grave with a far more
tender and hopeful feeling than she could have thought possible when he had rent her away from
her old home. She looked up at her husband and said, 'Is not her work done?'

THE END.