The horse-breakers (chalanes) are generally free men of color. They possess great bodily vigor,
and understand their business thoroughly; but they use the horses very cruelly, and thereby
render them shy. For the first three years foals are suffered to roam about with perfect freedom;
after that time they are saddled, an operation not performed without great difficulty, and
sometimes found to be impracticable, until the animal is thrown on the ground and his limbs
tied. The young horse under the management of the chalan is trained in all sorts of equestrian
feats, especially the art of pirouetting (voltear). This consists in turning either wholly
or half round on the hind legs with great rapidity and when at full gallop. Another important
object of the chalan is to teach the horse to stop short suddenly, and to stand perfectly motionless
(sentarse) at the signal of his rider; and to go backward (cejar) for a considerable space
in a straight line. When all this is accomplished, the horse is regarded as completely broken
(quebrantado).

As an instance of the certainty with which a Peruvian horse will make a pirouette (voltata)
at the signal of his rider, I may mention the following fact, which occurred under my own observation.
A friend of mine, in Lima, rode at full gallop up to the city wall (which is scarcely nine
feet broad), leaped upon it, and then made his horse perform a complete voltata, so that the
fore-feet of the animal described the segment of a circle beyond the edge of the wall. The
feat he performed several times in succession, and he assured me he could do the same with
all his horses. 

Resisting sternly the temptation to embroider his theme with the distractions of scene and
circumstance (of course he had to tell us of that dinner at the mess of an Alpine regiment
where he met the man who had discovered the "Venus of Cyrene"), he keeps as closely as may
be to his main subject, but cannot escape from infusing it with his own sense of colour and
romance and the unconscious appeal of his personality. One may envy him his rare experience, yet
fully share his pride in the fearless devotion of the men and women
of our race (one can imagine it of no other) in these perilous and
lonely outposts of mercy.

A little paper book, illustrated with little photographs, and costing just a shilling. The author
and his publishers (METHUEN) are devoting the profits to the British Red Cross; so you who buy and
read it--and I don't see how anybody can refuse--may extract a claim to virtue from an hour of pure
delight.

* * * * *

A quiet style, keen powers of observation, and a delightful assumption of his own unimportance
combine to make Mr. FREDERICK PALMER'S With the New Army on the Somme
(MURRAY) a book that will be read long after the Hun has returned
to the place from which he came.

"Those whose business it was to observe, the six correspondents ... went and came always with
a sense of incapacity and sometimes with a feeling that writing was a worthless business when others
were fighting." There we have his apology for doing what obviously seemed to him a second-best
thing; but much as I like his modesty I can assure him that no finer tribute has yet been paid
to our new army. Mr. PALMER was the accredited American correspondent at the British Front, and though
the days are happily passed when he was a neutral in name his position as an impartial spectator
gives him an advantage denied to the most veracious of our own correspondents. Our French Allies
too may be congratulated, by themselves as well as by us, on being observed by eyes so shrewd
and friendly.

Anyone who has been in the war-zone and seen a French regiment resting
cannot fail to be struck by the acuteness of this remark; indeed it
provides the key to what, for an ordinary British mind, is a puzzle. So says the German proverb; and it may not
be uninteresting to take a glance at the Limeños during their performance of these two important
operations. The hour of breakfast is generally nine in the morning. The meal consists of boiled
mutton (Sancochado), soup (Caldo), with yuccas, a very pleasant-tasted root, and Chupe. This
last-mentioned dish consists, in its simplest form, merely of potatoes boiled in very salt
water, with cheese and Spanish pepper. When the chupe is made in better style, eggs, crabs,
and fried fish are added to the ingredients already named; and it is then a very savory dish.
Chocolate and milk are afterwards served. A negress brings the Chocolatera into the breakfast-room,
and pours out a cup full for each person. The natives prefer the froth to the actual beverage;
and many of the negresses are such adepts in the art of pouring out, that they will make the
cup so overflow with foam, that it contains scarcely a spoonful of liquid. Chocolate is the
favorite beverage of the Peruvians. In the southern parts of the country it is customary to
offer it to visitors at all hours of the day. The visitor is no sooner seated than he is presented
with a cup of coffee, which is often so thick that the spoon will stand upright in it. It would
be a breach of politeness to decline this refreshment, and whether agreeable or not it must
be swallowed!

The best cocoa is obtained from the Montañas of Urubamba, and from the Bolivian Yungas. The
long land transport, however, renders it very dear, and therefore the nuts brought from Guayaquil
are those commonly used in Lima.

Dinner, which takes place about two or three in the afternoon, commences with a very insipid
kind of soup. This is followed by the Puchero, which is the principal dish. Puchero, made in
its best style, contains beef, pork, bacon, ham, sausage, poultry, cabbage, yuccas, camotes
(a sort of sweet potato), potatoes, rice, peas, choclitas (grains of maize), quince and banana.
When served up, the different kinds of meat are placed in one dish, and the vegetable ingredients
in another. I was at first astonished at the poorness of the soups in Lima, considering the
quantity of meat used in preparing them; but I soon discovered that the soup served up to table
was little more than water, and that the strong gravy of the meat was either thrown away or
given to the negroes. There prevails an almost universal belief that the liquor in which the
meat is first stewed is injurious to health. Only a very few families are sufficiently free
from this prejudice to allow the strong gravy to be used in the preparation of caldo, &c. The
Puchero is an excellent and nutritious dish, and would in itself suffice for a dinner, to which,
however, in Lima, it is merely the introduction. Roast meat, fish, vegetables, preserves and
salad are afterwards served. Another dish not less indispensable to a Lima dinner than puchero,
is picante. Under this denomination are included a variety of preparations, in which a vast
quantity of cayenne pepper is introduced. The most favorite picantes are the calapulcra, the
lagua, the zango, the charquican, the adobas, the picante de ullucos, &c. The calapulcra is
composed of meat and potatoes dried and finely pounded; the lagua is made of maize flour and
pork; the zango, of the same ingredients, but differently prepared; the adobas consists of
pork alone; and the picante de ullucos is made of a root resembling the potato, cut into small
square bits. These dishes, though much too highly seasoned for European palates, are considered
great dainties by the Limeños. All the picantes have a very red color, owing to the quantity
of cayenne used in preparing them; the achote grains, which are also used, produce a beautiful
vermilion tint. Another dish, common on the dinner-table in Lima, is called ensalada de frutas.
It is a most heterogeneous compound, consisting of all sorts of fruits stewed in water. To
none but a Limanian stomach could such a mixture be agreeable. The dessert consists of fruits
and sweets (dulces). The Limeño must always drink a glass of water after dinner, otherwise
he imagines the repast can do him no good; but to warrant the drinking of the water, or, as
the phrase is, para tomar agua, it is necessary first to partake of dulces. The one without
the other would be quite contrary to rule. The dulces consist of little cakes made of honey
or of the pulp of the sugar-cane; or they are preserved fruits, viz., pine-apple, quince, citron,
and sometimes preserved beans or cocoa-nut. There is also a favorite kind of dulce made from
maize, called masamora.

The Peruvians have some very singular prejudices on the subject of eating and drinking. Every
article of food is, according to their notions, either heating (caliente), or cooling (frio);
and they believe that certain things are in opposition one to another, or, as the Limeños phrase
it, se oponen. The presence in the stomach of two of these opposing articles of food, for example,
chocolate and rice, is believed to be highly dangerous, and sometimes fatal. It is amusing
to observe the Limeños when at dinner, seriously reflecting, before they taste a particular
dish, whether it is in opposition to something they have already eaten. If they eat rice at
dinner, they refrain from drinking water, because the two things se oponen. To such an extreme
is this notion carried, that they will not taste rice on days when they have to wash, and laundresses
never eat it. Frequently have I been asked by invalids whether it would be safe for them to
take a foot-bath on going to bed, as they had eaten rice at dinner!

The white Creoles, as well as all the superior class of people in Lima, are exceedingly temperate
in drinking. Water and a kind of sweet wine are their favorite beverage; but the lower classes
and the people of color are by no means so abstemious. They make free use of fermented drinks,
especially brandy, chicha, and guarapo. The brandy of Peru is very pure, and is prepared exclusively
from the grape. On the warm sea coast, the use of this liquor is not very injurious; there,
its evil effects are counteracted by profuse perspiration. But one half the quantity that may
be drunk with impunity on the coast, will be very pernicious in the cool mountainous regions.
An old and very just maxim of the Jesuits is, "En pais caliente, aguardiente; en pais frio,
agua fria" (in the warm country, brandy; in the cold country, water).

Guarapo is a fermented liquor, made of sugar-cane pulp and water. It is a very favorite beverage
of the negroes. There are several kinds of guarapo. The best sorts are tolerably agreeable.
Chicha is a sort of beer prepared from maize. The seeds of the maize are watered and left until
they begin to sprout, after which they are dried in the sun. When sufficiently dry they are
crushed, boiled in water, and then allowed to stand till fermentation takes place. The liquid
is of a dark yellow color, and has a slightly bitter and sharp taste. Chicha is likewise made
from rice, peas, barley, yuccas, pine-apples, and even bread. The kind most generally used
is that made from maize. Even before the Spanish conquest of Peru, this maize beer was the
common beverage of the Indians. In Lima there are some very dirty and ill-arranged restaurations,
styled picanterias. These places are divided by partitions into several small compartments,
each of which contains a table and two benches. The restaurateur, usually a zambo or a mulatto,
prides himself in the superiority of his picantes and his clicha. The most motley assemblages
frequent these places in the evening. The Congo negro, the grave Spaniard, the white Creole,
the Chino, together with monks and soldiers, may be seen, all grouped together, and devouring
with evident relish refreshments, served out in a way not remarkable for cleanliness. Brandy
and guarapo are likewise sold in shops which are to be met with at the corner of almost every
street. The coffee-houses are very inferior; most of them are very dirty, and the attendance
is wretched.

Every street in Lima contains one or more cigar shops, in which mestizos and mulattos are busily
employed in making cigars. Smoking is a universal custom, and is practised everywhere except
in the churches. The cigars used in Lima are short, and the tobacco is rolled in paper, or
in dried maize leaves. The tobacco is brought from the northern province, Jaen de Bracamoras,
in very hard rolls called masos, about a yard long and two inches thick. Another kind of cigars
is made of Peruvian or Columbian tobacco. They are scarcely inferior to the Havannah cigars,
and would be quite equal to them, if they were kept long enough and well dried: but in Lima
they are smoked within a few hours after being made. When any one wants to light his cigar
in the street, he accosts the first smoker he happens to meet, whatever be his color, rank,
or condition; and asks him for a light. The slave smokes in the presence of his master, and
when his cigar dies out, he unceremoniously asks leave to relight it at his master's. It has
been calculated that the daily cost of the cigars smoked in Lima and the immediate vicinity
amounts to 2,300 dollars.

Formerly the market was held on the Plaza Mayor, and was always abundantly supplied with vegetables,
fruit, and flowers. Now it is held in the Plazuela de la Inquisicion, and it is very inferior
to what it used to be. Along the sides of the Plaza are stalls kept by women, who sell sausages
and fish. The central part of the market is appropriated to the sale of vegetables, of which
there is always an excellent supply. Facing the Palace of the Inquisition are the butchers'
shops. The meat is good, though not very plentifully displayed. The most abundant kinds of
meat are mutton and beef. The slaughtering of young animals being strictly prohibited by law,
veal, lamb, and sucking pigs are never seen in the market. The daily consumption of butcher's
meat in Lima is about twenty-eight or thirty heads of horned cattle, and between one hundred
and sixty and two hundred sheep. Pork, neither fresh nor cured, is seen in the market; though
great numbers of swine are slaughtered. The fleshy parts of the animal are cut into small square
pieces, and boiled; the fat or lard is used in cookery, and the pieces of pork, which are spread
over with lard, are called chicharones, and are held in high esteem by Limanian epicures. There
is an abundant show of poultry in the market, especially fowls and turkeys, which are brought
from Huacho. Game is never sold, and but very little is obtained in the neighborhood of Lima.
The flower market, which is held on the Plaza Mayor, is but sparingly supplied with the gifts
of Flora. The ladies of Lima recal pleasing recollections of the former glory of their flower
market, and speak with regret of its present degenerate condition. The much-vaunted pucheros
de flores are still occasionally displayed for sale. They are composed of a union of fragrant
fruits and flowers. Several small fruits are laid on a banana leaf, and above them are placed
odoriferous flowers, tastefully arranged according to their colors: the whole is surmounted
with a strawberry, and is profusely sprinkled with agua rica, or lavender water. These pucheros
are very pleasing to the eye, on account of the tasteful arrangement of the flowers; but their
powerful fragrance affects the nerves. They vary in price, according to the rarity of the fruits
and flowers of which they are composed. Some cost as much as six or eight dollars. A puchero
de flores is one of the most acceptable presents that can be offered to a Lima lady.

A mingled feeling of disgust and surprise takes possession of the European who witnesses the
joy which pervades all classes of the inhabitants of Lima on the announcement of a bull-fight.
For several days the event is the exclusive topic of conversation, and, strange to say, the
female portion of the population takes greater interest in it than the men. Bills notifying
the approaching entertainment are stuck up at the corners of the streets; and every one is
anxious to obtain a lista de los toros. When the season of the toros[36] commences, a bull-fight
takes place every Monday, and then the whole city of Lima is thrown into a state of indescribable
excitement. The ladies prepare their finest dresses for the occasion, and they consider it
the greatest possible misfortune if anything occurs to prevent them going to the bull-fight:
indeed, a Monday passed at home in the season of the toros would be regarded as a lost day
in the life of a Limeña. Those who cannot go to the corrida, resort to the bridge, or to the
Alameda, where they sit and amuse themselves by looking at the throngs of people passing and
repassing.

In the time of the Viceroys, bull-fights frequently took place on the Plaza Mayor. Now there
is a place expressly built for these entertainments, called the Plaza firme del Acho. It is
a spacious amphitheatre without a roof, and is erected at the end of the new avenue of the
Alameda. The preparations for the sport commence at an early hour in the morning. Along the
Alameda are placed rows of tables covered with refreshments, consisting of lemonade, brandy,
chicha, picantes, fish, dulces, &c. About twelve o'clock, those who have engaged places in
the amphitheatre begin to move towards the Plaza del Acho.

Most European ladies would turn with horror, even from a description of these cruel sports,
which the ladies of Lima gaze on with delight. They are barbarous diversions, and though they
form a part of national customs, they are nevertheless a national disgrace. At the same time
it would be unjust to make this love of bull-fighting a ground for unqualified censure on the
Limeños, or a reason for accusing them of an utter want of humanity. Being accustomed to these
diversions from early childhood, they regard them with perfect indifference; and custom, no
doubt, blinds them to the cruelties they witness in the bull-ring. The same extenuation may
be urged in behalf of the women: and though to most of the Limeñas a bull-fight affords the
highest possible gratification, yet there are some who form honorable exceptions to this remark,
and who, with true feminine feeling, shrink with horror from such scenes.

Peru is the only one of the South American states in which bull-fights are included in the
category of public amusements. As Peru was the last to answer the cry of independence, and
to shake off the yoke of Spanish domination, so she adheres with most tenacity to the customs
of the mother country; for she has not the energy requisite for developing a nationality of
her own. Even here is apparent that want of independence of character for which the Peruvians
are remarkable. The faults of the Spaniards in them become vices, because, in imitating without
reflecting, they push everything to an extreme. Thus, if bull-fights are cruel in Spain, they
are barbarous in Lima. The government, too, finds it expedient to court popularity by favoring
public entertainments, among which bull-fights take the lead. By allowing the people to indulge
unrestrainedly in all their favorite amusements, the government gains a two-fold object, viz.,
that of securing the support, if not the love of the people, and of averting public attention
from political affairs. These, it must be confessed, are important objects in a country which,
like Peru, is continually disturbed by revolutions caused by the outbreaks of a turbulent populace,
or an undisciplined army.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 31: A very small number in a population of 55,000.]

[Footnote 32: Puquio in the Quichua language signifies springs.]

[Footnote 33: These fine blocks of ice clearly refute the assertion made by some travellers,
that the first real glaciers are found in 19° S. lat.

Lima, according to the careful observations made by Herr Scholtz, is situated in 12° 3' 24''
south latitude, and 77° 8' 30'' west longitude from Greenwich. It may, however, be mentioned
that the longitude from Greenwich is very differently stated. In sea charts and Manuals of
Geography it is often marked 76° 50'. Humboldt makes it 77° 5' 5''; and Malaspina 77° 6' 45''.
According to Ulloa it is 70° 37' west of Cadiz. The latitude is very generally fixed at 12°
2' 3'' south. The height above the level of the sea is also differently estimated. Rivero,
in the Memorial de Ciencias Naturales, I., 2, page 112, states it to be 154 metres, or 462
French feet. On another occasion he makes it 184-4/5 Castilian varas (each vara being equal
to 33 inches English). He gives the following account of heights, according to the barometer,
between Callao and Lima, in varas, viz., Callao, 00; Baquijano, 24-3/5; La Legua, 50-2/5; Mirones,
94-3/20; Portada del Callao, 150; Plaza de Lima, 184-4/5.

The first estimate given by Rivero is the most correct. Gay makes the height of Lima, at the
corner of the church of Espiritu Santo, 172·2 Castilian varas; but most of his heights are
incorrectly stated.

The conical hill in the north-east of Lima, called Cerro de San Cristoval, is, according to
trigonometrical measurements, made in 1737, by Don Jorge Juon, and De la Condamines, 312 varas
higher than the Plaza Mayor, or 134 toises above the sea; but one of the most exact measurements
is Pentland's, who found the height to be 1275 English feet.

The average temperature during the hottest period of the year, from December to March, is 25°
C. The medium temperature during the cold season, from April to November, 17·5° C. Highest
rise of the hygrometer, 21·5°.

The low temperature of Lima at the distance of only twelve degrees from the Equator is to be
ascribed to the situation of the town, and the prevailing atmospheric currents. The Cordilleras,
rising at the distance of only twenty-eight Spanish leagues east of the city, are crowned with
eternal snow; and on the west the sea is distant only two leagues. The prevailing wind blows
from the south-south-west. West winds are not very common, though they sometimes blow with
extraordinary violence for those regions, and breaking on the surrounding mountains, they form
atmospheric whirlwinds, which diffuse alarm through the whole population. In June, 1841, I
had the opportunity of observing one of these dreadful whirlwinds, which swept away huts, and
tore up trees by the roots. The atmospheric currents from the north, which pass over the hot
sand-flats, are not of constant occurrence, but they are oppressively sultry. There must be
other causes for the low temperature of Lima, for in the villages, only a few miles from the
city, and exposed to the same atmospheric influences, it is much higher.

Miraflores is a small place, about one Spanish league and a half from Lima, but it is much
hotter. Among the records of the thermometer are the following:--

  December 20 to 27, maximum 31·8° C.; minimum, 25·9° C.

  December 28, at 6 in the morning, 26·0° C.; at 2 P.M., 32·7° C.;
    at 10 at night, 27·3° C.

  January 1, at 2 P.M., 33·1° C., maximum of the day.

  January 18, at 2 P.M., maximum 34·2° C.

A comparison with the temperature of Lima, on the same days, gives an average of 5·7° C. of
heat in favor of Miraflores.

The River Rimac, which rises among the glaciers of the Cordilleras, and after a course of no
great length, intersects the city, doubtless contributes to cool the atmosphere.

The climate of Lima is agreeable, but not very healthy. During six months, from April to October,
a heavy, damp, but not cold mist, overhangs the city. The summer is always hot, but not oppressive.
The transition from one season to another is gradual, and almost imperceptible. In October
and November the misty canopy begins to rise; it becomes thinner, and yields to the penetrating
rays of the sun. In April the horizon begins to resume the misty veil. The mornings are cool
and overcast, but the middle of the day is clear. In a few weeks after, the brightness of noon
also disappears. The great humidity gives rise to many diseases, particularly fevers, and the
alternations from heat to damp cause dysentery. On an average, the victims to this disease
are very numerous. It is endemic, and becomes, at apparently regular but distant periods, epidemic.
The intermittent fevers or agues, called tercianos, are throughout the whole of Peru very dangerous,
both during their course and in their consequences. It may be regarded as certain that two-thirds
of the people of Lima are suffering at all times from tercianos, or from the consequences of
the disease. It usually attacks foreigners, not immediately on their arrival in Lima, but some
years afterwards. In general the tribute of acclimation is not so soon paid by emigrants in
Lima as in other tropical regions.

In consequence of the ignorance of the medical attendants, and the neglect of the police, the
statistical tables of deaths are very imperfectly drawn up, and therefore cannot be entirely
depended upon. I may, however, here subjoin one of them, which will afford the reader some
idea of the mortality of Lima.

The annual number of deaths in Lima varies from 2,500 to 2,800.

In the ten months, from the 1st of January to the 30th of October, 1841, the number of marriages
was 134, of which 46 were contracted by whites, and 88 by people of color.

        DEATHS IN LIMA FROM JANUARY 1, TO OCTOBER 30, 1841:-

  Diseases.                             Men.  Women.  Children.  Total. 

  The title truly indicates the character of the contents, which are exactly
  what you would expect from a plain blunt man, who loves his friends,
  and equally loves a good story about them, at his own or their expense,
  impartially. The anecdotes in the book are legion, and the actors in
  them range from troopers to generals, and beyond. KING EDWARD, their
  present Majesties, Sir DOUGLAS
    HAIG ("a nice-looking clean little boy in an Eton jacket and collar")
  all figure in the author's pictures of the past, which include also
  a highly characteristic study of WILLIAM THE FRIGHTFUL, congratulating
  the "citizens of Salisbury," represented by a handful of curious urchins,
  upon their "beautiful and ancient cathedral."
     Girls.   Total.

  In marriage          410     412      822
  Not in marriage      432     428      860
                       ---     ---    -----
                       842     840    1,682

The number of births not in marriage (860) is remarkable, and no less so is the number of dead
children exposed, which, during the above interval, was 495. These are most decided proofs
of the immorality and degraded state of manners prevailing in Lima, particularly among the
colored part of the population. Though there is no certain evidence of the fact, yet there
is reason to conjecture that a considerable number of those infants are destroyed by the mothers.
Of the children born out of marriage, nearly two-thirds, and of those exposed dead, full four-fifths
are Mulattos.

The important annual surplus of deaths over births is a matter of serious consideration for
Lima. The above tables show, in the course of ten months, a surplus of 562 deaths. By a comparison
of the lists of births and deaths from 1826 to 1842, I find that on an average there are annually
550 more deaths than births. It would lead me too far to endeavor to investigate all the grounds
of this disparity, but I may observe that one of the causes, unquestionably, is the common,
though punishable crime of producing abortion.

The slighter shocks are sometimes accompanied by a noise; at other times, they are merely perceptible
by the motion of the earth. The subterraneous noises are manifold. For the most part they resemble
the rattling of a heavy loaded wagon, driven rapidly over arches. They usually accompany the
shock, seldom precede it, and only in a few cases do they follow it; sounding like distant
thunder. On one occasion the noise appeared to me like a groan from the depth of the earth,
accompanied by sounds like the crepitation of wood in partitions when an old house is consumed
by fire.

Of the movements, the horizontal vibrations are the most frequent, and they cause the least
damage to the slightly-built habitations. Vertical shocks are most severe; they rend the walls,
and raise the houses out of their foundations. The greatest vertical shock I ever felt was
on the 4th of July, 1839, at half-past seven in the evening, when I was in the old forests
of the Chanchamoyo territory. Before my hut there was an immense stem of a felled tree, which
lay with its lower end on the stump of the root. I was leaning against it and reading, when
suddenly, by a violent movement, the stem rose about a foot and a half, and I was thrown backwards
over it. By the same shock the neighboring river, Aynamayo, was dislodged from its bed, and
its course thereby changed for a considerable length of way.

I have had no experience of the rotatory movements of earthquakes. According to the statements
of all who have observed them, they are very destructive, though uncommon. In Lima I have often
felt a kind of concussion, which accords with that term in the strictest sense of the word.
This movement had nothing in common with what may be called an oscillation, a shock, or a twirl:
it was a passing sensation, similar to that which is felt when a man seizes another unexpectedly
by the shoulder, and shakes him; or like the vibration felt on board a ship when the anchor
is cast, at the moment it strikes the ground. I believe it is caused by short, rapid, irregular
horizontal oscillations. The irregularity of the vibrations is attended by much danger, for
very slight earthquakes of that kind tear away joists from their joinings, and throw down roofs,
leaving the walls standing, which, in all other kinds of commotion, usually suffer first, and
most severely.

Humboldt says that the regularity of the hourly variations of the magnetic needle and the atmospheric
pressure is undisturbed on earthquake days within the tropics. In seventeen observations, which
I made during earthquakes in Lima with a good Lefevre barometer, I found, in fifteen instances,
the position of the mercury quite unaltered. On one occasion, shortly before a commotion, I
observed it 2·4 lines lower than it had been two hours before. Another time, I observed, also
on the approach of the shock and during the twelve following hours, a remarkable rising and
sinking in the column. During these observations the atmosphere was entirely tranquil.

Atmospheric phenomena are frequent, but not infallible prognostics of an earthquake. I have
known individuals in Lima, natives of the coast, who were seldom wrong in predicting an earthquake,
from their observation of the atmosphere. In many places great meteors have been seen before
the commotion. Before the dreadful earthquake of 1746, there were seen fiery vapors (exhalaciones
encendidas) rising out of the earth. On the island of San Lorenzo these phenomena were particularly
remarked.

Many persons have an obscure perception--a foreboding, which is to them always indicative of
an approaching earthquake. They experience a feeling of anxiety and restlessness, a pressure
of the breast, as if an immense weight were laid on it. A momentary shudder pervades the whole
frame, or there is a sudden trembling of the limbs. I, myself, have several times experienced
this foreboding, and there can scarcely be a more painful sensation. It is felt with particular
severity by those who have already had the misfortune to have been exposed to the dangers of
an earthquake.

I will here only briefly mention the celebrated earthquake of 1746, as all its details are
fully described in many publications. The reader need scarcely be reminded that it happened
on the 28th of October, the day of St. Simon and St. Jude. During the night, between ten and
eleven o'clock, the earth having begun to tremble, a loud howling was heard, and, in a few
minutes, Lima became a heap of ruins. The first shock was so great, that the town was almost
completely destroyed by it. Of more than 3000 houses, only twenty-one remained. Still more
horrible was the destruction in the harbor of Callao. The movement of the earth had scarcely
been felt there, when the sea, with frightful roaring, rushed over the shore, and submerged
the whole town with its inhabitants. But in Lesser American Fiction they are for some undiscovered
reason always "fiery." To the fiery one the heroine "unconsciously turns" when the apparent
earmarks of the hero's wormhood are dramatically revealed, and of course she hands him what she
would probably describe as the "sister" stuff when the gentleman emerges in his natural colours.
That is what makes the story-book Southerner so fiery. Place these complex characters in an imaginary
Carribean Republic, a sort of transpontine Ruritania; add a revolution fostered by the serpentine
diplomats of a European power; let the American eagle issue a few
screams, and there you have the environment in which The Unspeakable
Perk lives and moves and has his unreal being.
It was first observed a quarter of an hour after the commotion occurred at Lima, but there
was no trembling of the earth. According to the old chronicle writers, the earthquake of 1630
was more disastrous.

The serious commotions which take place on the Peruvian coast appear to acquire progressively
greater extension, but only in the southern and northern directions. A shock, of which Lima
is the centre, though felt fifty leagues towards the north, and as far towards the south, may,
nevertheless, be imperceptible in the easterly direction (towards the mountains) at the distance
of ten or twelve leagues. This peculiarity is made manifest, not only by the terraqueous oscillations,
but also by the undulations of the sound, which usually proceeds still further in a direction
towards the south or the north.

Slight shocks are usually only local, and are not felt beyond the limits of a few square miles.

The atmospheric phenomena during and after earthquakes are very different. In general, the
atmosphere is tranquil, but occasionally a stormy agitation is the harbinger of a change. I
was unexpectedly overtaken by a violent commotion on the sand-flat between Chancay and Lima.
The whole surface of the plain presented a kind of curling movement, and on every side small
columns of sand rose, and whirled round and round. The mules stopped of their own accord, and
spread out their legs as for support and to secure themselves against apprehended danger. The
arieros (mule-drivers) leaped from their saddles, threw themselves on their knees beside the
animals, and prayed to heaven for mercy.

The effect of earthquakes on the fertility of the soil is sometimes remarkable. Numerous observations
tend to show that after violent commotions luxuriant lands often become barren wastes, and
for several years produce no thriving vegetation. Several Quebradas in the province of Truxillo,
formerly remarkable for their fertility in grain, were left fallow for twenty years after the
earthquake of 1630, as the soil would produce nothing. Similar cases occurred at Supe, Huaura,
Lima, and Yca. All kinds of grain appear to be very susceptible to the changes produced by
earthquakes. Cases are recorded in which, after slight shocks, fields of maize in full bloom
have withered; and in the course of a day or two the crops have perished.

The causes of the frequent earthquakes on the coast of Lima are involved in an obscurity too
deep to be unveiled. That they are connected with volcanic phenomena seems probable. Lima is
more than ninety leagues distant from the nearest active volcano, that of Arequipa. But the
earthquakes of the Peruvian capital are uniformly independent of any state of activity in that
volcano, and it is certain that the town of Arequipa, which lies at the foot of the mountain,
experiences fewer earthquakes than Lima. Of the six serious earthquakes, the dates of which
I have mentioned, only that of 1687 stands in connection with a decided shock in Arequipa,
and an eruption of the volcano. Earthquakes are of rarer occurrence in the mountainous districts
than on the coast, yet Huancavellica, Tarma, Pasco, Caramarca, have been visited by heavy shocks;
and within a recent period the village Quiquijana, in the Province of Quipichanchi, Department
of Cusco, suffered from a serious commotion. Laura also came to share their sentiment. By the
time things had reached this climax the moment was obviously ripe
for the disappearance of the much detested one, in order that the
rest of the tale might keep you guessing which of the three had (so
to speak) belled the cat.

 During the whole month of January, 1841, heavy thunder prevailed, but without
any motion of the earth. On February 11th, we again had a smart shock, and from that day the
vibrations recommenced, which, strange enough, were always most violent on Mondays and Thursdays.
The subterraneous noise resounded incessantly; but it was heard only in the village; for at
the distance of half a league from it all was tranquil. The heaviest shocks were felt in a
circuit within the radius of three leagues. From May 21st to June 2d, all was tranquil; after
the last-mentioned date the vibrations recommenced, and frequently became heavy commotions.
They continued until the middle of July, 1841. From that time we have not been disturbed, and
we have now returned to the ruins of our village."

The volcano of Arequipa, which is forty-five leagues distant from Quiquijana, manifested, during
the whole of this time, no unusual phenomena, a circumstance which speaks forcibly against
the idea of any local connection between the earthquake and the volcano.

On most men earthquakes make a powerful and extraordinary impression. The sudden surprise,
often in sleep, the imminent danger, the impossibility of escape, the dull subterraneous noise,
the yielding of the earth under the feet,--altogether make a formidable demand on the weakness
of human nature.

Humboldt in the Cosmos truly observes--"What is most wonderful for us to comprehend is the
undeception which takes place with respect to the kind of innate belief which men entertain
of the repose and immovability of the terrestrial strata." And further on he says--"The earthquake
appears to men as something omnipresent and unlimited. From the eruption of a crater, from
a stream of lava running towards our dwellings, it appears possible to escape, but in an earthquake,
whichever way flight is directed the fugitive believes himself on the brink of destruction!"

