She went down and opened the door, and the wind rushed into the house and up the stairs, and
I had to shut the bedroom door hastily to keep it out. Then I heard Polly pulling and pulling
at it, and vainly trying to shut it, and I had to go down to help her. She was some minutes
away, for she had difficulty in rousing her neighbour, and I sat beside the unconscious child.
He was talking the whole time, but I could distinguish very little of what he said. It seemed
to be chiefly about going with his daddy in his boat, and every now and then he would call
out quite loudly, 'Come, daddy, come, daddy, to little John.'

When Polly returned with old Betty, I had again to go down to help them to close the door.

'What do you think of him, sir?' said Polly.

I did not like to say what I thought, so I answered, 'Well, perhaps it would be as well to
get the doctor to have another look at him. I'll go for him if you like.'

'I don't believe you could manage it, sir,' said Betty. 'You can't stand outside; me and Polly
has been clinging on to the palings all the way, and it will be terrible up on the top.'

'Shall I try, Polly?'

She gave me a grateful look, but did not answer by words. But the two women gave me so long
a description of the way to the doctor's house, and interrupted each other so often, and at
length both talked together in their eagerness to make it clear to me, that at the end I was
more bewildered and hopelessly puzzled than at the beginning, and I determined to go to Mr.
Christie before I started, in order to obtain from him full and clear directions.

It took me quite ten minutes to reach his house, and I felt as if I had gone through a battle
when I arrived there at length, quite spent and breathless. I saw a light in the lower room,
and I found Mr. Christie and his wife and children sitting in the room where I had passed through
so much the night before. Marjorie and little Jack were in their nightgowns, wrapped in a blanket,
and sitting in the same arm-chair. My mother's picture was looking at me from the wall, and
I fancied that she smiled at me as I came in.

'What a terrible night!' said Mrs. Christie. 'The children were so frightened by the noise
of the wind in their attic that we brought them down here.'

I told them my errand, and Mr. Christie at once offered to go with me for the doctor. I shall
never forget that walk as long as I live. We could not speak to each other more than a few
necessary words, we were simply fighting with the storm. Then, to our disappointment, when
our long walk was ended, we found that the doctor was away, and would probably not return until
morning.

The walk home was, if possible, worse than the walk there, for the wind was dead against us
as we came down the cliff. It had changed somewhat the last hour, and was now blowing from
the north-east.

'There will be trouble out at sea,' Mr. Christie said, as we stopped to take breath.

'And what about the boats?' I asked.

'Yes,' he said, almost with a groan, 'what about the boats?'

We could see very little out at sea, though it was beginning to grow light, but we determined
to make our way to the shore, to see all that it was possible to distinguish. He went home
for a moment, and then followed me to my lodging. Polly and her old friend were still watching
the child.

'I think he's a little better, sir,' she said; 'he's quieter. Oh, Mr. Christie, I am glad to
see you, sir! Will you pray, sir? I think I shall hear the wind less if you pray!'

We knelt down beside the child's bed, but the noise of the storm almost drowned his voice.
At the end of the prayer the child began once more to cry for his father, so piteously, so
beseechingly, that at last I could bear it no longer, but ran downstairs, to be out of the
sound of that touching little voice. Mr. Christie soon followed me, and we went out together
in the grey light of that terrible morning.

'The child is dying, Jack,' he said.

'Oh, don't say so, Mr. Christie!' I answered; 'dying before his father comes back.'

'God grant he may come back!' he said; 'look at the sea, Jack.'

The sea was dashing wildly against the rocks, and the noise of the wind was so great we could
hardly hear our own voices. In the dim uncertain light we could at length distinguish a group
of anxious watchers on the shore. Some old fishermen were there trying to hold a telescope
steady in the gale, that they might look across the water for any sign of a boat, and mothers
and wives and sweethearts of the absent fishermen were there also, with shawls tied over their
heads, and with troubled and tear-stained faces, peering out into the dismal light of that
sorrowful morning.

Mr. Christie and I stood near them, and he spoke from time to time a word of encouragement
and hope to the anxious women beside him. As the light increased the wind dropped somewhat,
and the gale seemed to have spent its violence. We were thankful to notice, that although the
sea was still very rough, and would be so for hours, the wind was gradually subsiding; instead
of howling and shrieking, as it had done the whole night long, it was dying away with gentle
moans, like a child weary with passion who is crying himself to sleep. But still there was
no sign of the boats.

The women on the shore were wet through, and Mr. Christie tried to persuade them to go home.
Their men would want good fires and hot tea on their return, he told them, and they ought to
make ready for them. I was glad to notice that one by one they followed his advice, and turned
to climb the hill towards their cottages. Then we turned also, and went back to my lodging.
We crept into the room, and found old Betty asleep in her chair, and Polly holding the little
hand in hers as the child slept.

'Have the boats come, sir?' she said as we went in.

'Not yet, Polly; but please God they will come soon.'

We sat down beside her for a little time, but we presently heard a shout from the shore.

'Thank God,' said Polly, 'he's come!'

The child seemed in some strange way to have heard that shout, and to have understood its meaning,
for he opened his eyes and said, 'Come, daddy, come to little John.'

We hurried down to the shore, where a large crowd had already collected. The whole of Runswick
Bay seemed to have gathered together in that short space of time. We could distinctly see the
boats far out at sea, but wind and tide were with them, and they, were coming rapidly nearer.
What a night they must have had, and what a welcome they would receive from the watchers on
the shore!

'How many boats went out last night, Bob?' said one man as they drew nearer.

'There was eight, Jem,' he said--'the Jane Ann one, Lady Hilda two, the Susan three, the Mary
Ann four, Princess Alice five, the Lightning six, the Eliza seven, the Alert eight.'

'Are you sure, Bob?'

'Quite sure, I saw them start.'

'Well, there's one missing, Jem,' he said; 'catch hold of this glass, and just you count.'

'One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.'

There was one missing, and I felt that I knew which it was before they came in sight.

It was the Mary Ann.

Chapter IX

ASK WHAT YE WILL

We had run down the hill as quickly as we possibly could, but we were in no haste to return.
We waited until the boats were drawn in, and the worn-out fishermen had come on shore. They
knew nothing of the Mary Ann; they had lost sight of her soon after the beginning of the gale.
They told us they had had an awful night, and had thought they would never reach home in safety.

'However shall we tell Polly?' I groaned.

But a cold hand was laid on mine at that instant, and I turned round to see Polly herself just
behind me. She could wait no longer, but had run down to the shore to hasten her husband up
the hill. She was trembling from head to foot, and seemed ready to faint. The kind-hearted
fishermen crowded round her with words of cheer and comfort.

'He'll be all right, my lass, never fear. He's put into Saltburn or Staithes maybe; these gales
they drive so far. He'll be home all safe and sound afore night.'

But Polly did not seem to hear them. She stretched out her hands feebly to Mr. Christie and
to me as she said:

'Take me home; I can bear it better there.'

The fishermen turned away sorrowfully, and there were very few dry eyes amongst the group which
we left on the shore.

When we reached the house again all was quite still, and as we entered the bedroom I thought
the little soul had passed away, but I bent over him to listen and to my relief I found he
was still breathing.

As I look back, I hardly know how we lived through that sorrowful day. The doctor came, and
did nothing but shake his head in the ominous way which doctors have when they feel a case
is beyond their power. I think Polly had so little hope herself that she did not care to ask
him what his real opinion was.

I went out for a short walk in the afternoon, to get a little fresh air to strengthen me for
the coming night, when I had determined to watch with Polly beside little John, if he was still
living. My young friends, Bob and Harry, joined me, and we were pacing up and down together
watching the tide come in when we thought we saw a dark speck far out to sea.

There were others who saw it also. The coastguard was looking at it through his telescope,
and before very long the shore was covered with fishermen and their wives, all gazing in the
same direction. Whatever the object was, it was coming rapidly shoreward; wind and tide were
both with it, and it was being borne swiftly along. After a little time we could distinguish,
even without the help of a telescope, what it was, and I do not think there was anything which
we could have been more aghast to see, for the floating object was a boat bottom upwards, and
being driven rapidly before the tide.

A groan came from the group of fishermen who were watching, and as the capsized boat neared
shore they ran into the water to meet it. I do not think it was necessary to look at the name
upon it as it was dragged out of the water: we all did look, however, and we found there the
name which we knew we should see before we looked. It was the Mary Ann.

I shall never forget the piercing shriek which came from the wife of one of Duncan's mates,
who was standing just behind me, when she read the name on the boat. I thought the shock and
the sorrow had driven her mad, for she ran screaming up the hill; indeed, I firmly believe
that for the time she was quite out of her mind.

Poor Polly heard the shrieks of the woman as she ran under her window, and looking out, she
saw the boat on the shore, and guessed the truth at once. She did not scream nor cry, but she
looked as if she had been turned into stone. No word escaped her lips, not a tear was in her
eye; but she looked as if all her youth had gone in a moment, and as if she had suddenly become
an old and worn-out woman.

She never looked up as we went in, but bent over little John, moistening his lips from time
to time, and watching his every movement. We tried to say a few words of comfort, but she did
not seem even to hear our voices. Yet no moan, no sigh from the child was unheard by her; she
seemed to be listening to every breath he drew, as if it might be his last.

