There was a certain old Mrs. Brownlow, who inhabited a large old-fashioned house on the Fulham
Road, just beyond the fashionable confines of Brompton, but nearer to town than the decidedly
rural district of Walham Green and Parson's Green. She was deeply interested in the welfare
of the Underwood girls, having been a first cousin of their paternal grandmother, and was very
unhappy because their father would not go home and take care of them. She was an excellent
old woman, affectionate, charitable, and religious; but she was rather behindhand in general
matters, and did not clearly understand much about anything in these latter days. She had heard
that Sir Thomas was accustomed to live away from his daughters, and thought it very shocking;--but
she knew that Sir Thomas either was or had been in Parliament, and that he was a great lawyer
and a very clever man, and therefore she made excuses. She did not quite understand it all,
but she thought it expedient to befriend the young ladies. She had heard, too, that Ralph Newton,
who had been entrusted to the care of Sir Thomas, was heir to an enormous property; and she
thought that the young man ought to marry one of the young ladies. Consequently, whenever she
would ask her cousins to tea, she would also ask Mr. Ralph Newton. Sometimes he would come.
More frequently he would express his deep regret that a previous engagement prevented him from
having the pleasure of accepting Mrs. Brownlow's kind invitation. On all these occasions Mrs.
Brownlow invited Sir Thomas;--but Sir Thomas never came. It could hardly have been expected
of him that he should do so. Bolsover House was the old-fashioned name of Mrs. Brownlow's residence;
and an invitation for tea had been sent for a certain Tuesday in July,--Tuesday, July the 18th.
Mrs. Brownlow had of course been informed of the arrival of Mary Bonner,--who was in truth
as nearly related to her as the Underwood girls,--and the invitation was given with the express
intention of doing honour to Mary. By the young ladies from Popham Villa the invitation was
accepted as a matter of course.

"Will he be there?" Clary said to her sister.

"I hope not, Clarissa."

"Why do you hope not? We are not to quarrel; are we, Patty?"

"No;--we need not quarrel. But I am afraid of him. He is not good enough, Clary, for you to
be unhappy about him. And I fear,--I fear, he is--"

"Is what, Patty? Do speak it out. There is nothing I hate so much as a mystery."

"I fear he is not genuine;--what people call honest. He would say things without quite meaning
what he says."

"I don't think it. I am sure he is not like that. I may have been a fool--" Then she stopped
herself, remembering the whole scene on the lawn. Alas;--there had been no misunderstanding
him. The crime had been forgiven; but the crime had been a great fact. Since that she had seen
him only once, and then he had been so cold! But yet as he left her he had not been quite cold.
Surely that pressure of her hand had meant something;--had meant something after that great
crime! But why did he not come to her; or why,--which would have been so far, far better,--did
he not go to her papa and tell everything to him? Now, however, there was the chance that she
would see him at Bolsover House. That Mrs. Brownlow would ask him was quite a matter of course.

The great event of the evening was to be the introduction of Mrs. Brownlow to the new cousin.
They were to drink tea out in the old-fashioned garden behind the house, from which Mrs. Brownlow
could retreat into her own room at the first touch of a breath of air. The day was one of which
the world at large would declare that there was no breath of air, morning, noon, or night.
There was to be quite a party. That was evident from the first to our young ladies, who knew
the ways of the house, and who saw that the maids were very smart, and that an extra young
woman had been brought in; but they were the first to come,--as was proper.

"My dear Mary," said the old woman to her new guest, "I am glad to see you. I knew your mother
and loved her well. I hope you will be happy, my dear." Mrs. Brownlow was a very little old
woman, very pretty, very grey, very nicely dressed, and just a little deaf. Mary Bonner kissed
her, and murmured some word of thanks. The old woman stood for a few seconds, looking at the
beauty,--astounded like the rest of the world. "Somebody told me she was good-looking," Mrs.
Brownlow said to Patience;--"but I did not expect to see her like that."

"Is she not lovely?"

"She is a miracle, my dear! I hope she won't steal all the nice young men away from you and
your sister, eh? Yes;--yes. What does Mr. Newton say to her?" Patience, however, knew that
she need not answer all the questions which Mrs. Brownlow asked, and she left this question
unanswered.

Two or three elderly ladies came in, and four or five young ladies, and an old gentleman who
sat close to Mrs. Brownlow and squeezed her hand very often, and a middle-aged gentleman who
was exceedingly funny, and two young gentlemen who carried the tea and cakes about, but did
not talk much. Such were the guests, and the young ladies, who no doubt were accustomed to
Mrs. Brownlow's parties, took it all as it was intended, and were not discontented. There was
one young lady, however, who longed to ask a question, but durst not. Had Ralph Newton promised
that he would come? Clary was sitting between the old gentleman who seemed to be so fond of
Mrs. Brownlow's hand and her cousin Mary. She said not a word,--nor, indeed, was there much
talking among the guests in general. The merry, middle-aged gentleman did the talking, combining
with it a good deal of exhilarating laughter at his own wit. The ladies sat round, and sipped
their tea and smiled. That middle-aged gentleman certainly earned his mild refreshment;--for
the party without him must have been very dull. Then there came a breath of air,--or, as Mrs.
Brownlow called it, a keen north wind; and the old lady retreated into the house. "Don't let
me take anybody else in,--only I can't stand a wind like that." The old gentleman accompanied
her, and then the elderly ladies. The young ladies came next, and the man of wit, with the
silent young gentlemen, followed, laden with scarfs, parasols, fans, and stray teacups. "I
don't think we used to have such cold winds in July," said Mrs. Brownlow. The old gentleman
pressed her hand once more, and whispered into her ear that there had certainly been a great
change.

Suddenly Ralph Newton was among them. Clarissa had not heard him announced, and to her it seemed
as though he had come down from the heavens,--as would have befitted his godship. He was a
great favourite with Mrs. Brownlow, who, having heard that he was heir to a very large property,
thought that his extravagance became him. According to her views it was his duty to spend a
good deal of money, and his duty also to marry Clarissa Underwood. As he was as yet unmarried
to any one else, she hardly doubted that he would do his duty. She was a sanguine old lady,
who always believed that things would go right. She bustled and fussed on the present occasion
with the very evident intention of getting a seat for him next to Clarissa; but Clarissa was
as active in avoiding such an arrangement, and Ralph soon found himself placed between Mary
Bonner and a very deaf old lady, who was always present at Mrs. Brownlow's tea-parties. "I
suppose this has all been got up in your honour," he said to Mary. She smiled, and shook her
head. "Oh, but it has. I know the dear old lady's ways so well! She would never allow a new
Underwood to be at the villa for a month without having a tea-party to consecrate the event."

"Isn't she charming, Mr. Newton;--and so pretty?"

"No end of charming, and awfully pretty. Why are we all in here instead of out in the garden?"

"Mrs. Brownlow thought that it was cold."

"With the thermometer at 80°! What do you think, who ought to know what hot weather means?
Are you chilly?"

"Not in the least. We West Indians never find this climate cold the first year. Next year I
don't doubt that I shall be full of rheumatism all over, and begging to be taken back to the
islands."

Clarissa watched them from over the way as though every word spoken between them had been a
treason to herself. And yet she had almost been rude to old Mrs. Brownlow in the manner in
which she had placed herself on one side of the circle when the old lady had begged her to
sit on the other. Certainly, had she heard all that was said between her lover and her cousin,
there was nothing in the words to offend her. She did not hear them; but she could see that
Ralph looked into Mary's beautiful face, and that Mary smiled in a demure, silent, self-assured
way which was already becoming odious to Clarissa. Clarissa herself, when Ralph looked into
her face, would blush and turn away, and feel herself unable to bear the gaze of the god.

In a few minutes there came to be a sudden move, and all the young people trooped back into
the garden. It was Ralph Newton who did it, and nobody quite understood how it was done. "Certainly,
my dears; certainly," said the old lady. "I dare say the moon is very beautiful. Yes; I see
Mr. Ralph. You are not going to take me out, I can tell you. The moon is all very well, but
I like to see it through the window. Don't mind me. Mr. Truepeny will stay with me." Mr. Truepeny,
who was turned eighty, put out his hand and patted Mrs. Brownlow's arm, and assured her that
he wanted nothing better than to stay with her for ever. The witty gentleman did not like the
move, because it had been brought about by a newcomer, who had, as it were, taken the wind
out of his sails. He lingered awhile, hoping to have weight enough to control the multitude;--in
which he failed, and at last made one of the followers. And Clarissa lingered also, because
Ralph had been the first to stir. Ralph had gone out with Mary Bonner, and therefore Clarissa
had held back. So it came to pass that she found herself walking round the garden with the
witty, exhilarating, middle-aged gentleman,--whom, for the present at least, she most cordially
hated. "I am not quite sure that our dear old friend isn't right," said the witty man, whose
name was Poojean;--"a chair to sit down upon, and a wall or two around one, and a few little
knick-nacks about,--carpets and tables and those sort of things,--are comfortable at times."

"I wonder you should leave them then," said Clarissa.

"Can there be a wonder that I leave them with such temptation as this," said the gallant Poojean.
Clarissa hated him worse than ever, and would not look at him, or even make the faintest sign
that she heard him. The voice of Ralph Newton through the trees struck her ears; and yet the
voice wasn't loud,--as it would not be if it were addressed with tenderness to Mary. And there
was she bound by some indissoluble knot to,--Mr. Poojean. "That Mr. Newton is a friend of yours?"
asked Mr. Poojean.

"Yes;--a friend of ours," said Clarissa.

"Then I will express my intense admiration for his wit, general character, and personal appearance.
Had he been a stranger to you, I should, of course, have insinuated an opinion that he was
a fool, a coxcomb, and the very plainest young man I had ever seen. That is the way of the
world,--isn't it, Miss Underwood?"

"I don't know," said Clarissa.

"Oh, yes,--you do. That's the way we all go on. As he is your friend, I can't dare to begin
to abuse him till after the third time round the garden."

"I beg, then, that there may be only two turns," said Clarissa. But she did not know how to
stop, or to get rid of her abominable companion.

"If I mustn't abuse him after three turns, he must be a favourite," said the persevering Poojean.
"I suppose he is a favourite. By-the-bye, what a lovely girl that is with whom your favourite
was,--shall I say flirting?"

"That lady is my cousin, Mr. Poojean."

"I didn't say that she was flirting, mind. I wouldn't hint such a thing of any young lady,
let her be anybody's cousin. Young ladies never flirt. But young men do sometimes;--don't they?
After all, it is the best fun going;--isn't it?"

"I don't know," said Clarissa. By this time they had got round to the steps leading from the
garden to the house. "I think I'll go in, Mr. Poojean." She did go in, and Mr. Poojean was
left looking at the moon all alone, as though he had separated himself from all mirth and society
for that melancholy but pleasing occupation. He stood there gazing upwards with his thumbs
beneath his waistcoat. "Grand,--is it not?" he said to the first couple that passed him.

"Awfully grand, and beautifully soft, and all the rest of it," said Ralph, as he went on with
Mary Bonner by his side.

"That fellow has got no touch of poetry in him!" said Poojean to himself. In the meantime Clarissa,
pausing a moment as she entered through the open window, heard Ralph's cheery voice. How well
she knew its tones! And she still paused, with ears erect, striving to catch some word from
her cousin's mouth. But Mary's words, if they were words spoken by her, were too low and soft
to be caught. "Oh,--if she should turn out to be sly!" Clarissa said to herself. Was it true
that Ralph had been flirting with her,--as that odious man had said? And why, why, why had
Ralph not come to her, if he really loved her, as he had twice told her that he did? Of course
she had not thrown herself into his arms when old Mrs. Brownlow made that foolish fuss. But
still he might have come to her. He might have waited for her in the garden. He might have
saved her from the "odious vulgarity" of that "abominable old wretch." For in such language
did Clarissa describe to herself the exertions to amuse her which had been made by her late
companion. But had the Sydney Smith of the day been talking to her, he would have been dull,
or the Count D'Orsay of the day, he would have been vulgar, while the sound of Ralph Newton's
voice, as he walked with another girl, was reaching her ears. And then, before she had seated
herself in Mrs. Brownlow's drawing-room, another idea had struck her. Could it be that Ralph
did not come to her because she had told him that she would never forgive him for that crime?
Was it possible that his own shame was so great that he was afraid of her? If so, could she
not let him know that he was,--well, forgiven? Poor Clarissa! In the meantime the voices still
came to her from the garden, and she still thought that she could distinguish Ralph's low murmurings.

