Military Order OF THE Loyal Legion of the United States

COMMANDERY OF THE STATE OF MISSOURI

The Battle of Spring Hill, Tennessee.

PREPARED BY Companion Captain John K. Shellenberger

READ AFTER THE STATED MEETING HELD FEBRUARY 2d, 1907

PREFACE.

More than twenty-five years have passed since I began to collect the materials from which this
pamphlet has been evolved. As a substantial basis, to begin with, I was an eye-witness of all
the fighting in the vicinity of Spring Hill, that amounted to anything, from the time Forrest
attacked the 64th Ohio on the skirmish line until Cleburne's Division recoiled from the fire
of the battery posted at the village.

Since I began collecting I have neglected no opportunity to increase my stock of information
by conversation, reading or correspondence. I have twice revisited the battlefield. I have
the Government volume containing the official reports, all of which I have carefully studied.
Among my correspondents, on the Union side, have been Generals Stanley, Wilson, Opdycke, Lane
and Bradley, besides many others of lesser rank. I am as confident, from their letters, that
my paper would have the approval of those named, who are now dead, as I am sure it has the
approval of General Wilson, to whom a manuscript copy was submitted for criticism.

Among other Confederates, I wrote to General S.D. Lee, who referred me to Judge J.P. Young,
of Memphis Tennessee, with the statement that he had exhausted the subject on the Confederate
side. He was present at Spring Hill as a boy soldier in Forrest's cavalry, and for years has
been engaged in writing a history of the Confederate Army of Tennessee, to which he has given
an enormous amount of careful research. To him I am indebted for much of the most valuable
part of my information concerning the Confederate troops. From the materials thus gathered
I have tried to give, within the compass of a Loyal Legion paper, a clear and truthful account
of the affair just as it happened. That opinions will differ, is shown by the fact that Judge
Young holds General Brown responsible for the Confederate failure, while I believe that Cheatham,
Stewart and Bate were all greater sinners than Brown. He was acting under the eye of Cheatham,
who could easily have forced an attack by Brown's Division if he had been equal to the occasion.

By a curious coincidence General Lee was present as the guest of the Missouri Commandery at
the meeting when the paper was read, and, in commenting on it, General Lee stated that I had
told the truth about as it had occurred. The deductions made from the facts stated are my own.

THE BATTLE OF SPRING HILL.

It may be fairly claimed that the success of General Sherman's famous March to the Sea hung
on the issue of a minor battle fought at Spring Hill, in Middle Tennessee, the evening of November
29th, 1864, when Sherman and his army were hundreds of miles away in the heart of Georgia.
It will be remembered that when Sherman started from Atlanta for Savannah his old antagonist,
General Hood, was at Florence, Alabama, refitting his army to the limit of the waning resources
of the Confederacy, for an aggressive campaign into Tennessee. If Hood's campaign had proved
successful Sherman's unopposed march through Georgia would have been derided as a crazy freak,
and, no doubt, the old charge of insanity would have been revived against him. By how narrow
a margin Hood missed a brilliant success, a truthful account of the Spring Hill affair will
disclose. Much has been written by interested generals of both sides, and by their partisan
friends, to mislead as to the real situation. With no personal friendships or enmities to subserve,
it is the intention of this paper to tell the truth without any regard to its effect on the
reputation of any general, Federal or Confederate.

The Administration gave a reluctant consent to Sherman's plan on the condition that he would
leave with General Thomas, commanding in Tennessee, a force strong enough to defeat Hood. On
paper Thomas had plenty of men, but Sherman had taken his pick of infantry, cavalry, artillery
and transportation, leaving the odds and ends with Thomas, consisting largely of post troops
garrisoning towns; bridge guards in block-houses along the railroads; new regiments recruited
by the payment of the big bounties that produced the infamous tribe of bounty jumpers; negro
regiments never yet tested in battle; green drafted men assigned to some of the old, depleted
regiments in such large numbers as to change their veteran character; dismounted cavalrymen
sent back to get horses, and convalescents and furloughed men belonging to the army with Sherman
who had come up too late to join their commands, organized into temporary companies and regiments.

Moreover, Thomas' forces were scattered from East Tennessee to Central Missouri, where General
A.J. Smith, with two divisions of the Sixteenth corps, was marching for St. Louis to take steamboats
to join Thomas at Nashville. The only force available for immediate field service consisted
of the Fourth and the Twenty-third corps, the two weakest corps of Sherman's army, which he
had sent back to Thomas. These two corps, temporarily commanded by General Schofield, were
thrown well forward towards Florence to delay Hood long enough for Thomas to concentrate and
organize from his widely scattered resources a force strong enough to give battle to Hood.

Passing over all prior operations we will take up the situation as it was the morning of November
29th. General Schofield had then well in hand on the north bank of Duck River, opposite Columbia,
Tennessee, the divisions of Kimball, Wagner and Wood, composing the Fourth corps, and of Cox
and Ruger, of the Twenty-third corps, Ruger's lacking one brigade on detached service. Across
the river were two divisions of General S. D. Lee's corps of Hood's Army. The preceding evening
Hood, himself, with the corps of Cheatham and Stewart, and Johnson's division of Lee's corps,
had moved up the river five and one-half miles to Davis' ford, where he was laying his pontoons
preparatory to crossing. His plan was to detain Schofield at the river by feinting with two
divisions while he would lead seven divisions past the left flank and plant them across Schofield's
line of retreat at Spring Hill, twelve miles north of Duck River. As Hood greatly outnumbered
Schofield, his plan contemplated the destruction of Schofield's army.

During the evening of the 28th General Wilson, commanding our cavalry, had learned enough of
Hood's movement to divine its purpose. In view of its vital importance, to insure a delivery,
he sent a message in triplicate, each courier riding by a separate road, informing Schofield
of what Hood was doing, and advising and urging him to get back to Spring Hill with all his
army by 10 o'clock, the 29th. General Wilson has stated that his couriers all got through,
the one riding by the shortest road reaching Schofield's headquarters at 3 a.m. of the 29th.

From the reports sent him by Wilson, General Thomas at Nashville had also correctly divined
Hood's intention, and in a dispatch dated at 3:30 a.m., of the 29th--but by the neglect of
the night operator not transmitted until 6 o'clock, when the day operator came on duty--he
ordered Schofield to fall back to Franklin, leaving a sufficient force at Spring Hill to delay
Hood until he was securely posted at Franklin.

I was commanding Company B, 64th Ohio Regiment, Bradley's brigade, Wagner's division. The brigade
was under arms that morning by 4 o'clock, and had orders to be ready to march on a moment's
notice. It is assumed that all the rest of the army received the same orders, and that this
action was taken on account of the information brought by Wilson's courier at 3 o'clock. But
nothing was done until 8 o'clock, when the movements began which disposed of our army as follows:

Wagner's division was sent to Spring Hill to guard the reserve artillery and the wagon trains,
all ordered to Spring Hill, from any raid by Hood's cavalry. General Stanley, the corps commander,
went with Wagner. Cox's division was posted along the river, and was engaged all day in skirmishing
with the two divisions under Lee, which kept up a noisy demonstration of forcing a crossing.
Ruger's two brigades were posted four miles north of Duck river, where the pike to Spring Hill
crosses Rutherford's creek, to hold that crossing. The divisions of Kimball and Wood were aligned
between Cox and Ruger, facing up the river towards Hood's crossing. At 9 o'clock Post's brigade,
of Wood's division, was sent up the river to reconnoiter, and before 11 o'clock Post had reached
a position where he could see Hood's column marching towards Spring Hill, and repeatedly reported
that fact.

Nevertheless none of the four divisions near Duck river were started for Spring Hill until
after 4 o'clock, when Schofield had heard from Stanley that Hood was attacking at Spring Hill.
When, two months later, Schofield was in Washington, where they knew nothing about the details
of the campaign, he so successfully impressed his claim on the Administration that he was given
the same promotion with which General Sheridan had been rewarded for the victory at Winchester,
jumping at one bound from the rank of captain to that of brigadier-general in the regular army.
But it is plain that after five hours' of deliberation that morning Schofield had reached a
wrong conclusion as to Hood's intention, for if "Actions speak louder than words," there can
be no question that Schofield's dispositions were made under the conviction that Hood would
march down the river, after crossing, to clear the way for Lee to cross. And so deeply infatuated
was he with this self-imposed delusion that, disregarding the order of Thomas and the advice
of Wilson, he cherished it for about five hours after Post had reported that Hood was marching
towards Spring Hill.

Wagner's advance, double-quicking through Spring Hill at noon, and deploying just beyond on
a run, interposed barely in time to head off the advance of Hood's cavalry, Wagner arriving
by the Columbia pike from the southwest and the cavalry by the Mount Carmel road from the east.
General Forrest, commanding Hood's cavalry, had used his superior numbers so skillfully as
to push back Wilson with our cavalry just north of Mount Carmel, which is five miles east of
Spring Hill, before noon. Leaving one brigade to watch Wilson, Forrest then crossed over to
Spring Hill with all the rest of his three divisions of cavalry. If Wagner had arrived a few
minutes later he would have found Forrest in possession at Spring Hill.

General Cox, in his book on this campaign, claims that General Wilson committed a grave error
in not crossing over to Spring Hill, in advance of Forrest, with all our cavalry. But in justice
to Wilson it must be remembered that at Mount Carmel he acted under the belief that Schofield
was following the advice he had given early that morning. If Schofield had been at Spring Hill
at 10 o'clock, as Wilson had advised, with all his infantry, what reason could there have been
for the cavalry joining him there?

When Bradley's brigade, the rear of Wagner's column, was nearing Spring Hill some of the cavalry
approached the pike through the fields to reconnoiter, and the 64th Ohio was sent to drive
them away. With the right wing deployed as skirmishers and the left wing in reserve, the regiment
advanced steadily, driving before it the cavalry, without replying to the harmless long-range
fire they kept up with their carbines, but always galloping away before we could get within
effective range. About a mile east of the pike we crossed the Rally Hill road. This was the
road by which Hood's infantry column approached. It there runs north nearly parallel with the
pike to a point 500 yards east of Spring Hill, where it turns west to enter the village. Leaving
one of the reserve companies to watch the road, the rest of the regiment kept on in pursuit
of the cavalry until our skirmishers were abreast of the Caldwell house, about 800 yards east
of the road, when a halt was called. A few minutes later, at 2:30 o'clock, the left of our
skirmish line, north of the Caldwell house, was attacked by a line of battle in front while
the cavalry worked around our left flank. At the time we believed the battle line to be a part
of Hood's infantry, and in a letter from General Bradley he states that it caused great consternation
at headquarters in Spring Hill when Major Coulter, of the 64th, came galloping back with the
information that the regiment was fighting with infantry. But investigation has disclosed that
the battle line was composed of mounted infantry belonging to Forrest's command. They were
armed with Enfield rifles, and always fought on foot like ordinary infantry, using their horses
for traveling rapidly from place to place.

The four reserve companies were thrown in on a run at the point of contact, but our line was
soon forced to fall back by the cavalry turning our left flank, where they cut off and captured
three of our skirmishers. One of the three was badly wounded that evening in trying to escape,
a bullet entering from behind and passing through his mouth in a way to knock out nearly one-half
of all his teeth. We found him in a hospital at Spring Hill when passing through in pursuit
of Hood's army after the victory at Nashville. In relating his experience he stated that when
they were captured they were taken before some general, name unknown to him, who questioned
them closely as to what force was holding Spring Hill. The general was probably Forrest, for
he was personally directing the attack on the 64th, but may have been Hood himself, for he
was on the Rally Hill road, less than a mile away, soon after the men were captured. They all
declared that they knew the Fourth corps was at Spring Hill, and they believed all the rest
of the army. Their declaration must have carried greater weight on account of their own faith
in what they were telling, for at that time the whole regiment believed that all the rest of
the army had followed to Spring Hill close on the heels of Wagner's division.

Eventually the 64th was driven back across the Rally Hill road, where a last stand was made
in a large woods covering a broad ridge abutting on the road about three-fourths of a mile
southeast of Spring Hill. While in these woods, occurred a bit of exciting personal experience.
A bullet, coming from the right, passed through my overcoat, buttoned up to my chin, in a way
to take along the top button of my blouse underneath the coat. That big brass button struck
me a stinging blow on the point of the left collar-bone, and, clasping both hands to the spot,
I commenced feeling for the hole with my finger tips, fully convinced that a bullet coming
from the front had gone through me there and had inflicted a serious and possibly a mortal
wound. It was not until I had opened the coat for a closer investigation that I found I was
worse scared than hurt. Some of the enemy had secured a position on our right flank, where
they opened an enfilading fire, and it was one of their bullets that had hit me. To get out
of that fire the regiment fell back towards the interior of the woods, where it was so close
to our main line that it was called in.

It was then about 3:30 o'clock, and by that time the situation of our army had become so critical
that nothing short of the grossest blundering on the part of the enemy could save it from a
great disaster, and there was a fine possibility for destroying it.

Wagner's division had so much property to protect that it was stretched out on a line extending
from the railway station, nearly a mile northwest of Spring Hill, where two trains of cars
were standing on the track, around by the north, east and south, to the Columbia pike on the
southwest. Behind this long line the village streets and the adjacent fields were crammed with
nearly everything on wheels belonging to our army--ambulances, artillery carriages and army
wagons to the number of about 800 vehicles. The nearest support was Ruger's two brigades, eight
miles away, and it was about an hour later before Ruger had started for Spring Hill. Opdycke's
brigade was covering the railway station and the Franklin pike on the north, and Lane's brigade
the Mount Carmel road on the east. They had a connected line, but it was so long that much
of it consisted of skirmishers only. They had in their front detachments of Forrest's cavalry
feeling along their line for an opening to get at the trains. Bradley's brigade occupied an
advanced, detached position, on the ridge to the southeast that has been mentioned, to cover
the approach by the Rally Hill road. There was a gap of half a mile between Lane's right in
front of Spring Hill and Bradley's left, out on the ridge. Bradley had in his immediate front
the main body of Forrest's three divisions of cavalry and the three divisions of infantry composing
Cheatham's corps, while four more divisions of infantry were within easy supporting distance.
In brief, ten of the twelve divisions, cavalry included, composing Hood's army, were in front
of Spring Hill, and at 4 o'clock Hood was attacking with his infantry Wagner's lone division,
guarding all our trains, while Schofield was still waiting for Hood at Duck river with four
divisions from eight to twelve miles away. If Wagner's division had been wiped out, a very
easy possibility for the overwhelming numbers confronting it while stretched out on a line
about three miles long, without any breastworks, the rich prize of our ambulance train, six
batteries of artillery, and all our wagons with their loads of supplies would have fallen into
Hood's hands, and the retreat of the four divisions would have been squarely cut off, while
having a short supply of artillery and no food or ammunition except what the men were carrying
in their haversacks and cartridge boxes. The escape of our army from this deadly peril was
largely due to the great skill with which General Stanley handled the situation at Spring Hill,
but manifestly no amount of skill on the part of Stanley could have saved us, where the disadvantages
were so great, if the enemy had improved with a very ordinary degree of vigor and intelligence
the opportunity opened to them by Schofield's delusion as to Hood's intention. General Hood
rode with the advance of his column until after it had crossed Rutherford's creek, two and
one-half miles south of Spring Hill. It was then about 3 o'clock. There was no bridge, and
his men had to wade the creek, which caused some delay. A short distance north of the crossing
Hood met Forrest, and got his report of the situation at Spring Hill as he had developed it
during the three hours preceding. He had met with resistance on so long a line that no doubt
he greatly overestimated the force holding Spring Hill, and such an estimate would agree with
the story told by the captured 64th men.

On the other hand, a courier had arrived with a report from Lee that Schofield's main body
was still in his front at Duck river, and Lee's report was confirmed by the sounds of the heavy
cannonading that had been coming from his direction. These reports disclosed that a part of
Schofield's army was at Spring Hill and a part at Duck river, but they conflicted as to which
position was held by his main body. In the uncertainty thus arising Hood decided, as his dispositions
clearly show, that his first move must be to plant Cheatham's corps on the pike between those
two parts. Developments would then determine his next move. Cleburne's division was the first
to cross the creek, and marching up the road until his advance was close to the woods where
Forrest's men were fighting with the 64th Ohio, Cleburne halted and formed his battle line
along the road facing west towards the Columbia pike. If the intention had been to make a direct
attack, his line would have formed facing north towards our line in the woods, where its position
had been developed by Forrest. The intention unquestionably was for Cleburne, avoiding any
encounter with our line in the woods, first to cross over to the pike and then change direction
and advance on Spring Hill astride the pike, while Bate's division, following Cleburne's, received
orders as reported by Bate, to cross to the pike and then sweep down the pike towards Columbia.
Hood himself gave the orders to Cleburne and Bate, and then established his headquarters at
the Thompson farm house, near by, about 500 yards west of the Rally Hill road, and nearly two
miles south of Spring Hill, where he remained till next morning. To save time Cleburne started
for the pike as soon as he was ready, and Bate, then forming on Cleburne's left, followed as
soon as his formation was completed.

While Cleburne and Bate were moving out, General Cheatham was at the crossing hurrying over
Brown's division. When Brown got over he could support either Cleburne or Bate, as developments
might dictate. Uncandid statements have been made that Cheatham's divisions were moved around
in a disjointed manner and without any plan. There was not only a logical plan but a successful
plan, if it had been carried out, in the orders given to Cheatham's divisions. The other four
divisions were halted south of Rutherford's creek, and fronted into line facing west towards
the Columbia pike. This proves that it was then Hood's belief that Schofield's main body was
still at Duck river. If it should march up the pike and attack Bate, the four divisions would
be on its flank. If it should attempt to reach the fortifications at Murfreesboro by cutting
across the country south of Spring Hill the four divisions would be in a position to intercept it.

General Bradley had four regiments in line in the woods on the ridge, with the left towards
the Rally Hill road and the right trending away towards the pike. They faced in a southeasterly
direction. To cover more ground there were short gaps between the regiments. The 65th Ohio
was the right regiment of the four, and to the right rear of the 65th was a gap of a couple
hundred yards extending out into cleared land, where the 42d Illinois was posted, refused as
to the 65th and facing south to cover that flank. To the front, right and rear of the 42d was
a broad expanse of rolling fields extending on the right to the pike, about 1,000 yards away,
where two guns were posted to sweep the fields in front of the 42d with their fire. To the
left of the 42d an extension of the woods ran out into the fields and concealed the 42d from
Cleburne until he had advanced almost abreast of its position. When the 64th came off the skirmish
line it was sent to the support of the 42d. The 36th Illinois, Opdycke's only reserve, was
hurried across on double-quick from the other side of Spring Hill to support the two guns at
the pike. As many guns of the reserve artillery as could be utilized were placed in battery
around the southeasterly skirt of the village, looking towards Bradley's position. Bradley's
men very hastily had constructed weak barricades of rails or anything else they could lay their
hands on. The 42d had such protection as was afforded by a rail fence.

Shortly before 4 o'clock, having completed his formation, Cleburne started to march across
to the pike. His division consisted of four brigades, but one was on detached duty, and he
had three in line--Lowrey's on his right, then Govan's, then Granbury's. First crossing a field
in his front, Lowrey entered the extension of the woods that has been mentioned, and on emerging
on the other side his right came in view within easy range of the 42d, and that regiment opened
an enfilading fire, Lowrey's line being then almost perpendicular to the line of the 42d. It
was this accident of Lowrey's right passing within range of the 42d that led to the failure
of Hood's plan, which, up to that minute, had been a great success. When the 42d opened fire
the two guns at the pike also opened, their fire crossing that of the 42d, and the 64th, running
forward and intermingling ranks with the 42d, poured in their fire. When our fire had thus
developed our position, out in those wide fields they could see just what we had. They pulled
down the rims of their old hats over their eyes, bent their heads to the storm of missiles
pouring upon them, changed direction to their right on double-quick in a manner that excited
our admiration, and a little later a long line came sweeping through the wide gap between the
right of the 42d and the pike, and swinging in towards our rear. Our line stood firm, holding
back the enemy in front until the flank movement had progressed so far as to make it a question
of legs to escape capture when the regimental commanders gave the reluctant order to fall back.
The contact was then so close that as the men on our right were running past the line closing
in on them they were called on with loud oaths, charging them with a Yankee canine descent,
to halt and surrender; and, not heeding the call, some of them were shot down with the muzzles
of the muskets almost touching their bodies. By the recession of the two regiments on the flank
the rear of the four regiments in the woods became exposed. They were attacked at the same
time by Forrest in front, and by Cleburne on their right and rear, and were speedily dislodged.
The attack was pressed with so much vigor that in a few minutes after the 42d had opened fire
Bradley's entire brigade was in rapid retreat towards Spring Hill, with Cleburne in close pursuit,
and pouring in a hot fire. In falling back we had to cross the valley of a small stream, and
I never think of our strenuous exertions to get out of a destructive cross-fire, while running
down the easy slope leading to the stream, without recalling the story of the officer who called
to a soldier making the best time he could to get out of a hot fire: "Stop, my man! What are
you running for?"

"Because I have no wings to fly with," called back the soldier over his shoulder while increasing
his efforts to make better time.

As we descended into the valley we uncovered our pursuers to the fire of the battery at the
village, which opened with shrapnel shells, firing over our heads. General Stanley, who was
in the battery, reported that not less than eight guns opened fire. As soon as Cleburne encountered
that fire he hastily drew back over the ridge, out of sight. All pursuit with its accompanying
direct and cross-fire having thus ceased, Bradley's men stopped running and walked on back
to the vicinity of the battery where a new line was formed without trouble or confusion. When
coming down the slope towards the stream Major Coulter, whose horse had been killed, was running
a few feet in front of me, and I was just speculating whether my short legs could keep up with
his long ones, when he called back over his shoulder: "Rally at this fence," meaning a rail
fence we were approaching. I had a poor opinion of the fence as a place to attempt a rally,
for we would still be exposed to a cross-fire, but wishing to obey orders I made for the strongest
looking fence corner in my front, and, jumping over and stopping behind it, looked around to
see if any concerted effort would be made to reform behind the fence. In my brief halt there
I had some opportunity to observe the effect of our artillery fire on the enemy. I saw by the
smoke where a number of our shells exploded, and they all seemed too high in the air and too
far to the rear, for I could not see any men knocked down by them. No doubt the fear of killing
some of our own men caused our gunners to aim high, and it is probable that the noise made
by so many guns and exploding shells had more to do with stopping the enemy than the execution
that was done. Their after-actions showed that they believed Bradley's brigade to have been
an outpost; that our main line was where the battery was posted, and that so much artillery
must have a correspondingly strong infantry support.

General Bradley reported a loss of 198 men in his brigade, nearly all of it falling on the
three regiments on the exposed flank, the other three regiments falling back with light loss
because their position had become untenable. He was disabled with a wound, and Colonel Conrad,
of the 15th Missouri, then assumed command of the brigade. By the casualties in the 65th Ohio
the command of that regiment devolved upon the adjutant, Brewer Smith, a boy only 19 years
old, and possibly the youngest officer to succeed to the command of a regiment throughout the war.

A regiment of the 23d corps which had come to Spring Hill as a train guard, and was placed
in support of the battery at the village, has persistently claimed that the salvation of our
army was due to the heroic stand it made after all of Wagner's division had run away. In a
historical sketch of the regiment occurs this statement:

"At Spring Hill the regiment had another opportunity to show its pluck. A division that had
been sent forward in charge of the trains was drawn up to resist any attack the rebels might
make while the regiment, being with the headquarters train, was ordered to support a battery
so placed as to sweep an open field in front of the troops. The enemy, emerging from the woods,
marched steadily up to the National lines, when the entire division broke and ran." That is
pretty strong language in view of the battle record of Wagner's division, for of the four brigades
out of all the brigades serving in all the Western armies, given prominent mention by Colonel
Fox in his book on regimental losses as famous fighting brigades, two, Opdycke's and Bradley's,
belonged to Wagner's division, to say nothing of the very awkward fact that the brigades of
Opdycke and Lane were on the other side of Spring Hill, out of sight of Cleburne's attack,
but it is seriously so stated--"the entire division broke and ran, leaving the regiment and
the battery to resist the attack. Fixing bayonets the men awaited the onset. As soon as the
enemy came within range they poured a well-directed fire into their ranks which, being seconded
by the battery, caused them to waver. Portions of the retreating division having rallied, the
rebels were compelled to betake themselves to the woods."

And in a paper on this campaign by a captain of the regiment, he relates how the officers of
the regiment tried to stop the flying troops, and taunted their officers with the bad example
they were setting their men; how the regiment opened a rapid, withering fire from a little
parapet of cartridges which the officers, breaking open boxes of ammunition, had built in front
of the men, and how their fire proved so destructive at that close range that it stopped Cheatham's
men who then fell back and commenced building breastworks. In calling them Cheatham's men,
did the captain wish to insinuate that Cheatham's whole corps was charging on the regiment?
He uses the words "withering," "destructive," and "that close range," in a way to raise the
inference that the contact was very close. The actual distance was shrapnel-shell range, for
the battery stopped Cleburne with those missiles before he had crossed the little stream more
than 1,000 yards away, so that instead of a cool regiment of exceptional staying qualities
delivering a destructive fire at very close range, as pictured by the captain, the truth discloses
a highly excited, not to say a badly scared regiment, wasting ammunition at too long range
to do any damage. That this was the truth is proved by the very significant fact, not deemed
worthy of mention in either of the accounts quoted, that the regiment did not lose a single
man killed or wounded; not one, and it was not protected by breastworks. With impressive mystery
the captain describes the regiment as what was left of it after the way it had been cut up
in the Atlantic campaign, with the same artful vagueness used in the matter of the range, seeking
to create the inference that the battle losses of the regiment had been very extraordinary.
Again, to be specific, the regiment lost in its three years' term of service two officers and
thirty-seven men killed or died of wounds, less than one-third the average loss of the six
regiments composing Bradley's brigade, and it stands 109th among the infantry regiments of
its State in the number of its battle losses, or, excepting six regiments that spent most of
their time in garrison duty, at the bottom of the list of all three years' regiments sent from
the State. It would appear that the 103d Ohio had become pretty well imbued with the spirit
characteristic of the headquarters with which it was associated, to claim credit in an inverse
ratio to services rendered.

When Cleburne changed direction his left swung in so close to the pike that the two guns and
the 36th Illinois were driven away and Cleburne could then have extended his left across the
pike without meeting with any further opposition.

