Taking another kind of hitter, suppose that he steps up in the best form, making a short stride
toward the pitcher, keeping his balance well and his form erect. As already said, he is a dangerous
batter and likely to hit in spite of my best efforts, but I must do the best I can with him.
I therefore observe his manner of holding the bat and note whether he prefers a high or low
ball, and we will say that it is a low one. I send a couple of low drop curves just out of
his reach. It is just what he wants if he could only get at them, and the next time he steps
well in toward the plate. This time, however, I send a fast, straight, high ball over the plate,
and if he hits it at all, it will be in the air. Another fast, straight, high one might not
escape so easily, but I have two balls called and can't take the chances of giving him his
base. I therefore try it again. If he has missed that I now have two strikes, and only two
balls, and can afford to throw away a ball or two, which I do as before by pitching a couple
of low drop curves out of his reach, until his mind is again fixed upon that point. Then I
would probably again try a fast, high ball on the inside corner of the plate. These two cases,
are given merely to illustrate the line of reasoning, and in practice each would be governed
by its own particular circumstances. To avoid confusing details, I will add only a few observations:
A batter who steps away from the plate, should be worked on the outside corner; one who steps
in, on the inside corner; one who makes a long, vicious swing at the ball, will be easily deceived
by a slow ball, much more readily than one who "snaps" or hits with a short, quick stroke;
one who strides long must necessarily stoop or crouch, and is in bad form to hit a high ball;
if he swings his bat always in a horizontal plane, he will not be able to hit a shoulder or
knee ball as well as one who swings in a perpendicular plane, i.e., who "cuts" under at a low
ball and "chops" over-hand at a high ball; there are some batters who prefer to hit only at
a fast, straight ball, while others wait for a curve, and in such a case the pitcher may get
a strike or two by pitching what he will not care to hit at; some are never ready to hit at
the first ball pitched, so that by sending this in over the plate a strike may be secured;
some are known as great "waiters," who will only hit when forced, and these should be forced
to hit at once; others are anxious and cannot wait, and may be safely "worked" wide of the
plate. Then occasionally there will be found a batter who betrays by his manner when he has
made up his mind to hit, and in that case he will let go at anything within reach; therefore
a ball should be pitched where he will be least likely to hit it. If the pitcher finds a batter
facing for a hit to right field, he should not give him the ball out from him, but crowd him
with it, keeping it on the inside corner, and it will be almost impossible for him to succeed.

It does not do to work the same batter always in the same way, or he will discover a pitcher's
method. Sometimes the pitcher must "cross" him and at times it is even advisable to give him
a ball just where he would like to have it, but where, for that very reason, he least expects it.

Finally, a pitcher should not be in a hurry to deliver the ball. As soon as the catcher returns
the ball the pitcher should assume a position as though about to pitch and stand there; he
should take all the time the umpire will give him. This will allow him to give and receive
any necessary signal from the catcher, it will rest him and thus enable him to hold his speed,
and, finally, it will work upon the nerves and eyesight of the batter. The batter will grow
impatient and anxious, and unless his eyes are very strong the long strain in a bright light
will blear his sight.

FIELDING THE POSITION.

Some pitchers seem to harbor the impression that nothing else is expected of them but to pitch
the ball, and the effect of this opinion is to diminish their worth to a very great extent:
A pitcher is just as much a fielder as any of the other players, and may render his side efficient
service by his ability to properly care for this part of his work.

I have already spoken of throwing to bases to catch runners, and it is unnecessary to say anything
further except to again caution against too much of it. A pitcher should throw only when there
is a chance of making the put-out.

In fielding ground-hits he must exert considerable activity on account of the very short time
allowed him. He should have the courage to face a hard hit, because on account of the position
of the second baseman and short-stop such a hit will generally be safe if he does not stop
it, or at least turn its course. It is his place to get all "bunted" hits. It is a mistake
to break up the in-field by bringing a third baseman in close to get hits which a live pitcher
should be able to field. When a batter who is likely to bunt the ball comes to the bat, the
pitcher must be ready at every ball pitched to move in the direction of the third base line,
where such hits are always made. There are some pitchers, such as Galvin and Van Haltren, against
whom it is not safe to try a bunt, but, as I have said, many others seem to think they are
expected only to pitch.

On a hit to the first baseman the pitcher should cover the base, and if the hit is slow or
if the baseman fumbles it he may still have time to toss the ball to the pitcher. The pitcher
should not wait until he sees the fumble before starting, but the instant the hit is made go
for the base; he will then be there and ready to receive the ball and not be forced to take
it on the run. So, too, the occasion may arise when he should cover second or third, where
some combination of play has taken the baseman away and left the base uncovered. In all cases
where a runner is caught between bases the pitcher must take part in the play. If the runner
is between first and second, the pitcher will back up the first baseman, leaving the short-stop
to back the second baseman; if between second and third, he will back up the third baseman;
and if between third and home, he will back the catcher.

The pitcher must back up the catcher, the first and third basemen, on all throws from the out
field. He must not wait until the throw is made before getting in line, but the moment the
probability of such a throw arises, he should get there, and then he can see the entire play,
and will be sure to get in a line with the throw. In backing up he must not get too close to
the fielder he is backing, otherwise what is a wild throw to him will be likewise to the pitcher.
He should keep from fifty to seventy-five feet away.

With runners on bases he should be sure that he understands the situation perfectly before
pitching, and he must keep it in mind; then, if the ball is hit to him, he need lose no time
in deciding upon the proper place to throw it. If his play is to try for a double by way of
second base, he should not wait until the baseman gets there and then drive the ball at him
with all his might; but he should toss it to the baseman as he runs for the base, timing the
speed of the throw so that the baseman and the ball will reach the base together. Thus no time
will be lost, and the throw being easy, may be much more quickly and safely handled.

In short, a pitcher should make himself useful wherever he can, and use his wits in fielding
as well as in pitching. He should not be disheartened by poor support or unavoidable accidents,
but should keep up his courage, and the entire team will be infused with his spirit. There
are some pitchers who are not hit hard and yet seldom win because they display such a lazy
disposition in the box that they put all the other players to sleep; and, again, there are
others not so successful in the matter of base hits, who yet win more games, on account of
the aggressive spirit they impart to their fellow-players. Let the pitcher be alive, then,
and if he has any "heart" let him show it; let him keep up his spirits, have a reason for every
ball pitched, and use his brain as well as his muscle, for it is only in this way that he,
can ever take a place in the front rank.

CHAPTER IV. THE CATCHER.

Next after the pitcher, in regular order, comes the catcher. Though the negative pole of "the
battery," his support of the pitcher will largely influence the latter's efficiency, and he
therefore becomes an important factor in the attacking force. Were it not for the extreme liability
to injury, the position of catcher would be the most desirable on the field; he has plenty
of work of the prettiest kind to do, is given many opportunities for the employment of judgment
and skill, and, what is clearer than all to the heart of every true ball player, he is always
in the thickest of the fight. Moreover, his work, unlike that of the pitcher, always shows
for itself, and is therefore always appreciated. A pitcher's success depends upon many circumstances,
some of which are beyond his own control, so that, no matter how faithfully or intelligently
he may work, he must still suffer the annoyance and mortification of defeat. But the catcher
has almost complete control of his own play, he is dependent upon no one but himself, and,
in spite of everything and everybody, the nature of his work remains the same.

There are some cases in which a steady, intelligent catcher is of more worth to a team than
even the pitcher, because such a man will make pitchers out of almost any kind of material.
Bennett, the grandest of every-day catchers, has demonstrated this fact in many instances,
and I have no doubt that much of the success of the St. Louis pitchers has been due to the
steady support and judicious coaching of Bushong.

There are certain qualifications necessary to produce a good catcher, and if a person has any
ambition to play the position, he should first examine himself to see whether he is the possessor
of these. Here again the size of the candidate seems not to be of vital importance, for there
are good catchers, from the little, sawed-off bantam, Hofford, of Jersey City, to the tall,
angular Mack, of Washington, and Ganzell, of Detroit. Still, other things being equal, a tall,
active man should have an advantage because of his longer "reach" for widely pitched balls,
and on account of the confidence a big mark to pitch at inspires in the pitcher. Besides, a
heavier man is better able to stand against the shocks of reckless runners to the home plate.

More important than size are pluck and stamina, especially if one contemplates becoming a professional
catcher. In every well-regulated team nowadays the pitchers and catchers are paired, and the
same pair always work together. Perfect team work involves a perfect understanding by each
man of all the points of play of the others, and it is believed that a battery will do better
team-work where its two ends are always the same. But to be able to work regularly with one
pitcher through an entire season, catching every day when he pitches, a catcher will more than
once find his powers of endurance strongly taxed; and if, for real or fancied injuries, he
is often obliged to lay off, then, no matter how brilliant his work when he does catch, he
will lose much of his value to the team. Certain injuries are inevitable and necessitate a
rest, but there are others of minor importance to which some men will not give way. I do not
laud this as pure bravado, but because it sets an example and infuses a spirit into a team
that is worth many games in a long race. I have the greatest respect and admiration for the
Bennetts and the Bushongs of base-ball.

But there are other features necessary before a person can hope to become a first-class catcher.
As before said, he has many chances offered for the employment of judgment and skill; and to
make the best use of these he must be possessed of some brains. The ideal catcher not only
stops the ball and throws it well, but he is a man of quick wit, he loses no time in deciding
upon a play, he is never "rattled" in any emergency, he gives and receives signals, and, in
short, plays all the points of his position, and accomplishes much that a player of less ready
perception would lose entirely. Two of the best catchers in the country are neither of them
remarkable back-stops nor particularly strong and accurate throwers, and yet both, by their
great generalship and cleverness, are "winning" catchers. I refer to Kelly, of Boston, and
Snyder, of Cleveland. Ewing, of New York, combines with wonderful skill and judgment the ability
to stop a ball well and throw it quicker, harder, and truer than any one else, and I therefore
consider him the "King" of all catchers--when he catches.

In learning to catch, the first thing, of course, is to acquire a correct style, that is, an
approved position of body, hands, and feet, the best manner of catching a ball, the proper
place to stand, how to throw quickly, and the best motion for throwing. After this comes the
study of the different points of play. There are as many different styles in detail as there
are individual catchers, and yet, through all, there run certain resemblances which may be
generalized.

As to the position of the body, all assume a stooping posture, bending forward from the hips,
in order better to get a low as well as a high pitch. Some, like Daily, of Indianapolis, crouch
almost to the ground, but such a position must be not only more fatiguing, but destroy somewhat
the gauging of a high pitch. A catcher should not stand with his feet too widely apart. It
is a mistake some players make, but a little reflection will convince a catcher that a man
in such an attitude cannot change his position and handle himself as readily as if he stood
with the feet nearer together. Besides, on a low pitched ball striking the ground in front
of him, it is necessary to get the feet entirely together to assist the hands in stopping it,
and this he cannot do if he is too much spread out. These things may appear to be of minor
importance, but it is their observance which often makes the difference between a first-class
and an ordinary catcher.

A catcher should not stand directly back of the plate, but rather in line with its outside
corner; and when he gets (or gives) his sign for the kind of ball to be pitched, he should
not, by any movement out or in, indicate to the batter what is coming; there are some batters
who glance down at the plate to see, from the corner of the eye, where the catcher is standing.
He will have ample time to move after the pitcher has begun his delivery and when the batter's
attention is wholly occupied with that. If an out-curve is coming, he should be ready to move
out, or if an in-curve, or fast, straight ball, he should be ready to step in. He should not
anchor himself and try to do all his catching with his hands, but in every instance, if possible,
receive the ball squarely in front of him. Then if it breaks through his hands it will still
be stopped by his body.

In catching a high ball the hands should be held in the position shown in the following cut
of Bushong, the fingers all pointing upward.

Some players catch with the fingers pointing toward the ball, but such men are continually
being hurt. A slight foul-tip diverts the course of the ball just enough to carry it against
the ends of the fingers, and on account of their position the necessary result is a break or
dislocation. But with the hands held as in this cut there is a "give" to the fingers and the
chances of injury are much reduced. For a low ball the hands should be held so that the fingers
point downward, and for a waist ball, by crouching slightly it may be taken in the same manner
as a high ball.

Some catchers throw more quickly than others because, having seen the runner start, they get
into position while the ball is coming. Instead of standing square with the plate, they advance
the left foot a half step, and then, managing to get the ball a little on the right side, they
have only to step the left foot forward the other half step and let the ball go. To throw without
stepping at all is not advisable, because, on account of the long distance, there would not
be sufficient speed; to take more than one step occupies too much time, more than is gained
by the extra speed obtained; so that the best plan and the one used by the most successful
catchers is the one just described. It is not however the speed of the throw alone that catches
a base-runner, but the losing of no time in getting the ball on the way. Some very ordinary
throwers are hard men to steal on, while others, who give much greater speed to the ball, are
not so dangerous.

A ball may be thrown under-hand, round-arm, or over-hand. Experience has proven to me that
a ball may be thrown a short distance, as from home to second, most accurately by a swing of
the arm, half way between a round- arm and over-hand delivery. My natural style was over-hand,
but I have cultivated the other until it now comes without difficulty. I was influenced to
make the change by noting the styles of other players, particularly of Ewing and O'Rourke.
I found that they both got great speed and accuracy, and I also noticed that they seldom complained
of "lame arm." By being a more continuous swing, it is a more natural motion, less trying on
the muscles, and gives greater accuracy on account of the twist such a swing imparts to the
ball, much on the same principle as does the twist to a bullet from a rifled gun. I therefore
recommend it for trial at least. When practicing with the pitcher the catcher should be just
as careful about his style as he would be in a game, for it is while practicing that his habits
are being formed. In returning the ball to the pitcher each time, he should learn to catch
it and bring the arm back, with one continuous motion of the hands, without making any stops
or angles.

A word about high foul flies, since many of the catcher's put-outs are from these hits. A ball
thrown directly up into the air by the hand will descend in a direct line, and may be easily
"judged," but a pitched ball hit directly up is given a tremendous twist by its contact with
the bat, and, in descending, this twist carries the ball forward sometimes as much as ten,
or even twenty feet. Consequently we see catchers misjudging these hits time after time because
they either do not know this, or fail to take it into consideration. It is also necessary to
know the direction and force of the wind, and this should be noted from time to time during
the game by a glance at the flags, or in some equally sure way.

