THE REPAIRING & RESTORATION OF VIOLINS.

PRINTED BY E. SHORE & CO., 3, GREEN TERRACE, ROSEBERY AVENUE, LONDON, E.C.

[Frontispiece: HORACE PETHERICK.]

"THE STRAD" LIBRARY, No. XII.

ILLUSTRATED BY THE AUTHOR.

CONTENTS.

                                                              PAGE
CHAPTER I.--Introductory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1

CHAPTER II.--Slight Accidents--Modern Restorers--"Chattering"--
     The Proper Sort of Glue--Its Preparation and Use  . . . .   3

CHAPTER III.--Minor Repairs--Cramps and Joints--Violin Cases--
     Rattles and Jars--Loose Fingerboards--Atmospheric
     Temperature--Old-Fashioned Methods of Repairing--Modern
     Ways--A Loose Nut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

CHAPTER IV.--Injuries to the Head or Scroll--Insertion of Fresh
     Wood--Colouring of White Wood--Separation of Head from
     Peg-box and Re-joining--Stopping Material for Small Holes
     or Fractures--The Peg-box Cracked by Pressure . . . . . .  28

CHAPTER V.--Fracture of Peg-box and Shell--Chips from this
     Part--Filling up of Same--Restoration to Original Form,
     after Parts have been Lost--Worn Peg-holes, Re-filling or
     Boring Same . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46

CHAPTER VI.--Loosening of Junction of Graft with Peg-box, and
     Refixing Same--Grafting, Different Methods of Performing
     this--Lengthening the Neck--Old and Modern Method--Renewal
     of Same--Inclination of Neck and Fingerboard with Regard
     to the Bridge--Height of Latter, and Reason for It  . . .  58

CHAPTER VII.--Finishing the Fingerboard--Fixing the Nut--Size
     and Position of Grooves for the Strings--Filing Down the
     Graft--Smoothing, Colouring, and Varnishing Same  . . . .  84

CHAPTER VIII.--Injuries that can be Repaired from the Outside--
     Insertion of Fresh Wood in Fracture of the Ribs--The
     Effects of Climate on the Glue in Violins . . . . . . . .  92

CHAPTER IX.--The Glue Used by the Early Italian Makers--
     Insertion of Pieces of Wood for Repairing Lost Parts--
     Replacing Lost Rib and Repairing Interior without Opening
     when Possible--Securing Loose Lower Rib to End Block--
     Different Methods--Treatment of Worm-holes--Fixing on
     Graft on Neck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

CHAPTER X.--Ways of Removing the Upper Table and the Neck--
     Cleansing the Interior--Preservation of the Original
     Label--Closing of Cracks in Upper Table . . . . . . . . . 114

CHAPTER XI.--Getting Parts Together that apparently do not
     Fit--The use of Benzine or Turpentine--Treatment of
     Warped or Twisted Lower Tables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

CHAPTER XII.--Removal of Old Superfluous Glue by Damping--
     Replacing Old End Blocks by New Ones--Temporary Beams
     and Joists Inside for Keeping Ribs, etc., in Position
     while Freshly Glued . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

CHAPTER XIII.--Re-opening the Back to Correct the Badly
     Repaired Joint--A Few Words on Studs--Filling Up Spaces
     left by Lost Splinters--Matching Wood for Large Cracks,
     etc.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145

CHAPTER XIV.--Repairing Lost Portions--Margins of Sound Holes--
     Matching the Grain--Fixing and Finishing Off--Replacing
     with Fresh Wood Large Portions of Upper Table--Lost Parts
     of Purfling--Restoring It with Old Stuff  . . . . . . . . He is found, by Roméro and Ribeiro, to be very correct and somewhat
cold in his verse.

He took little delight in nature and lacked the passionate,
     robust temperament that projects itself upon pages of
     ardent beauty. In the best of his prose works, however,
     he penetrates as deep as any of his countrymen into the abyss of
the human soul.

     
     The judgment of Verissimo upon Machado de Assis differs somewhat from
that of his distinguished compatriots.

Both because of the importance of Machado de Assis to Brazilian
     literature, and as an insight into Verissimo's delightful
     critical style, I translate somewhat at length from that
     writer.

"With Varias Historias," he says in his studies of Brazilian letters, "Sr. Machado de Assis
published his fifteenth volume and his fifth collection of tales ... To say that in our literature
Machado de Assis is a figure apart, that he stands with good reason first among our writers of
fiction, that he possesses a rare faculty of assimilation and evolution which makes him a writer of
the second Romantic generation, always a contemporary, a modern, without on this account having
sacrificed anything to the latest literary fashion or copied some brand-new aesthetic, above
all conserving his own distinct, singular personality ... is but to repeat what has been said
many times already. All these judgments are confirmed by his latest book, wherein may be noted
the same impeccable correctness of language, the same firm grasp upon form, the same abundancy,
force and originality of thought that make of him the only thinker among our writers of fiction,
the same sad, bitter irony ...

"After this there was published another book by Sr. Machado de Assis,
Yayá Garcia.

Although this is really a new edition, we may well speak of it here
since the first, published long before, is no longer remembered by
the public.

Moreover, this book has the delightful and honest charm of being
in the writer's first manner.

"But let us understand at once, this reference to Machado de Assis's first manner. In this author
more than once is justified the critical concept of the unity of works displayed by the great
writers.

All of Machado de Assis is practically present in his early works; in fact, he did not change,
he scarcely developed. He is the most individual, the most personal, the most 'himself' of our
writers; all the germs of this individuality that was to attain in Braz Cubas, in Quincas
Borbas, in the Papeis Avulsos and in Varias Historias its maximum
of virtuosity, may be discovered in his first poems and in his earliest
tales.

His second manner, then, of which these books are the best example, is only the logical, natural,
spontaneous development of his first, or rather, it is the first manner with less of the romantic
and more of the critical tendencies ... The distinguishing trait of Machado de Assis is that
he is, in our literature, an artist and a philosopher. Up to a short time ago he was the only one
answering to such a description. With the onward
march of time this has been changed; the art of the Italian liutaro having reached its climax
some century and a half back, the masterpieces executed during that time are gradually diminishing
in number and cannot be replaced by instruments having a sufficiently high degree of excellence;
naturally enough the skill of the repairer has been more and more in requisition, so much so,
that many who have shown exceptional ability for this kind of work have achieved a reputation
for it alone, among the large circle of dealers in the principal cities of Europe. The necessities
of the time have thus brought into prominence a modification of the art of the old Italian
liutaro, in which there has to be displayed much more mechanical ingenuity if with very little
or no originality; the high class of artisan has become strongly in evidence, while the artist
has disappeared. It was in the consideration of these facts that the idea was first suggested
that a work treating of the general methods adopted by professional restorers for important
work, coupled with helpful hints in the management of minor injuries, would be interesting
and acceptable to amateur as well as professional repairers, besides the numerous readers of
THE STRAD, in the pages of which the following chapters were first issued.

In sending out the matter in book form, some alterations and additions have been, as usual,
found advisable for completeness. All readers readily admit the impossibility of touching upon
one half of the various accidents and ailments to which a violin is liable during its usually
long life; the most likely ones have therefore been taken, and it is hoped that the suggested
treatment of these cases may enable the repairer to become sufficiently adept for undertaking
such others, serious, or slight, as may not have been here referred to.

Further, the author is hopeful that those readers who may feel indisposed themselves to put
into practice the various hints, instruction, or advice, will be enabled by knowing how good
repairing is carried out, to select the proper kind of person into whose hands they can safely
intrust their cherished instruments.

Under the above title (dry and unpalatable as the subject may seem at first sight to many)
it is proposed to bring before the reader some deductions from observations in general, and
particulars in detail that may be interesting as to the past, and suggestive as to the future.
In the first place, the simple art of repairing a violin--and as for that, anything that has
been fractured by accident or intent--will be in the minds of many associated with the presence
of some strong glue or adhesive material, the right pieces to be attached, neatly or not, as
the skill or experience of the repairer may be sufficient or available.

The nose or limb of a marble statue knocked off and lying in close proximity to the main body
may be thought to give little or no trouble further than the collection of the fragments, the
ascertaining of their original relationship, the spreading of a sufficient amount of strong
cement over the raw surface and then pressing accurately into position; easy work to a person
endowed with average powers of mechanical adaptation, under circumstances where the materials
being of an unyielding nature retain their form for any length of time. But if any parts are
lost different faculties and powers educated for the work are requisite and brought to bear
on the subject. The additions, besides the estimated proportions and form, must necessarily
be composed of material differing in age, perhaps in quality, even when of the same supposed
class as the original, and make further demands on the trained eye, both for discrimination
of material and appropriateness for the work in hand. There will be lastly, but not least,
the art of imitating old work, the consideration how far to go and when to stop in the dressing
up of new bodies in an old guise so as to produce harmony of effect generally, and where possible
in minute detail. Thus far concerning the repair or restoration of objects of art made from
rigid materials, including hard wood carving.

Much ability, energy and patience have been expended on the reparation of ancient art work
in which materials of various degrees of hardness and texture have been employed, and which
require the attention of a restorer of extended knowledge and mechanical dexterity. "And why don't
you, you blockhead?" he replied passionately, with distended eyes.

That is how he was in his peaceful intervals; what he was during his attacks of anger, you may well
imagine!

He hit me no more with his cane, but his insults were the
same, if not worse. A costly work of art in need of repair or restoration is placed in the hands of an
artificer whose reputation warrants the confidence of the owner. The works of art, however,
with which our subject is connected, differ in important particulars from those for which gratification
of the senses is to be favoured solely through the medium of the eye; they not only frequently
demand the exercise of mechanical ingenuity of no mean order for purposes of restoration in
regard to general appearance, but further and additionally, the no less important details concerned
in a renewal, so far as may be possible, of their powers for the exhibition of acoustical properties
such as were implanted in them by their original constructors. In the instance of a re-uniting
of separated pieces, the insertion of fresh material to fill up spaces that must not be left
open, strengthening, or even renewal of such parts as may have become worn away or--as is too
often met with--"honey-combed" from the inroads of those vandals of all time known as "the
worm," all the supporting, rebuilding of the interior and re-decoration of the exterior must
be taken chiefly as means to an end, that of the resumption of its rightful position among
friends or rivals in the same line.

This restitution becomes of increasing importance and necessity every day, a condition arising
from the verdict emphatically given by his majesty the public that there are not any instruments
of the violin family ready to take the place--that is, worthily--of those made by the principal
masters of Italy during the two hundred odd years before the commencement of the nineteenth
century, and also that there does not seem to be much probability of others arising at least
for a few generations to come. No wonder then that the most energetic searching has been going
on for a long time, not only in Italy but over the whole of Europe, with the hope that in some
out of the way court or alley there may yet be reposing in obscurity some long forgotten, unrecognised
work by an old master of the art of violin making. Should one be unearthed, if but a wreck
of its former greatness or even a portion, this is not refused but eagerly grasped and placed--not
yet in open daylight before the gaze of the world, but in the hands of a specialist in re-vivifying
these dry bones of a bygone age, re-habilitating them--perhaps having by him or given him other
portions of a similar maker, or it may be--it has sometimes occurred--the actual missing parts.

The specialist in the repairing and restoring art is now not of the same class as in olden
times. When the Amatis, Stradivaris, Guarneris and the like were being turned out one after
another, there was not so much necessity for preserving all the pieces or splinters of precious
pine that had been separated by the fracture of the upper table from any cause, there was a
better remedy at hand, the nearest maker would naturally be sought whose reputation was possibly
more than local and whose self confidence prompted him to make a fresh table rather than devote
time and labour for which adequate compensation could not be hoped for. As a result, we frequently
find old violins and their kindred turning up with fronts and backs which, although fitting
well as regards size and outline, have been made by a distinctly different workman, in some
instances equal or even superior to the originator. At the present day, however, this kind
of restoration is much more rarely attempted and is not resorted to unless the damage is very
extensive or vital portions have been irrecoverably lost.

The modern maker has no longer within reach, pine with requisite acoustical properties, of
which the old Italian masters seem to have had so large a store, or if not, the knowledge where
to obtain it. As a consequence there has, in response to the pressure of necessity, arisen
a class of workmen some of whose dexterous conversion of a mere bundle of splinters of an old
master into the semblance of its former grandeur of aspect would have astonished the original
designers. These modern restorers are not to be confounded with the minute imitators or forgers,
than whom they are much more clever, hard-working and honest withal. The art of repairing and
restoring has now become so distinct from that of making, that many in the foremost ranks in
the increasing large army of restorers may never have made a violin throughout. The faculties,
skill and experience directed on the restoration of a violin "on the sick list," differs from
those exercised by the first constructor whose mechanical dexterity is an aid or secondary
to other qualifications: whereas it is paramount in importance in the constitution of a first
class repairer.

The construction of a violin from beginning to end may be said to be an art based on certain
fixed principles, not all of them known, however. When these are, as far as possible, acted
upon by a workman of sufficient intelligence and training, the progress of the work may be
considered as being in a fairly straight and open course. Not so with the restoration of it
after fracture or loss of parts great or small, several different courses may be open as to
treatment and this will be as the temperament of the restorer will suggest or the exigencies
of the moment may demand. Temporary alleviation of symptoms--how to make the thing go somehow--when
there is no fiddle physician within beck or call, is a problem frequently arising and very
annoying, necessity then being the mother of invention, often of a most curious sort, as most
professional repairers who have had the re-consideration of the matter will have impressed
on their memories. Among the most frequent of simple ailments the fiddle tribe is subject to,
is that known as "chattering" or jarring, caused mostly by some parts having become dis-united,
perhaps through damp or accident sometimes of a most trifling nature, and which henceforth,
unless remedies are at once applied, make themselves evident in this way, accompanying every
note that happens to be in unison with themselves, and lending discord instead of harmony,
expressing urgently their thirst and desire for a small drink from the glue pot. Not unfrequently
the exact spot where the jarring or chattering takes place is not easy to find by mere examination
of the exterior, especially if the separation is fresh and at a part where very little adhesion
has taken place at any time, or possibly the very slight portion of glue originally placed
at the time of construction, has, with the progress of time, gradually dried away. Should this
have occurred at the junction of the upper or lower tables (most frequently the first), the
sides, or ribs, the exact spot must be found by gently tapping all round carefully, holding
the instrument meanwhile firmly at parts that are least likely to have become disconnected
or that are known to be perfectly sound. The tapping or sounding can be done in the way usual
with dealers and repairers, that is, by the knuckle joints of the hand rapping round the instrument,
but this is sometimes deceptive, the tendons over the bones of the hand interfering and occasionally
causing a double sound, and so defeating the efforts at discovery. A more delicate and therefore
better means of testing is by the use of a felted hammer of the kind and size acting on the
bass string of a grand pianoforte; this will be found very handy. Should the rapping or sounding
all round the border not reveal any weak spot, we may be sure the seat of the complaint is
to be sought for elsewhere; possibly there is looseness in the interior and therefore something
requiring deeper consideration.

We will for the present assume that there has been no uncertainty in locating the weakness,
and that it is at the part before referred to as the most frequent in showing signs of disorder--the
upper table losing its grip on the ribs. This is one of the many common ailments that are teazing
to the violin during its troublous career; a slight accidental tap, or hastily putting the
instrument to rest in a too closely fitting case being often sufficient. Sometimes, on the
reverse, it is from being in too large a one, getting well shaken while being taken home after
some orchestral rehearsal; the joy of having mastered Mozart or battered Beethoven for an evening
is turned in the morning to grief and vexation, when in response to the gentle persuasions
of the bow there are but chatters and jarrings. Under such circumstances the treatment administered
by the hands of non-practical or inexperienced people is akin, more often than not, to that
popularly supposed to be effectual in suppressing slight functional disorders of the human
system; namely, a prompt and appreciable dose of medicine for the one, a good stuffing of thick
dark glue for the other. In both cases it may well be said that not unfrequently "the remedy
is worse than the disease." Glue is a good thing in its way and when properly applied, but
not so if overdone, even if the kind is the best obtainable.

A few remarks may here be offered as to the qualities that should be present in good glue,
especially with regard to violin repairing. Among the makers of it, the glue which will absorb
the largest quantity of water ranks as the best. It will, after proper application, resist
best the action of moisture in the atmosphere, or in fact take longer time before releasing
the two surfaces it may have been holding in contact. There is not much difficulty in getting
glue very satisfactory in most respects--as good animals die now-a-days as ever got into the
gluepots of the old masters--but it must be selected. That kind used extensively in the German
manufactories is said to be a fish glue, remarkably hard, very light in colour and almost opaque.
This is not to be recommended for violin repairs; it holds the parts together with such tenacity
that fresh fractures are likely to be caused in undoing a portion, a process often very necessary;
professional repairers will tell you "it tears the wood too much." The glues mostly in favour
among upper class repairers are those known as Russian, Cologne and Isinglass, all good; they
are light in colour, very firm, not too brittle, and transparent. There are other varieties
to be had of excellent quality and which conform to the conditions required. Thick cakes of
a dark brown colour with an unpleasant odour should be avoided; they are too easily affected
by the atmosphere, turn bad in the gluepot under very little provocation from damp warm winds,
and spoil the look of good and refined workmanship. There are many different kinds of glue
sold under various titles, some termed "liquid glue," others cement, apparently for saving
the very insignificant time and trouble in warming up the orthodox solution; but none appear
satisfactory in general and many of them are even detestable. There are some adhesive materials
used in India where warmth and damp have their full play and make short work of an old master's
joints, but these cements of the Eastern Hemisphere are likewise unsuitable for the kind of
work under consideration, as when once dried, being unaffected by damp to any extreme, they
are of course difficult to remove when further repairs have become necessary.

One of the special advantages of glue to the repairer is its yielding to the direct application
of moisture, so that in future repairings the old stuff can be washed completely out and fresh
glue used over clean work. Let all amateur repairers therefore, abstain from seeking after
a vain thing of the nature of glue impervious to moisture. One word more, as preachers say,
and that is as to the preparation or melting of the glue--simplest of processes--some pieces
of selected glue put into a small glazed gallipot with two-thirds of clean water and left to
soak during the night will only require warming in the morning by placing the pot in a larger
one and surrounding it with hot water. The quantity of glue being varied according to requirement
is far preferable to the old-fashioned iron glue-pot which darkens the glue and is in other
ways objectionable. If the injury or want of adhesion extends only to a trifling distance round
the edge and has happened at a time when good glue and proper appliances are not to hand, the
routine pursued must still be the same as if they were: first by obtaining a well-worn table
knife, the thinner the better (but if the household knives happen to be new and strong you
may call on some artist friend, borrow his palette knife, clean it, have ready some clear water,
a cushion or a substitute, and some rather thick gum). If time will allow, the strings should
be taken off the violin, and then placing it face downwards on the cushion, the knife having
been dipped in the water, can be inserted gently at the part requiring attention. (Diagram 1.)

You will soon tell by the sound in moving the knife about whether the separation has been recent
or of long standing, if the latter, the slipping of the knife will cause a slight grating sound
and when drawn out will show signs of dirt. The knife must be rinsed and re-inserted a sufficient
number of times until all the evidence of dirt has disappeared, the knife coming away clean
and not gritty. Care should be taken meanwhile to keep the violin on the tilt so that the water
introduced on the surface of the knife does not run inside but outward to the edge; the parts
should also each time be wiped by a clean absorbent piece of cotton or linen. The knife can
then be charged with gum instead of water and inserted as before, the process being finished
by the wiping.

But now the question will arise how about the closing up and pressing together of the parts. Again
Blake's ship was compelled to engage several Dutch, including Tromp's flagship. De Ruyter, the
brilliant lieutenant of Tromp, attempted to cut Blake off from his supports on the north,
and Evertsen steered between Blake and Penn's squadron on the south. (See diagram 1.) Blake's dozen
ships might well have been surrounded and taken if his admirals had not known their business.
Penn tacked right through Evertsen's squadron to come to the side of Blake, and Lawson foiled
de Ruyter by bearing away till he had enough southing to tack in the wake of Penn and fall
upon Tromp's rear (diagram 2). Evertsen then attempted to get between Monk and the rest of the
fleet and two hours after the fight in the center began Monk also was engaged. When the lee
vessels of the "red" or center squadron came on the scene about four o'clock, they threatened
to weather the Dutch and put them between two fires. To avoid this and to protect his convoy,
Tromp tacked his whole fleet together--an exceedingly difficult maneuver
under the circumstances--and drew off to windward.

Darkness stopped the fighting for that day. All night the two fleets sailed eastward watching
each other's lights, and hastily patching up damages.

Morning discovered them off the Isle of Wight, with the English on the north side of the Channel.
As Tromp's chief business was to save his convoy and as the English force was now united, he took a defensive
position. He formed his own ships in a long crescent, with the outward curve toward his enemy,
and in the lee of this line he placed his convoy. The wind was so light that the English were
unable to attack until late. The fighting, though energetic, had not proved decisive when darkness fell.

The
following day, the 20th, brought a fresh wind that enabled the English to overhaul the Dutch, who
could not move faster than the heavily laden merchantmen, and force a close action. Blake tried
to cut off Tromp from the north so as to block his road home. Vice Admiral Penn, leading the
van, broke through the Dutch battle line and fell upon the convoy,
but Blake was unable to reach far enough to head off his adversary
before he rounded Cape Gris Nez under cover of darkness and found
anchorage in Calais roads.

That night, favored by the tide and thick weather, Tromp succeeded in carrying off the greater
part of his convoy unobserved. Nevertheless he had left in Blake's hand some fifty merchantmen
and a number of men of war variously estimated from five to eighteen. At the same time the
English had suffered heavily in men and ships. On Blake's flagship alone it is said that 100
men had been killed and Blake and his second in command, Deane, were both wounded, the former
seriously.

The result of this three days' action was to encourage the English to press the war with energy
and take the offensive to the enemy's own coast. English crews had shown that they could fight
with a spirit fully equal to that of the Dutch, and English ships and weight of broadside, as
de Ruyter frankly declared to his government, were decidedly superior. The fact that the shallow
waters of the Dutch coast made necessary a lighter draft man of war than that of the English
proved a serious handicap to the Dutch in all their conflicts with the British. Both fleets
were so badly shot up by this prolonged battle that there was a lull in operations until May.

In
that month Tromp suddenly arrived off Dover and bombarded the defenses. The English quickly
took the sea to hunt him down. As Blake was still incapacitated by his wound, the command
was given to Monk. The latter, with a fleet of over a hundred ships, brought Tromp to action
on June 2 (1653) in what is known as the "Battle of the Gabbard" after a shoal near the mouth
of the Thames, where the action began. Tromp was this time not burdened with a convoy but his
fleet was smaller in numbers than Monk's and, as he well knew, inferior in other elements of
force. Accordingly, he adapted defensive tactics of a sort that was copied afterwards by the
French as a fixed policy. He accepted battle to leeward, drawing off in a slanting line from his enemy
with the idea of catching the English van as it advanced to the attack unsupported by the rest
of the fleet, and crippling it so severely that the attack would not be pressed. As it turned
out, a shift of the wind gave him the chance to fall heavily upon the English van, but a second
shift gave back the weather gage to the English and the two fleets became fiercely engaged
at close quarters. Blake, hearing the guns, left his sick bed and with his own available force
of 18 ships sailed out to join battle. The sight of this fresh squadron flying Blake's flag,
turned the fortune of battle decisively. The Dutch escaped destruction only by finding safety in
the shallows of the Flemish coast, where the English ships could not follow.

After this defeat the Dutch were almost at the end of their resources and sued far peace, but
Cromwell's ruthless demands amounted to a practical loss of independence, which even a bankrupt
nation could not accept. Accordingly, every nerve was strained to build a fleet that might yet
beat the English. The latter, for their part, were equally determined not to lose the fruits of
their hard won victories. Since Blake's active share in the battle of the Gabbard aggravated
his wound so severely that he was carried ashore more nearly dead than alive, Monk retained
actual command.

Monk attempted to maintain a close blockade of the Dutch coast and to prevent a junction between
Tromp's main fleet at Flushing and a force of thirty ships at Amsterdam. In this, however, he was outgeneraled
by Tromp, who succeeded in taking the sea with the greatest of all Dutch fleets, 120 men of war.
The English and the Dutch speedily clashed in the last, and perhaps the most furiously contested,
battle of the war, the "Battle of Scheveningen." The action began at six in the morning of July
30, 1653. Tromp had the weather gage, but Monk, instead of awaiting his onslaught, tacked towards
him and actually cut through the Dutch line. Tromp countered by tacking also, in order to keep
his windward position, and this maneuver was repeated three times by Tromp and Monk, and the
two great fleets sailed in great zigzag courses down the Dutch coast a distance of forty miles,
with bitter fighting going on at close range between the two lines. Early in the action the
renowned Tromp was killed, but his flag was kept flying and there was no flinching on the part
of his admirals. About one o'clock a shift of the wind gave the weather gage to the English.
Some of the Dutch captains then showed the white feather and tried to escape. This compelled
the retirement of DeWith, who had succeeded to the command, and who, as he retreated, fired on his
own fugitives as well as on the English. As usual in those battles with the Dutch, the English
had been forced to pay a high price for their victory. Their fleet was so shattered that they
were obliged to lift the blockade and return home to refit. But for the Dutch it was the last
effort. Again they sued for peace.

Cromwell drove a hard bargain; he insisted on every claim England had ever made against the Netherlands
before the war, but on this occasion he agreed to leave Holland her independence.

Thus in less than two years the First Dutch War came to an end. In the words of Mr. Hannay,[1]
the English historian, its "importance as an epoch in the history of the English Navy can hardly
be exaggerated. Though short, for it lasted barely twenty-two months, it was singularly fierce
and full of battles. Yet its interest is not derived mainly from the mere amount of fighting but
from the character of it. This was the first of our naval wars conducted by steady, continuous,
coherent campaigns. Hitherto our operations on the sea had been of the nature of adventures
by single ships and small squadrons, with here and there a great expedition sent out to capture
some particular port or island."

[Footnote 1: A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ROYAL NAVY, Vol. I, p. 217.]

As to the intensity of the fighting, it is worth noting that in this short period six great battles took
place between fleets numbering as a rule from 70 to 120 ships on
a side.

By comparison it may be remarked that at Trafalgar the total British force numbered 27 ships
of the line and the Allies, 33. Nor were the men of war of Blake and Tromp the small types
of an earlier day. In 1652 the ship of the line had become the unit of the fleet as truly as it was in
1805. It is true that Blake's ships were not the equal of Nelson's huge "first rates," because
the "two-decker" was then the most powerful type. The first three-decker in the English navy was
launched in the year of Blake's death, 1657. The fact remains, however, that these fleet actions
of the Dutch Wars took place on a scale unmatched by any of the far better known engagements
of the 18th or early 19th century.

A curious naval weapon survived from the day when Howard drove Medina Sidonia from Calais roads,
the fireship, or "brander." This was used by both English and Dutch. Its usefulness, of course,
was confined to the side that held the windward position, and even an opponent to leeward could
usually, if he kept his head, send out boats to grapple and tow the
brander out of harm's way.

In the battle of Scheveningen, however, Dutch fireships cost the English two fine ships, together
with a Dutch prize, and very nearly destroyed the old flagship of Blake, the Triumph. She was
saved only by the extraordinary exertions of her captain, who received mortal injury from the
flames he fought so courageously.

This First Dutch War is interesting in what it reveals of the advance in tactics. Tromp well deserves
his title as the "Father of Naval Tactics," and he undoubtedly taught Blake and Monk a good
deal by the rough schooling of battle, but they proved apt pupils. From even the brief summary of
these great battles just given, it is evident that Dutch and English did not fight each other
in helter skelter fashion. In fact, there is revealed a great advance in coördination over the
work of the English in the campaign of the Armada. These fleets worked as units. This does not
mean that they were not divided into squadrons. A force of 100 ships of the line required division
and subdivision, and considerable freedom of movement was left to division and squadron commanders
under the general direction of the commander in chief, but they were all working consciously
together. Just as at Trafalgar Nelson formed his fleet in two lines (originally planned as three) and
allowed his second in command a free hand in carrying out the task assigned him, so Tromp and Blake
operated their fleets in squadrons--Tromp usually had five--and expected of their subordinates
responsibility and initiative. All this is in striking contrast with the practice that paralyzed
tactics in the latter 17th and 18th centuries, which sacrificed everything to a rigid line
of battle in column ahead, and required every movement to emanate
from the commander in chief.

Although details about the great battles of the First Dutch War are scanty, there is enough recorded
to show that both sides used the line ahead as the normal battle line. It is equally clear, however,
that they repeatedly broke through each other's lines and aimed at concentration, or destroying
in detail. These two related principles, which had to be rediscovered toward the end of the
18th century, were practiced by Tromp, de Ruyter, and Blake. Their work has not the advantage of
being as near our day as the easy, one-sided victories over the demoralized French navy in the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic era, but the day may come when the British will regard the age
of Blake as the naval epoch of which they have the most reason to be proud. Then England met the
greatest seamen of the day led by one of the greatest admirals of history and won a bitterly
fought contest by virtue of better ships and the spirit of Cromwell's "Ironsides."

Porto Farina and Santa Cruz

Nor did the age of Blake end with the First Dutch War. As soon as the admiral was able to go aboard ship,
Cromwell sent him with a squadron into the Mediterranean to enforce respect for the Commonwealth
from the Italian governments and the Barbary states. He conducted his mission with eminent success.
Although the Barbary pirates did not course the sea in great fleets as in the palmy days of
Barbarossa, they were still a source of peril to Christian traders. Blake was received civilly
by the Dey of Algiers but negotiations did not result satisfactorily. At Tunis he was openly
flouted. The Pasha drew up his nine cruisers inside Porto Farina and defied the English admiral
to do his worst. Blake left for a few days to gain the effect of surprise and replenish provisions.
On April 4, 1655, he suddenly reappeared and stood in to the attack.

The harbor of Porto Farina was regarded as impregnable. The entrance was narrow and the shores
lined with castles and batteries. As Blake foresaw, the wind that took him in would roll the
battle smoke upon the enemy. In a short time he had silenced the fire of the forts and then
sent boarding parties against the Tunisian ships, which were speedily
taken and burnt.

Then he took his squadron out again, having destroyed the entire Tunisian navy, shattered the
forts, and suffered only a trifling loss. This exploit resounded throughout the Mediterranean.
Algiers was quick to follow Tunis in yielding to Blake's demands. It is characteristic of this
officer that he should have made the attack on Tunis entirely without orders from Cromwell,
and it is equally characteristic of the latter that he was heartily pleased with the initiative
of his admiral in carrying out the spirit rather than the letter of his instructions.

Meanwhile Cromwell had been wavering between a war against France or Spain. The need of a capture
of money perhaps influenced him to turn against Spain, for this country still drew from her
western colonies a tribute of gold and silver, which naturally would fall a prey to the power
that controlled the sea. One month after Blake's exploit at Tunis, another English naval expedition
set out to the West Indies to take Santo Domingo. Although Jamaica was seized and thereafter
became an English possession, the expedition as a whole was a disgraceful failure, and the leaders,
Penn and Venables, were promptly clapped by Cromwell into the Tower on their return. This stroke against
Spain amounted to a declaration of war, and on Blake's return to England he was ordered to blockade
Cadiz. One detachment of the plate fleet fell into the hands of his blockading ships and the
silver ingots were dispatched to London. Blake continued his blockade in an open roadstead for
six months, through autumn and winter, an unheard of thing in those days and exceedingly difficult.
Blake was himself ill, his ships were not the copper-bottomed ones of a hundred years later,
and there was not, as in later days, an English base at Gibraltar. But he never relaxed his vigilance.

In
April (1657) he learned that another large plate fleet had arrived at Santa Cruz, Teneriffe. Immediately
he sailed thither to take or destroy it.

If Porto Farina had been regarded as safe from naval attack, Santa Cruz was far more so. A deep harbor,
with a narrow, funnel entrance, and backed by mountains, it is liable to dead calms or squally bursts of
wind from the land. In addition to its natural defenses it was heavily fortified. Blake, however,
reckoned on coming in with a flowing tide and a sea breeze that, as at Porto Farina, would
blow his smoke upon the defenses. He rightly guessed that if he sailed close enough under the
castles at the harbor entrance their guns could not be sufficiently depressed to hit his ships,
and as he saw the galleons and their escorts lined up along the shore he perceived also that
they were masking the fire of their own shore batteries. For the most difficult part of his undertaking,
the exit from the harbor, he trusted to the ebbing tide with the chance of a shift in the
wind in his favor.

Early on the morning of April 20th (1657) he sailed in. As he had judged, the fire of the forts
did little damage. By eight o'clock the English ships were all at their appointed stations and
fighting. During the entire day Blake continued his work of destruction till it was complete, and
at dusk drifted out on the ebb. Some writers mention a favoring land breeze that helped to extricate
the English, but according to Blake's own words, "the wind blew right into the bay." In spite
of this head wind the ships that were crippled were warped or towed out and not one was lost. The
English suffered in the entire action only 50 killed and 120 wounded, and repairs were so easily
made that Blake returned to his blockading station at once.

This was the greatest of Blake's feats as it also was his last. All who heard of it--friend
or enemy--pronounced it as without parallel in the history of ships.

A few months later Blake was given leave to return home. He had long been a sick man, but his
name alone was worth a fleet and Cromwell had not been able to spare him. As it happened, he
did not live long enough to see England again. Cromwell, who knew the worth of his faithful admiral, gave
him a funeral of royal dignity and interment in Westminster Abbey.

Blake never showed, perhaps, great strategic insight--Tromp and de Ruyter were his superiors
there, as was also Nelson--but he, more than any other, won for England her mastery of the sea,
and no other can boast his record of great victories. These he won partly by skill and forethought
but chiefly by intrepidity. We can do no better than leave his fame in the words of the Royalist
historian, Clarendon--a political enemy--who says: "He quickly made himself signal there (on
the sea) and was the first man who declined the old track ... and disproved those rules that had
long been in practice, to keep his ships and men out of danger, which had been held in former
times a point of great ability and circumspection, as if the principal requisite in the captain
of a ship had been to come home safe again. And though he hath been very well imitated and followed,
he was the first that drew the copy of naval courage and bold resolute
achievement."

The chaos that followed the death of the Protector resulted in Monk's
bringing over the exiled Stuart king--Charles II.

Thereafter Round Head and Royalist served together in the British navy. An important effect of the
Restoration was organization of a means of training the future officers of the fleet. The Navy
as a profession may be said to date from this time, in contrast with the practice of using merchant
skippers and army officers, which had prevailed to so great a degree hitherto. Under the new
system "young gentlemen" were sent to sea as "King's Letter Boys"--midshipmen--to learn the ways
of the navy and to grow up in it as a preparation for command. This was an excellent reform
but it resulted in making the navy the property of a social caste from that day to this, and
it made promotion, for a century and more, largely subject to family influence.

Another effect of the Restoration was to break down the fighting efficiency of the fleet as
it had been in the days of Blake. The veterans of the First Dutch War fought with their old
time courage and discipline, but the newer elements did not show the same devotion and initiative.
The effect on the material was still worse, for the fleet became a prey to the cynical dishonesty
that Charles II inspired in every department of his government.

The
Second Dutch War

Five years after Charles II became king, England
was involved in another war with the Netherlands. There was still
bad feeling between the two peoples, and trading companies in the
far east or west kept up a guerilla warfare which flooded both governments
with complaints. The chief cause seems to have been the desire of
the English Guinea Company to get rid of their Dutch competitors who
persistently undersold them in the slave markets of the West Indies.
Before there was any declaration of war an English squadron was sent
out to attack the Dutch company's settlement on the West African coast.
After this it crossed the Atlantic and took New Amsterdam, which thereafter
became New York. The Dutch retaliated by sending out one of their
squadrons to retake their African post and threaten the Atlantic colonies.
In March, 1665, war was declared.

In this conflict the relative strengths
of the two navies were about the same as in the previous war. The
Dutch had made improvements in their ships, but they still suffered
from the lack of unity in organization and spirit. The first engagement
was the battle of Lowestoft, on June 3, 1665. The English fleet was
under the personal command of the Duke of York, later James II; the
Dutch were led by de Ruyter. The two forces numbered from 80 to 100
ships each, and strung out as they were, must have extended over nearly
ten miles of sea. The Duke of York formed his fleet in the pattern
that he set by his own "Fighting Instructions," which governed the
tactics of all navies thereafter for a hundred years, namely, the
entire force drawn up in single line. This line bore down abreast
toward the enemy until it reached gunshot, then swung into line ahead
and sailed on a course parallel to that of the enemy. The tool is inserted, not directly in a line pointing
exactly midway between the upper and lower tables, but slightly upwards or contrary to the
tendency of the peg to accommodate itself to the strain. When the parts under strain have settled
down, the peg is seen to be as near as possible horizontal with the length of the violin. The
best way, undoubtedly, is to make the peg an accurate but not too tight fit, it should be sufficiently
long to go right through the block. In cases where the hole has been enlarged, badly directed
or even made ragged by a bad tool, it should be a stopped up very carefully with a plug, neatly
glued in, and a fresh hole bored. Sometimes this has proved necessary from the carelessness
of the original maker. The old masters were not always exact with their mechanical fittings
in connection with the violin. The moderns, for obvious reasons, have paid much attention to
them. I remember coming across an Italian violin that had changed hands frequently for the
asserted reason of insufficient tone. The maker having a renown for considerable power, it
appeared to me that the tone was possibly there, but that from some undiscovered cause it was
not properly emitted. On examination I found that the maker had joined the ribs, not at the
central part as usual, but too much to the left, perhaps a pupil or assistant had bored the
hole at the junction. There were besides, some tinkerings by modern regulators endeavouring
to counteract the uneven strain over the instrument. The right spot, or it may be called the
axis of the instrument, having been found, the peghole was neatly and permanently plugged,
and a fresh one bored, which allowed the strain to be better distributed. The result was satisfactory
and delightful; the tone of much power and purity had free play in manifesting itself, and
the violin was enabled to take its rightful position among its brethren. A few words as to
the right spot for the peghole. This was treated by many of the old Italian liutaros as a matter
for mere guess work apparently, when there was no join in the upper table, nor in the lower
one, sometimes the lower rib being continuous. The best spot, and therefore the right one,
may be fixed upon by finding the centre between the two inner edges of the purfling on the
upper table at the lower part, the same between that of the upper, and drawing a faint line
through the points with a piece of soft white chalk cut to a point, and guided by a flexible
rule or straight edge down to the nut. If this line does not touch at the centre of the nut,
then the latter is out of place, and it should be rectified. The line should pass through the
centre of the nut, and immediately underneath this and midway between the edges of the upper
and lower table will be the spot for the centre of the peghole. The line thus made will not
always be found to agree with the centre joint of the pine; many of the old Italian makers
may have not, from lack of wood of the right sort and in equal widths, been able to do otherwise.
At times it may have been carelessness. Some of their roughly made violins have the joint line
over a quarter of an inch from the centre, occasionally it will be not only wider on one side
than the other, but the thread or grain will diverge instead of running parallel with the centre
line. The judiciousness of careful measurement for the centre, instead of relying on the joint
line, will therefore be obvious. There is not much to be said in preference of one kind of
hard wood over another for the end peg, it being a matter of fancy as to appearance. Ebony
being black and very hard, should perhaps take the preference in wear, and acquiring a polish
from the gentle friction it is liable to. The old Italian end pegs were mostly of cherrywood,
with lines neatly turned round a centre of ivory or bone.

Leaving this part now, we can turn our attention for a time to reparation of injury to the
head or scroll. This interesting and often highly artistic part of the general structure of
the violin, and in which no man since the time of the old Brescian, Gasparo da Salo, has succeeded
in effecting any permanent change of fashion, is subject to as many knocks as any other part.
A piece out of the ear or first turn from the axis is, with a delicately carved scroll, so
frequently seen as to be almost fashionable; little pieces out of the edges further off from
the central part, are common disfigurements. Modern vandals rub these parts down with a file
or glasspaper, to make it nice and even to their vision, saving themselves time and trouble.
Many a graceful scroll, carved with loving care and enviable dexterity by a master of his art,
has thus come to an untimely end. Should your cherished Guarneri or Stradivari scroll got chipped
or fractured by accident and the piece drop, search for it at once, and when found, if you
have not good mechanical ability and experience in fitting such delicate parts, it should,
while fresh and free from soiling, be entrusted without delay to the care of a professional
repairer of repute, but not to a provincial amateur or rough carpenter who would probably make
matters worse. On setting to work after a preliminary inspection, the careful repairer will
fit the parts together as they are, to ascertain that there is nothing to prevent a close join
of the surfaces, sometimes a splinter will prevent a close fit of the surfaces; this must be
pushed into its right position or, if in the interior, it may be better to remove it altogether.
If the part is lost, then the bare space must be carefully examined and the direction of the
grain and quality of the surrounding wood matched as closely as possible; otherwise the most
accurate fitting and finishing off will not make a good restoration. The repairer of experience
will have at hand a large quantity of odds and ends of different kinds of maple, curled or
plain; perhaps old worn out necks or otherwise useless fragments of relics of a bygone age,
and not necessarily of musical instruments. But sometimes these are not to be obtained, nothing
but new or modern wood, and it may be of good appearance and applicable excepting for the colour.
What is to be done? There is the drawback to new white wood, that it is difficult to colour
down to match the surrounding wood, when it has been fixed, and besides, if the part happens
to be where there is any friction, the white wood soon makes itself apparent, if not very conspicuous.
It is advantageous, therefore, to colour the wood artificially before placing in position.
There have been many ways adopted at times for meeting this requirement. It must be remembered,
however, that there is no perfectly successful mode of artificially colouring wood so as to
defy detection, but small portions such as are under consideration at the present moment may
be treated so as to look tolerably well. Firstly, a well known, often tried, but very bad method
is to steep a piece of white new wood in a solution of nitric acid and water. When dry, old
age will seem to have crept over and through it, but of a delusive and unnatural kind. The
corrosive properties of the acid still remain and gradually disintegrate the fibres until the
whole mass becomes rotten. It may be fairly termed premature old age, as the lowering or toning
down of the colour in wood and other materials seems to be caused by similar, if not identical,
constituents of the ordinary atmosphere, but under different conditions. Another way is lay
the pieces of wood upon a stove with a regulated heating power and watching for the exact degree
of change in the colour with continued heat. There is very little to be said against it for
small repairs, the degree of heat required for the desired tint is insufficient to damage the
wood but enough to harden it, and if not too hastily done the colouring will go quite through.

Among other methods is tinting the wood by any of the various stains sold for the purpose.
Few of them are of any good to the violin repairer, some choking the softer parts and leaving
the harder ones or threads standing out lighter when they should be darker. Their colour, if
it were not for this drawback, is sometimes good. Some of the manufacturers of new musical
instruments on the continent lower the colour of the wood before varnishing by staining it
with a solution of bichromate of potash. Sometimes when dexterously applied the colour is very
good, but the stain is liable to make itself too evident in parts where the wood may be a little
more spongy than at others. Most of the instruments treated in this way may be recognised at
a glance, the curl of the maple is brought out strongly, in fact overdone. With small portions
of wood for repairing this stain may, with much caution, be used to advantage. It has the property
of throwing up the threads of the pine and the nutmeggy parts of the maple without impairing
seriously the clearness of the grain under the varnish. The preparation of the solution is
as follows--some pieces of bichromate of potash can be put into any ordinary bottle of a convenient
size and water poured on to them. The water will take up a certain quantity in solution which
will be too strong for the repairer's use; some of it, say a gill, can be put into an equal
quantity of clear water, and then painted over the wood to be coloured down. There will not
be any perceptible colouring for half-an-hour or so, but further exposure to good or strong
sunlight will gradually bring about a change from the slight orange tint to the dull light
brown approaching that produced by the slow secret process adopted by "Old Father Time." It
must be kept in mind that bichromate of potash is a poison. There are other stains that will
bring a good colour to the surface of the wood, but are likely to change colour when the varnish
is applied. The whole work of careful restoration may thus be upset in a moment. All stains
should be carefully and repeatedly tested before being applied to any work of importance. Some
repairers use a hastily made solution of powdered colour such as burnt umber, and paint or
rub it into the wood. This process is to be condemned as resulting in opaqueness and giving
a tinkered aspect to the wood and work.

There are doubtless many substances or liquids capable of imparting a tint resembling that
alone caused by age, but experience only will enable the repairer to decide which is best.
It may be as well to point out that some tinting substances are more suitable for colouring
wood of a dense quality than for a more open grained or spongy one. Much will depend on the
judgment exercised and skill in matching tints. When it becomes absolutely necessary to use
fresh white wood, this will require more colouring than an older piece, but a rather strange
thing in connection with this is that if some of the varnish has been removed from the parts
adjacent to the freshly inserted wood, the old material will require colouring down as well
as the new, but not so much. This seems like some indication that varnish does get lowered
in tint as age progresses; it may be, however, that the top surface of the wood gets darker
than the under parts from the action of light.

The final touching up or finish of the newly inserted wood and its varnishing will have to
remain over for the present, and will be taken up after the mechanical work is concluded.

Having thus far got to work upon a fractured or lost piece that may have been knocked off a
projecting part of the scroll, there are other injuries likely to occur to this part of the
instrument and caused in a variety of ways, some occasionally seeming mysterious in their origin.
Thus from a weakness or flaw in the grain of the wood, or it may be from a blow having first
started a crack and successive ones gradually increasing the fracture, the scroll itself will
come away bodily, separating at the weakest part just behind the second turn. This is a delicate
matter for manipulation. If the fracture is quite new, the raw surfaces uninjured and some
properly prepared rather strong glue is handy, then an almost instant application of it to
both surfaces and pressing them together, exactly fitting, will result in an effectual and
lasting junction of the parts. But supposing the breakage to have occurred some time back and
the parts to be separate and soiled, the difficulties are much increased, as in the majority
of cases no purchase can be obtained whereby a good pressure can be directly applied. Cramps
cannot be applied, therefore, with any degree of safety, even if a good grip can be obtained
and with the safeguard of some padding, as the first is bound to injure the wood around, leaving
an ugly imprint of the grip, and thus making things worse in appearance instead of better.
The other is likely to be productive of slipping out of position, the hold not being retained,
and vexatious results ensuing with the accompaniment occasionally of unprintable language coming
from the repairer. The best way on all occasions will be found to be that in which patience
is not taken as a virtue but as necessity, and the presence of Old Father Time altogether ignored,
which may often mean time saved. Constant practice may give facility in keeping pace with that
steady old party with the hourglass, but a good result is seldom obtained when the clock is
much consulted during the progress of the work in hand. It is this which has caused the complete
ruin of many a damaged gem from Cremona's workshops of the olden time. We will therefore suppose
the repairer to be unfettered by time and that he will be properly paid for work that will
tend to restore the commercial value, as well as the usefulness and beauty.

The main consideration will be the manner of getting a proper attachment of parts that cannot
be wedged or forced together at once, in fact, to get a good purchase or leverage. This must
be either obtained indirectly or dispensed with altogether. For the former, building up or
"making," as it is termed, must be resorted to, and which may include temporarily glueing fresh
wood on to the old parts to be separated or cut away afterwards. Many inexperienced repairers
are too apt to look upon all glueing as for permanency, but practice should soon make it plain
that all joinings are effected only for such length of time as may be desirable. In making
or building up a part from which we can obtain a stand or commanding point from which to get
a more direct purchase, it may be necessary to glue one or more pieces of wood, cut to a proper
shape and stuck with a dab of thick glue and left until dry. For this purpose the soft white
wood or poplar referred to at the beginning will be found useful, it is so easily cut with
a chisel or knife keen edged--this condition is an essential at all times. By the bye, some
readers may be thinking of the best means of getting a nice clean edge to their knife or chisel.
There are several kinds of oilstone or hone in repute for giving a finishing or sharp cutting
edge, England, America and the European continent supplying them, the "Chalney Forest" being
the commonest known in England; the American "Arkansas" or "Washita" are expensive when very
good, but there is nothing that can beat a well selected piece of "Turkey stone" with a nice
even surface to begin with. For obtaining a clean cutting edge, a few drops of oil before rubbing
will be sufficient. Olive or good mineral oil will do, the latter preferably as it gradually
evaporates; whereas vegetable oils acquire a siccative property from contact with the minute
particles of steel; the stone then gets clogged and unworkable till thoroughly cleansed. Mineral
oil disappearing gradually leaves but little residue, which can be now and again wiped off.
In cases where the utmost delicacy of surface cutting or close fitting is required, and where
no other tool but the chisel can be used, it may be as well to have at hand a stout, smooth
leather strap fixed at each end over a piece of wood about twelve inches in length. The residue
on the Turkey stone can be taken off with a knife--care being taken that no dust or grit is
with it--and smeared on the strap with a little olive oil. The chisel or knife used briskly
and gently on this will after a few passes become as near perfection of keenness as possible.
After getting everything in readiness, which will include the carving to shape, of any wood
that is to act as a support or fulcrum, these parts must be made to fit as accurately as possible,
and may not require glueing but at one or two places and those selected to come in contact
with those of the original structure least liable to be affected or damaged. Thus the interior
of the peg-box will be found a convenient position from which to build a support that shall
reach up underneath the volute or under turn of the scroll. Having well tried the parts as
to the fitting, the support or prop may be secured or glued in roughly to the lower surface
of the peg-box--presuming of course that the pegs have all been removed--and left to dry hard.
When so the parts had better be tried for fitting again, and if any little inaccuracy shows
itself, or the pressure in glueing the fracture is likely to be uneven and the junction be
untrue, a little paper or card may be inserted or even glued in between, or where judgment
may dictate, to enable a good distribution of the balance of pressure necessary. There can
be no certain description given of the size or form of the supports or made up parts to be
temporarily fixed; all must depend upon the estimation of what is best to be done under the
circumstances; it can be likened to engineering on a minute scale, quite as interesting, but
less dangerous, while more comfortably conducted in your own home without exposure to the baleful
influence of unsympathetic elements.

The next and most necessary proceeding will be the cleansing of the surfaces that are to be
permanently joined. In most instances the application of clean cold water in a sponge will
be sufficient, but where much grime and grease have accumulated different means must be resorted
to. Soap is not to be recommended but, and especially if the surfaces are irregular, some pure
benzine, applied or slightly scrubbed in by a stiff brush, not too large, and the parts then
wiped repeatedly on a clean cotton or other absorbent rag. Pure benzine, if not rubbed in too
hard or too long, will not injure the adjacent varnish, be it the delicate film on a thousand
pound gem of Cremona or the flinty covering of a less presumptuous output from Naples. When
evaporation is complete, it will be so in a few minutes, some clean water brushed in and wiped
away, will leave the surfaces in a state for receiving glue.

The glue should be of good strength--the junction being intended to be permanent--and applied
in a warm atmosphere or the parts warmed a little, as, under different conditions the glue
will coagulate or "set" (diagram 18). When the parts are placed properly in position, and the
outside blocks or buffers adjusted for opposing pressure, the cramps may be applied and screwed
fairly tight. If the surfaces meet well and the pressure is properly distributed, the glue
will ooze out at the juncture of the fractured parts. This can be wiped off with a cloth, but
occasionally mended parts cannot be got at easily, if so the glue must be rubbed away after
cramps and moulds have been removed, by a damp sponge or cloth and then wiped dry. Sometimes
differently to the above mentioned simple fracture, it may be of the kind described by surgeons
as comminuted or split into small fragments. This will be found to be much more troublesome
than the former; after cleansing as usual, if the injured parts are actually separated from
the main structure, judgment must be exercised in selecting those portions--the largest if
possible--that when glued in, will act as a support for others to be afterwards inserted. The
same attention in kind and amount will mostly bring about a satisfactory result, but frequently
with this class of fracture minute pieces may have been lost past recovery, leaving a small
gap here and there to be filled up somehow. These places, if large enough, should have pieces
let in according to the manner before described. If they are too small for this treatment--a
little experience will enable the eye to judge at a glance--then the only course will be to
fill them up with some kind of paste or improvised mixture. For this purpose a good "stopping"
must be made. This has, in olden times as well as the present, been a difficulty to meet. Many
kinds of material have been used, most of them having some objectionable quality; some repairers
keeping some kind, others generally making further experiments. Among the various materials
plaster of Paris or common chalk worked up in glue has been frequently used; it is certainly
strong for some time after use, but gradually, as age creeps on, contraction takes place towards
the central portion, and a small fissure all round is seen more and more evident, and which
gets filled with grime causing a very distinct black line, which draws attention to the spot,
the substance also being so much harder than the surrounding wood, gets polished with a little
friction and usage and declares its unsympathetic nature; further, it is difficult to colour
successfully, or even well, and for these objections it should never be used. Wax is another
material that has been extensively in use among the older English repairers, but it has very
little to recommend it except handiness, and that quality ought not to be placed in the balance
against much more important ones. It is not easily colourable; with usage the top surface gets
wiped off, leaving a hollow. Powdered wood with shellac, or the latter with some heterogeneous
materials have also failed, as the alcoholic solution destroys the surrounding varnish.

Sealing wax has also in turn been used with no better result. Other substances are met with
whose precise nature is not known, odd mixtures made up in a hurry at the moment of requirement,
but no material or mixture has been found to excel that made with wood and glue. Many, perhaps
the majority of instances in which this has been used, have also been failures; not from any
inherent defect in the substance, but from lack of proper management. Different varieties of
wood have been tried, a great drawback being the contraction when the glue dries; this is markedly
the case when a hard wood, powdered by glass-paper, is used. The granulations and their hardness
are also objectionable, and if ground up too small, contraction to a greater degree takes place,
and the repairer's object is defeated. Long experience has shown that the disintegrated fibres
of soft pine, not powdered, offer the best security against contraction, it can be made strong
or weak according to the thickness of glue used, is always at hand, and on the whole gives
the least trouble. It requires little or no colouring, and moreover approaches nearest in character--or
can be made to do so--to the surrounding material. If there is a selection possible, the well
known soft grained American pine should in preference be used. There is a good and a bad way
of managing the process to ensue. To roughly seize a chump of wood and begin filing it away
anyhow, collecting the residue and making a rough paste, will bring disappointment, as sure
as houses built with wrongly mixed mortar. To put method into the matter, a piece of clear,
knotless, soft, grained wood should be obtained and cut to a cylindrical form (diagram 19).
A flat file of rather fine texture--this may be according to the size of the instrument to
be repaired--should be worked against it at right angles. The file (not glass or sand-paper)
must not be of the toothed kind, but grooved. The shower of particles sent off during the action
of filing, will consist of a number of minute silky fibres, which, of course, must be collected
together, placed upon a clean porcelain dish, or palette, and worked up with glue--strong--for
filling spaces in the maple, and weaker, if used for the pine of the front table. It can be
tucked into the crevices as required by the end of a small, worn, or pointed knife. Some portions
will remain above the surface and, in fact, will not go in completely, owing to the fibrous,
or threadiness of the mass, but this constitution is the safeguard against its contraction,
the glue in drying clinging round the fibres instead of to itself. When dry and hard the projecting
portions can be neatly levelled off. If, as will sometimes happen, a little hole or two can
be perceived, perhaps under magnifying power, the process can be repeated on a minute scale.
By attention to the above there will be but small risk of contraction, and if cleanly done
there will not be much trouble in colouring the part to match the surroundings.

We can now advance another step and notice a frequently occurring fracture that is caused by
the constant pressure and tuning up of the A peg, at a part which in many violins, owing to
the peculiarity of design, is a very weak one, the grain of the wood above the peg being short
and liable to overstraining by impetuous performers. Being one of the most inconvenient positions
on the instrument for working upon, if the repairing is not effected in a methodical manner,
it is nearly certain to come undone again. The crack is more often than not unperceived for
a considerable time by the performer, and meanwhile grease and dirt work their way secretly
into the pores of the wood. A repairer may take a glance at the state of the fracture, whip
out some glue, paint a little on each side, wriggle the whole well at the risk of extending
the wound, get in a little more glue, and let that harden under pressure from the cramps, which--unless
extraordinary care and skill is exercised, damage other portions of the work--replace the peg
and send the instrument home again apparently as sound as new (diagram 20). This treatment,
if resorted to immediately after a sudden and clean fracture, may be effectual for some time,
but if, as above mentioned, it has begun secretly and enlarged by degrees, the kind of repairing
described will serve but a few turns of the peg, when crack it goes once more. Off to the fiddle
hospital again, where it may be possibly subjected to a repetition of the treatment, especially
if the owner is of an economical turn of mind as regards "bill of costs."

Under the above circumstances of combined age and dirt, some repairers would dare to increase
the fracture or pull the scroll quite off in order to get at the part, cleaning it well before
glueing it on again. This is making things worse, particularly as this part of the violin is
one of the most awkward at which to apply direct strong pressure on a good and neat junction.

Sometimes the first mode is resorted to with the addition of what is called bushing the peg-hole,
that is, after the glueing performance has been gone through, it will last strong enough while
the hole is being enlarged, a cylindrical plug of wood being inserted, and glued. This is levelled
down and re-bored, to suit the peg or a fresh smaller one. This treatment is to be avoided
if possible, as it is accompanied by a more or less disfigurement of the "cheeks" of the peg-box,
and at the best is uncertain. A much more sure and neat method is, in the first place to clear
all dirt and grease away possible, and gently work some clean water into the crack, repeatedly
wiping with a clean cloth. When sufficiently done, some strong glue may be worked in, in like
manner, cramps and pads applied and the parts brought neatly in contact.

When the glue is thoroughly hard and dry, on the inside of the peg box extending each side
of the crack and beyond the peg hole, a space must be cut away having straight sharp sides
to the depth of about 1/16 of an inch, perhaps a trifle less. It must be done with keen edged
chisels--size according to requirement--and the walls made as even as a piece of plate glass.
Sometimes, in consequence of the shortness of the peg box, it will be necessary to make the
cut away space extend further upward, and into the solid part. In all instances it will test
the mechanical dexterity and patience for cutting in confined spaces. When this has been accomplished
to satisfaction, a piece of maple without curl or knot must be cut a little thicker than what
has been removed, but as to superficial area, fitting to a hair's breadth if skill will allow.

Some old scrolls, particularly among the old Italians, are made of beech or other tough woods;
in these instances the material must be matched according to the means at the disposal of the
repairer. In cutting the small veneer of wood to be placed in position, care should be taken
that when fitted in, the grain should run as nearly as possible at right angles with that of
the part to be repaired. If this is attended to, with all other necessary precautions, there
will be little cause for fear of the part going bad again, in fact it should be actually stronger
than before.

It may occasionally happen that both sides of the peg-box have been strained and split, with
accompanying conditions of previous bad repairing and dirt. The same treatment will suggest
itself for the "double event" as sportsmen say. But the two fractures are really as easily
repaired--that is, with proper care and skill--as the single one. This is because the same
cramps can be used for joining the two fractures simultaneously. For this operation the cut
out space referred to close by, if not covering the peg-hole, will have to be repeated on the
opposite side with great exactness, so as to allow of a single fitting up and filling the intermediate
space, the grain running as described before, and which will therefore be--when placed in position--with
the end of the grain towards the spectator--looking towards the front of the peg-box. It should
be neatly and very closely fitted (diagram 21). In carving the blocks that are to be used outside
the peg-box for evenly distributing the pressure, precautions must be taken not to cut them
of equal thickness, or when the pressure is applied, they are likely to slip, particularly
when the peg-box diminishes rapidly in width under the volute. They must therefore be cut more
or less wedge like, according to the modelling or proportion of the parts, so that when placed
on, the screwing of the cramp will be direct. When this is done to satisfaction, the usual
process advised for the glueing may be proceeded with, and being carefully seen to be in proper
order, the cramp with pads against the outside cheeks of the peg-box may be screwed on rather
tightly. When quite dry, the cramp being unscrewed, the side block of wood will be found firmly
adhering, with the superfluous glue squeezed up from between the surfaces by the pressure.

The next proceeding will be to level down the projecting parts of the block in front, to the
line of the throat. This being accomplished with great neatness--the line of old work and new
wood being exactly level, a line may be drawn with a pencil or cut with the point of a knife
over the block as a continuation of the inner surfaces of the peg-box. If carefully managed
the knife point is preferable, a piece of stiff card or very thin veneer may be cut to the
width, bent over and the point run down each side. The advantage of the knife line is that
you have already a cut to work up to. After this the chiseling out or mortising can be proceeded
with. The tool must be very keen edged, and as the cutting has in great part to be done against
the grain, no violence must be exercised; rapidity will only come with regularity in taking
off thin shavings. When all the surfaces have been carefully pared down until, as regards thickness
and evenness of line and surface, the peg-box is just as it left the hands of the original
maker, there will remain to be done the clearing of the wood at each of the peg-holes which
will have been covered by the block perhaps wholly or more than half way. In the case of the
double fracture this will be found to be in the same condition on both sides. The hole will
require continuing through the fresh wood, in fact re-boring so far as this is concerned. It
will be a more or less delicate operation to prevent splitting the wood, especially if from
shaving down to the surrounding levels, it is not very stout.

To guard against catastrophy, a small hole should be bored exactly in the centre. Particular
attention must be paid to this, or the whole work may be spoilt and a fresh block or bushing
of the hole be found necessary, and much of your work to be done again. The small hole may
be drilled if you have the necessary means at hand, if not a small brad-awl may be used, not
of the usual round kind, but square. Such brad-awls are, I believe, known as chairmender's
brad-awls. If one cannot be obtained, an ordinary round one can, with a little trouble, be
filed square. The advantage of this form of awl is that it does not split the wood and can
be used with safety and certainty where one of the ordinary pattern would be certain to split
and spoil the work. Several sizes may be used to enlarge the aperture, the square edges breaking
away the sides without causing an extended crack in the direction of the grain. When sufficiently
enlarged, recourse may be had to the rat-tailed or circular file. Here again much care must
be taken, as the toothing of the file is arranged somewhat in the fashion of a screw, and if
the tool is used one way it soon buries itself, becomes tightly wedged and will inevitably
split the surrounding wood. It must therefore be turned in a direction that may be called backward,
the revolutions to the left instead of to the right. It will take a little more time than might
be expected, but the result will be more satisfactory, free from danger of splitting and the
interior surface of the hole be made smooth. The use of one, a degree or two finer in tooth
will give enough finish. A constant look out must be kept that the tool is working properly
in the centre; should it be found working a little too much to one side, it must be removed
and the opposite part gently cut away by a slender sharp knife so that the equality may be
restored.

Caution must be exercised that the action of the tool is arrested at the right moment, that
is, when the opening made in the fresh wood is worked closely up to that of the old; the tool
should not be allowed to work against the walls of the old aperture, as there is much risk
of damage or enlargement and the necessity of a fresh peg, which is to be avoided, if the set
of pegs have been doing their duty well and are free from splits. In the fitting of the peg,
a degree of tightness into the new wood will be found advantageous; the surface being fresh
and softer than that of the old, soon accommodates itself during the insertion and revolution
of the peg, whereas the process will have been going on a long time with the old walls which
have become hardened. After a few turns with the inserted peg, the fitting of it will have
been tested, and if satisfactory, it may be taken out; a piece of soft chalk stroked down and
followed by a piece of very dry old soap in the same manner at the parts coming into contact
with the interior walls of the aperture and will stop any squeaking or catching. The proportion
of soap to chalk must be varied, the one, soap, being increased according to the catching or
jerking and lessened if there is too much slipping and no grip. It may be as well to note at
the same time that the peg should be quite circular, or it will revolve by fits and starts
notwithstanding soap and chalk, or any other mixture.

We may now take another degree lower down and study the treatment best for a fracture similar
to that last described, but which, if at one of the lower peg-holes, may appear quite as difficult
to manage, if not more so, as at the upper part, in consequence of the curved form of the shell
or lowest part of the grooved back of the scroll. Firstly, the cleansing must be effected and
drying, as previously with the upper fracture, bringing or pressing the parts together for
testing their accuracy of fit. The cramp must be again brought into use. Owing to the wider
and deeper hollowing of the back at this part and the longer and often very unequal continuation
of the line of contour, the shell or tail end sometimes curling up more abruptly than usual,
an increase in the substance of the padding against the cramp will be found necessary. A piece
of cork cut or filed to the shape will prove handy and effective. The superficial area of the
interior walls of this part of the peg-box being much greater, the thickness ditto, there is
seldom a necessity for fitting a block of wood in the manner before mentioned, unless as sometimes
it is found, the part has been so worm-eaten as to be too weak for its work of supporting the
pegs and sustaining the strain of the strings. In that case, excision of the "honey-combed"
part is obligatory and a slice of wood must be let in as before explained. Sharp shaving with
a minimum of force will be required. Should the worm-eaten portion extend to the outsides or
"cheeks" of the peg-box, it would be well to insert here also another slice of fresh wood as
before, the length according to requirement, but in these instances, the portion of the head
piece under consideration being lower down and broader, the grain of the inside slice may run
continuously with the original wood. It will also be inserted first, and not until the glue
is quite hard will the arrangements for the outer one be commenced.

Especial care will be required in the management of the cramps--one or two may be necessary--as,
if mere padding is placed between the iron and the wood, the latter, being in a state equivalent
to rottenness, will be crushed together and the shape will be ruined. As a preservative against
accident a piece of soft wood, perhaps a quarter of an inch in thickness, and cut in width
and shape equal to that of the "cheek" of the peg-box, and placed over the part with a piece
of paper against the varnished surface, will enable the rotten portion to keep its form, the
pressure being distributed; care must be exercised in carving the block of wood that it reaches
over and quite on to the sound parts. When the glue has hardened perfectly and the cramps have
been removed, the careful shaving down and finishing of both the inner and outer blocks or
slices may be proceeded with. If the burrowings and tortuous course of the obnoxious depredator
give indication of its having been of huge proportions for its species, for these creatures
vary in size from a small pin to nearly an eighth of an inch in diameter, and the tunnellings
are not very close together, then pieces of fresh wood matched carefully and fitted in the
manner before described, must be inserted and glued in. This will, if the wood is much riddled,
be much like mosaic work, the fitting in of the pieces running here and there over the surface.
The contour, however, is preserved by this treatment, it being difficult, unless the repairer
has considerable artistic knowledge, to keep or reproduce the exact form if the half or more
of the peg-box and adjacent portions are cut clean away as is often done.

Scrolls of masterly design and execution are frequently met with mounted on a peg-box, selected
or carved, without the least reference to the style of the original, imparting to the whole
a hideously mixed and vulgar aspect. Save then, every morsel of the original work that you
possibly can, especially if it be the work of old Italian makers, as it will be sure to have
about it some points of interest, or that will call for your admiration of its artistic merits.
Bear in mind that at the present day utility and low price are "to the front." Unfortunately
for art, a very large section of the public called musical, ignore the artistic aspect of the
violin, apart from its individual authorship and monetary equivalent, and think almost solely--not
always in the right way--about its working or sounding capacity. To them one sort of curled
heading to the peg-box is as good as another, if strong enough, the whole of this part of the
mechanism being simply dedicated to the winding up of unwilling "catgut." The old masters,
their pupils, and modern imitators, have thought otherwise and treated this portion of the
structure as that in which they could concentrate much of their best artistic talent. To them
it has been the crowning head piece of the work, and requiring for effect the closest attention
in detail. Every part of it has received, by each master, a distinctive touch of tool, or conception
of design, that the modern repairer should earnestly "read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest,"
so that if a small portion is by carelessness, or unavoidable accident, chipped off, the contour
may not by restoration (?) be spoilt, or the flow of line ruinously disturbed. Some remarks
might be made by some admirers of high finish in its simple sense, about the bold unfinished
gouging of some of the old Italian makers, and queries whether the irregularities should be
studiously followed up by the repairer, as it should unquestionably be with work of high refinement
and minute finish. The answer is at once simple and conclusive, every part that can be preserved
should be so, and well studied, that the new work may be a continuation of the old to the minutest
detail, even to the accidental emphasis of tooling left by the maker.

The fact must not be overlooked, that rough as some work looks at a glance, it has been, by
masters of their art, properly thought out beforehand. Rapidity of execution, coupled with
fine artistic style, is not to be acquired within a short space of time. In most of the apparently
rough hewn scrolls of the Italian masters there is to be seen the result of experience in cutting,
perhaps, hundreds of them previously. If we examine closely the mannerism of the different
schools with regard to that seemingly insignificant termination of the back grooves called
the shell; the different ways, breadths, depths and direction of the gouging will be found
to give, not only an accurate indication of the country, or city, in which it was carved, but
with it the school, or style to which the maker belonged, besides his own individuality. As
a landmark for distinguishing these interesting particulars, every part of the scroll of an
old master, with its belongings, no less than any other part of the instrument, should be treated
by the repairer with much reverence for its age and respect for the talent expended on it in
course of its construction. That this is not always acted up to I am reminded by an instance
that came under my personal knowledge many years since.

A repairer and maker of some experience was examining a violin by one of the old Italian makers,
that had, underneath the shell a rather sudden demarkation at the part where the graft had
been fitted in. He remarked to the party who brought the violin, that if it were his own, or
had been requested to put it in good order, he would file or glasspaper down the edge round
the lower part of the shell, so as to make it conform with the modern work. The violin was
not entrusted to his care, nor do I think many others were, judging by after events. Trust
not any violin of value or interest to this class of repairer, or grief will count you for
its own and mortification that of the fiddle.

Occasionally small pieces get chipped off the lower rim of the shell; the latter under these
circumstances, as before observed, should never be rubbed smooth with glasspaper or cut down.
It is not a difficult position to get at and small pieces can easily be inserted. This part
also is so fashioned that a comparatively small loss of the edge, especially at the sides,
will alter the whole character and reduce a most elegant and masterly form to that associated
with mere rubbish. Three or four scrolls of Stradivari's are in my recollection as having been
under such treatment and the contour being destroyed there was little about the general shape
to remind the spectator of the beautiful design as it left the maker's hands. But, it may be
remarked by a fortunate discoverer of an old gem, my Amati has lost all this part, cut away
perhaps because of its being quite past recovery, and the question arises what had better be
done under these circumstances? The answer, seek some party who has an Amati with this part
perfect or in excellent preservation. Take some moderately firm veneer and after careful measurement
cut pieces to fit as exactly as possible the parts answering to those of your own instrument
that are missing. The line from the lowest part or edge of the shell and reaching right over
the top of the scroll will require earnest attention and accurate fitting. For the next stage
the pegs must be taken out as a matter of course. Number each one with a pencil for identification
when reinserting; lay a piece of veneer flat on the outside of the peg-box reaching up a little
past the top of the scroll; to do this nicely a segment should be cut away where the volute
intervenes, and with the pencil, mark carefully on each side a line neatly against the back
and front. With a sharp, narrow knife cut away the veneer up to the outside of the line, leaving,
if cleanly done, an exact pattern of the throat or exterior of the peg-box (diagram 22). Next,
as the veneer will not bend sufficiently, cut a piece of rather stout paper, and after laying
it against the back of the scroll, a rough tracing can be made and cut to exactness by degrees,
trying it against the model and correcting until satisfactory. As this part of an Italian violin
is not cut so mechanically as many people imagine, another and perhaps quicker way, if means
are to hand, is to use thin paper and with some heelball, used by shoemakers, rub the edges
that may be felt through and under the paper held in position against it. If the paper is kept
from shifting a very good clear line can be obtained. The process may be adopted for the other
parts instead of using the veneer, the latter would, however, be useful as a permanent guide
or template, keeping its shape. This would not apply of course to tracing of the back part,
which must of necessity be of a material that will bend or fold over.

Having procured a piece of sycamore, very old if possible, and with the closest resemblance
in curl, texture and colour to the scroll to which it is to be attached; it must be squared
up and made equal so that the tracings of the two sides of the throat may be placed in position
and transferred. This must be done so accurately that the new throat shall not be out of the
square or twisted. More, of course, will be traced down than will be actually left, the reason
will soon be perceptible. If the tracing is clear and well defined it will not require touching;
but if any part is not well brought up, it may be made sufficiently so by carefully running
a pencilled line over the fainter one. The next step will be to get rid of the superfluous
wood. This will be most readily done by a bow-saw after securing the block of wood in a vice,
if these are not within reach, it can be done at a sawing mill where steam saws of different
sizes and degrees of tooth are ready at a moment's notice and the removal of any sized masses
of wood hard or soft is effected with remarkable precision and rapidity.

When the sawing is complete, the fining down, or smoothing of the sawn surfaces may be proceeded
with. This may be done with a file, having one side curved, the other flat, and of rather fine
tooth; a glass papering will then complete the process so far as the profile view is concerned.
Further progress will be made when the tracing of the back is transferred, the paper pattern
being laid, or wrapped round, after being accurately adjusted.

The outside wood can be removed in the same manner as last described, with the finishing, or
semi-polishing to the required degree. There will be thus cut out a replica in the solid or
uncarved state of the whole of the part adjoining the scroll and downwards, which will be ready
for the further process of joining on to the scroll itself. To this end, the surfaces that
are to be glued together at the junction will have to be got into proper shape and condition,
that is, both pieces must have flat faces, that when put together, will allow the line at the
top of the scroll to run continuously and truly as if forming an original carved homogeneous
work. The faces must be cut by a very sharp chisel, until fitting as nearly air-tight as possible.
For highly finishing off these parts a small steel scraper should be used and turned round,
working it in several directions. If the scraper is quite straight and sharp, it will with
gentle handling bring the surfaces very flat, no movement or wriggling being perceptible when
placed together, or there may be in very good work a slight kind of suction by the air being
driven out from between them. The work will be then ready for glueing. The wood should be quite
warm, the glue fresh and strong. A few seconds or so may be well spent in brushing or working
the glue into the pores of the two surfaces to be opposed. If they are as perfect, or true
as possible, a little rubbing together will be sufficient for an effectual and lasting junction
without the use of cramps; but if there is any doubt on the subject, then the process described
previously for joining the parts together after fracture had better be gone through.

When the whole is thoroughly dried and the glue which has exuded from between the opposing
surfaces has been cut or chipped away, the gouging of the grooves down the back may be commenced,
care being taken to follow the lines from the scroll downwards and gradually finishing backwards
and forwards according to the grain. Different sized gouges will, of course, be required for
this work, according to the fashion or type of the violin. A glass papering of the parts will
complete the matter so far as the exterior is concerned. Some restorers might recommend the
glueing on of the scroll to be proceeded with earlier, or before the block has been finally
reduced and cut to shape. There is not very much preference one way or the other; in the one
above detailed we avoid the risk of fresh damage to the scroll while sawing and cutting, the
rough or more violent tooling being done before the junction is effected. It would be as well
to let the new wood be of full measurement to allow of fining down the new surface to meet
that of the old, which may possibly have some lustrous varnish upon it, and which every good
restorer would do his utmost to preserve. After this is all satisfactorily done, the lines
may be traced which are to act as guides for the hollowing of the peg-box.

For this purpose a rather small chisel of the kind known among cabinet makers as a mortising
chisel will be required. Gently and by degrees the mass of superfluous maple will have to be
removed. It must be borne in mind that maple or other tough wood will not bear the forcing
that a piece of pine will. A hard-wood workman is essentially a man of degrees, the tougher
the wood the less must be shaved off at a stroke. The strong, massive form of the mortising
chisel is used in order that there may be as little spring as possible in it while cutting
and so prevent a hacking of the parts instead of a clean cut surface; indeed, no other proportioned
tool can be used with any degree of facility. It must not be ground to a very acute angle,
or the objections that are sought to be avoided will reappear in another form. Great care must
be taken that the mortising does not extend to a depth that will cause the back to be thin
and weak. This mistake is often seen to have been committed in very valuable instruments, especially
such as have the two grooves deeply modelled, or the contour downwards from the volutes is
much indented. At times, on the other hand, sound judgment has been perceptibly directed to
this part and instead of cutting away wood to allow of freedom in the winding of the strings
over the pegs, the holes for these have been filled up and re-bored nearer to the front edges.
Many most excellent old Italian makers seem to have been rather careless with regard to the
exact position of the peg-holes, making them to be equi-distant from each other. There might
have been little or no objection to this in the days when the strain on the pegs was not near
what it is in the present times of very high pitch. The shaft of the old pegs used in Italy
at the time of the great masters, was not half as thick as is thought expedient now. Towards
the latter end of last century and the beginning of this, more attention was paid to the matter,
and we accordingly find the two upper peg-holes much closer together and the two lower ones ditto.

Concerning the refilling or "bushing" as it is termed of the peg-holes, a few words may not
be out of place. For the purpose the holes must be enlarged more or less or there may not be
sufficient of the new wood to hold together when the re-boring takes place. The cutting must
be truly circular and very sharply done, no tearing of the wood must be perceptible, but a
clean, almost polished surface inside. A solid cylinder must be cut with great exactitude,
of maple or the same kind of wood if obtainable as the scroll. The old makers did not invariably
use maple, perhaps being unable to obtain it in sufficient quantities for their business purposes.
It is useless to think of cutting the cylinder or rod any other way than with the grain, it
is seldom if ever done, and moreover involves an expenditure of time and labour that brings
no adequate return. The enlargement of the hole must be effected by a good form of tool and
this in good condition; peg-hole cutters and fluted rimers are sold for the purpose. When the
cylindrical rod is cut and rounded to make an exact fit, a portion can be cut off a trifle
longer than will be apparently necessary so as to allow of finishing off. If satisfactory in
all respects, recourse may now be had as to the solution of glue, which should be quite fresh
and strong, as this is to be for a permanency. The rod or portion should be warmed if the season
is cold, the glue allowed to settle round for a moment while some should be placed on the inner
surfaces of the hole in which the cylinder is to form a solid fixture. When inserting the cylinder
it should be worked round a little, but not jammed in with violence. Your reliance in repairing
must not be in force but accurate fitting. The opposite hole to be used for the same peg must
be made and treated in the same manner. Some repairers, for economy of time, would make a fresh
enlargement right through the two opposite holes and push the rod through both and glueing
same at one process, cutting it away from the interior of the peg-box when the glue has hardened,
but this is risky work. One hole is sure to be larger than the other and the fitting scarcely
likely to be accurate both sides.

When a sufficient time has elapsed for the glue to dry, a piece of hard, but not too thick,
cardboard should have a hole made so as to allow of placing on the projecting part of the rod,
which can be now sawn off close to the card. When this is completed and the card removed, a
sharp flat chisel will then reduce it to the absolute level of the surrounding plain.

The next stage will be that of re-boring a fresh hole in a proper position. This must be carefully
calculated, so that when complete the whole of the four strings will be independent of each
other, the A string not being in friction with that of the G or the D not touching the E. If
this is not attended to, much trouble will be given to the performer, the jerking or catching
of the string during the winding up, not being caused by any difficulties with the fitting
of the peg itself but by the string pressing on and being checked by the peg of another. The
boring of the fresh hole and fitting of the peg is of course a similar operation to that just
described, with the difference that the peg must be more conical, whereas the plugging must
be as near equal in diameter as possible along the whole of its length. The preparation of
the fresh peg to fit the new hole will be already evident as to its requirements. There is
one detail to be noticed, however, that of boring the hole for the reception of the string.
Of course the E will not require so large an aperture as the D. The latter will require the
largest aperture of the four. If this operation is not conducted in a methodical manner, with
a proper knowledge of the best treatment according to the material used for the peg, splitting
will ensue, which is trying to the temper. When a peg is once split it had better be thrown
aside as useless, the strain on it being unsupported by the solidity of the material. No wooden
peg that has been split in the operation of boring for the string should be retained. It being
necessary to use wood of the hardest or toughest consistency, the splitting tendency is increased
as the grain is closer. There is discussion as to the best material for pegs, and here in my
opinion the old Italian makers were wise in choosing the cherry wood seemingly abundant enough
at their command. It is not so hard and brittle as ebony. Another wood was used by them, a
kind of dark walnut, straight in the grain, but a little firmer than the rose wood so fashionable
at the present day, which has a waxy consistency but accommodates itself to the jamming by
the impetuous amateur who will have his way.

In our progress downwards from the scroll and its adjoining parts, before quite leaving it
we may refer to a disorder sometimes occurring when the neck is modern and grafted on to the
old scroll. There are several ways, or fashions it may be termed, in which this is effected.
The most usual method pursued in England and Germany is that of sawing the head off at a part
below the end of the shell and then chiselling a level passage so far as a straight surface
makes it necessary along the floor of the peg-box. The sides are treated in the same way but
the width across diminishes as they proceed upward. The solid graft is shaped, inserted, and
afterward hollowed, but of this more presently. Like all other parts of the instrument, the
junction or insertion of the neck or graft sometimes gets loose, from bad fitting chiefly,
bad glue or prolonged exposure to damp. When the sides or back part give warning that they
are likely to part, they should be loosened still more or separated and a little clean water
on a brush inserted in the cleft where discoverable, the parts being pressed and worked together
until clean, for all cracked or loosened joints will be found more or less dirty and greasy.
Some strong glue can be then worked in, both sides pressed together by cramps and left to dry.
The backing of a flat piece of soft wood with an interleaving of stout paper or, better still,
millboard, must not be forgotten. If, as sometimes happens, the flooring of the peg-box threatens
to part from the graft in contact, the same course of working out dirt and inserting good glue
must be pursued. In pressing the back or shell of the scroll, this being of short and sometimes
abrupt hollowing, the pressure on the substance of the wood direct would be dangerous to its
form. The fibres of the wood at the edge are necessarily very short and brittle. A thick piece
of cork should, therefore, be placed between the cramp and the hollow grooving or shell, a
small block of moderately hard wood being placed inside the peg-box as an opposing pad or buffer,
the cramp may then be screwed down fairly tight. The two operations, glueing and pressing the
side parts and that in connection with the shell, must not be attempted simultaneously.

We may now, being on the part as it were, take up the subject of grafting and the different
and best means of performing this somewhat exacting operation. Accurate calculation and sharp
straight cutting are absolutely necessary for even moderate success in this undertaking. As
before mentioned, there is more than one method of securing a neck to an old head. Each one
carried out with the necessary skill and neatness can be made a lasting and highly finished
piece of joinery. The mode adopted in England (see diagram 25) is the most ready and gives
the least difficulty in a difficult undertaking. The solid end of the graft is chiselled or
planed off to a slightly wedged form with a straight or square upper end which is measured
to reach when inserted, nearly or just up to the lowest of the upper two peg-holes. Great care
has to be taken in the cutting that the sides are equal, otherwise the scroll, when fitted,
will look awry.

Another method has been known as the French, and when neatly done is one of the most sparing
of the old wood (see diagram 24), but it is beaten in this respect by another foreign method
(diagram 26), which is less evident to the eye, although requiring more skill in accurate cutting
and adjustment. Another yet more secret I have only seen in an Italian grafting, and it may
be native; no join whatever is seen in a front view nor in the peg-box if this part is at all
soiled or dusty, as is usually the case. This is owing to the join--there must be one of course--being
each side at the angles formed by the walls of the peg-box. This is counterbalanced however
by the necessary cutting away of the central line or ridge at the back for a considerable distance.
If done accurately and artistically, all very well, but this is not likely to be always the
case, although a comparatively easy bit of work with the original lines each side as a guide.
This method of grafting is puzzling when successful, as little or nothing is perceptible from
the front and not much, unless searched for, at the back.

On measuring the different parts of an old violin in its original condition, we shall find
the neck, taking from the edge of the upper shoulder of the instrument to a point where the
nut is placed, to be not much more than four and a half inches, whereas our modern necks measured
at the same parts would give five inches and an eighth. The old length taken at this part alone
would give too short a fingerboard, causing the fingers to hamper each other, especially in
the upper part of the register, where so many modern composers seek for effective passages.
The neck must, therefore, to meet the requirements of the day, be lengthened. In the earlier
part of the present century there was a method much in vogue for effecting this without interfering
with the head and while keeping the greater part of the original neck (diagram 23). This was
done by firstly removing the fingerboard, probably worn into ruts; the middle of the thickest
or lowest part of the neck attached to the body had then to be loosened and removed, often
no doubt a troublesome task owing to one, two and sometimes three nails being in the way, this
in consequence of the habit of the old makers of attaching the neck with its scroll before
closing up the body of the violin. Having accomplished this, the repairer chiselled off two
square pieces, one on each side at the same end, and then fitted longer blocks with the grain
running the same way. These were afterwards cut down to the proper form, so that the terminating
part under the fingerboard increased the length of the neck to the modern standard. Of course,
when fitted into the original space or socket from whence the neck was taken, the rounded part
going to or above the button was now too large, this part was therefore cut, filed and finished
down to the required size and shape.

This method of lengthening the neck, however, went out of fashion as connoisseurs and performers,
finding the old necks so frequently devoid of figure--the reason being probably that plain
wood answered best for the cutting of the volutes--made the repairers remove the whole of the
neck and substitute one of the best figure they could obtain.

This forced fresh attention to the splicing as it is termed of the scroll to the neck or graft,
and the method has continued to the present time of clearing away the whole of the neck and
using handsome wood. Further impulse was given to the practice by the fact of the fingerboards
put by the old makers rising so little above the body of the instrument. The bridge was made
very low to accommodate this state of things. The increased rapidity of the movements of the
bow from one string to another over the middle ones in the performance of modern music made
a higher one absolutely imperative, as the heel of the bow would too frequently chip pieces
from the waist curves. There were thus three good reasons at least for placing an entirely
new neck on an old violin; firstly the plain wood of the original maker, shortness and the
low angle with regard to the plane of the body.

In order, therefore, that everything may be accomplished with sufficient exactitude, we will
begin with the roughly sawn block ready for measuring and shaping up for its destined purpose.
The scroll, which is to be replaced on a neck according with modern ideas, we will suppose
to be on an Italian violin that has come down to us from the early part of the last century.
The violin tuned up to the present concert pitch and music of our period having many of the
modern style of difficulties, would prove utterly inadequate to the task of giving out its
tones in a manner expected of it.

In proceeding to work then, the workman executing this modification having selected his block
of curled maple, planes it to an oblong of equal breadth. He calculates as to the best position
for showing off the curl on each side of the neck when finished. Having decided which is to
be the upper part or that covered by the fingerboard, this is planed to a good level and smoothed.
A line drawn with a good pointed pencil or pointed knife, and sharply defined, is then drawn
down the whole length exactly in the centre. At the end which is intended for the thickest
to be inserted in the body of the instrument an equal width each side must be marked. Near
the other end, at a distance that shall correspond with the opening of the peg-box, an equal
width each side of the line must be marked off as at the other end. These two measurements
will represent as nearly as possible the width of the neck along its course at the junction
of the fingerboard. From the point representing the opening of the peg-box one of two lengths
upwards must be decided upon; if the splicing is to be effected in the manner common in this
country, a greater length will be required than for that of the French style. This latter is
more to my fancy than the other, as there is less of the original wood lost. If for the former,
a length of wood beyond the opening will be required of two inches, if for the latter or French
a little over one inch and a half will be enough. The central line has of course been continued
for the whole length of the wood. The waste wood at the end can now be sawn off down to the
line. The next measurement will be, supposing the French style is adopted--that of the extreme
width of the end, which will be given by taking a point at half the thickness of the peg-box
wall at the part and similarly placed on the other or opposite and taking the width between
the two. This divided equally and marked on the wood of the new graft each side of the central
line will give the narrowest width of the part to be inserted in the peg-box. The outside may
be then removed by the saw vertically. There will now be necessary the marking off a part on
the graft that shall represent the thickness of the nut or the distance between the end of
the fingerboard and the peg-box opening; the breadth across, or we may call it the length of
the upper part of the nut, will be exactly that of and at the part where the opening will be
made in the peg-box for the reception of the graft.

The wood to be cleared away outside the lines which mark the width along the course of the
fingerboard will be the next proceeding; it may be done neatly with a rather fine toothed saw
and then carefully planed up closer to the lines, barely touching them. It is preferable to
leave the sides for the present at right angles with the top surface, although they will not
be kept so for long, but by thus working the measurements are facilitated. Going to the lower
or wider end a line must be accurately marked quite square with the long central line, if not
accurate the whole work will be thrown out of truth. On the sides there may now be marked and
roughly sawn away (diagram 28) so much of the wood that shall leave enough for the cylindrical
part that is to be finally rounded and finished off for handling. Care must be taken that the
rounding commences underneath, a little away from the part that will be fitted into the peg-box.
This of course must be according to measurement or template kept for the purpose if graftings
are likely to be wanted in the future. There will now be required the marking of the exact
form of the part that is to be inserted in the body of the violin, or more strictly speaking,
into the upper block. This is done easily from a pattern cut to shape and size for instruments
of average proportions. Sometimes, owing to the height of the ribs, the pattern cannot be applied
so as to fit; in that case fresh lines must be drawn to measurement as with the central one
on the fingerboard plane.

The line dividing the part exactly in the middle must be accurately done, the distance at the
narrowest or lowest part that is to be glued on to the button carefully marked, allowing the
top part when placed in position to be a quarter of an inch above the border (diagram 29).
The width of the lowest portion must be mainly guided by the size of the button, which, although
there is an average of a rough kind, is sometimes small, at others very wide. The width must
be taken of the button, carefully divided into two equal parts to be marked on each side of
the central vertical line (diagram 30). All below what is necessary to keep may now be cut
away, the surface being kept parallel with the fingerboard plane. The parts outside the slanting
lines may be hewn away, the surface running evenly with the outer lines of the fingerboard
width so far as it extends, which will not be more than about an inch.

The next process will be that of excavating the part that is to receive the root or end of
the neck. If the instrument has been accurately constructed with the join running down precisely
in the centre, the line already marked on the root of the neck will be a safe guide for marking
each side of the join the width of the portion to be cut away. The depth inward of the cutting
should be an average of a quarter of an inch. In case the already excavated part in an old
and much repaired instrument is roughly torn about and made unequal in its measurements, attention
must be fairly directed to this part separately; that is, if too much wood has been cut away
on one side it must be replaced by fresh, after clearing away irregularities in order that
a good fit may be accomplished. The fresh wood must be neatly inserted or placed in position
and may be held in position during the hardening of the glue by supports or wedges placed across
from side to side. When quite fit by reason of its dryness, the distance from the centre must
be marked and the fresh wood cut away to the required depth and width with a keen edged chisel
and small shavings cut at a stroke, as there will be some cutting against the grain to be done
besides working in a confined position.

Great regard must be paid during the process of cutting this part that the corners or angles
are quite cleared out, or the neck when inserted as a trial or rehearsal will not give a truthful
report of the accuracy of the incisions owing to some insignificant portions sticking up and
causing the neck to look awry. So far we may take the fitting as having been accurately done
to the central line down the middle of the instrument; but now comes a further process in connection
with the adjustment of the neck, and that is, the rise and inclination of the level of the
fingerboard in relation to the bridge which is to be fitted eventually.

The average--it may almost be called the standard--height of the violin bridge is one three-eighth
inches. There are occasions when this measurement may be departed from, as in the instance
of a high model, when an eighth, or even more, may be taken off with advantage. This must not
be taken as necessary for the proper emission of the tone from a highly built instrument. The
raising of the bridge in modern times is due to other causes, the most important being that
of allowing better play or room for bowing rapidly over from side to side without rasping the
border at the waist. It is an alteration which accompanied the lengthening of the neck and
stop in the early part of the last century.

To obtain a proper setting or inclination of the neck, several ways are adopted by repairers.
They vary according to the kind of guide or pattern used. This is usually cut from a piece
of hard wood, sycamore or pear. It is sometimes made as a double guide in the adjustment of
both the inclination and the elevation of the under part of the fingerboard above the body
of the instrument at the junction of the neck. This we will call No. 1. The other, No. 2, is
similar, but has the height of the bridge only as a fixture, the rise of the end of the neck
above the border being higher and lower at discretion. Another way, No. 3, is somewhat like
No. 1, but would be used when the fingerboard is glued on before the setting. This should only
be done by a fitter of some experience, as a little error in calculation is likely to lead
to disaster. With each the application of the guide, or pattern, is the same, namely the testing
of the exact coincidence of the inclination of the top surface of the bed under the fingerboard
(diagram 31), or above the latter as shown in diagram 32. While getting the right inclination,
in both instances it will be found necessary to ease the fitting of the neck into its socket,
as the difference of the angle at which the neck is inserted causes an increase in the tightness
of the contact of the parts. The lower part of the facing that is to be inserted in the socket,
will have to be made to go into it at an angle conformable to that of the inclination or set
of the neck. This will require executing with precision, and great care will have to be exercised
that the squareness or rectangular disposition of the upper part already fitted and adjusted
to the middle line down the instrument is not interfered with. It will be well to test this
as the work proceeds. Some of the lower part, that coming into contact with the button, will
have to come away in order that all parts may fit, and when fixed, form a homogeneous rigid
part of the structure.

To ensure complete success in all the foregoing operations, every tool in use must be well
sharpened, and all the guide lines accurately drawn. Part of the neck left rough and projecting
beyond the button may be left for future manipulation, but the joints that are to receive glue--if
done by a workman of skill and experience--will fit almost air tight. With regard to this,
the parts likely to give the amateur most trouble will be the exact fitting of the flat opposing
surfaces of the root or squared end of the neck or graft with the socket. It will be necessary
to get a perfectly flat surface. In the first place, glass papering must be avoided, not from
unsuitableness of material, for in that respect it is a temptation, but from the difficulty
of regulating the pressure of the hand; with the exercise of the utmost care in handling the
glass paper, even when it is backed by a piece of hard wood, there will be found, when the
test comes, a rotundity of surface that was deemed impossible under the circumstances. Careful
scraping of the surfaces must be chiefly relied on for exactness. As good a mode of proceeding
as any is as follows--after the first roughing into shape and then flat chiselling has been
done to as great a nicety as possible, all the irregularities--there are sure to be some--can
be worked down with the edge of a straight square file, used very steadily and crossways repeatedly.
This done sufficiently and tested with some hard and truly cut substance, metal preferably,
will be an exactly flat surface for working upon the final or finished surface. The next thing
used will be a carefully sharpened and keen edged steel scraper. To put this tool into proper
order for the purpose, it must be sharpened on a hone, not exactly at right angles, as the
first impulse would suggest. The hone, or stone, must be quite flat and unworn. If done carefully,
a nice level edge will be perceptible along its course, but it is not yet at its best. Placing
it on a bed of hard wood, or evenly shaped mass of iron, projecting over and held firmly in
position, a good stout brad-awl may be passed along from end to end, keeping the awl perfectly
flat on the horizontal surface. The scraper may now be turned over and process repeated, but
not in the same manner or angle, for the awl will be held vertically with the handle downwards
and firmly pressed along the edge at right angles with the horizontal plane, this will cause
a burr right along which will have a razor-like sharpness and cutting power. This scraper can
now be applied (not too heavily) over the filed down surface, and thus work down finally all
irregularities left by the file. The adaptation of this tool will at once be perceptible in
the fine whitish soft shavings that will come off during its application. A little repetition
across and across should give an almost perfect level. Different sized scrapers may be used
for the other surfaces where it is desirable to obtain the most accurate fitting. If all the
processes have been properly carried out, the parts when tried by inserting the neck or graft
for trial, should fit together without the slightest looseness or wriggling. They will now
be ready for permanently glueing together.

It will be seen after perusing the above that the fitting of the neck or graft to an old violin,
well or badly preserved, is a task not to be overcome easily and satisfactorily without much
care and no little practical experience.

The whole of the work must be well looked over and tested as to the accurate fitting in all
respects; nothing must be left uncertain or loose; in fact the flat surfaces for a perfectly
successful result at the junction of all the parts should be as nearly as possible air-tight.

Having seen that the glue of good quality is strong and clean, the surfaces that are to come
in contact may be brushed over with it. For this purpose a small hog-hair brush of about three-eighths
of an inch wide is handy. Where the grain or threads of the wood run parallel with the surface--this
being less absorbent than the other parts,--there will be less painting over required, but
where the grain comes end upwards to the surface the glue will be rapidly absorbed. The painting
over these parts must be repeated, the glue as a matter of course being kept warm--all the
work ditto, until absorption ceases. This is a matter of some importance, as in many instances
joints have become loose or broken apart, not from the perishing of the glue or damp, but from
the want of this precaution on the part of the repairer during this preliminary proceeding.
It must be borne in mind that this is to be a permanent junction, not to come apart from any
jarring or rough usage; it is also to be one of the most rigid, and only to be separated by
a saw or chisel in the hands of some future repairer when it shall be absolutely necessary.
Sufficient glue having been applied the work may be put aside.

It will now be apparent to those who have possibly done a little glueing that the whole of
the wetted portions have to some degree swollen, and therefore if the junctions were brought
together they would be found too tight and refuse to meet. Just so; and that is one of the
reasons for placing the work aside until the glue has dried at all the parts painted with it.
When after a sufficient time has elapsed the work is examined, it will be found to have contracted
to its old size and form. There will not be the necessity for waiting till the glue is at its
hardest; probably time will not allow of this, some days being absolutely required, but it
must, for the next process, be very firm and seemingly dried through.

Examination will reveal the fact of the whole of the surfaces that have been wetted, being
raised or roughened under the foregoing operations. Recourse must now be had to our small scrapers
again. These will again be applied carefully across and across the surfaces, until, in the
judgment of the operator, the surfaces are level and clean. Particular care must be taken with
the edges, angles and corners, that the superabundant glue is removed. The right angle of the
scraper will be used for this purpose, and should a small particle or two, at any angle or
corner, refuse to budge at the request of such a light tool as a scraper, the powers of a sharp
chisel must be brought to bear upon the subject, and the obstacle removed. Close attention
should be paid to the above, as in the operation of first glueing, the wood, or woods, having
unequal absorbing powers, will swell in accordance therewith, and upset the calculations that
have been so carefully made for the close junction of the parts. For first rate work, the scraping
must be so carefully and accurately done down to the surface of the different parts, as to
leave little or no glue above the surface of the wood. The desired result will thus be secured,
that of the pores of the wood being closed or filled up. For the next stage the glue will not
be necessarily quite so strong, a degree weaker will do. Everything must be ready to hand,
including a cramp of sufficient size and strength. Before proceeding further, however, the
manner of the application of the cramp must be considered. And now, how are we to obtain a
direct pressure of the cramp on the largest surface, and which would have to be in one direction,
end to end of the violin, seemingly a perfectly impracticable matter? The answer is, it is
not practicable, hence the above numerous injunctions as to preliminaries, and which have to
do with counterbalancing the impossibility of direct and strong pressure. The only pressure
that can be applied directly is that of a nearly perpendicular one, the cramp grasping the
button from underneath, with a proper guard or padding of millboard, or cork, cut into shape.

A full brush of glue will now be passed over the whole of the surface of the socket, or receptacle
for the root of the neck; which latter must an instant after be treated in the same manner.
The two must be treated as one operation, and in a warm atmosphere. In the summer time no extra
precautions will be necessary; but in cool weather the strong glue will soon set if the parts
to be operated on are not kept in close proximity to a heating stove, or fireplace, or the
apartment kept at summer heat. The neck and socket being thus kept at a warm temperature, the
former will be firmly thrust into position, and with hand pressure put as close as possible.
The superfluous glue will ooze out all around at the junction of the different parts; if it
does not, that will be a sign that there is a looseness somewhere, or the surfaces have not
been forced together close enough. This must be seen to at once, the parts separated and examined.
It may be that the failure has happened through carelessness in allowing a chip to get in,
or a piece of grit has prevented the opposing surfaces coming together. This being removed
by a small knife, the brush, with a little more fresh glue, may be passed over the surfaces
again, and the fitting this time should be perfect. The cramp and padding should be at once
placed in position and screwed down tightly. All glue appearing above the joints should be
carefully wiped away with a cloth kept ready to hand for the purpose; it is better to do that
now than have to scrape or cut it away when hard; it will also save time.

Ample time must be allowed for the glueing to thoroughly dry. This must be estimated according
to the conditions of the time and place. In very warm weather, or where the atmosphere is heated
artificially, the time consumed in the drying and hardening is less than when the air is saturated
with moisture.

When on examination the dryness is such as will warrant the removal of the cramp, this can
be done. If all the measurements, fitting and precautions have been duly attended to, the neck
or graft, with its line in the centre--supposing the present method is that adopted before
the fingerboard is placed in position--will form an exact continuation of a line down the centre
of the violin. A look down from end to end, or placing a long straight edged rule against the
line, will be a way of testing this: if all is correct, the line will be perfectly straight
and not bent. Should the latter be the case, the measurements, or fitting, in some respects,
will have been inaccurate. It would be very provoking to find it so after all the trouble undertaken,
and many instances are to be seen where the work has been left in this condition, and the stringing
up and regulation has been, not only under great disadvantages, but absence of comfort in playing,
and indeed the proper emission of the tone has been sacrificed. If the violin is one that is
worthy of being performed upon with skill, there is only one alternative to putting it aside
as useless, that of having the neck sawn off and the whole process of renewal gone through,
with the aim of next time being more careful and true.

Supposing, however, the neck is truly set and all is satisfactory, the next stage will be the
laying of the fingerboard. This should be of good, close and straight grained ebony, free from
knots. Fingerboards are usually sold in the rough; that is, with the upper surface, or rounded
part trimmed down to an approximate curve. Monson, like many a later expert, suspended judgment
regarding the two types; but Sir Walter Raleigh came out strongly for the smaller design. "The
greatest ships," he writes, "are the least serviceable...., less nimble, less maniable; 'Grande
navi grande fatiga,' saith the Spaniard. A ship of 600 tons will carry as good ordnance as a
ship of 1200 tons; and though the greater have double her number, the lesser will turn her
broadsides twice before the greater can wind once." And elsewhere: "The high charging of ships
makes them extreme leeward, makes them sink deep in the water, makes them labor, and makes them
overset. Men may not expect the ease of many cabins and safety at once in sea-service."[1]

[Footnote 1: WORKS, Oxford ed. 1829, Vol. VIII, p. 338.]

These statements were made after the Armada; but the trend of English naval construction away from
unwieldy ships such as used by the Spanish in the Armada, is clearly seen in vessels dating from
1570-1580--the Foresight, Bull, and Tiger (rebuilt from galleasses), the Swiftsure, Dreadnought,
Revenge, and others of names renowned in naval annals. These were all of about the dimensions
of the Revenge, which was of 440 tons, 92 feet over all, 32 feet beam, and 15 feet from deck
to keel. That is to say, their length was not more than three times their beam, and their beam
was about twice their depth in the hold--the characteristic proportions of the galleon type.

The
progressiveness of English ship construction is highly significant, for to it may be attributed
in large measure the Armada victory. Spain had made no such advances; in fact, until the decade
of the Armada, she hardly had such a thing as a royal navy. The superiority of the English ships was
generally recognized. An English naval writer in 1570 declared the ships of his nation so fine
"none of any other region may seem comparable to them"; and a Spaniard some years later testified
that his people regarded "one English ship worth four of theirs."

Though not larger than frigates of Nelson's time, these ships were crowded with an even heavier
armament, comprising guns of all sizes and of picturesque but bewildering nomenclature. According to
Corbett,[1] the ordnance may be divided into four main classes based on caliber, the first
two of the "long gun" and the other two of the carronade or mortar type.

[Footnote 1: DRAKE AND THE TUDOR NAVY, Vol. I, p. 384.]

I. Cannon proper, from 16 to 28 caliber, of 8.5-inch bore and 12 feet in length, firing 65-pound
shot. The demi-cannon, which was the largest gun carried on ships of the time, was 6.5 inches by
9 feet and fired 30-pound shot.

II. Culverins, 28 to 34 caliber long guns, 5 inches by 12 feet, firing 17-pound shot. Demi-culverins
were 9-pounders. Slings, bases, sakers, port-pieces, and fowlers belonged to this class.

III. Perriers, from 6 to 8 caliber, firing stone-balls, shells, fire-balls, etc.

IV. Mortars, of 1.5 caliber, including petards and murderers.

The "great ordnance," or cannon, were muzzle-loading. The secondary armament, mounted in tops, cageworks,
bulkheads, etc., were breech-loading; but these smaller pieces fell out of favor as time went
on owing to reliance on long-range fire and rareness of boarding actions. Down to the middle of
the 19th century there was no great improvement in ordnance, save in the way of better powder and
boring. Even in Elizabeth's day the heaviest cannon had a range of three miles.

These advances in ship design and armament were accompanied by some changes in naval administration.
In 1546 the Navy Board was created, which continued to handle matters of what may be termed
civil administration until its functions were taken over by the Board of Admiralty in the
reorganization of 1832. The chief members of the Navy Board, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor
of Ships, Surveyor of Ordnance, and Clerk of Ships, were in Elizabethan times usually experienced
in sea affairs. To John Hawkins, Treasurer from 1578 to 1595, belongs chief credit for the excellent
condition of ships in his day. The Lord High Admiral, a member of the nobility, exercised
at least nominal command of the fleet in peace and war. For vice admiral under him a man of practical
experience was ordinarily chosen. On shipboard, the only "gentleman" officers were the captains;
the rest--masters, master's mates, pilots, carpenters, boatswains, coxswains, and gunners--were,
to quote a contemporary description, "mechanick men that had been
bred up from swabbers."

But owing to the small proportion of soldiers on board, the English ships were not like those
of Spain, which were organized like a camp, with the soldier element supreme and the sailors
"slaves to the rest."

The Political Situation

The steps taken to build up the navy in the decade or more preceding the Armada were well justified
by the political and religious strife in western Europe and the dangers which on all sides
threatened the English realm. France, the Netherlands, and Scotland were torn by religious warfare.
In England the party with open or secret Catholic sympathies was large, amounting to perhaps
half the population, the strength of whose loyalty to Elizabeth it was difficult to gage.
Since 1568 Elizabeth had held captive Mary Queen of Scots, driven
out of her own country by the Presbyterian hierarchy, and a Catholic
with hereditary claims to the English throne.

Before her death, Philip of Spain had conspired with her to assassinate the heretic Elizabeth;
after Mary's execution in 1587 he became heir to her claims and entered the more willingly upon
the task of conquering England and restoring it to the faith. For years, in fact, there had been
a state of undeclared hostility between England and Spain, and acts which, with sovereigns less
cautious and astute than both Elizabeth and Philip, would have meant war. In 1585 Elizabeth formed
an alliance with the Netherlands, and sent her favorite, Leicester, there as governor-general,
and Sir Philip Sidney as Governor of Flushing, which with two other "cautionary towns" she took as pledges
of Dutch loyalty. The motives for this action are well stated in a paper drawn up by the English
Privy Council in 1584, presenting a situation interesting in its analogy to that which faced the
United States when it entered the World War:

"The conclusion of the whole was this: Although her Majesty should thereby enter into the war presently,
yet were she better to do it now, while she may make the same out of her realm, having the help
of the people of Holland, and before the King of Spain shall have consummated his conquest of
those countries, whereby he shall be so provoked by pride, solicited by the Pope, and tempted by the
Queen's own subjects, and shall be so strong by sea; and so free from all other actions and quarrels--yea,
shall be so formidable to all the rest of Christendom, as that her Majesty shall no wise be
able, with her own power, nor with the aid of any other, neither by land nor sea, to withstand
his attempts, but shall be forced to give place to his insatiable malice, which is most terrible
to be thought of, but miserable to suffer."

These were the compelling reasons for England's entry into the war. The aid to Holland and the
execution of Mary, on the other hand, were sufficient to explain Philip's attempted invasion. The
grievance of Spain owing to the incursions of Hawkins and Drake into her American possessions,
and England's desire to break Spain's commercial monopoly, were at
the time relatively subordinate, though from a naval standpoint the
voyages are interesting in themselves and important in the history
of sea control and sea trade.

Hawkins and Drake

John Hawkins was a well-to-do ship-owner of Plymouth, and as already stated, Treasurer of the Royal
Navy, with a contract for the upkeep of ships. His first venture to the Spanish Main was in
1562, when he kidnapped 300 negroes on the Portuguese coast of Africa and exchanged them at
Hispanola (Haiti), for West Indian products, chartering two additional vessels to take his cargo
home. Though he might have been put to death if caught by either Portugal or Spain, his profits
were so handsome by the double exchange that he tried it again in 1565, this time taking his
"choice negroes at £160 each" to Terra Firme, or the Spanish Main, including the coasts of
Venezuela, Colombia, and the Isthmus. When the Spanish authorities, warned by their home government,
made some show of resistance, Hawkins threatened bombardment, landed his men, and did business
by force, the inhabitants conniving in a contraband trade very profitable to them.

On his third voyage he had six vessels, two of which, the Jesus of
Lubeck and the Minion, were Queen's ships hired out for the voyage.

The skipper of one of the smaller vessels, the Judith, was Francis Drake, a relative and protégé
of the Hawkins family, and then a youth of twenty-two. On September 16, 1567, after a series of
encounters stormier than ever in the Spanish settlements, the squadron homeward bound was driven
by bad weather into the port of Mexico City in San Juan de Ulua Bay. Here, having a decided
superiority over the vessels in the harbor, Hawkins secured the privilege of mooring and refitting
his ships inside the island that formed a natural breakwater, and mounted guns on the island
itself. To his surprise next morning, he beheld in the offing 13 ships of Spain led by an
armed galleon and having on board the newly appointed Mexican viceroy. Hawkins, though his guns
commanded the entrance, took hostages and made some sort of agreement by which the Spanish ships
were allowed to come in and moor alongside. But the situation was too tense to carry off without
an explosion. Three days later the English were suddenly attacked on sea and shore. They at once
leaped into their ships and cut their cables, but though they hammered the Spanish severely
in the fight that followed, only two English vessels, the Minion and the Judith, escaped, the
Minion so overcrowded that Hawkins had to drop 100 of his crew on the Mexican coast. Drake made
straight for Plymouth, nursing a bitter grievance at the alleged breach of faith, and vowing vengeance
on the whole Spanish race. "The case," as Drake's biographer, Thomas Fuller, says, "was clear
in sea-divinity, and few are such infidels as not to believe doctrines which make for their own
profit."[1]

[Footnote 1: THE HOLY STATE, Bk. II, Ch. XXII.]

In the next three years, following the example of many a French Huguenot privateersman before him,
and forsaking trade for semi-private reprisal (in that epoch a few degrees short of piracy),
he made three voyages to the Spanish Indies. On the third, in 1572,
he raided Nombre de Dios with fire and sword.

Then, leaguing himself with the mixed-breed natives or cameroons, he waylaid a guarded mule-train
bearing treasure across the Isthmus, securing 15 tons of silver which he buried, and as much
gold as his men could stagger away under. It was on this foray that he first saw the Pacific
from a height of the Cordilleras, and resolved to steer an English squadron into this hitherto
unmolested Spanish sea.

The tale of Drake's voyage into the Pacific and circumnavigation of the globe is a piratical epic,
the episodes of which, however, find some justification in the state
of virtual though undeclared hostilities between England and Spain,
in the Queen's secret sanction, and in Spain's own policy of ruthless
spoliation in America.

Starting at the close of 1577 with five small vessels, the squadron was reduced by shipwreck
and desertion until only the flagship remained when Drake at last, on September 6 of the next year,
achieved his midwinter passage of the Straits of Magellan and bore down, "like a visitation
of God" as a Spaniard said, upon the weakly defended ports of the west coast. After ballasting
his ship with silver from the rich Potosi mines, and rifling even the churches, he hastened onward
in pursuit of a richly laden galleon nicknamed Cacafuego--a name discreetly translated Spitfire,
but which, to repeat a joke that greatly amused Drake's men at the time, it was proposed to change
to Spitsilver, for when overtaken and captured the vessel yielded 26 tons of silver, 13 chests
of pieces of eight, and gold and jewels sufficient to swell the booty to half a million pounds
sterling.

For 20 years the voyage across the northern Pacific had been familiar to the Spanish, who had
studied winds and currents, laid down routes, and made regular crossings. Having picked up charts
and China pilots, and left the whole coast in panic fear, Drake sailed far to the northward, overhauled
his ship in a bay above San Francisco, then struck across the Pacific, and at last rounded
Good Hope and put into Plymouth in September of the third year. It suited Elizabeth's policy
to countenance the voyage. She put the major part of the treasure into the Tower, took some
trinkets herself, knighted Drake aboard the Golden Hind, and when the Spanish ambassador talked
war she told him, in a quiet tone of voice, that she would throw him into a dungeon.

This red-bearded, short and thickset Devon skipper, bold of speech as of action, was now the
most renowned sailor of England, with a name that inspired terror on every coast of Spain. It was
inevitable, therefore, that when Elizabeth resolved upon open reprisals in 1585, Drake should
be chosen to lead another, and this time fully authorized, raid on the Spanish Indies. Here he sacked the
cities of San Domingo and Carthagena, and, though he narrowly missed the plate fleet, brought
home sufficient spoils for the individuals who backed the venture.

In the year 1587 with 23 ships and orders permitting him to operate freely on Spain's home
coasts, he first boldly entered Cadiz, in almost complete disregard of the puny galleys guarding
the harbor, and destroyed some 37 vessels and their cargoes.

Despite the horrified protests of his Vice Admiral Borough (an officer "of the old school" to
be found in every epoch) at these violations of traditional methods, he then took up a position
off Saigres where he could harry coastwise commerce, picked up the East Indiaman San Felipe with a
cargo worth a million pounds in modern money, and even appeared off Lisbon to defy the Spanish
Admiral Santa Cruz. Thus he "singed the King of Spain's beard," and set, in the words of a recent
biographer, "what to this day may serve as the finest example of how a small, well-handled fleet,
acting on a nicely timed offensive, may paralyze the mobilization of an overwhelming force."[1]

[Footnote
1: DRAKE AND THE TUDOR NAVY, Corbett, Vol. II, p. 108.]

The Grand Armada

At the time of this Cadiz expedition Spanish preparations for the
invasion of England were already well under way, Philip being now
convinced that by a blow at England all his aims might be secured--the
subjugation of the Netherlands, the safety of Spanish America, the
overthrow of Protestantism, possibly even his accession to the English
throne.

As the secret instructions to Medina Sidonia more modestly stated, it was at least believed that
by a vigorous offensive and occupation of English territory England could be forced to cease
her opposition to Spain. For this purpose every province of the empire was pressed for funds.
Pope Sixtus VI contributed a million gold crowns, which he shrewdly made payable only when
troops actually landed on English soil. Church and nobility were squeezed as never before.
The Cortes on the eve of the voyage voted 8,000,000 ducats, secured by a tax on wine, meat, and oil,
the common necessities of life, which was not lifted for more than two hundred years.

To gain control of the Channel long enough to throw 40,000 troops ashore at Margate, and thereafter
to meet and conquer the army of defense--such was the highly difficult objective, to assure the
success of which Philip had been led to hope for a wholesale defection of English Catholics to
the Spanish cause. Twenty thousand troops were to sail with the Armada; Alexander Farnese, Duke of
Parma, was to add 17,000 veterans from Flanders and assume supreme command. With the Spanish
infantry once landed, under the best general in Europe, it was not beyond reason that England
might become a province of Spain.

What Philip did not see clearly, what indeed could scarcely be foreseen
from past experience, was that no movement of troops should be undertaken
without first definitely accounting for the enemy fleet.

The Spanish had not even an open base to sail to. With English vessels thronging the northern
ports of the Channel, with 90 Dutch ships blockading the Scheldt and the shallows of the Flanders
coast, it would be necessary to clear the Channel by a naval victory, and maintain control until it
was assured by victory on land. The leader first selected, Santa Cruz--a veteran of Lepanto--at
least put naval considerations uppermost and laid plans on a grand scale, calling for 150 major
ships and 100,000 men, 30,000 of them sailors. But with his death in 1587 the campaign was again
thought of primarily from the army standpoint. The ships were conceived as so many transports,
whose duty at most was to hold the English fleet at bay. Parma was to be supreme. To succeed
Santa Cruz as naval leader, and in order, it is said, that the gray-haired autocrat Philip might
still control from his cell in the Escorial, the Duke of Medina Sidonia was chosen--an amiable
gentleman of high rank, but consciously ignorant of naval warfare, uncertain of purpose, and
despondent almost from the start. Medina had an experienced Vice Admiral in Diego Flores de
Valdes, whose professional advice he usually followed, and he had
able squadron commanders in Recalde, Pedro de Valdes, Oquendo, and
others; but such a commander-in-chief, unless a very genius in self-effacement,
was enough to ruin a far more auspicious campaign.

Delayed by the uncertain political situation in France, even more
than by Drake's exploits off Cadiz, the Armada was at last, in May
of 1588, ready to depart.

The success of the Catholic party under the leadership of the Duke of Guise gave assurance
of support rather than hostility on the French flank. There were altogether some 130 ships, the best
of which were 10 war galleons of Portugal and 10 of the "Indian Guard" of Spain. These were supported
by the Biscayan, Andalusian, Guipuscoan, and Levantine squadrons of about 10 armed merchantmen
each, four splendid Neapolitan galleasses that gave a good account of themselves in action,
and four galleys that were driven upon the French coast by storms and took no part in the battle--making
a total (without the galleys) of about 64 fighting ships. Then there were 35 or more pinnaces
and small craft, and 23 urcas or storeships of little or no fighting value. The backbone of the force
was the 60 galleons, large, top-lofty vessels, all but 20 of them
from the merchant service, with towering poops and forecastles that
made them terrible to look upon but hard to handle. On board were
8,000 sailors and 19,000 troops.

Dispersed by a storm on their departure
from Lisbon, the fleet again assembled at Corunna, their victuals
already rotten, and their water foul and short. Medina Sidonia even
now counseled abandonment; but religious faith, the fatalistic pride
of Spain, and Philip's dogged fixity of purpose drove them on. Putting
out of Corunna on July 22, and again buffeted by Biscay gales, they
were sighted off the Lizard at daybreak of July 30, and a pinnace
scudded into Plymouth with the alarm.

For England the moment of supreme
crisis had come, Elizabeth's policy of paying for nothing that she
might expect her subjects to contribute had left the royal navy short
of what the situation called for, and the government seems also, even
throughout the campaign, to have tied the admirals to the coast and
kept them from distant adventures by limited supplies of munitions
and food. But in the imminent danger, the nobility, both Catholic
and Protestant, and every coastwise city, responded to the call for
ships and men. Their loyalty was fatal to Philip's plan. The royal
fleet of 25 ships and a dozen pinnaces was reënforced until the total
craft of all descriptions numbered 197, not more than 140 of which,
however, may be said to have had a real share in the campaign. For
a month or more a hundred sail had been mobilized at Plymouth, of
which 69 were greatships and galleons. These were smaller in average
tonnage than the Spanish ships, but more heavily armed, and manned
by 10,000 capable seamen. Lord Henry Seymour, with Palmer and Sir
William Winter under him, watched Parma at the Strait of Dover, with
20 ships and an equal number of galleys, barks and pinnaces. The Lord
High Admiral, Thomas Howard of Effingham, a nobleman of 50 with some
naval experience and of a family that had long held the office, commanded
the western squadron, with Drake as Vice Admiral and John Hawkins
as Rear Admiral. If the corners
are not equally attended to with the rest--and to do this properly the angle of the steel scraper
may be used with good effect--there will be a roughness at the part over which the varnish
will settle, become rough when dry, and give the appearance of untidy corners. If the scraper
with right angles is insufficient to clear the corner satisfactorily, one with a rather acute
angle will be found to do the work; it must be sharp, and gently used (or ridges small, large,
or both, will become evident), working across first one way then the other until the appearance
is quite up to the exactions and desire of the eye.

Another wetting will be of some further benefit for a good and lasting surface. When dry the
roughness will not be so obtrusive as in the first instance, and the application of the finest
grain of glasspaper, or a piece that has been under use for some time and got a little stale
will give the desired surface. The action of the glasspaper over the surface should be continued
for some time, until there being less and less powder routed up the surface, it assumes a polished
appearance, and if the whole work is well done it will suggest a kind of finish that looks
too good to spoil by covering up with varnish. But the latter is a necessity; if not really
varnish in the usual sense of the term, a substitute must be used, and here we touch a little
upon the confines of fashion or individual fancy.

It may not be generally known that the old Italian makers--I mention these as they have always
been looked up to as guides for almost everything in connection with violin facture--varnished
the whole of the neck--which under present circumstances we call the graft--with the same varnish
and thickness of it as the rest of the instrument. We never see such a thing now, and if a
maker were to send forth his new violins in this manner or trim, he would be looked upon as
eccentric. Nevertheless at one time it was universal. Probably the increased number of movements
of the hand, and especially the thumb, to meet the requirements of more florid execution and
in connection with the growth of the ability among players for performing much music on the
higher positions or shifts, showed very soon how the coloured varnish looked patchy under wear.
This fashion of covering over the most handled part of the instrument with the coloured varnish
then became discarded.

"Appearances must be preserved" was found to be an axiom almost forced upon the makers and
repairers, and, as time went on, the substitution of strongly curled wood for necks or grafts,
in place of the plainer material hitherto used, gradually settled down into the present fashion.
Now-a-days the skill of the repairer is exercised in the various treatment of this part. Players
vary in their tastes or whims, some liking a perfectly smooth or polished surface as more suitable
to their handling than what they understand as an unvarnished neck, others like it the other
way as not so likely to slip, there being a little more hold or resistance. Anyhow, the raw
wood cannot be left simply glass-papered, this would be speedily followed in use by an accumulation
of dirt and grease unpleasant to the eye, and to the touch, clammy and unwholesome. It will
therefore be as well to consider the two modes of treatment. In either case the parts of the
graft near the insertion in the socket and at the other end where the peg-box is fitted will
require varnishing down.

Before active operations commence a fair examination should be made of the colour or complexion
of the body of the violin. Very often this has no attention paid to it, with the result of
a hideous contrast between the neck and the ribs adjoining, a sign of bad workmanship and carelessness.
The materials at hand for making a good match must then be thought over, the most appropriate
selected and the number of coats, if possible, determined upon. This latter will be taken in
a general sense, as an exact number will not be possible; appearances are in this process deceptive
and must be regulated by the exigencies of the moment, but what can be calculated is the question
of one or two applications only (which would result in a cheap and common appearance) or a
number with the same materials carefully laid to the satisfaction of the repairer.

Without plunging into the whirlpool of the best or particular gums, resins and their individual
mode of application, a matter that will take up hereafter our more undivided attention, it
may be taken as a certainty that the varnishing materials used for the parts under consideration
must be of an alcoholic solution, no other would "set," evaporate or dry with sufficient rapidity
to allow of handling: or, as we may put it in another way, that would lose tackiness within
a convenient time.

Most people are aware of the nature of an oil varnish during the drying process, there is firstly
the "setting," that is, all the volatile particles dispersing; secondly, the real drying or
hardening which ensues with sufficient time or age; both accompanied with some degree of contraction,
and until the process is complete, handling or friction of any kind has to be carefully avoided.
This will at once show its unsuitableness for repairs and restorations, especially of the kind
now under consideration. The same process has to be gone through in the drying of a spiritous
or alcoholic varnish, but it is so much the more rapid in consequence of there being only the
alcohol to disperse, leaving the resin in a comparatively dry state.

Colouring will be the chief consideration after the resin has been selected, and on this the
judgment of the operator will have to be centred. For obtaining the effect desired or that
is fashionable at the present day, one or two coats or paintings will be commenced at the corners
where the graft is inserted in the upper ribs and gradually being thinned off as the curved
part rounding upwards from the button dies away. Sometimes in consequence of the fresh wood
appearing very white--it is not always possible to obtain aged wood--some colouring material
or stain mixed with the first two wettings will subdue the staring aspect, this may be continued
along the graft and bring up the figure or curl more prominently. Often between the curves
each end of the graft repairers force very strong stain, this being sometimes common writing
ink; when varnished over the effect is violent and common even when nicely done. The best that
can be recommended is some sufficiently dark wood stain--sold at most of the oil and colourmen's
shops--and rub it in, allowing it to dry and then finishing off as before described.

If the neck is to be left unvarnished, as it is termed, the colouring and fining off can be
followed with a rubbing of good oil, linseed, raw or boiled, it must be really rubbed in and
vigorously frictioned up and down with a dry cloth--or after an application of the same kind
with some old fine flannel. This will drive in the oil, consolidating the whole, and as it
will dry inside after a time, keep a good smooth surface under usage.

Some repairers continue to varnish or polish along the sides of the fingerboard to the extremity.
There is no objection to this, and if very neatly done, the general effect is enhanced. The
varnishing of the whole of the fingerboard is perhaps not so good in general, too much glare
seeming to obtrude itself, but the filling up the pores with the varnish and then working it
down to a dull surface has a good effect and helps in the resistance to wear. The polishing
of the neck, or fingerboard with it, may be effected by making a small ball or dabber of about
half an inch in diameter of fine grained flannel; this should be covered with another surface
of closer material such as calico, but large enough to enclose the little bunch and to be tied
up with a piece of string. A portion of varnish being placed ready in a smaller saucer or any
convenient porcelain article with a shallow even bottom, the ball or dabber will be moistened
with some linseed oil and then its rounded face dipped in the varnish and rubbed briskly, but
lightly, over the surfaces to be polished. These surfaces rapidly absorb the polish, while
the oil in the dabber allows it to pass over without clinging. The rubbing should be continued
until a smooth, glassy appearance comes and you feel sure that the wood has imbibed enough
of the polish; this treatment may be continued over all the parts at which it may be desirable
to have an even shining surface. The work may now be put aside for some hours, so that the
evaporating and hardening may take place. When this has been ascertained to be satisfactory,
the surfaces may be wiped gently with some soft, absorbent material which will take away any
superfluous particles of oil that may have been accidentally left in the process of rubbing.
If there should be some uneven, clotted, or rough parts observable, a small ball or dabber
made in the same way as the preceding, but used with spirit and oil instead of varnish, will
work these down to a proper condition. For the dead surfacing, care must be taken that all
is quite hard enough. Taking a small piece of flannel of fine texture doubled up and with its
face well oiled, having some rotten-stone powder at hand, dip in the latter and rub as before
lightly round and round over the parts to be dead polished; this will give a nice refined,
even appearance, with comparatively little glare. A final wipe off with a soft cloth as before,
will bring matters to a conclusion.

We may now take this portion of the work as finished and turn to the consideration of repairs
of fractures or filling up of parts last. It is early yet to think of opening the instrument
for the purpose of rectification of anything that appears to have gone wrong either with the
general structure or with small details. A golden rule to be observed by all repairers is that
of never opening an instrument--that is removing the upper or lower table--until all other
means of correction have proved futile. Extensive repairs to the interior may be accomplished
without opening after a very careful look over with proper calculation. There are several reasons
for keeping the above rule well in mind, among them, that if the violin is old and has undergone
much affliction while under the hands of many doctors, some of these possibly belonging to
the "heroic school," it may be found that the last visitant of the interior had straightened,
bent, or contracted and held some of the parts together while the glue was in process of drying
and that sufficient time had not elapsed since the occurrence for the strained parts to settle
down under their new condition. An opening of the violin, removal of upper or lower table or
any large portion, must be undertaken after due consideration and every precaution has been
taken that nothing shall be disturbed if the reparation can be accomplished without. An opening
of the instrument for the purpose of one repair may lead to the necessity of half a dozen before
closing up again. Our opening ceremony will therefore be postponed until a future occasion,
and we will confine ourselves to the consideration of such external injuries of ancient or
recent origin that may be with the least inconvenience restored to ordinary health or even
strength. The numbers of such and their varieties are more than can be related, the curious
manner of their occurrence, too, would be an addition that would indefinitely prolong the story.

Taking, therefore, small injuries or fractures that can be repaired from the outside, among
the first coming to mind and not infrequently seen, is at the corners, a small piece of the
projecting part of the rib--one of the upper or lower sets; this may have caught against something
and got lifted away from the block, it may be on one side or the other, in size perhaps little
more than an eighth of an inch, but all the same requiring immediate attention, or dirt will
get in and make an adjourned repair more difficult if not wholly impossible to obscure.

According to the condition, age and date of the injury, so the treatment must be. If the injury
is quite recent and the fractures are quite clean, some good thick glue placed on the exposed
surface and the lifted piece placed back in position may remain there with no further attention
than the wiping off when dry of any superfluous glue that may have exuded when pressing the
part on. This has been a simple matter, but if the part knocked away is lost, a different course
must be pursued. As it would be impossible to find a piece of fresh wood to fit a ragged or
irregular-shaped hollow, there is but one method to proceed upon, that of clearing a regular
space with a sharp pointed knife. The walls of the space or opening should be as clean in line
as possible, also quite vertical. A small keen-edged chisel may be found advantageous, as,
by its aid, using it with the angular or sharpened side downwards, the floor of the excavation
can be reduced to a fair level. This hollowing-out should not be too deep, leaving as much
as possible of the bare wood uncut, only enough being removed for a good holding surface. If
this is done neatly, the opening will be like that of a box into which will be fitted the fresh
wood. As to this last it should be selected to match both with regard to texture and age whenever
possible, also in continuation of the run of the grain, so that when fitted it should look
as much like the surrounding wood as possible, that is, when free of varnish. In cutting the
wood to the required size it should not, as in the instance of the aperture, be made with perfectly
upright sides, but the parts that are to go into the aperture should be a fraction less than
the outer, so as to allow of its being pressed in and fitting very closely all round. As the
parts under consideration lie in the curved parts on the structure, to fit a piece in with
success, it should also be bent with a requisite curve; if this is not attended to, and the
clear varnish comes over it when being finished off, there will be a glistening of the grain
underneath when shifted about in the light. To avoid this, which is apt to draw attention to
the repaired parts, a larger piece of veneer than necessary should be first bent into the proper
curve and the part nearly small enough cut from it and then made to fit. The bending of the
piece can be effected by steeping it in some hot water, pressing it into form; being but a
small portion, it will probably retain its inclination; if large enough and obstinate it must
be kept bent by some means until dry, when it will show no disposition to revert back to its
old form. If these particulars are all attended to with care, the piece of wood or veneer will
only require a little pressure--the opening being gone over with strong glue--to retain its
form in proper position. In case of failure under these conditions and the parts not holding
together as they should, another course must be adopted.

It will be most likely that some grease is the cause of the non-adherence of the parts. The
remedy will be that of using a little benzine on a brush and wiping or mopping out with a small
piece of linen on the end of a pointed stick of soft wood, after which, when quite dry, some
fresh glue must be applied, and the parts pressed together and held in position.

Ingenuity and the perception of the adaptation of means to an end will constantly be called
into exercise, and at a part of the instrument such as is at present under consideration, will
be often severely taxed. Want of purchase or no direct pressure being possible, or at least
perceptible, will be the complaint of the operator, but this can always be overcome with a
little patience.

Now supposing that a piece has come off at the upper part of the waist curve, and if narrow
or the curve is sudden it will at first sight be a little puzzling as to keeping pressure on
the fresh part, even if cut sharply and ready to be deftly inserted. The difficulties will
be considerably lessened, if not disposed of, if we take up a portion of soft pine or poplar,
cut it in a moment or two to shape, so as to very loosely fit the upper curve or part we are
about to glue, and not quite reaching the lower or usually larger curve of the waist; a small
piece of cork placed between the wood to be inserted and that which is to press it while in
position and another piece of cork of a wedge form can be squeezed in at the other end, so
as to prevent the varnish being injured and to tighten the pressure, which will not be necessarily
great if the fitting is good.

Another kind of repair not unfrequently necessary, and which should not be delayed, is caused
by the parting of the two ribs at the angle, in consequence often of accidental knocks and
over weak glue. This is a more difficult part at which to get direct pressure than almost any
part of the instrument. Many repairers would lift up the loose part or parts, both being occasionally
loose, brush a little glue in, squeeze the parts together and leave them. When dry the ends
will under this treatment seldom be found to meet properly as in their original condition.
The best mode of repairing will be found that of proceeding by degrees, overcoming the enemy
in detail. Thus firstly, we must observe whether the junction or construction of this part
has been effected in the old Brescian manner--that is, the two equal parts being brought together,
or according to the later method, the end of the middle rib being placed in position first,
trimmed to a feather edge and the upper left thick and slightly overlapping it and afterwards
trimmed into shape. In both instances the under surfaces must be cleaned and all the hard old
glue softened and cleared out, if unfractured the surfaces of both corner block and rib fitting
will be as originally left by the maker. In either style of construction it will be best to
proceed first with the middle rib and support or prop it against the block in the way before
mentioned. When quite dry we can remove the pressure and get to work at the other. After being
quite sure that no hard glue or foreign particles remain between the surfaces to prevent a
perfect fit as in the original condition, a small mould cut from soft wood again and of a size
and shape that will fit loosely the semi-circular part must be cut, and some soft paper got
ready to go between as a protection for the varnished part. If the parts are not much worn
away, or the front and back plates are in fair condition, the rib may be glued and the screw
cramp, cork or paper of course being used as a protector, and the rib will be held in position.
If this is not sufficient for getting a close and accurate fit, the soft wood mould mentioned
above must be placed, and a slight pressure gained by a wedge of wood gently inserted and pressed
home. This mode of repair, it will be borne in mind, is when the upper and lower plates are
in fairly good condition. Different treatment would be adopted if both were separated or the
upper one taken off.

Sometimes the cramping, although sufficient for getting a good mend where there is a good extent
of surface, will not be quite the thing for a small part, perhaps a slight opening at the extreme
edge; in this instance a wooden mould, cut in a few minutes from a flat board large enough
to allow of an oval aperture being made that will admit of the body of the violin being passed
through. This being done and a small wedge being here and there judiciously inserted, will
enable the operator to get enough purchase, or advantage may be taken of the juxtaposition
of the cramp, and using both to gain the requisite pressure against the bend of the rib in
the manner before mentioned.

There are as a matter of course extremely numerous kinds of fractures or injuries arising from
almost as many different causes. If time and space permitted, they might be classified and
each credited to their different agencies. Sufficient for our purpose, however, will be the
separation of them into three divisions: firstly, those which may be the outcome or result
of ordinary wear and giving way of parts through atmospheric influence, such as damp or excessive
dryness, or both at times, in combination with varying temperature. People are apt to debit
the climate of Britain with many shortcomings and the cause of much undoing of good work in
the fiddle world and the prevention of its being accomplished in the concluding stages of fiddle
facture.

Much of the good quality attached to Italian instruments has been attributed to the beautiful
and dry air of Italy. Now that Italy has beautiful air no one can deny, that is, while not
standing in the streets of some of the most interesting cities therein, but that it is dry
generally is perhaps going beyond the mark; remember it is a very mountainous place with some
exceptional portions, this may be easily verified by a glance over a good map of the place,
or better, a tour by railway from the northern provinces down as far as Naples. Knowledge is
fairly general as to mountainous districts, much more than plains, being the localities where
rain is most frequent, the more or less saturation of the atmosphere following as a matter
of course.

But let Italian fiddles speak for themselves, otherwise than through the medium of gut strings.
The first makers of violins in Brescia used no side linings, but trusted to the most excellent
quality of their glue for holding back and front to the ribs. That their trust was not misplaced
in many instances is proved by the work in its primitive condition remaining intact to the
present day. With the rise of the Cremonese school, delicacy in treatment of detail became
fashionable; makers found that in order to give expression to their ideas in as many particulars
as possible over the work, especially in respect of refinement in the curving of the ribs,
less thickness of wood in these parts would have to be used, especially when of very decided
curl; but this would not hold well except in the driest districts. The system was then introduced
of using the thin slips of wood running from block to block; the thickness of these, although
slight, added to the thin substance of the rib, allowed a better holding power to back and front.

The fact is here evident that the glue, of exceeding good quality--and that it was so will
be corroborated by all repairers who have had to do with the old Italian instruments--was too
easily affected by the damp of the atmosphere.

Further evidence frequently turns up among the great numbers of old Italian instruments gathered
from all sorts of places, of the efforts at combating the effects of damp. Some of the means
adopted by various repairers, apparently in the smaller towns--judging by the bad, even extraordinary
woods used--have been very curious, many interesting, others primitive, even stupid. At about
the same time the Amatis were introducing the use of side-linings, Giov. Maggini was trying
other means of preventing the parting of the upper and lower tables from the ribs by damp.
A method he adopted, and which many later makers imitated--if it did not occur to them spontaneously--was
by cutting a groove all round and inserting the ribs. It will be obvious from this that no
linings were used in these instances. That his efforts were not followed by success may be
concluded from the fact that he did not persevere with the system. The simple method of his
master was fallen back upon and thicker ribs placed in position. When we come across one of
those grooved tables it will probably be found--as might have been anticipated by Maggini had
he known beforehand of the course to be taken by his art, which was at the time almost a local
one--that a repairer has at one time thought it necessary to lift the ribs from one or the
other plate, and almost, of course, bungled over it. This will be seen in the irregularity
of the fitting of the ribs, which have been ruthlessly cut or torn out of the groove, some
portions being left in. Taking them out was found to be unprofitable work, with a general result
of a wretched wreck remaining, instead of the whole original being there but shifted a little,
from the glue losing its hold while perishing from the action of moisture.

Here, before proceeding further, it may be as well to call attention to the kind of damage
done by the atmosphere. We speak of the glue perishing. Under most circumstances this will
not occur, but under exceptional ones it will. If good in the first instance, it will be perfectly
sound and strong as ever at the end of three hundred years. I have found this to be so in the
work of Gasparo da Salo and his pupil, Giovanni Paolo Maggini, besides other makers nearly
contemporary. What particular kind of glue they used I am unable to say, possibly they did
not know very much more themselves beyond what they believed was the best obtainable in their
day and city. When the perishing has occurred there must have been very much moisture in the
atmosphere of the locality in which the violin rested for some time, as the best glue will
absorb the most moisture before losing its firmness, or power of adherence. Prolonged exposure
to damp allows chemical change to take place and then all adhesive quality is lost; when dry
air afterwards attacks it, the parts of the instrument that should have been held firmly together
are released, with results that may be serious in degree according to the position of the part
affected.

To continue the consideration of the repair of a violin that has been constructed with grooves
for holding the ribs. A long and troublesome piece of work would be the loosening and taking
away of the fragments of rib inserted in the groove and cut away by some repairer from the
rest or standing rib; it is therefore preferable in ordinary and neat repairing to clear the
parts that may be ragged or begrimed, firstly, by washing with a stiff brush of appropriate
size and wiping with a clean cotton rag repeatedly; when the rag ceases to be soiled or discoloured
after wiping, the parts may be taken as fairly clean. For this triumph of West over East, of Christianity
over barbarism, we have to thank partly the courage and genius of great warriors and statesmen who
arose here and there, like Alfred of England and Martel of France, but chiefly the Eastern Empire,
with its capital at Constantinople, which stood through this entire
epoch as the one great bulwark against which the invasions dashed
in vain.

In this story of defense, the Christian fleets won more than one Salamis, as we shall see in the
course of this chapter.

In the year 328 A.D. the Emperor Constantine the Great moved his capital to Byzantium and named
it "New Rome." In honor of its founder, however, the name was changed soon to "Constantinople," which
it has retained ever since. It may seem strange that after so many glorious centuries Rome
should have been deprived of the honor of being the center of the great empire which bore its
own name, but in the fourth century the city itself had no real significance. All power rested
in the person of the Emperor himself, and wherever he went became for the time being the capital
for all practical purposes. At this time the empire was already on the defensive and the danger
lay in the east. Constantine needed a capital nearer the scene of future campaigns, nearer
his weakest frontier, the Danube, and nearer the center of the empire. Byzantium not only served
these purposes but also possessed natural advantages of a very high order. It was situated
where Europe and Asia meet, it commanded the waterway between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean,
and it was a natural citadel. Whoever captured the city must needs
be powerful by land and sea.

Under the emperor's direction the new capital was greatly enlarged and protected by a system
of massive walls. Behind these walls the city stood fast for over a thousand years against
wave after wave of barbarian invasion.

Of the wars with the Persians, the Vandals, and the Huns nothing need be said here, for they do
not involve the operations of fleets. The city was safe so long as no enemy appeared with the
power to hold the sea. That power appeared in the seventh century when the Arabs, or "Saracens,"
as they were called in Europe, swept westward and northward in the first great Mohammedan invasion.

Most
migrations are to be explained by the pressure of enemies, or the lack of food and pasturage
in the countries left behind, or the discovery of better living conditions in the neighboring
countries. But the impulse behind the two tremendous assaults of Islam upon Europe seems to have been
religious fanaticism of a character and extent unmatched in history. The founder of the Faith,
Mohammed, taught from 622 to 632. He succeeded in imbuing his followers with the passion of winning
the world to the knowledge of Allah and Mohammed his prophet.

The unbeliever was to be offered the alternatives of conversion or death, and the believer who
fell in the holy wars would be instantly transported to Paradise. Men who actually believe
that they will be sent to a blissful immortality after death are the most terrible soldiers to face,
for they would as readily die as live. In fact Cromwell's "Ironsides" of a later day owed their
invincibility to very much the same spirit. At all events, by the time of Mohammed's death
all Arabia had been converted to his faith and, fired with zeal, turned to conquer the world.
Hitherto the tribes of Arabia were scattered and disorganized, and Arabia as a country meant
nothing to the outside world. Now under the leadership of the Prophet it had become a driving
force of tremendous power. Mohammedan armies swept over Syria into Persia. In 637, only five
years after Mohammed's death, Jerusalem surrendered, and shortly afterwards Egypt was conquered.
Early in the eighth century the Arabs ruled from the Indus on the east, and the Caucasus on the
north, to the shores of the Atlantic on the west. Their empire curved westward along the coast
of northern Africa, through Spain, like one of their own scimitars, threatening all Christendom.
Indeed, the Arab invasion stands unparalleled in history for its rapidity and extent.

The one great obstacle in the way was the Christian, or Roman, empire with its center at Constantinople.
Muaviah, the Emir of Syria, was the first to perceive that nothing could be done against the
empire until the Arabs had wrested from it the command of the sea. Accordingly he set about building
a great naval armament. In 649 this fleet made an attack on Cyprus but was defeated. The following
year, however, it took an important island, Aradus, off the coast of Syria, once a stronghold
of the Phnicians, and sacked it with savage barbarity. An expedition sent from Constantinople
to recover Alexandria was met by this fleet and routed. This first naval victory over the Christians
gave the Saracens unbounded confidence in their ability to fight on the sea. They sailed into
the Ægean, took Rhodes, plundered Cos, and returned loaded with booty. Muaviah, elated with
these successes, planned a great combined land and water expedition against the Christian capital.

At
this point it is worth pausing to consider what the fighting ship of this period was like. As we have
seen in the preceding chapter the Roman navy sank into complete decay.

At the end of the fourth century there was practically no imperial navy in existence. The conquest
of the Vandals by Belisarius in the sixth century involved the creation of a fleet, but when
that task was over the navy again disappeared until the appearance of the Arabs compelled the building
of a new imperial fleet. The small provincial squadrons then used to patrol the coasts were by
no means adequate to meet the crisis.

The warships of this period were called "dromons," a term that persists even in the time of the
Turkish invasion eight centuries later. The word means "fast sailers" or "racers." The dromon
was not the low galley of the later Middle Ages but a two-banked ship, probably quite as large
as the Roman quinquereme, carrying a complement of about 300 men. Amidships was built a heavy
castle or redoubt of timbers, pierced with loopholes for archery. On the forecastle rose a kind
of turret, possibly revolving, from which, after Greek fire was invented, the tubes or primitive
cannon projected the substance on the decks of the enemy. The dromon had two masts, lateen rigged,
and between thirty and forty oars to a side.

There were two classes of dromons, graded according to size, and a third class of ship known as the
"pamphylian," which was apparently of a cruiser type, less cumbered with superstructure. In addition
there were small scout and dispatch boats of various shapes and sizes.

Both Christian and Saracen fought with these kinds of warships. Apparently the Arabs simply copied
the vessels they found already in use by their enemies, and added no new device of their own.

In
655 Muaviah started his great double invasion against Constantinople. He sent his fleet into
the Ægean, while he himself with an army tried to force the passes of the Taurus mountains.
Before the Arab fleet had gone far it met the Christian fleet, commanded by the Emperor himself,
off the town of Phaselis on the southwestern coast of Asia Minor. A great battle followed. The
Christian emperor, Constantine II, distinguished himself by personal courage throughout the
action, but the day went sorely against the Christians. At last the flagship was captured and
he himself survived only by leaping into a vessel that came to his rescue while his men fought
to cover his escape. It was a terrible defeat, for 20,000 Christians had been killed and the
remnants of their fleet were in full retreat. But the Saracens had bought their victory at such
a price that they were themselves in no condition to profit by it, and the naval expedition
went no further. Meanwhile Muaviah had not succeeded in forcing the Taurus with his army,
so that the grand assault came to nothing after all.

The following year the murder of the Caliph brought on a civil war among the Saracens, in consequence
of which Muaviah arranged a truce with Constantine. The latter was thus enabled to turn his
attention to the beating back of the Slavs in the east and the recovery of imperial possessions
in the west, notably the city and province of Carthage. During the last of these campaigns he was killed
by a slave.

The death of this energetic and able ruler seemed to Muaviah the opportunity
to begin fresh operations against the Christian empire.

Three great armies invaded the territory of the Cross. One plundered Syracuse, another seized and
fortified a post that threatened the existence of Carthage, a third pushed to the shores of the
Sea of Marmora. These were, however, only preliminary to the grand assault on the capital itself.

In
673 a great Arab armada forced the Hellespont and captured Cyzicus. With this as a base, the fleet
landed an army on the northern shore of the Sea of Marmora. By these means Constantinople was invested
by land and sea. But the great walls proved impregnable against the attacks of the army, and
the Christian fleet, sheltered in the Golden Horn, was able to sally out from time to time and
make successful raids on detachments of the Saracen ships. This state of affairs continued for
six months, after which Muaviah retired with his army to Cyzicus, leaving a strong naval guard
to hold the straits.

The next spring Muaviah again landed his army on the European side and besieged the city for several
months. The second year's operations were no more successful than the first, and again the Arab
force retired to Cyzicus for the winter.

The Arab commander was determined to stick it out until he had forced the surrender of the city
by sheer exhaustion, but his plan had a fatal error. During the winter months the land blockade
was abandoned, with the result that supplies for the next year's siege were readily collected
for the beleaguered city. Emperor and citizens alike rose to the emergency with a spirit of
devotion that burned brighter with every year of the siege.

Meanwhile the Christians of the outlying provinces of Syria and Africa were also fighting
stubbornly and with considerable success against the enemy. The year 676 passed without any
material change in the situation.

During the siege a Syrian architect named Callinicus is said to have come to Constantinople with
a preparation of his own invention, "Greek fire," which he offered the Emperor for use against
the Saracen. This, according to one historian, "was a semi-liquid substance, composed of sulphur,
pitch, dissolved niter, and petroleum boiled together and mixed with certain less important
and more obscure substances.... When ejected it caught the woodwork which it fell and set it
so thoroughly on fire that there was no possibility of extinguishing the conflagration. It
could only be put out, it is said, by pouring vinegar, wine, or sand upon it."[1]

[Footnote 1: THE ART OF WAR, Oman, p. 546.]

Constantine IV, the Emperor, was quick to see the possibilities of the innovation and equipped
his dromons with projecting brass tubes for squirting the substance upon the enemy's ships.
These are sometimes referred to as "siphons," but it is not clear just how they were operated.
One writer[2] is of the opinion that something of the secret of gunpowder had been obtained from
the East and that the substance was actually projected by a charge
of gunpowder; in short, that these "siphons" were primitive cannon.

In addition to these tubes other means were prepared for throwing the fire. Earthenware jars
containing it were to be flung by hand or arbalist, and darts and arrows were wrapped with tow soaked
in the substance.

[Footnote 2: THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE, Foord, p. 139.]

The Christian fleet was no match for the Saracen in numbers, but Constantine pinned his faith
on the new invention. Accordingly, during the fourth year of the siege, 677, he boldly led his fleet
to the attack. We have no details of this battle beyond the fact that the Greek fire struck such
terror by its destructive effect that the Saracens were utterly defeated. This unexpected blow
completed the growing demoralization of the besiegers.

The army returned to the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus, and the survivors of the fleet turned
homewards. Constantine followed up his victory with splendid energy. He landed troops on the
Asiatic shore, pursued the retreating Arabs and drove the shattered remnant of their army back
into Syria. The fleet was overtaken by a storm in the Ægean and suffered heavily. Before the
ships could reassemble, the Christians were upon them and almost
nothing was left of the great Saracen armada.

Thus the second great assault on Constantinople was shattered by the most staggering disaster that had
ever befallen the cause of Islam.

The Christian empire once more stood supreme, and that supremacy was attested by the terms of peace
which the defeated Muaviah was glad to accept. There was to be a truce of thirty years, during
which the Christian emperor was to receive an annual tribute of 3000 pounds of gold, fifty
Arab horses and fifty slaves.

It is unfortunate that there was no Herodotus to tell the details of this victory, for it was tremendously
important to European civilization. Western Europe was then a welter of barbarism and anarchy, and
if Constantinople had fallen, in all probability the last vestige of Roman civilization would
have been destroyed. Moreover, the battle is of special interest from a tactical point of view
because it was won by a new device, Greek fire, which was the most
destructive naval weapon up to the time when gunpowder and artillery
took its place.

Indeed this substance may be said to have saved Christian civilization for several centuries,
for the secret of its composition was carefully preserved at Constantinople and the Arabs never
recovered from their fear of it.

The victory did not, however, mark the crisis of the struggle. In the half century that followed,
Constantinople suffered from weak or imbecile emperors while the Caliphate gained ground under
able rulers and generals. In the first fifteen years of the eighth century the Saracens reached
the climax of their power. Under a great general, Muza, they conquered Spain and spread into
southern France. It was he who conceived the grandiose plan of conquering Christendom by a
simultaneous attack from the west and from the east, converging at the city of Rome. One army was
to advance from Asia Minor and take Constantinople; another was to cross the Pyrenees and
overrun the territory of the Franks. Had the enterprise been started at the time proposed
there could have been little opposition in the west, for the Franks were then busy fighting
each other, but luckily Muza fell into disgrace with the Caliph at
this time and his great project was undertaken by less able hands
and on a piecemeal plan.

The eastern line of invasion was undertaken first in the year 717. A fleet of warships and transports
to the number of 1800 sailed to the Hellespont, carrying about 80,000 troops, while a great army
collected at Tarsus and marched overland toward the same destination. Meanwhile two more fleets
were being prepared in the ports of Africa and Egypt, and a third army was being collected to reënforce
the first expedition. This army was to be under the personal command of the Caliph himself.
The third attack on the Christian capital was intended to be the supreme effort.

Fortunately, the ruler of Constantinople at this hour of peril was a man of ability and energy,
Leo III; but the empire had sunk so low as a result of the misrule of his predecessors that his
authority scarcely extended beyond the shores of the Sea of Marmora, and his resources were at a low
ebb.

The navy on which so much depended was brought to a high point of efficiency, but it was so
inferior in numbers to the Saracen armada that he dared not attempt even a defense of the
Dardanelles.

For the Arabs all went well at first. Unopposed they transported a part of their army to the European
shore, moved toward Constantinople and invested it by land and sea. One detachment was sent
to cover Adrianople, which was occupied by a Christian garrison; the rest of the force concentrated
on the capital itself.

Meanwhile the Christian fleet lay anchored in the shelter of the Golden Horn, protected by a
boom of chains and logs. As the Saracen ships came up to occupy the straits above the city they
fell into confusion in trying to stem the rapid current. Seeing his opportunity, the emperor
ordered the boom opened, and leading the way in his flagship, he fell upon the huddle of Saracen
vessels in the channel. The latter could make little resistance, and before the main body of the fleet
could work up to the rescue, the Christians had destroyed twenty and taken a number of prizes
back to the Horn. Again Greek fire had proved its deadly efficacy. Elated with this success,
Leo ordered the boom opened wide and, lying in battle order at the mouth of the Horn, he challenged
the Arab fleet to attack. But such was the terror inspired by Greek fire that the Grand Vizier,
in spite of his enormous superiority in numbers, declined to close.

Instead he withdrew his dromons out of the Bosphorus and thereafter followed the less risky policy
of a blockade. This initial success of the Christian fleet had the important effect of leaving
open the sea route to the Black Sea, through which supplies could still reach the beleaguered
city.

The Arabs then sat down to wear out the defenders by a protracted siege on land and sea. In
the spring of 718 the new army and the two new fleets arrived on the scene. One of the latter
succeeded, probably by night, in passing through the Bosphorus and closing the last inlet to
the city. The situation for the defenders became desperate. Many of the men serving on these new fleets,
however, were Christians. These took every opportunity to desert, and gave important information
to the emperor as to the disposition of the Arab ships. Acting on this knowledge, Leo took
his fleet out from the shelter of the boom and moved up the straits against the African and
Egyptian squadrons that were blockading the northern exit. The deserters guided him to where these
squadrons lay, at anchor and unprepared for action. What followed was a massacre rather than
a battle. The Christian members of the crews deserted wholesale and turned upon their Moslem officers.
Ship after ship was rammed by the Christian dromons or set on fire by the terrible substance which
every Arab regarded with superstitious dread. Some were driven ashore, others captured, many
more sunk or burnt to the water's edge. Of a total of nearly 800 vessels practically nothing was left.

Leo
followed up this spectacular naval victory by transporting a force from the garrison of the city
to the opposite shore of the Bosphorus, attacking the army encamped there and driving it in rout.
Meanwhile the Bulgarian chieftain had responded to Leo's appeal and, relieving the siege of Adrianople,
beat back the Saracen army at that point with great slaughter. The fugitives of that army
served to throw into panic the troops encamped round the walls of Constantinople, already demoralized
by disease, the death of their leaders, and the annihilation of the African and Egyptian fleets
in the Bosphorus.

The great retreat began. The Arab soldiers started back through Asia Minor, but only 30,000
out of the original force of 180,000 lived to reach Tarsus. The fleet set sail for the Ægean, and
as in the similar retreat of a half century before, the Arabs were overwhelmed by a storm with
terrible losses. The Christian ships picked off many survivors, and
the Christians of the islands destroyed others that sought shelter
in any port. It is said that out of the original armada of 1800 vessels
only five returned to Syria! Thus the third and supreme effort of
the Saracen ended in one of the greatest military disasters in history.

The
service of the Christian fleet in the salvation of the empire at this
time is thus summarized by a historian:

"The fleet won most of the
credit for the fine defense; it invariably fought with admirable readiness
and discipline, and was handled in the most masterful manner. It checked
the establishment of a naval blockade at the very outset, and broke
it when it was temporarily formed in 718; it enabled the army to operate
at will on either shore of the Bosphorus, and it followed up the retreating
Saracens and completed the ruin of the great armament."[1]

[Footnote
1: THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE, Foard, p. 170.]

The winning stroke in this
campaign was the tremendous naval victory at the mouth of the Bosphorus,
and this, even more emphatically than Constantine's victory in 677,
deserves to be called another Salamis. Not only did it save the Christian
empire but it checked the Caliphate at the summit of its power and
started it on its decline. Not for thirty years afterwards was the
Saracen able to put any considerable fleet upon the sea.

It was ten
years after the Arab defeat at Constantinople that the armies of the
west began the other part of Muza's project--the conquest of the Franks.
By this time the Frankish power was united and able to present a powerful
defense. In six bitterly contested battles between Tours and Poitiers
in 732 Charles Martel defeated the Arabs in a campaign that may well
be called the Marathon, or better, the Platæa, of the Middle Ages,
for it completed the work done by the imperial navy at Constantinople.
From this time forward the power of the Saracen began to ebb by land
and sea.

As it ebbed, the new cities of Genoa, Pisa, and Venice began
to capture the trade and hold the control of the sea that once had
been Saracen, until the Christian control was so well established
as to make possible the Crusades. Later, as we shall see, a second
invasion of Mohammedans, the Turks, ably assisted by the descendants
of the Arabs who conquered Spain, once more threatened to control
the Mediterranean for the cause of Islam. But the Persian Gulf and
the Indian Ocean, which fell into the hands of the Arabs as soon as
they took to the water, remained in Arab hands down to the times of
the Portuguese. In those waters, because they were cut off from the
Mediterranean, the Saracen had no competitor. Out of the house his steps are lighter
and swifter as he gets nearer his premises. When arrived he takes it to the repairing room;
removing it from the case he again examines it, and with a smile says to his chief repairing
help--here, what d'ye think of that? This workman, who has not studied as an enthusiastic connoisseur
during the many years of his working on the premises, takes it up, looks it well over, and
then observes--"well, at first I thought it was a good modern copy, but now if I don't think
it's a real one! Well, I never! it is, too! look at that stuff all over it." This was his manner
of criticising varnish when it seemed to him of good quality. "I would like to have some of
that! a worm-hole though. Don't know how far that goes." "We'll soon see," says the other.
After a few turns over again amidst remarks of admiration expressed in different ways, the
fiddle is brought into a good light and preparations made for opening it. "Why, I don't think
it's ever been opened before," says one. "Certainly not," says the other. "Now," says the dealer,
"you had better do it," and the workman proceeds thus--first removing the tailpiece and with
a "post setter" lifting the sound post out carefully through the right sound hole, he removes
the tail pin, and holding the instrument to let as much light as possible into the interior,
looks through the pin hole and observes--"No patch in this, Mr. ----, fresh as a new-laid egg--original
bar too,--however, let's go ahead." The fiddle is then laid face downwards on a cushion or
soft pad and held in position with the extended palm of the hand. The operator then takes what
has been once in use as a table knife, but is now thin and smooth with wear, keeping the left
hand firmly in position and the knife in the other, he casts his eye round for any portion
that may seem looser or more lightly glued than the rest. It has been very neatly done however,
and one part seems as good as another. "Stop a moment," says his companion, "let's have another
look inside, maybe we shall see how the worms have been going about by the light passing through."

It is taken again to a window; the sun fortunately is streaming in and so enables master and
man to proceed under favourable conditions. The dealer patiently turns the violin about so
that the rays of the sun may penetrate wherever possible through the material; after a while
he hands the violin to his workman--"you have a look, James, I cannot see any traces--I don't
think the worm has gone very far, seemingly only a short distance from the opening." James
looking again, and coming to the same conclusion, the violin is again taken to the operating
table and the knife taken in hand.

I recollect many years back, when in company with a violinist of some note, we were talking
over various details in connection with the reparation and regulation of violins of a high
class, particularly those of the great masters. The fact of so many fine instruments having
fractures of the same kind and in the same position was remarked as being curious, why so numerous
as to form a very large majority? Well, said the professor, at one time cracks were really
fashionable, and an instrument well endowed with them was thought to emit its tone more freely,
especially if it had been somewhat stiff before. This might account for some, but not so many
coming from all parts, I observed, from their similarity I am inclined to their being due to
one principal cause, that of carelessness on the part of repairers in former times and some
even of the present. It is through hurry or want of method in removing the upper table, should
it be necessary. A repairer once confessed to me that he had sometimes caused these fractures
in his impetuousness while going through this preliminary; his excuse was one frequently made
for all sorts of bad work, clumsiness and want of judgment, that people would not pay for proper
time and care being expended, and so when he cracked the front while taking it off, he glued
it up again.

As generally is the case, more than one method can be pursued for removal of the upper table.
A somewhat original one was recommended to me once as being very successful and causing the
table to part from the rest beautifully without risk of fracture, and that was, firstly to
obtain some vessel holding boiling water and with a suitable pipe attached for throwing a fine
jet of steam against the glued parts requiring separation. Not having seen this done, or tried
it myself, I am unable to speak for or against this process, but there appears to be some risk
of damaging the varnish in the vicinity while the steam is forced against the small space for
operating upon. I was assured that this was an excellent mode of separation, there being no
tearing about or splintering of the wood. It might be a good method where there is perceptibly
much impasto of glue, and which, while almost readily yielding to the penetrative power of
steam, is a great nuisance under ordinary circumstances. Another method would be that of getting
some lengths of soft cotton rag or other substance that would retain moisture well when wetted;
these could be laid all round, tucked closely against the junction of the upper table and ribs
and left for a reasonable time or kept wetted in dry weather. This, if not quite causing a
disjunction, would facilitate the operation of the knife in the usual way. I think, however,
that any departure from the rule of using the knife is very rare indeed, any other means necessarily
taking time and taxing the patience.

We will now return to the dealer and his assistant or repairer. The matter in hand with them
is business, and therefore a regular routine is gone through when the instrument is worthy
of first class repair, and everything conducive to the best results in up-to-date regulation
has to be calculated and carried out in minute detail. Searching eyes will go over all the
fresh parts, looking for any possible inaccuracy, any slip of the tool or ruggedness where
a fine, even surface ought to be. In order that all may be conveniently attended to, the first
proceeding will be that of sawing off the head and neck, this is done rather close to the body
of the instrument. Under present circumstances, more care than usual with modern violins has
to be exercised, as the repairer knows that it was customary with the old Italian makers to
secure the neck to the upper block by one, two, or at times even three nails. They were driven
in from the interior before the final closing up or fixing of the upper table. Sometimes a
screw is found in the same place instead of nails. These arrangements point to a want of confidence
in glue by these old masters, notwithstanding the evidence we have of their using the finest
quality only. In separating the neck from the body, it will obviously be wise to act in a very
cautious manner, or the saw may come suddenly upon the nails or screw, and there will be a
grating of teeth, and perhaps upsetting of the temper of the performer. It will therefore be
a consideration for the repairer whether the instrument has been previously opened, or is in
that very rare condition, as the maker left it. Economy of time and labour always more or less
being a desideratum, in the supposed instance before us, that of an untouched old master, our
repairer having had experience with many Italian violins of different degrees of merit, first
proceeds by removing the old fingerboard. This being short and less massive than the modern
kind, presents but little difficulty. The cushion filled with sawdust or sand, is now called
into requisition. Placing the violin on its back and tilting it up so that the button and the
back of the scroll press equally on the yielding surface, it is held in position with some
degree of firmness, the fingers of the right hand being placed underneath the wide end of the
fingerboard, a sudden pull upward causes the fingerboard in most instances to part with a snap.
Should it refuse to do so, other means must be resorted to. The fingerboard may be one of the
old inlaid kind, or veneered pine, and worth keeping as a curiosity, in which case the saw
must be applied to any part of the neck for removing wood that will not be required again,
piece-meal, until the board is free, when it can be further cleared at leisure.

Our repairer, not finding in the fingerboard under his hands any particular merit, it being
besides worn into ruts near the nut by performers of the early schools, who used but little
more than the first position, moreover, coming away with ease, proceeds to the sawing process.
The presence of nails or screw he believes to be fairly certain, therefore instead of sawing
down close and even as possible with the ribs, the saw line is made at an angle downward and
outward toward the head, or say at an angle of some forty-five degrees, beginning at about
a quarter of an inch away from the borders of the upper table. The cut thus made would be free
from any nail or screw, unless of extraordinary dimensions. (Diag. 35.)

In the case of a modern violin, the saw cut could be made close to the border and downward
to within a short distance of the button, where another cut at right angles and parallel to
the surface of it will free the neck completely. The violin, now as before, is placed front
downwards on the cushion or pad, some repairers would hold it on their knees, but only in the
absence of either means. In the present instance, being a prize and sure to eventually pay
for any amount of trouble and skill expended, the violin is treated in a manner that long experience
and judgment dictate as safest. Opening the instrument has been agreed to as being absolutely
necessary, the old short bar would certainly prove inadequate to withstand the pressure from
above if the violin and its fittings were to be subjected to modern regulation under present
conditions. Everything being ready, the operator with steady hands inserts the knife with a
sudden push at the under part of the edging--from the position of the violin the knife would
now be above it--at the lower quarter of the instrument, this having the largest curve and
therefore being weakest in resistance to the plunge of the knife. As the thin bladed knife
is worked along, there is a tendency to stick occasionally. This is counteracted by running
along, or slightly wiping the surface of the knife, a cotton rag, with the smallest touch of
oil upon it; this will enable the knife to go quite smoothly. Great care is exercised that
the knife is held on an exact level with the plane of the pine table, or there will be great
risk of running the knife into the pine instead of lifting it away from the joint. Evidence
of bad judgment in this respect is not infrequently to be met with on otherwise well repaired
instruments. A series of sharp cracking sounds come forth as the knife works its way in. It
is worked along in either direction until near the corner block or near the nut. At this part,
the violin being in the original state as fresh from the hand of its maker at Cremona, the
treatment will be slightly different to what it would be after modern regulation.

The knife will come to a full stop here, and be taken out for proceeding with the release of
the table on the opposite side. It will be as a matter of course, necessary to place the violin
the other end foremost, the larger end being furthest from the operator; the knife, as before,
being inserted at the large curve in the same manner and for the same reason, finally stopping
as before at each end. The principal reason for stopping at the end is that with most of the
old Italian violins there is a short wooden pin, probably used for temporarily securing the
table in position before the final glueing down. These wooden pins of hard or tough consistency
being driven in firmly, offer considerable resistance to the passage of the knife if the latter
is forced through. Most of the violins having these pins originally, give evidence of the exertions
of the repairer to press the knife through these obstacles at the risk, ofttimes with certainty,
of breaking up or smashing the fibres of the surrounding portion of the pine. Of a dozen old
Italians, perhaps on an average ten will be found with this part broken, jagged, or having
a portion of fresh wood inserted where ruffianly treatment has bruised the threads of the pine
past remedy. Our professional repairers, being men of experience, further, both having a natural
disposition and qualification for their calling, know better than to use much violence in this
part of their work, so taking the knife away, the operator cleanses it from all glue or resinous
particles, and when perfectly dry, passes the slightly oiled rag again over both surfaces.
The knife being inserted again and again, is pressed round about the pin and thrust forward
so that the increasing thickness of the blade may act as a long wedge, this gradually lifts
the table away, leaving the pin standing.

The lower end will require the same treatment for easing the upper table round the pin. In
original condition most of the old Italian violins would not give further trouble, but some
later or middle period ones, instead of the small piece of ebony or other hard substance slightly
inserted or laid half way through the table, have an ebony nut going quite through and down
in a triangular form nearly to the tailpin. In these instances a small knife held vertically
and pressed along between the parts of the ebony touching the pine will enable the table to
come away gradually in the manner indicated. We now may suppose ourselves again in the presence
of the repairers, operator and master; the upper table has been successfully and cleanly released
from the blocks and along the upper edging of the ribs, very few splinters here and there are
left, giving double evidence of neat glueing on the part of the maker and systematic care on
that of the modern repairer.

Being now quite free and gently lifted off, the table is turned about for a moment and attention
is directed to the interior. The two men look at all the parts with very different eyes. One
with eager expectancy, critical eye and much experience, sees at a glance much that intensely
interests him, confirms certain views of the old methods of working, whether the wood was white
and new when the violin was constructed, how a little of the precious material enveloping the
whole structure had dropped through the sound holes during the process of varnishing; watches
the form of the drops whether they indicate a thin or a thick solution of the resinous particles,
whether these have cracked or blistered in the Milanese or Venetian manner, whether they show
signs of having set at once or remained soft and running for a time; the corner and end blocks,
their material, and whether the same as those linings let into the middle ones and their being
finished off before or after the placing in position. The joint of the back too, and if there
remained any evidence of system in working different to what we moderns would do? These and
other queries passed rapidly through the mind of the dealer and connoisseur, more of the latter
than the former, and that is why he was not more successful by many degrees than any others
of the fraternity. To be a dealer in the strictly business sense of the term, a number of valuable
violins must to him be no more than potatoes in a basket to a greengrocer, i.e., what they
appear worth.

His assistant--a good accurate mechanic in almost all respects, sees in this unearthed "old
master," "gem of antiquity," or chef d'oeuvre of Italian art, nothing but the interior of a
dirty brown box with a rolling ball of fluff resting in one of the corners.

There are perhaps few things more disappointing than the interior of a violin when opened for
the purpose of repairing. Be it a matchless gem of Cremona's art or an old and common Tyrolese
worth but a few shillings, the difference to an ordinary observer is so slight as to be uninteresting,
indeed to connoisseurs of experience there is not the variation sufficient to excite curiosity
to the extent of opening the instrument on that ground solely. The raw and unvarnished wood,
with the parts between the threads swollen from damp, begrimed and repeatedly washed by repairers,
presents anything but a pleasing spectacle even when the interior of a fine "Strad" or Joseph
is laid bare. Many years ago a friend owning a fine Cremonese viola asked me to open it and
find out the cause of some buzzing or rattling within that had not been evident till that time.
After an examination, finding that opening it would be absolutely necessary, I asked him whether
he would like to see the interior of what he had paid so much for; it might not prove an enjoyable
sight from the roughness and dirt of ages in combination with clumsily executed repairs while
in unskilful hands; being unaccustomed to such sights he wisely restrained his curiosity and
waited till all was placed right again.

But to our dealer and workman again; the former, taking up the two portions alternately, at
last makes the remark, "Clean work, James, inside as well as out, good tool work, they had
some steel in those days, plenty of glass-papering here apparently, unlike some others made
at the same period, time seems to have been no object. Possibly the maker was well paid for
his work, if not he ought to have been." To these observations the workman only gives a sniff
in reply. He thinks that all this can be quite equalled at the present day, if a fellow is
really well paid; but this is reckoning with only a part of the subject. A further exclamation
of admiration comes from his chief--"Think, James, what a wonderful draughtsman this old Italian
was; mind you, this is not a copy, traced from something else as we should do now-a-days, but
a first idea, an original design; it is in some respects a departure from the man's best known
patterns, good as them, however, although differing; look at the way those lines run from point
to point, what ease! the tenderness with which the sound holes are drawn, the lightness and
freedom! that man was a born artist if ever there was one!" Another sniff from James, who doesn't
believe in born anything, but that good work comes with good tools and a reasonable prospect
ahead of good remuneration for extra trouble. "Don't see, sir, why we can't put a bit of purfling
round as clean as that! some of those French copies are as cleanly purfled as any part of this!"
He is released from the necessity of further illustration by his chief interposing: "Quite
true, James, and if these mechanical copyists had put as much energy into efforts at truly
original and artistic designs as they have in copying that which seems to have been laid down
for their guidance, they would have advanced very many steps further than they have done in
the essentials of the art--in the highest sense of the term--of making violins. But we must
get to work, there are lots of repairs of all sorts for us to get through the next fortnight,
and as there is comparatively little anxious work about this job we will get it out of hand!"

The violin is now subjected to another and final inspection before the active treatment is
commenced. "How about that wormhole, James, that we were worrying over before the separation
of the upper table?" "That's just what I've been looking at, sir, and as it doesn't go more
than a quarter of an inch into the wood--I've tried it with this bit of wire--the maker must
have cut this bit of pine from a worm-eaten log, perhaps because it was old and likely to give
a good tone!" "There you're wrong, James!" the chief interposes--he is rather inclined to snub
his assistant when that essentially practical man gives any indication of a flight of fancy--"the
'worm' is no sign of age, I have known it to affect wood that has been cut but a year before
its discovery, and do you think those old Italians were such fools as to make fiddles that
would be only fit to be heard when tried by their descendants two hundred years after they
died?" James collapses, and getting a basin with some warm water, a cloth and a piece of sponge,
proceeds to smear the latter up and down and round the sides of the instrument. The sponge
and water soon show signs of the work in hand. "Very dirty, sir, hasn't been washed for a hundred
years, I should think! There's a ticket, too, but I can't make out much of it. I'll wash it
over a bit." He then begins to try the deciphering, taking one letter at a time. "There's a
large H at one part, the next is A or O and then U or N, and next to it there's R or D; its
either London or perhaps its one of those we came across the other day, Laurentius something."
"It's neither one nor the other," his chief almost roars, while rapidly striding across the
room to his assistant, who hastily hands over the portion of the violin, glad to leave the
regions of speculation. "There's nothing about that fiddle having any connection with any place
but Cremona," and the chief bumps down into a chair to further study the mysterious ticket.
"You have not improved that ticket by washing it, the date has gone and the greater part of
the print; you should never wash a ticket, that is how the very large majority of even well
preserved ones have lost the date or part of it written with ink in which gum has been one
of the ingredients and which is easily dissolved, the best way after dusting it is to get some
bread and rub gently over the surface, and if that does not bring out the letters or figures
you may mostly consider them past recovery."

James does not think much of this attempt at instilling wise maxims into his prosaic constitution,
and replies "I don't think you could have seen more letters before I washed the ticket than
after, sir, the plainest were what I read out, which looked more like London than anything
else. There was another word underneath which I think was alum, that's English, isn't it?"
This is intended as a kind of parting shot in a contest during which he has been slightly uncomfortable.
The chief answers rather snappishly, "No! that's Latin. I must tell you that at the time so
many of the finest fiddles were made the use of Latin was very fashionable, being used much
on monumental decorations, signatures to works of art generally, down to the prescriptions
of doctors, which we have not got rid of yet; that is the former, the latter are always with
us and will be. But stop! why, after all, this is not the original ticket, I think it is one
pasted over another! hand me that camel hair brush and the water." This being done, the wetted
brush is repeatedly passed over the ticket so as to keep it moist till the water has soaked
through and dissolved sufficiently the glue or gum that held it close. After a while, the corner
is gently lifted up with the aid of a pointed knife, the end caught hold of and pulled; by
degrees the whole of the upper ticket is lifted off, leaving to the pleased eyes of the chief
the original ticket in all the better preservation for being covered up. "Yes, there it is!
I knew I was right, a fine Nicolas Amati! I believe that top one is the remains of a Laurentius
Guadagnini Alumnus Stradivarius, which some wiseacre thought a more appropriate title."

The Guadagnini ticket is laid by till dry and then placed in a small drawer in which are a
number of others of various makers and nationalities; it may emerge from its obscurity some
day and become of use so far as the condition or its legibility will allow.

The upper table is taken in hand again by the chief, turned over repeatedly and both sides
of the border carefully examined for the presence of any cracks, long or short, old or new,
the latter being scarcely expected, as the assistant is of a sufficiently cautious disposition
naturally and as yet has not been debited with any charge of injury to his work from over haste
or carelessness. "There is a very small crack at the lower right side about one inch from the
centre, I think, but let us be certain, have you got your glue in good order?" "Quite," is
the reply, "fresh and strong too, sir." "Just see if that mark is really a crack or not." The
assistant takes the portion in hand, holds it to the light, examines it from different angles
of vision, and finally resolves to test it in the following way; holding the plate of pine
carefully with the left hand, with the right holding a "camel hair" dipped in clear water,
he passes it over the possible crack, then taking the plate again in both hands, with the thumbs
placed on each side of the mark, the fingers being underneath, it is very gently bent backward
and forward, and the wetted part closely watched. Presently, the water is observed to gradually
disappear, having worked its way into the crack. "It is one, sir, but quite clean as if newly
done." By this time, the slight bending, or what is really the case, the opening and shutting
of the crack by the movement, causes some minute white bubbles to appear along the course,
these give an indication of the extent of the fracture, which is something over an inch in
length. "I think it is the result of the contraction of the wood from being kept in such a
dry place, it is not a repairer's crack, which would have extended further into the centre,"
so the chief observes, "get the hand vice ready with the paper, and I will hold the parts together."
At this time, the fresh warm glue is being applied in a similar way to that of the clear water,
the latter enables the glue to work in or follow the course of the moisture, and similar, but
whiter, small bubbles are seen along the direction of the crack under the manipulation as before
described. The small hand-vice, having several layers of stout white paper or card inserted
at the opening or between the teeth, is slackened to receive the part of the border to be held
together. The chief, holding the plate with the fractured part furthest from him, and consequently
in front of his assistant, it is held in position firmly by both hands. "One moment, James!"
he exclaims, "this border has had little or no wear, and the surface is so fresh, that if we
use card or paper alone we shall leave a mark of the pressure, hand over those thin pieces
of cork and let us put them between the paper and the metal of the vice, there, that will be
better for standing the pressure, more elastic you see." The vice under the fresh conditions
is now applied, the parts of the table or plate are brought together accurately and held tightly
in position by the fingers, the glue exuding from the crack where it can be seen just beyond
the reach of the paper, the screw is turned tightly by the assistant, and with the remark,
"that will do," the whole is left to him for placing aside while drying.

"We will now," says the chief, "have a look at that old Brescian violin that I bought last
week, it is in that set of drawers by the bench there, the third from the top." The assistant
gives a look in the direction that would strike a spectator as expressive of doubt whether
a violin could be even squeezed by hard pressure into any of the drawers. Nevertheless he obeys,
opens the drawer, and seeing only a brown paper parcel tied with thin string, takes it out
and holding it up says, "do you mean this paper bag, sir?" "Yes, that is it." The paper bag
is brought to the table at which the chief is sitting and who undoes the string and paper,
letting loose a number of begrimed pieces of veneer-like wood, some of these fractured, the
upper and lower tables comprising three parts, a head that some modern makers would think ugly
enough to cause a nightmare, with its short heavy neck as left by the maker about three hundred
years back. The condition of the whole concern was suggestive of its having been raked up from
some out of the way dust heap that had, after the oblivion of a century, at last caught the
eye of a modern sanitary inspector. There was only one sort of person to whom it would be at
all inviting, that of our chief above mentioned. "Now that is what I call a bargain, James,"
he begins, when turning over the pieces one by one; "all perfect, not a part lost. I bought
it of a dealer in the country who said he could not get the parts together, they would not
fit, and he was glad to get rid of the lot with as little loss as possible." James at this
moment has been placing the two tables of the violin together and remarks, "I don't think these
belong, sir, the back is nearly a quarter of an inch shorter than the front and narrower too."
"Never mind that," is the answer, "the style is the same, the purfling, the work and the varnish
are the same, it was all together at one time and looked well enough, and it will have to go
together again and possibly look much better, and you will have to do it under my instruction,
as you proceed, it will repay for all the trouble and time spent upon it by its appearance
and tone. The man who sold it to me said that its former owner told him he had a good try at
getting it together and failed. This is the direction in which they have both made their mistake,
they treated the unmechanical old Italian work as they would a modern copy of a Cremonese maker,
and which had been built upon a machine cut block that served for ever so many warehouse fiddles;
these old Italians had to use the hand bow saw, which was not adapted, unless great care was
taken, for getting very true upright sides, hence the upper and lower tables are as often as
not differing in size, sometimes the upper is largest, at others the lower. Occasionally the
length may be the same with the width differing. Now you had better set to work and wash all
that muck from the pieces, be careful not to separate any parts that may be fairly well fixed.
I want you to do this cleaning in my manner, not that which you were accustomed to before coming
here. I know the too frequently pursued method of putting the whole collection of parts in
a tub of water and there letting them float about until the glue has dissolved and left the
wood, but the following is preferable. Firstly, get some hot water sufficient for your requirements
as you proceed, renewing it occasionally. Your piece of sponge you always have ready, and your
cotton cloth as usual. I have cut down a hog hair brush of half-an-inch in width, you can use
other sizes according to convenience. Being cut abruptly across, they can be used as small
scrubbing brushes after dipping in the hot water. The advantage is that of your being enabled
to leave untouched or even dry, certain parts which you are not desirous of interfering with.
The occasional sopping up with the sponge and cloth will show the progress that is made. The
dark, dirty glue of the modern fiddle tinker will gradually wash off, leaving frequently the
ancient, light coloured stuff in quite a fresh state and sharply defined, further, it will
sometimes give you a hint as to the exact position which the adjacent pieces held originally.
There will not be any necessity for scrubbing very hard with the cut-down brushes; if this
is done the surface of the wood will suffer; a little patience as one part after another is
cleansed and the whole completely denuded of its covering of dirty glue and grime, and it will
be perceptible that there is method in this, and consequently the most rapid real progress.

"Occasionally there will be found in and about old repairings or tinkerings lumps of pitch-like
substances, hard or soft as the occasion has seemed to the workman to require, or possibly
the only stuff obtainable, if not with the idea of a damp resisting material. These, as you
know, will be treated in your usual manner, that is, removing with a blunt knife for a large
piece and a piece of fine flannel wetted with some pure benzine, which having a strong affinity
for any oily particles, absorbs them rapidly and leaves a clean surface. Spirit of turpentine
will also answer the purpose, but is less rapid in its action and does not evaporate so completely,
leaving a slight residuum of resin. Alcohol of any degree of strength must be kept quite away
from the work, as even supposing it specially adapted as a solvent for removing the objectionable
material that may be found clinging anywhere, it has such destructive action upon the old Italian
varnishes that the slightest drop on the surface will cause irreparable injury. Keep it quite
clear of your repairing work, it is not absolutely necessary under any circumstances, although
it is very tempting to a slovenly repairer."

We will now suppose that the instructions have been duly carried out, the different parts have
now resumed their original condition of cleanliness and have a wholesome aspect. One or two
of the ribs left standing and even undisturbed since being placed in position by the maker
about three centuries back, serve as a guide respecting the projection of the edging over the
ribs. After carefully noting this, and damping round the inner edge, these are removed and
placed aside. The chief and his assistant are now enabled to thoroughly examine the work of
this product of a by-gone age. It is none the worse for being clean. The comments upon the
tool-marks now visible after the dispersion of the grime are of a rather opposite character,
the connoisseur noticing the manner of working over the surface by the old Italians as being
different to that pursued now; the assistant sees nought but rough gougings and scratchings
as with a notched or blunted tool, and concludes that the old makers were not as good workmen
as the moderns. "Now, James," says the other, "you have been doing little else than repairing
since you took up with this business, and have never had the opportunity of working a violin
from the beginning, straight off the stocks, without being drawn away to some other work. Consequent
upon this your work has not so much distinctive character, much effort at mere smoothness being
apparent and in excess of good style. These old Italians were designing and making new violins
day after day for their livelihood. Repairing, when they could make equally good, fresh instruments,
was to them of secondary importance, and so we find restorations in the olden times were of
a kind we should now call very indifferent, if not altogether bad."

The lower table or back of good sycamore is now turned about and well scrutinised by James,
who now remarks, "this back is warped, I think that is why the last two owners could not make
the other parts fit well, what is to be done with it, we are not likely to make a better job
of it than they were with a back twisted like that?" The reply is, "that old Brescian maker
was not likely to turn out a new violin with such a twisted spine! that condition has arisen
since and is not a constitutional defect, it has been caused by damp and straining, and being
repaired while in the strained condition, it retained the twist; we must alter that. Fortunately,
the back is in one piece, so we shall not have the trouble about the joint, although with the
necessary extra care the treatment would have to be much the same. Now, first of all, get a
cotton cloth sufficiently large when folded once or twice to cover a surface such as the violin
back presents. It must now be well soaked with water till it holds as much as possible without
dripping. The violin table will now be placed with the varnished side downwards, the wetted
cloth placed over it. Be sure that the surfaces of cloth and wood are in contact by gently
dabbing it down all over. It can now be placed aside for about three or four hours in order
that the moisture may soak into the wood for some depth. Meanwhile we may determine upon and
get ready the means whereby the warping, as far as possible, if not wholly, may be got rid
of. It must be borne in mind that the wood which was cut in its natural state from the tree
and mostly with the grain, will be disposed, under the influence of damp, to return to the
original form or condition in a more or less degree. Under good management, that is to say,
with a sufficient amount of damp and no more, it almost seems to try to resume its old condition.
This will be borne out by watching the effect of much wet upon any wood that has been previously
bent into shape, or upon the separated ribs of a violin. The efforts of the wood to return
to its original conformation will be apparent in the instance of the ribs, perhaps provoking,
as the re-bending without injuring the varnish, which may happen to be of the most lustrous
and delicate description, is often a matter of great difficulty, and at times an impossibility."

It was for the purpose of avoiding the risk of such defacement that the brushing away of the
glue and grime by parts at a time was recommended, although the time consumed by taking the
parts in detail may often be a drawback. If the ribs are quite saturated, as when left to float
in water, they will be sure to come out nearly straight, and the varnish, if not of the kind
that has been worked well into the wood, irrecoverably spoilt. Even when quite so, the trouble
does not end here, for the wood having taken nearly its own form again, will have to be bent,
with all its attendant troubles, into shape. Complete saturation of any part of the violin
should therefore be avoided.

The "making" or arrangement of whatever may be needful for getting rid of the warp or twist
of the back plate will now have to be decided upon. There is generally more than one way of
getting over a mechanical difficulty, and in the present instance there may be many, but the
one promising to be most successful and offering the least number of obstacles to success will
have attention. The repairer takes in hand some of the softest wood obtainable, say American
pine, or if any is easily obtainable, poplar; that kind known as "black poplar" is perhaps
as free from hard thread as any, a couple or more of slabs about three or four inches wide
and two or three longer than the upper and lower widths of the back, with about a quarter of
an inch of thickness. An opening is bored in each, one in which the upper or smaller part will
pass through, the other sufficiently large to admit the lower or larger half. The opening must
of course be enough for admission of the rise or modelling and a little more. The object of
this will soon be apparent. When the inner surface of the back plate has absorbed sufficient
moisture from the wet cloth, this being so in the judgment of the operator, the wood will have
lost very much of its resisting power to twisting by the hands. Advantage is taken of this
condition, and each piece or collar of wood passed over the proper portion of the back like
a loop. If fitting tolerably close, all the better; but it may require a soft wedge or two
in parts to keep it from shifting after being placed in position. In some instances more than
two or even three or four pieces may be of advantage where the tendency to twist is irregular.
The operator now gets a short plank of ordinary wood, of even surface, straight, and true as
possible in each direction; lifting the violin table with the loops of wood attached and placing
it on the plank, some of the loops will be raised up on one side while others are depressed
at the same. In the case of the simple warp, one of the two will vary in rise or a different
angle to the plane. The process now is simple, and the loop rising at one side will be pressed
down and held in position by either a weight or any contrivance handy. It should be done a
little more than seems necessary for restoring the even line of the edging, which can be fairly
well seen by looking along from end to end; this is to allow of a slight recoil when the loops
or wooden cramps are removed.

For a more determined twist the extra depression of one part can be accomplished by inserting
layers of wood under the opposing parts so as to get more distance for the remaining one.

Nothing is now required but the drying thoroughly. This will be according to temperature and
moisture present in the atmosphere; no artificial means should be resorted to.

Not the slightest injury will accrue from the process described, provided due care is taken
that there is no overstraining, and the damping is neither excessive nor insufficient. The
result of the former is likely to be an inequality in the bending, the line or level of the
edging when looked at along its course, will look uneven, as if some upheaval had taken place
here and there. Courage and caution are faculties brought to bear strongly and continuously
on the subject by every repairer with a reputation for success. Without the former, many attempts
which might have ended successfully have proved to be failures and to require doing over again;
and insufficiency of the latter is what is so strongly evident in a very large majority of
so-called "restored" violins. The cases may have been considered by the repairers as requiring
heroic treatment, overstraining, excision of an unnecessary amount of the old wood, making
too much of a clean sweep of parts that may have afforded food and lodging for bore worms being
too evident, besides the saving of time and trouble.

To the workroom we will again return. The back has had ample time to dry while the assistant
James has been doing other work of an ordinary or trifling character. The loops or collars
are gently released, put aside for future use, and the now much less warped back is brought
for the chief's inspection. "That will do, James, nicely, I think, now you will be able to
go ahead with the other parts, and perhaps we shall be successful enough when the whole is
finished to make those people, when they see it, rather regretful at their hasty disposal of
the paper full of scraps of old Brescia. While we are in the bending mood, however, we will
get that Lorenzo Guadagnini into a little better trim, you left it on that shelf over there
last week." James fetches it, a rather woe-begone affair to an ordinary observer; it had been
cut open, the head sawn off, placed inside, the upper table laid on and a string passed round
the waist and tied with a loose knot. "Look at it, James, and tell me what is wrong and the
remedy." The string is untied, and the parts laid on the bench and examined one by one. "In
excellent preservation, sir, in most respects, although it has been opened many times and a
heap of glue left about it." An inch rule is taken up and passed over the separated parts for
comparison; some slight expression of amazement passes over James's features, re-measurement
ensues, and turning to his chief he remarks, "I didn't see that at first, sir, it's worse than
that old Brescian; just look here, sir, the ribs are not upright, but bending inwardly; across
the upper part they are so much out of the perpendicular that when the upper table is laid
carefully on, instead of there being the eighth of an inch of overlapping border it is nearly
a quarter of an inch each side; and what is more curious, the ribs do not seem to have been
unglued since they were first put there, excepting a small part at the upper and lower ends,
and see, sir, when I put the upper table on it is like an arch, and to press that part down
on to the ribs will send a crack along from the sound hole on either side, which will simply
be breaking up the whole affair by degrees." "Well, what method would you propose for correcting
all this and making a good restoration of it, James? Give it a look over carefully and tell
me." The assistant well knows the attendant circumstances connected with a good restoration
or a bad one; if left as it is, it may be sold "in the trade" for so much, if badly restored
it will fetch less, if well done it will be worth to the outside world a considerable sum,
and if it should go well as regards the emission of its doubtless fine tone, the value as a
whole would be greatly enhanced. Much thinking and careful calculation is therefore concentrated
on the subject, and after awhile James says, "Well, sir, this lot of glue all round may as
well come off first as last, there's no doing anything with it as it is." With this his chief
agrees; so he sets to work, not with a chisel or any cutting instrument, he is so far advanced
in his methodical working to know from experience that it is next to impossible to avoid injuring
the sharply defined and level edge of the rib as left by the maker originally if such rough
treatment as filing, chipping or cutting is resorted to; he therefore adopts a milder course
of treatment. Taking a few pieces of cotton cloth or white sheeting--old calico is equally
efficient--he folds them into several layers, and when so about four inches long by about three-quarters
of an inch in width. Nearly a dozen of these are got ready. After being soaked in water, they
are taken out and slightly squeezed so that they no longer drip. One by one they are placed
all round on the edge of the ribs close to each other so that no vacant space is perceptible
between each, and after a gentle patting down with the fingers along the course they are left
to do their work quietly, more effectively, too, by far, than any steel tool with the brute
force necessary for ploughing through that most obstinate of materials, hard, dry glue. These
folds of cotton material James calls his poultices for drawing the impurities away from the
system; they, in the present instance, afford him time to think over the sort of engineering
that will task his energies to some extent.

Leaving the poultices to their work, the old Brescian is again taken in hand under the direction
of the chief. "Now, James, let us look over the parts again. The next step must be getting
the end blocks attached to the back. We have got that into a tolerably straight line again,
so that we can work on the affair almost like a new fiddle. Those old blocks, well I should
like to retain them if possible, but on looking over them very little discernment is sufficient
to conclude that fresh ones will be not only better but necessary. In the first place, they
are very small, were roughly cut in the first instance, and since have been meddled with by
would-be restorers; good new ones properly fitted will be far better than old ones added to,
necessarily for strength. Some of that old pine, or as good, that French willow will suit our
purpose. We will choose the latter. See that the grain runs perpendicularly or at right angles
with the cut surface that is to be glued down. Chop or split it, don't saw it into shape, and
then you can finish it off when glued into position, when you will not find you have to cut
against the grain." This, as a matter of course, is conformed to, the blocks split off the
bulk or plank, sawn to a little over the proper length or height to allow of finishing, and
then the surface to be glued is made even and squared with the part against which the ribs
will be hereafter glued. The lower end one will of course require a trifle of curving to allow
of the ribs following the course of the curve of the border; this the assistant duly sees to
by trying it in position until it appears to be satisfactory. The parts of the blocks to be
left facing the interior of the violin he leaves roughly done to shape and size of those in
modern violins, that being found the best from experience since the demise of the old masters
of Italy. The upper one is left more protuberant, or nearly semi-circular; the reason for this
is that the strain upon both upper and lower table at this end is greater than at any other
part, therefore if the block is too narrow there is not enough grip or extent of glued surface,
a frequent result of which is the lowering of the fingerboard, and a buckling of the surface
underneath of the upper table, a condition much to the detriment of the proper emission of
the tone. Great attention should always be paid this particular part. Many repairers seem fearful
that the air-space of the interior of the violin will be lessened by a projecting block. A
little consideration will enable them to see that for effectiveness of purpose the form of
the interior of almost any violin will not--from its curved surface--allow of an over large
block with a flat glueing surface above and below.

These conditions having been seen to, the assistant with some freshly made glue paints over
the surfaces of the ends that will be fastened to the lower table. As this is to be for a permanency,
the glueing must be of the best. When dry, the surface is scraped even and the usual glueing
and cramping done.

To Lorenzo Guadagnini again; sufficient time being allowed for the moisture in the folds of
cotton to affect and be absorbed by the glue, the assistant fetches it from its enforced retirement,
brings it to the light carefully, lifts up one of the poultices, touches the glue with the
tip of a small knife and is satisfied. The glue has been softened and is now little more than
a jelly attached to the prominent parts of the ribs. The first thing will be to get some rag
or paper, place it handy and remove one of the wet pads or poultices, then with the small knife,
kept for such purposes, being blunt and worn smooth, the glue or jelly is carefully scraped
away. The advantage of using the blunt knife will be evident, as it does not cut the surface
as it passes over it. The point is occasionally used for any corner that may require it. After
this a small sponge or rag dipped in warm water is passed over the edges and removes what is
left untouched by the knife. This is repeated with each separate pad in succession all round
and when completed the work is put aside and allowed to dry. A previous examination of the
inside surface of the upper table had shown the necessity of similar treatment, but not to
such an extent.

Not much time expires before the assistant brings the parts before his chief. "As clean almost
as when new," is the exclamation of the latter; "it really wants little more than a new or
proper bar and then glueing together." "Yes, but about that difference of measurement, sir,
across the upper and lower parts." Here the assistant takes the upper table and places it like
a lid on a box; turning it back downwards for better inspection, he says, "it's nearly a quarter
of an inch out, the border overlaps frightfully, you would not glue it up like that, would
you, sir?" "Certainly not," says the other, without the least sign of annoyance on his features.
Turning to his man he says, "Now, James, here is a nice little instance where you can study
with much interest and profit the subject of cause and effect. You drew my attention to the
excellent preservation, and you have removed what appeared to you at first sight the only impediment
to perfect restoration, that of the coarse glueing. You have rightly observed that the back
has never been removed, and yet the ribs bend inwardly when tested and seem to require a smaller
upper table. The reason is plain after you have given the matter some right consideration.
The maker, as you know, was an excellent artificer and was a pupil of the great Stradivari.
Now here is the cause; the violin has been, as you know, opened several times by persons more
or less unfitted for the proper performance of such an operation, fiddle tinkers I call them,
and with a pot of thick dirty brown and repulsive looking glue, have with a coarse brush dabbed
it all round and then screwed the lid down. The successors in this ghastly process have not
had the decency to treat the instrument as worthy of much care, and so with dirty cloths and
glue have again repeated the work, if it may be dignified by such a term, spoliation is perhaps
a better one. Now we know that the violin has been separated and left so, being merely tied
up, and been in that dirty little den of ravening wolves or tinker dealers for nobody knows
how long, with the rays of the sun falling on it for many days; the result is as we see, the
back has contracted and drawn the ribs in to some extent, it is glue-bound, we will set it
free, the wood itself will help us, as if glad to resume its former occupation; give me that
soft brush with clean water." This being handed to him, the chief with repeated and careful
strokes and dippings of the brush passes over the surface, going round but leaving untouched
the label, which seems to have remained undisturbed: the joint down the centre is avoided in
a similar way. After some time, as the moisture has penetrated the wood, he turns to the assistant,
saying, "now, James, try the front on"; this is done, and the latter, thinking he will just
catch his master, says, "fits exactly now, sir! but won't it come back again beautifully as
it dries." "Well, that is just what we are going to prevent, James; while this is wet, cut
some soft sticks of wood and place them across from one side to the other, don't wedge them
in tightly, as many as will keep up an even pressure all along." This does not take long, the
sticks are inserted like so many little joists across, and the curious looking structure is
once more placed aside to dry.

While James was cutting and then placing the sticks of various lengths across, his chief was
close by suggesting now and then some trifling variation in the adjustment. "Don't put them
all with the same strain, give a look now and then as you proceed, in order to ensure against
an over amount of pressure--there, that will be enough! if too much against the large curves,
it will bulge out too far, and the shape will go." While proceeding he was now and then cautioned
as to this kind of insertion of pieces or joists. Very frequently old Italian instruments of
free design are most unequal in their curves, one side having a different curving to the other;
they are, indeed, seldom exactly the same on both sides, as modern makers try to make them.
It will be evident, then, that care must be taken that a flat or large curve should be treated
with more or less pressure than other parts. (Diag. 36.) When this inequality is very apparent,
a double system of joists must be adopted thuswise, get two pieces of strong wood, say plain
light mahogany, some three-quarters or an inch in thickness, and square along its course. The
ends are to be cut so that they will rest within the body of the instrument easily, barely
touching each end between the upper and lower linings, if at all. The two ends will touch or
rest against the upper and lower end blocks and the pressure, when the sticks are placed across,
will be against these, the pushing outward of parts of the ribs or linings being regulated
to a nicety. Should one or more of the sticks or joists be accidentally cut too short, a small
wedge of soft wood inserted at either end as may be deemed best will correct matters. Those who
come after him proceed consciously and unconsciously from him, some of them being mere worthless
imitators. In this genre, if I am not misemploying that term, he remained without a peer. Add
that this philosopher is a pessimist by temperament and by conviction, and you will have as complete
a characterization as it is possible to design of so strong and complex a figure as his in two strokes of
the pen.

"Yayá Garcia, like Resurreiçao and Helena, is a romantic account, perhaps the most romantic written
by the author. Not only the most romantic, but perhaps the most emotional. In the books that
followed it is easy to see how the emotion is, one might say, systematically repressed by the
sad irony of a disillusioned man's realism."

Verissimo goes on to imply that such a work as this merits comparison with the humane books of
Tolstoi. But this only on the surface. "For at bottom, it contains the author's misanthropy.
A social, amiable misanthropy, curious about everything, interested in everything,--what is,
in the final analysis, a way of loving mankind without esteeming it...

"The excellency with which the author of Yayá Garcia writes our language is proverbial ... The
highest distinction of the genius of Machado de Assis in Brazilian literature is that he is
the only truly universal writer we possess, without ceasing on that account to be really Brazilian."

When
the Brazilian Academy of letters was founded in 1897, Machado de Assis was unanimously elected
president and held the position until his death. Oliveira Lima, who lectured at Harvard during
the college season of 1915-1916, and who is himself one of the great intellectual forces of
contemporary Brazil, has written of Machado de Assis: "By his extraordinary talent as writer,
by his profound literary dignity, by the unity of a life that was entirely devoted to the
cult of intellectual beauty, and by the prestige exerted about him by his work and by his personality,
Machado de Assis succeeded, despite a nature that was averse to acclaim
and little inclined to public appearance, in being considered and
respected as the first among his country's men-of-letters: the head,
if that word can denote the idea, of a youthful literature which already
possesses its traditions and cherishes above all its glories ... His
life was one of the most regulated and peaceful after he had given
up active journalism, for like so many others, he began his career
as a political reporter, paragrapher and dramatic critic."

Coelho Netto (Anselmo Ribas, 1864- ) is known to his countrymen as
a professor of literature at Rio de Janeiro.

His career has covered the fields of journalism, politics, education and fiction. Although his
work is of uneven worth, no doubt because of his unceasing productivity, he is reckoned by so
exacting a critic as Verissimo as one of Brazil's most important writers,--one of the few,
in fact, that will be remembered by posterity. Among his best liked stories are "Death," "The
Federal Capital," "Paradise," "The Conquest," and "Mirage." Netto's short stories are very popular;
at one time every other youth in Brazil was imitating his every mannerism. He is particularly
felicitous in his descriptions of tropical nature, which teem with glowing life and vivid picturesqueness.

Coelho
Netto is considered one of the chief writers of the modern epoch. "He is really an idealist," writes
Verissimo, "but an idealist who has drunk deeply of the strong, dangerous milk of French naturalism."
He sees nature through his soul rather than his eyes, and has been much influenced by the mystics
of Russia, Germany and Scandinavia. His style is derived chiefly from the Portuguese group
of which Eça de Queiroz is the outstanding figure, and his language has been much affected by
this attachment to the mother country. His chief stylistic quality is an epic note, tempered by
a sentimental lyricism.

In his book Le Roman au Brésil (The Novel in Brazil, which I believe the author himself translated
from the original Portuguese into French) Benedicto Costa, after
considering Aluizio Azevedo as the exponent of Brazilian naturalism
and the epicist of the race's sexual instincts, turns to Coelho Netto's
neo-romanticism, as the "eternal praise of nature, the incessant,
exaggerated exaltation of the landscape..."

In Netto he perceives the most Brazilian, the least European of the republic's authors. "One may
say of him what Taine said of Balzac: 'A sort of literary elephant, capable of bearing prodigious
burdens, but heavy-footed.' And in fact ... he reveals a great resemblance to Balzac,--a relative
Balzac, for the exclusive use of a people,--but a Balzac none the less."

Despite his lack of ideas, his mixture of archaisms, neologisms, his exuberance, his slow development
of plots, his lack of proportion (noticeable, naturally, in his longer works rather than in
his short fiction) he stands pre-eminent as a patron of the nation's intellectual youth and as the
romancer of its opulent imagination.

Medeiros e Albuquerque (1867- ) is considered by some critics to be
the leading exponent in the country of "the manner of de Maupassant,
enveloped by an indefinable atmosphere that seems to bring back Edgar
Allan Poe."

He has been director-general of public instruction in Rio de Janeiro, professor at the Normal
School and the National School of Fine Arts, and also a deputy from Pernambuco. With the surprising
versatility of so many South Americans he has achieved a reputation as poet, novelist, dramatist,
publicist, journalist and philosopher.

IV.

The part that women have played in the progress of the South American
republics is as interesting as it is little known.

The name of the world's largest river--the Amazon, or more exactly speaking, the Amazons--stands
as a lasting tribute to the bravery of the early women whom the explorer Orellana encountered during
his conquest of the mighty flood.[3] For he named the river in honor of the tribes' fighting
heroines.

Centuries later, when one by one the provinces of South America rose to liberate themselves
from the Spanish yoke, the women again played a noble part in the various revolutions. The
statue in Colombia to Policarpa Salavarieta is but a symbol of South American gratitude to
a host of women who fought side by side with their husbands during the trying days of the early
nineteenth century. One of them, Manuela la Tucumana, was even made an officer in the Argentine
army.

[3] This derivation of the river's name is by many considered fanciful. A more likely source of
the designation is the Indian word "Amassona," i.e., boat-destroyer,
referring to the tidal phenomenon known as "bore" or "proroca," which
sometimes uproots tress and sweeps away whole tracts of land.

If women, however, have enshrined themselves in the patriotic annals of the Southern republics,
they have shown that they are no less the companions of man in the more or less agreeable arts
of peace. When one considers the great percentage of illiteracy that still prevails in Southern America,
and the inferior intellectual position which for years has been the
lot of woman particularly in the Spanish and Portuguese nations, it
is surprising that woman's prominence in the literary world should
be what it is.

The name of the original seventeenth century spirit known as Sor Inés de la Cruz (Mexico) is part
of Spanish literature. Only recently has she been indicated as her nation's first folklorist
and feminist! Her poems have found their way into the anthologies of universal poesy. The most
distinguished Spanish poetess of the nineteenth century, Gertrudis Gómez de Avellaneda, was
a Cuban by birth, going later to Spain, where she was readily received as one of the nation's leading
literary lights. Her poetry is remarkable for its virile passion; her novel "Sab" has been
called the Spanish "Uncle Tom's Cabin" for its stirring protest against slavery and its idealization
of the oppressed race. She was a woman of striking beauty, yet so vigorous in her work and the
prosecution of it that one facetious critic was led to exclaim, "This woman is a good deal
of a man!"

But South America has its native candidate for the title of Spanish
"Uncle Tom's Cabin," and this, too, is the work of a woman.

Clorinda Matto's "Aves Sin Nido" (Birds Without a Nest) is by one of Peru's most talented women,
and exposes the disgraceful exploitation of the Indians by conscienceless citizens and priests
who had sunk beneath their holy calling. It seems, indeed, that fiction as a whole in Peru has
been left to the pens of the women. Such names as Joana Manuele Girriti de Belzu, Clorinda Matto
and Mercedes Cabello de Carbonero stand for what is best in the South
American novel.

The epoch in which these women wrote (late nineteenth century) and the natural feminine tendency
to put the house in order (whether it be the domestic or the national variety) led to such stories
as Carbonero's "Las Consequencias," "El Conspirador" and "Blanca Sol." The first of these is an
indictment of the Peruvian vice of gambling; the second throws an interesting light upon the
origin of much of the internal strife of South America, and portrays a revolution brought on
by the personal disappointment of a politician. "Blanca Sol" has been called a Peruvian "Madame
Bovary."

Although Brazil has not yet produced any Amazons of poetry or fiction to stand beside such names
as Sor Inés de la Cruz or Gertrudis Gómez de Avallaneda, it has contributed some significant names
to the women writers of Latin America. Not least among these is Carmen Dolores (Emilia Moncorvo
Bandeira de Mello) who was born in 1852 at Rio de Janeiro and died in 1910, after achieving a wide
reputation in the field of the short story, novel and feuilleton. In addition to these activities
she made herself favorably known in the press of Rio, Sao Paulo and Pernambuco. Her career started
with the novel Confession. Other works are The Struggle, A Country Drama, and Brazilian Legends.
The story in this volume is taken from a collection entitled The Complex Soul.

* * * * * * *

The present selection of tales makes no pretense at completeness, finality or infallibility
of choice.

This little book is, so to speak, merely a modest sample-case. Some of the tales first appeared,
in English, in the Boston Evening Transcript and the Stratford Journal (Boston), to which organs
I am indebted for permission to reprint them.

ISAAC GOLDBERG.

Roxbury, Mass.

THE ATTENDANT'S CONFESSION

By Joaquim Maria Machado de Assis

First President of the Brazilian Academy of Letters

So it really seems to you that what happened to me in 1860 is worth
while writing down?

Very well. I'll tell you the story, but on the condition that you do not divulge it before my death.
You'll not have to wait long--a week at most; I am a marked man.

I could have told you the story of my whole life, which holds many
other interesting details: but for that there would be needed time,
courage and paper.

There is plenty of paper, indeed, but my courage is at low ebb, and as to the time that is yet
left me, it may be compared to the life of a candle-flame. Soon tomorrow's sun will rise--a
demon sun as impenetrable as life itself. So goodbye, my dear sir; read this and bear me no ill
will; pardon me those things that will appear evil to you and do not complain too much if
there is exhaled a disagreeable odor which is not exactly that of the rose. You asked me for
a human document. Here it is.

Ask me for neither the empire of the Great Mogul nor a photograph of the Maccabees; but request,
if you will, my dead man's shoes, and I'll will them to you and no other.

You already know that this took place in 1860. The year before, about the month of August,
at the age of forty-two, I had become a theologian--that is, I copied
the theological studies of a priest at Nictheroy, an old college-chum,
who thus tactfully gave me my board and lodging.

In that same month of August, 1859, he received a letter from the vicar of a small town in
the interior, asking if he knew of an intelligent, discreet and patient person who would be
willing, in return for generous wages, to serve as attendant to the invalid Colonel Felisbert.
The priest proposed that I take the place, and I accepted it eagerly, for I was tired of copying
Latin quotations and ecclesiastic formulas. First I went to Rio de Janeiro to take leave of a brother
who lived at the capital, and from there I departed for the little village of the interior.

When
I arrived there I heard bad news concerning the colonel.

He was pictured to me as a disagreeable, harsh, exacting fellow; nobody could endure him, not even
his own friends. He had used more attendants than medicines. In fact he had broken the faces of
two of them. But to all this I replied that I had no fear of persons in good health, still less
of invalids.

So, after first visiting the vicar, who confirmed all that I had heard and recommended to me charity
and forbearance, I turned toward the colonel's residence.

I found him on the veranda of his house, stretched out on a chair and suffering greatly. He received
me fairly well. At first he examined me silently, piercing me with his two feline eyes; then a
kind of malicious smile spread over his features, which were rather hard. Finally he declared
to me that all the attendants he had ever engaged in his service
hadn't been worth a button, that they slept too much, were impudent
and spent their time courting the servants; two of them were even
thieves.

"And you, are you a thief?"

"No, sir."

Then he asked me my name. Scarcely had I uttered it when he made a gesture of astonishment.

"Your name is Colombo?"

"No, sir. My name is Procopio José Gomes Vallongo."

Vallongo?--He came to the conclusion that this was no Christian name
and proposed thenceforth to call me simply Procopio. I replied that
it should be just as he pleased.

If I recall this incident, it is
not only because it seems to me to give a good picture of the colonel,
but also to show you that my reply made a very good impression upon
him. The next day he told the vicar so, adding that he had never had
a more sympathetic attendant. The fact is, we lived a regular honeymoon
that lasted one week.

From the dawn of the eighth day I knew the
life of my predecessors--a dog's life. I no longer slept. I no longer
thought of anything, I was showered with insults and laughed at them
from time to time with an air of resignation and submission, for I
had discovered that this was a way of pleasing him. His impertinences
proceeded as much from his malady as from his temperament. His illness
was of the most complicated: he suffered from aneurism, rheumatism
and three or four minor affections. He was nearly sixty, and since
he had been five years old had been accustomed to having everybody
at his beck and call. That he was surly one could well forgive; but
he was also very malicious. He took pleasure in the grief and the
humiliation of others. At the end of three months I was tired of putting
up with him and had resolved to leave; only the opportunity was lacking.

But
that came soon enough. One day, when I was a bit late in giving him
a massage, he took his cane and struck me with it two or three times.
That was the last straw. I told him on the spot that I was through
with him and I went to pack my trunk. He came later to my room; he
begged me to remain, assured me that there wasn't anything to be angry
at, that I must excuse the ill-humoredness of old age ... He insisted
so much that I agreed to stay.

"I am nearing the end, Procopio,"
he said to me that evening. "I can't live much longer. I am upon the
verge of the grave. You will go to my burial, Procopio. Under no circumstances
will I excuse you. You shall go, you shall pray over my tomb. And
if you don't," he added, laughing, "my ghost will come at night and
pull you by the legs. James dutifully proceeds with the work while his chief retires to make a short note
concerning some other matters.

"You're right, sir, there is a dirty envelope stuck between the strings and fingerboard." This
is taken away and handed to the chief, who runs a small knife along the edge and releases the
epistle, which runs as follows:--

SIR,--In this morning I have great trouble as I walk the stairs down my violin chest open itself,
and my violin go to the bass, and when I was to pick him up he was bad break in one two place.
I am sorry to come to you as good doctor to finish him soon, and please charge no large.

Truly yours, HERMANN GROSZHAAR.

"Capital English for him," says the chief, to which James answers in a careless sort of undertone,
"There's a little English, but less capital about him, wanted to borrow five bob from me when
he came last."

The violin, after being taken from the case, is closely examined by the chief, who turns it
round about, tapping it here and there and holding it up to the light. At last, handing it
to James he says:--"Not so much as I should have expected after the terrible occurrence described
in the letter; the fiddle is a good one, so it deserves proper attention, no matter who owns
it. Just look about the case and find if you can the small piece that has come from this place
in the front table."

James looks earnestly about the interior of the violin case without success. "No sign of it
here, sir, there's nothing at all but a little bit of sweetstuff," he says, taking out a small
white disc from one of the side pockets.

"Well, we must proceed to work without it, so get that box out with the odd pieces of old wood;
I've no doubt you will find a piece that will match the grain of the pine to a nicety; we must
have the upper table off, better do it first."

This proceeding, of a kind as described before, having occupied some minutes, the upper table
is held by the chief while the assistant gropes among the odds and ends of pine and in a minute
or two finds a piece which is pronounced to suit admirably. "Now, James, there appears to be
only this portion seriously injured, and another, almost a splinter, running along the part
adjoining. It will be compulsory to cut a well-squared opening for the fitting, you will be
careful to make the walls of this part contract as the descent is made, so that the wood inserted
is slightly wedge-shaped. You will at the same time be careful and bear in mind that this fresh
wood will have to match so nicely, that when inserted properly the threads or grain will appear
continuous and not broken to the eye of any person but the experienced critic. To please this
person, however, you will have not only to make the lines of the grain follow through evenly,
but so fit your wood as to be in the direction of the growth of the plank from which the table
was cut. You see this aperture is on the slant or curve about midway between the bridge and
part near the tail-piece. Many repairers, even when inserting fresh wood with exceeding neatness,
neglect this precaution, and, in consequence, when the part is finished and varnished over,
there is but little indication of repair when looked at from one standpoint, but from another
or a removal of the light, this fault is very conspicuous. A frequent attempt to conceal this
is made by covering the part with dull varnish that will not allow of much light passing through;
sometimes an entirely opaque plastering is pasted over, obscuring the grain of the old and
new wood alike in the locality, and thus making what is known as a botch."

For the execution of such repairs as these there will not be any necessity to open the violin.
They will really be more conveniently effected without, there being more support and leverage
where required.

A long crack while fresh will take the glue readily and be as secure as required when dry.
It should be placed along the line to the extreme ends or a little over, and with gentle pressure
alternately each side the glue will be gradually drawn in. This should be continued for some
time, until there is little disposition shown for more absorption.

The superfluous glue will now be wiped off; should there be any tendency on one side or the
other to remain higher, thus causing a ridge which must be most carefully guarded against,
a piece of tape or ribbon tied round the violin at the part, and a small wedge of soft wood
inserted between the tape and the elevated edge, will bring it to a proper level, when it may
be put aside to dry and harden.

When sufficient time has elapsed for this according to atmospheric conditions, the binding
may be removed and the surface along the crack wiped with a damp rag until only the line is
apparent.

If the foregoing is done neatly and cleanly, there will be very little evidence of damage remaining.
In such instances as the present there may be occasionally necessary two, three or more bindings
with proper wedges, according to the length of the crack, the size of the violin and the model.
If the latter is rather high, or of the kind called by our French neighbours bombé, the disinclination
for the edges to come evenly together without help will be much greater, and therefore binders
and wedges should be at once made ready after a glance at the model.

As the repairing now under consideration is of a kind requiring not only skill, but experience
in the handling of the tools and necessary appliances connected therewith, we will still suppose
ourselves in the trained repairer's rooms at the rear of his premises, and that professors
and amateurs frequently call at the shop in front with violins of various kinds with all sorts
of injuries that they are desirous of having put right.

Just at this moment a lady of highly fashionable appearance glides in, followed by her footman
carrying a violin case. She has brought a violin that has been laid aside and forgotten for
a long time at a friend's house, for generations in fact, it used to be in repute as a violin
by Cremona. It has been given to her daughter, who is making great progress under the guidance
of one of the most eminent performers of the day, and she wishes to have it put in good playing
order if it is worth the expense.

The footman obediently brings forward the case, unfastens the string that holds the lid down,
the hinges being out of working condition, and places it on the counter; the lid being raised,
a strong mousy odour comes forth.

Our chief takes the violin from the hands of the man and turns it over, raises his eyebrows
and remarks, "Yes, madam, the violin has been sadly neglected, the case having been left open
mice have been residing in the snug retreat afforded them." "Yes," is the lady's rejoinder,
"I believe the case was found a little way open, my friends have not been musical at any time
and took no interest in the matter. Is it a good violin, Mr. ----?"

"Good, madam? it is very fine, one of the masterpieces of Cremona. The mice have turned the
sound-holes into doorways, the nibblings have gone nearly half through one of the wings."

"Wings!" says the lady. "I was not aware of there being any wings to a violin." "No, ma'am,"
is the answer; "wings is a technical term we use to express that slender part with the straight
cut line at the lower end of the sound hole. We shall have to open the violin to repair that
part properly."

"I hope that will not ruin the instrument," observes the lady. "Can you not do the repair without?"
"We could, ma'am, if we wished to save time and run a risk." "Oh, please don't run any risk
with it, now that I know that it is a valuable instrument I must ask you to take extra pains
and do it in your best manner."

"If you would like to see the violin open, I will get my assistant to do it now, it will take
but a minute or so. Here, James, open this fiddle and bring it here again."

There is not much waiting, the upper table has not been very obstinate, and James soon reappears
with the loose parts, which he hands to his chief. The lady, rather eager at first to see if
there is anything curious about the inside of a violin, rather shrinks away when it is brought
near. "It is in a very dirty condition," the chief observes, "but we shall soon get that all
right," he adds, "by giving it a wash."

"But will not wetting it spoil the tone?" the lady asks. "Not in the least, ma'am," is the
reply. "In fact, it will be improved, as at present there is so much grease and filth that
the vibration would be seriously interfered with. When it is quite clean there will be more
freedom, and the true character of the tone declared."

The lady having departed, the chief takes the violin parts to the workroom. "This is a fine
thing," he says to James.

"I thought so too, sir," he replies, "got some fine stuff on it, fiery like, nothing the matter
with it but those mouse nibblings."

"That will require careful work, James, think you can do it sufficiently neat and make the
new wood match well?"

"I think so, sir. Some of that old pine that we had sent us last week will match thread for
thread."

"Well, give it a clean out first, James." This is at once commenced, and with the aid of some
clean water, a sponge and stubby brush, followed by the application of a clean dry rag or duster,
the interior presents a fairly clean appearance.

"I see you have been careful about the label, James. It was not possible to decipher it when
smothered with dirt, but we can read it now. Yes, what I thought, original ticket without a
doubt. Joseph filius. Bring me that bottle of benzine and the hog-hair brush." This being done,
the chief takes the brush wetted with the benzine and carefully brushes about the corners and
other parts where the grease has refused to come away under the ordinary treatment. Each application
is followed by a wiping of the cloth held in readiness.

"There," he says at last, "it is quite fresh and wholesome. Don't suppose Mr. Mouse will go
in again."

"Now, James, what do you propose doing? making a clean sweep of the ragged parts with the knife
or letting in angular portions in the German manner?"

"Well, sir, on looking close at it perhaps the best way will be to act both ways, cut that
part straight through and fit the splinters along there."

"Yes," says the chief, "I think that way will save as much of the old material, if not more,
than any other. Take pains with it and mind the small joinings are clean and sharp."

James retires with the upper table to his bench, where the different necessary excisions are
proceeded with.

The next stage is that of glueing pieces of wood at the back of and across the sound holes.
The object of this is to get more strength and leverage for pressing home the fresh wood to
be inserted. From the neglect of this precaution many instruments have had cracks and other
damages caused, making matters worse than before and necessitating much more work in rectifying
it. After the necessary time, the glue being hard and dry enough, James begins the matching
of the parts with pieces of old wood from the carefully hoarded pile in a box kept for the
purpose; first one piece, then another is tried, until the right one is obtained for each requirement,
both in respect of colour and matching of the thread or grain. The surfaces to come in contact
and be fixed are minutely fitted, the larger ones only at present, the smaller gaps are left.

All being ready, strong glue is applied to the parts which are to be united and they are pressed
together, help toward adjustment being obtained from the wood glued across.

Being left to dry, and this being complete, the cramps or wedges, as may have seemed appropriate,
are removed, the cross pieces cut away and the glue washed off.

The paring down of the fresh wood to the level of the surrounding parts has now to be very
carefully done. The adjacent curves must be studied and the surfaces of the fresh parts worked
until by testing, not only by the sight, but passing the finger across, the surface feels as
one piece.

For the small parts that require levelling, small pieces of glasspaper attached to a stick
of pine shaped according to requirement will be found useful.

The fresh wood will of course be projecting some way beyond the edges or course of the line
of the sound holes, the exact outline of which it is most desirous to continue.

This is about to be attended to by James, who thinks it a small matter to continue the line
with his sharp knife, but his master happened to catch sight of his first strokes and sees
his intention in time. "Stop!" he calls out, "not another stroke; just take a tracing of the
opposite or corresponding part of the other sound hole and trace it down, don't trust to your
eye unless you consider yourself an artist of experience and able to actually draw with your knife.

"You must attend to another thing besides the tracing of the contour. When you cut up to the
line that you take as a guide, you must see that you make the walls of the opening at the same
angle downwards, and your fresh wood in every respect of form an exact continuation of the
old work."

The repair so far as the wood work is concerned is finished. It has now to receive the varnishing
and touching up in detail for matching so as to arrest as little attention as possible as a repair.

"There are two fiddles, sir, that a party brought here yesterday. They seem very far gone;
one of them has lost quite a quarter of the upper table, it has had a bad smash and the pieces
have not been saved."

"Well, James," is the reply, "there is only one course to pursue, that is, to put a fresh piece
of wood, join it as neatly as possible and match the varnish. I think we have a piece of old
stuff sent us by an Italian dealer that will suit that exactly." The store of odds and ends
of pine is rummaged over and the piece, with some pencil notes on it of date, etc., brought
out and compared with the fractured fiddle. "Could not be better, James," says the chief. "Now
take off that table, or what remains of it, and pare the ragged edges at the part near the
sound hole.

"At that part you had better shave it at an angle from the upper surface and make a corresponding
start on the fresh wood; they must both fit to a nicety, and when so the old wood will overlap
the fresh stuff. You will take care to have the upper surface of the fresh wood a little above
the level of the old, to allow of finishing down to a good level when the time comes for the
final touches."

This is all seen to, the large slice of wood is for the present left square at the top, it
is thick enough to represent the appearance of the slab of wood used by the original maker
before the table was cut into form. There is some gouging to be done and shaping of the parts
adjoining the old wood.

It has, of course, been necessary to provide a sort of mould for fitting and pressing from
above the thin shaved edge of the old material on to the new. Precaution, however, is taken
to firstly glue the parts that are to be brought together at the joint. This will prevent the
shaved surfaces from slipping when pressure is applied.

These parts of the process having been done and the glue dried sufficiently, the under surface
is levelled all round as a continuation of the under part of the old border.

The table, therefore, can now be laid flat, and should fit well on to the ribs and linings
as it did before the fracture. James now has recourse to the advice of his chief as to the
best course to pursue.

"Shall I trace the other side, sir, and mark it down on the fresh wood so as to make it balance?"

"Certainly not," answers his chief, "this is what you must do. Lay the table on the ribs as
if you were about to glue it down, you can let it be held in position by a couple of screw-cramps,
then, with a lead pencil, take as a guide the ribs, holding it so that a mark can be made all
round representing the projection of the new edging. A short piece of a pencil laid flat against
the ribs and moved round, would perhaps be the most convenient."

James proceeds dutifully to work, marks the edging, and then, after removing the screw-cramps,
roughly hews away the wood to near the line.

Much care and more delicate manipulation has to be exercised now, or the precaution of the
pencil line will prove to be next to useless.

Files of different degrees of tooth are employed until quite an even contour is obtained and
a precise line, the continuation of the pattern, is seen.

The next proceeding will be to mark the thickness of the edging all round. For this purpose
a cut line is better than a mere mark, as the cutting up to it is easier and safer. The purfling
tool may be regulated and adapted in this case, after which the table will be laid flat, carefully
considered, and the more detailed gouging commenced. A small pair of calipers will prove handy
for measuring the depth of the channelling of the original parts and gouging down carefully
until a corresponding modelling has been effected.

If the original work is sharply defined and a distinctly shaped border is present, then the
work must be proceeded with as in the instance of making a new copy of a violin.

Some little difficulty may appear when the question of matching the purfling arises. The assistant
opens a drawer close by, selects a likely piece, compares it with that on the violin, and then
shows it to his chief, who examines it in a similar manner. "Yes," he says, "I think that is
sufficiently like, in fact, it will not be possible to get nearer, it is a bit of that old
stuff, is it not, that we have kept by for an emergency? Have you got the groove cleanly cut
and routed out?"

"Yes, sir," is the answer; "I noticed about the depth that would be wanted at that little part
where the old stuff had been snapped short at the fracture."

"Well, that will do, James. Be careful to cut the ragged end with a clean angle, doing the
same with the fresh stuff--fit the parts accurately, and when you insert the purfling see that
the end is pushed home so that as little as possible is seen of the junction of the two ends."

With these injunctions borne in mind, James proceeds to the work. Having had some experience
in this branch of the repairing art, and, further, this being to him a more interesting part
than others of the proceedings, he at once sets to work.

Having roughly measured the length of the piece of purfling to be inserted, he finds that it
will be necessary to bend it to the curves of the groove made for it. To force it in while
in its present condition would not do, as it is nearly straight; for, although it has served
to go round a violin in years gone by, it has almost resumed its old condition through the
action of the natural damp in the atmosphere.

Many old Italian violins bear indications of the haste of the maker to get the purfling done,
and so without the delay of any intermediary process the purfling has been pressed in with
great risk and sometimes an inevitable result of fracture.

In the present instance, the violin having all the evidence of great care having been expended
on its construction and finish, the repair, to be as successful as possible, must be carried
out on the same principle, every little deviation of curve being well imitated. For the bending
of the purfling there may be, of course, any number of methods. According to the consistency
of the material, so the management must be.

At present the piece of purfling, having been taken from a portion of an old violin bought
for the purpose of breaking up and using for repairs, is very dry and rather brittle. The light
coloured part or central portion is of some hard wood that refuses to accommodate itself easily
to the requirements of the moment; this is found to be the case on trying a small portion with
the fingers--it goes with a snap on very little attempt being made to bend it.

James having met with this kind of thing before, knows more than one way of meeting the difficulty.
As is often found, a rough and ready way is good for a small amount of work such as he has
before him.

He takes a candle and lights it. He has always at hand a jar of water ready for any damping
required in the number of little odd jobs constantly occurring. Placing the jar of water within
easy reach, he dips the purfling into it once and then wipes it with his handy cloth.

Taking the two ends with the fingers of each hand he passes it backward and forward near the
flame of the candle, using a gentle pressure to make it assume a crescent or bow shape. The
heat causes the damp to evaporate and steam the materials, and the purfling will gradually
assume the required curve.

When this latter happens to be short or sudden, another dip and heating may be necessary.

This being successfully accomplished, recourse is now had to the glue pot, a pointed piece
of wood is dipped into it, and a small streak of glue is laid in the groove. The purfling is
now carefully inserted along the course, pressed in and left to dry.

After a sufficient time has elapsed, James looks over it, and finding all things ripe for finishing,
takes a gouge of a size that will suit the channelling of the particular model adopted by the
maker.

Great care is necessary to shave off but a small portion as the gouge is passed along. The
latter has a very keen edge, or it will tear instead of cut. It is used here and there in contrary
direction, as the grain of the several parts of the purfling does not run quite level. A curved
file, and finally a little glasspapering, will complete the matter so far. There will be for
the finishing of the whole of the fresh wood a further process to go through, that is, a slight
damping.

This can be done with a small fine grained sponge or a moderately wet camel hair brush. This
is for the purpose of slightly raising the grain. If this is not done at this time the soft
part of the grain may show its automatic tendency to swell after the final process of varnishing
has been gone through. When quite dry, fine glasspaper is used to reduce the surface to an
almost polished level, after which some clear oil, having good drying qualities, is brushed
lightly but completely over all portions of the fresh work.

It will not be absolutely necessary that this should be quite dry and hard before proceeding
with the varnishing down to the tint of the old and surrounding work.

This being a separate and independent branch of the art of restoration, will be treated apart
hereafter.

For the present we will be content to know that this varnishing, a very delicate process in
connection with the repair, is undertaken by the chief himself, who sets to work at once and
in a manner as if it were a true labour of love, there being no hurry, but careful time-ignoring
attention to matching and calculation of effect. Just before settling down with colours, essences,
solvents and brushes, he gives directions to his man James to "finish up the crack or fracture
in that old 'Stainer' lying on the shelf there behind."

When it is taken down from its place of repose, James looks at it for a moment and then observes,
"Rather an awkward job, this, sir! The contra-bombardon man, we understand, also complains that his
instrument is too tight round the chest.

***

"The one unselfish friend of man is the dog," said Sir FREDERICK BANBURY, M.P. A less courageous
man would certainly have mentioned the PRESIDENT of the United States.

***

A Hendon man has just completed sixty-two years in a church choir.
Few choir-boys can boast of such a record.

***

One of the young recruits who joined the army last week in Dublin is seven feet two inches in height.
It is satisfactory to note that he is on our side.

***

It is reported that seven cuckoos have been heard in different parts
of the country during the past week.

It is felt in some quarters that it may be just one cuckoo on a route march.

***

"Bacon Free Yesterday," says a headline. Somebody must have left the
door open.

***

An American scientest claims to have discovered a harmless germ likely
to defeat the "flu" microbe.

It is said that some medical men have put up a purse and that the two germs are being matched to
fight a ten round contest under National Sporting Club rules.

***

Those who have said that the unemployment donation makes for
prolonged holiday have just been dealt a sorry blow. It appears that
one North of England man in receipt of this pay has deliberately started
work.

***

Plans for the housing of 12,000 Government clerks have
just been passed. While 12,000 may suffice for a nucleus, we cannot
help thinking that once again the Government isn't really trying.

***

A
postman going his rounds at Kingston found a deserted baby on the
lawn of a front garden. It speaks well for the honesty of postal servants
that the child was at once given up.

***

We are pleased to announce
with regard to the German waiter who, in 1913, gave a Scotsman a bad
sixpence for change, that reassuring news has just reached Scotland
that the fellow, is still alive.

***

A morning paper states that
a gentleman who had been at the War Office since August 1914 was given
a big reception on his return home. The name of the Departmental Chief
whom he had been waiting to see has not yet been disclosed.

***

A
morning paper tells us that FRISCO of New York, who is alleged to
have invented the Jazz, has declined an invitation to visit London.
Coward!

***

By the way, they might have told us whether the offer
to FRISCO came from London or New York. Meanwhile we draw our own
conclusions.

***

With reference to the horse that recently refused
at the third jump and ran back to the starting-post, we are asked
to say that this only proves the value of backing horses both ways.

***
 All being in readiness, fresh strong glue is inserted all along the opening,
the repeated pressing being kept up until he is sure that the glue has penetrated every part.
The superfluous glue oozing from the inside, after a slight squeeze along the course, is lightly
wiped off, the moulds applied back and front, and the cramps fixed.

Other little odds and ends of repairing have occupied the attention of the assistant during
the time of waiting for the drying of the before-mentioned upper table of the Stainer. This
latter being of full model, although not resembling the swollen or bolster-like form of many
imitations of the master, requires special attention with regard to fitting in of the fresh
wood or core.

The fresh wood must not be bent, or the matching of the grain with the old material will be
impossible, and the repair when completed will be strikingly conspicuous. It must therefore
be inserted in such a manner that when pared down, the direction or flow of the grain will
exactly coincide in all respects with the rest of the table. The fact must be recognised that
although the threads may be perfectly straight from end to end, yet they may rise higher at
one end than the other or not run level with the plane of the table. (Diagram 37.)

This being duly calculated by James when cutting the piece that is to be inserted as a core,
the table with its opening extending nearly from end to end is placed on an even surface facing
upwards, as when on the instrument. The core is then tried in the aperture. Perhaps a thin
shaving or two is found necessary, when finally it is sufficiently exact. The next stage is
that of getting ready the means of holding or pressing all the parts together till dry after
glueing. Taking a flat piece of wood, perhaps the one just used, and placing the table down,
a pencil line is traced on the board round the violin table as if for the purpose of copying
the pattern. Two straight lines are now ruled on each side touching the most projecting part
of the upper and lower curve (Diagram 38.)

On the outside of each line, but touching it, a strip of wood about a quarter of an inch square
is pegged or nailed down.

The table or plate when placed flat between these two small bars of wood, is within an acute
angle, and can be held tight or not according to the degree of pressure with which it is pushed
toward the smaller end.

It will at once be perceptible that a trifling pressure forward of the table towards the small
end will result in the raising of the central part and the widening of the opening instead
of closing it.

There must be, therefore, some means adopted to counteract this, and these are not difficult
to fix upon. In lieu of pressing the table forward with risk of damaging the part of the border
that will come in contact with the two fixed bars, it will be carefully tried as to fitting
the exact position it is to take when glued, that is, sufficiently forward in the space between
the bars that will only admit the table with a slight rise in the arching, the joint or part
holding the core being in a more open condition as a consequence.

The exact place or point of contact is marked with a soft pencil or piece of chalk on border
and bar. The table being taken away, the parts requiring it will be carefully glued.

Placed in position again, necessary means are taken that the surface or plane on each side
of the core are quite level with each other; if they are not so, they will, after the necessary
paring down of the core has been completed, cause an ugly, uneven appearance. To prevent this,
therefore, the parts must be adjusted by the application of the fingers on one side or the
other, or gently tapped by a piece of wood sufficiently heavy until exactness of level is made
sure.

There is now necessary a weight to be applied along the whole length of the junction for keeping
all in position until the glue is quite dry and hard.

Any kind of weight may be applied, the smaller and heavier in proportion to size the better,
as so much more can be seen when several are used instead of one and that of larger dimensions.

These being placed in position, the table with its adjusted weights is placed away for drying.

When time has elapsed for this to be satisfactorily accomplished the table is taken in hand
again, the weights lifted off and a slight tap at the upper with a piece of soft wood will
set it free.

The part of the core now rising above the upper or varnished side of the table is pared down
very gently, care being taken that the chisel does not work into the varnish on either side
of the core, and that it is not driven against the grain, as by so doing the wood is nearly
certain to be torn instead of cleanly shaven.

A close examination of the surface is now made, if found quite satisfactory, it may receive
its final polishing by the application of some very fine glass paper wrapped round a piece
of cork, with a little clear oil dabbed on it. This will give a dead smooth surface. If the
above directions are carried out with clean and sharp work, the line along the table marked
by the presence of the core will be so slight as to appear little more than the thread of the
wood, in the highest class of repairing it will be nearly exact.

The part of the core projecting on the under side of the table is easily disposed of by a gouge
in the same manner as described for the action of the chisel on the front.

The operations just described are of a kind that should not be undertaken without considerable
experience, as, indeed, ought to be the case with many other repairs, the requisite dexterity
of handling not coming at once even with much natural ability. 

His officers, however, scorned such a policy, and, being appointees
of the Sultan and far from subordinate in spirit to their chief, they
were finally able to force his hand and compel him to offer battle
to the Christians by leaving the security of the gulf and the fortress
and going out into the open, exactly where Doria wanted him.

Accordingly on the 27th of September, the Turkish fleet sailed out to offer battle. It happened
that Doria had gone ten miles away to Sessola for anchorage, and the Galleon of Venice lay
becalmed right in the path of the advancing fleet. Condalmiero sent word for help, and Doria
ordered him to begin fighting, assuring him that he would soon be reënforced.

The Turkish galleys, advancing in a crescent formation, soon enveloped the lonely ship. Her
captain ordered his crew to lie down on her deck while he alone stood, in full armor, a target to
the host of Moslems who pushed forward in their galleys anxious for the honor of capturing this
great ship. Condalmiero ordered his gunners to hold their fire until the enemy were within
arquebus range. Then the broadsides of the galleon blazed and the
surrounding galleys crumpled and sank.

A single shot weighing 120 pounds sank a galley with practically all on board. The signal to retreat
was given and speedily obeyed.

Thereafter there were to be no more rushing tactics. Barbarossa organized his galleys in squadrons
of twenty, which advanced, one after the other, delivered their fire, and retired. All the rest of
the day, from about noon till sunset, this strange conflict between the single galleon and
the Turkish fleet went on. The ship was cumbered with her fallen spars; she had lost thirteen
men killed and forty wounded. The losses would have been far greater but for the extraordinarily
thick sides of the galleon. After sundown the Turkish fleet appeared to be drawing up in line
for the last assault. On the Galleon of Venice there was no thought of surrender; the ammunition
was almost spent and the men were exhausted with their tremendous efforts, but they stood at
their posts determined to defend their ship to the last man.

Then, to their astonishment Barbarossa drew off, sending some of his galleys to pursue and
cut off certain isolated Christian units, but leaving the field to the Venetian galleon. Meanwhile,
during all that long, hot afternoon the great fleet of Andrea Doria, instead of pressing forward
to the relief of the Galleon of Venice and crushing Barbarossa with its great superiority in numbers,
was going through strange parade maneuvers about ten miles away. Doria's explanation was that
he was trying to decoy Barbarossa out into deeper water where the guns of the nefs could be used,
but there is no other conclusion to be reached than that Doria did not want to fight. Fortune
that day offered him everything for an overwhelming victory, one that might have ranked with the
decisive actions of the world's history, and he threw it away under circumstances peculiarly
disgraceful and humiliating. Never did commander in chief so richly deserve to be shot on his
own deck.

The following day as a fair wind blew for Corfu, Doria spread sail and retired from the gulf,
while Barbarossa, roaring with laughter, called on his men to witness
the cowardice of this Christian admiral.

The victory lay with Barbarossa. With a greatly inferior force he had challenged Doria and attacked.
Doria had not only declined the challenge but fled back to Corfu. No wonder the Sultan ordered the cities
of his domain to be illuminated.

Barbarossa's prizes included two galleys and five nefs, but he, too, had failed in an inexplicable
fashion in drawing off from the assault on the Galleon of Venice at the end of the day's fighting.
It is with her, with the gallant Condalmiero and his men, that all the honor of the day belongs.
Nothing in the adventurous 16th century surpasses their splendid,
disciplined valor on this occasion.

The astonishing powers of resistance and the deadly effect of the
broadsides of the Galleon of Venice displayed in a long and successful
fight against an entire fleet of galleys should have had the effect
of making a revolution in naval architecture fifty years before that
change actually occurred. "Well, you must take a fine chisel and work it in two before you
commence the opening."

James retires to his corner, and taking up a small chisel stuck in a short handle of his own
fitting, he inserts it carefully through the right sound-hole, chipping the post gradually
down one side, then turning the violin round on the cushion, he works away at the post through
the other, and although from the extra distance from this, the chisel has a weaker hold, there
is less substance to work through, the greater part having been worked away at the first attack.

The way is now clear for removing the upper table, which James does after some trouble in working
his knife along between the edging and the upper part of the ribs, in consequence of the glueing
having been done with a bountiful hand, and the parts pressed together tightly, so much so
as to show very distinctly where the screw cramps had been wound up.

The exposed interior is brought before the gaze of the chief, who looks at it for a while,
then remarks, "Very bad, but I have seen the like often before, and suppose will do so many
times again.

"Give it a cleaning, James, they've fastened the plaster on to the dirty wood, and I expect
the hold is very slight if at all in parts."

"No, sir, I tapped it about, and found some hollow spaces that would admit my small knife;
the plaster had not been cut evenly, and then not pressed equally all over. The back seems
about as bad, although it being thick does not need any support."

"No, James, the repairers, if we may give them such an honourable title, wanted to show that
something had been done for the money charged. Give the interior a clean out with warm water
and sponge, leave some wet rags over those plasters, and when the damp has soaked through,
you can soon get your gouge underneath and pull them off, washing the surfaces afterwards."

This having been done as requested, the two parts are again brought before the chief, who forthwith
takes a pair of calipers; these he applies carefully to both upper and lower tables in turn,
moving them over in all directions. "I declare, James," he then observes, "there is no necessity
for any patches or plasters anywhere; there is a very weak upper rib that has been so knocked
about by several mendings, and spoilt inside and out, besides being riddled by insects, that
we must make or fix a fresh piece in its place. Now, this fiddle being worth the trouble, you
must see if you can make the repair so neat as to be almost invisible even when closely examined."

"Well, sir, I'll try at it," is the reply, this being a kind of repair that James will take
much pleasure in, to show his dexterity of handling and clean cutting.

The first thing is to hunt among some pieces of old ribs for a part that will match well. This
takes some time. At last an old rib is found that appears just the thing--a part of it only
will be required.

The next requisite is a mould or piece of wood cut exactly to the curve of the inside of the
rib; this must not be roughly done, or any idea of "near enough" being thought of; if it does
not fit exactly, then the pressure to come against it will be unequal in parts. If cut from
a little block of soft wood the cutting will not take long, and the trouble be amply repaid
by the result.

An exterior mould will be as necessary as an interior, and if the original rib is of fairly
equal substance, the two moulds may be tried one against the other, and should fit nicely.

The ragged openings and rotten part of the original rib having been carefully examined with
regard to the size of the fresh piece to be inserted, a line is marked by soft chalk as to
the position and extent to be covered by the fresh wood. The aperture to admit the fresh piece
of rib must be determined upon exactly, and be cut with the utmost neatness. Before doing this,
however, the question must be gone into, and settled definitely, as to whether the fresh piece
is to be pressed on from the outside or from the inside.

The choice must be in favour of the more convenient, or that which will be most likely to lead
to the best results. As the sides of the aperture taken longitudinally must be cut at an acute
angle and not upright, the convenience of cutting the edges of the opening from the outside
will be decidedly better and more handy for obtaining the desirable sharpness of edge.

As a matter of course, the piece must be tried on again and again until it is clearly a good
fit all round. When in a satisfactory state it will, when tried finally, be elevated a trifle
above the surrounding wood.

The angle at which the upper and lower portions fit has no need to be cut so acutely as at
the ends.

Everything being ready, including some strong clean glue, this latter will require painting
over the surfaces that are to be closed together until absorption has ceased, and not before
this are the parts to be brought home, or the absorption or soaking into the wood will continue,
leaving no glue for holding the two surfaces.

When quite ready, the interior block of wood or mould will be held in position by the hand.

As usual, the piece of paper on the face of the mould will be used for preventing the glue
holding on to it. The piece of fresh rib is now placed in position, and the outer mould (faced
with paper, of course), applied. The screw cramps are now affixed, tightly wound up, and left
for drying.

After ascertaining that all the glued parts are perfectly dry and therefore hard, the cramps,
moulds and paper may be removed. If any paper should be found adhering a moistened rag will
easily remove it.

The next proceeding will be that of levelling down and removing any unevenness, on the outside
especially. If the fitting has been very accurately effected there will not remain much to
do in this line. For the inside a piece of glass-paper folded over a curved block of wood,
or the actual mould that has been in use, will serve the purpose if not too large. This can
be rubbed backward and forward till the surface is level. For the outside a slightly different
treatment will be preferable, that is, a portion of glass-paper of the finest grain placed
as before in front of a block of wood. There is no necessity for it being a very close fit
so long as it is even in surface.

This should have some oil of a drying nature put on the surface, a little dabbed on with the
tip of the finger will be enough.

A fine surface, after a little passing backward and forward over it, adding a little oil now
and then, will be obtained.

The advantage of the use of oil is, firstly, the ease in use and the smoothness of the surface
and absence of harshness, secondly, as it will have penetrated the wood to some extent it will
prevent the varnish, that eventually will have to be applied, from sinking into the pores.

Many otherwise excellent repairs have been spoilt from the neglect of this simple precaution;
without it, the glass-paper leaves a dry, finely torn or raw surface which absorbs very readily
the coloured varnish that will, in sinking, look much more intense, uneven and totally unlike
the surrounding old varnish, which, it is most desirable, should be as closely as possible
imitated.

All these particulars, rules, and precautions, having been carefully attended to by James,
the instrument is at last brought by him in as advanced a state as possible to his master,
the latter always reserving to himself the final touches or finishing and regulating.

About this time another caller, an amateur in a state of great excitement, brings a violin
case hurriedly in, and coming up to the chief without any ceremony, says, while undoing the
buckle of the straps binding the leather covering: "Oh, my favourite violin is ruined, its
back is broken, and I feel sure you can't do it up; it is a Venetian Montagnana that I have
had so many years, and that you--yes, even you--admired. You don't say much as a rule in favour
of anything I bring you, but you said this was the only good thing I had about me; it is past
your power to put right again, I am afraid." "Then why did you bring it to me," says the chief,
"if it is impossible for me to remedy the breakage? let me see it."

The case having been nervously opened by the owner, the violin, after a glance, is lifted out
by the chief, the owner looking on in a state of great perturbation. "Please be very careful,"
he says, as the practised hand of the master turns it about, looks at it here and there, over
one way and then the other. "Why, its back is not broken; where is the fracture?"--"Don't you
see, all the way down, it is quite loose and open?"

Another turn round or so, and the chief exclaims, "Oh, you mean the joint of the back is open--that
is not broken; I did not see it at first as the light was going in the same direction; we can
put that right again for you."--"Here, James!" he calls out, "just look at this; is it past
our mending?" James casts his eye over it for a second or two, and says, "No sir, I've done
up that kind o' thing over and over again." Then, turning to the owner, "Two against one, you see."

The amateur looks at the instrument with great earnestness for a moment or two, then observes:
"You will have, I suppose, to take it all to pieces to do that kind of repair, eh?"

"Oh no," replied the chief, "we shall close that up without undoing any part of it except taking
the strings and sound-post away." At this moment he has inserted the post-setter and pushed
the post a little, which proceeding causes the back to open wider, the mouth of the owner opening
widely also, accompanied by an increase in the general appearance of anguish.

"There now," says the repairer, "just that little extra pressure from the sound-post enables
us to see how far the opening extends; it is not all the way along, and there does not appear
to be anything to prevent it coming together evenly again."

The chief now dexterously, with the point of the "setter," takes the sound-post out, the owner
looking on with some amount of astonishment.

"You call in the day after to-morrow, sir, and I hope you will find it as right as ever."

These words have a cheering effect on the owner. "You are sure that will not be too soon,"
he observes. "Oh no," replies the other, "we shall put three or four studs along the centre,
inside, and that will prevent it going again."

"But how," rejoins the owner, "are you going to put studs along the joint inside without opening
the instrument?"--he was getting interested.

"Well, you leave that to us, sir, and we will tell you afterwards." This was said in consequence
of a fear that the amateur would be using the time of the establishment, and as a result the
amateur and owner walked away satisfied.

At the appointed time, not any earlier, the amateur makes his appearance, inquiring somewhat
anxiously as to whether the violin was finished, or more precisely speaking from fear, whether
the repairer had succeeded in restoring the instrument to playing order? "Oh, yes," is the
response, "and goes better than it could have done for some time back. You see its complaint
has been coming on for some time, beginning with a slight opening at the lower part, and continuous
playing with the strain of tuning up now and then extended it, until the time when it became
of such magnitude that you could not help observing it. Being gradual in its progress, the
tone getting worse by gentle degrees, was also unobserved by you."

On this, the violin being handed to its owner, a close examination is made all over the outside,
and through the sound-holes.

"Well, really," the owner at last breaks out with, "it is most beautifully done! I should not
have thought it possible, and however did you manage to get all those little squares of wood
ranged in a line inside, and you said you would do it without breaking open the violin, and--tell
me how it was done!"

"Then I will keep my promise if you have patience. His master, Martin Tromp, is regarded as the
father of the line ahead formation for battle, but he undoubtedly taught de Ruyter its limitations
as well as its advantages, and there is no trace of the stupid formalism of the Duke of York's
regulations in de Ruyter's brilliant work.

[Footnote 1: INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER UPON HISTORY, p. 144.]

At this time he had no worthy opponent. As Monk was dead, the Duke of York had again assumed
active command with Rupert as his lieutenant. Although the Duke was honestly devoted to the navy
he was dull-witted, and in spite of the advantage of numbers and the dogged courage of officers
and men which so often in English history has made up for stupid leadership, he was wholly
unable to cope with de Ruyter's genius.

As for the French navy, their ships were superb, the best in Europe, but their officers had no experience
and apparently small desire for close fighting. At all events, despite the odds against him, de
Ruyter defeated the allies in all four battles, prevented their landing
an army of invasion, and broke up their attempt to blockade the coast.

The war was unpopular in England and as it met with ill success it
became more so.

After the battle of the Texel, in 1673, active operations died down to practically nothing,
and at the beginning of the year England made peace. By this time Holland had managed to find
other allies on the Continent--Spain and certain German states--and while she had to continue
her struggle against Louis XIV by land she was relieved of the menace of her great enemy on the
sea. Fifteen years later, by a curious freak of history, a Dutch prince became King William III
of England, and the two old enemies became united in alliance.

But the Netherlands had exhausted themselves by their protracted struggle. They had saved their independence,
but after the close of the 17th century they ceased to be a world power of any consequence.

The
persistent enmity of the French king for the Dutch gained nothing for France but everything
for England. Unwittingly he poured out his resources in money and
men to the end that England should become the great colonial and maritime
rival of France.

As a part of her spoils England had gained New York and New Jersey, thus linking her northern
and southern American colonies, and she had taken St. Helena as a base for her East Indies merchantmen.
She had tightened her hold in India, and by repeatedly chastising the Barbary pirates had won immunity
for her traders in the Mediterranean.

At the beginning of the Second Dutch War Monk had said with brutal frankness, "What matters this
or that reason? What we want is more of the trade which the Dutch have." This, the richest prize of all,
fell from the hands of the Dutch into those of the English. During the long drawn war which went
on after the English peace of 1674, while Holland with her allies fought against Louis XIV, the
great bulk of the Dutch carrying trade passed from the Dutch to the
English flag. The close of the 17th century, therefore, found England
fairly started on her career as an ocean empire, unified by sea power.
Her navy, despite the vices it had caught from the Stuart régime,
had become firmly established as a permanent institution with a definite
organization.

The owner at last breaks in with the remark that a violin maker residing where he lately came
from had told him that the instrument would never go properly unless the back was re-lined--that
was perhaps the term used.

The chief then rejoins: "I think the repairer was very likely hitting the mark when he said
that; this is one of those old violins of the Brescian school, which are often too thin in
the back for modern usage, and there is no other resource but that of lining--or veneering,
some would call it--the back. If you like I will open it, and ascertain whether it is so with
this instrument."

Consent is given, and the chief goes to the back of his premises, and returns with a much-worn
table knife. Sitting calmly down before the new arrival, and resting the instrument face downwards
on his lap, he proceeds with sundry slow but strong thrusts of the knife round the junction
of the ribs with the upper table; the cracking sounds emitted as the knife gradually works
its way along are rather trying to the owner, who, however, has confidence in the reputation
of the master-hand at the kind of work. After a little extra pushing here and there, and lifting
gently to ascertain whether the parting is complete, the upper table is at last lifted quite
clear of the rest.

The owner at once asks, "Is the back in a very bad state?" "Well," is the reply, "it is in
such a dirty condition that it is not possible to tell.--Here, James, bring me that water and
sponge!" These being at once brought, with a cloth in addition, the chief at once begins bathing
the inside, giving a heavier rub in different parts, as some appearances suggest the extra
treatment.

At last, after some few minutes of this application, the cloth is applied, and the interior
assumes a cleaner aspect.

"Never being cleaned out since it was made, I should think," is the observation, "excepting
once," he adds, as his practised eye lights on a small, but thick stud resting over a small
crack at one side, "and that was a very long time ago, possibly a hundred and fifty years."
"Does it require the 'lining'--I think that is what it was called?" "Yes, it will be so much
better for it, almost necessary."

The owner soon after departs, and the chief and his assistant proceed to work upon the violin.
In general condition it happens to be very good, the one opening referred to being the time
at which the modern bar had been attached in place of the very old and small-sized one. The
fingerboard being old is easily removed by a sudden pull or jerk. After further cleaning with
the aid of a hog-hair brush, this being adapted for getting more completely into the corners,
both parts of the violin--they have both had a cleaning and looks more wholesome--are placed
aside to dry.

When this has taken place to the satisfaction of both master and man, the back is rubbed over
with an oiled rag, the object of this being to prevent the mould now to be taken from sticking
to it.

Some good plaster of Paris is mixed, and a sufficient quantity placed on it till a coating
an inch and a half in thickness is produced; this amount is necessary owing to the tendency
to get out of form or warp if too thin, failures having often resulted therefrom.

When well hardened, this mould is lifted off; it comes away easily, showing a perfect facsimile
in reverse of the back of the violin. This is carefully wiped, and any small specks of plaster
that may be adhering are picked off.

The mould has now to be dried, as it would otherwise--from the large amount of moisture within
it--undo the back, or any cracks that may have been glued up.

Placing in a moderately warm oven is as good a method as any, the natural drying by open air,
even in sunny weather, being a long process.

After being tested and found to contain no moisture whatever, the mould is placed upon a bench,
and the surface which has been in contact with the curved form of the back receives a slight
oiling with a brush. This will prevent as much as possible injury to the varnished surface
of the violin when placed in it. This may be further helped by a sheet of soft paper or soft
cotton being placed between, when the back of the violin is laid in the mould.

Before proceeding further, there will necessarily be the preparations made in connection with
the piece of veneer that is to be glued to the back.

In order that this may be as equally as possible pressed into the shape, there must be another
mould made; this will be of some soft wood that will cut easily into shape, and be made to
fit as near as can be to the back.

Next a layer or portion of cork about one-eighth of an inch thick, and large enough to cover
the whole of the veneer, will be required. Some repairers would prefer india rubber or other
yielding substances, which will fit into any unevenness while sustaining great pressure. This
last will be caused by the press or large cramp, which must be very strong.

All the foregoing being ready to hand, the veneer being cut down to the amount required, perhaps
to a pencilled line marked on it for width and length, it will be wetted; being of slight substance,
it will soon absorb sufficient moisture to remain damp during and over the time the other preparations
are made.

All being in readiness, the back being laid down accurately in its bed of hard plaster of Paris,
the cloth or paper having been placed between, the cleansed and dried surface of the table
is brushed over with the strong glue which, if the apartment is of sufficiently high temperature,
will not coagulate or set, but give time for the brushing of glue on one side of the veneer.
This is at once placed in position on the glued surface of the violin table; it is then covered
with some thin, soft paper, the cake of cork or india rubber being laid over it. More carefully
than all, the carved piece of wood that is to be pressed down must be exactly in its right
place, and above this, other slices, so that the pressure may be distributed well, and not
merely on one spot.

For this a goodly pile will be of advantage; to be quite scientific in its proportion, an imaginary
line drawn from the central point of the pressure above to the outside or margin of the field
of pressure at the lowest part, should not be at more than an angle of forty-five degrees.

Attention being paid to the foregoing, and the press or large screw cramp being already in
position, the pressure, which must be great, is applied.

The glue will be seen oozing out between the surfaces of the table and its veneer; this can
be wiped off easily, and save the trouble of removal when dry and hard.

Necessarily, a longer time will be consumed in thorough drying and hardening in a case like
this than in an ordinary repair in which the atmosphere can more readily obtain access. When
quite ready, the pressure and the pieces of wood, paper, cork, or indiarubber can be one by
one released, and the simple veneer, now firmly attached to the lower table of the violin,
can have its edges trimmed round with gouge, chisel, or scraper, and finally glass-papered
to a good finish.

When neatly done, the edging of the veneer will decline gradually in thickness, and die off
all round.

There is nothing further to be done now, but seeing that the bar is right in proportion, position,
and fitting.

Much false reasoning upon insufficient premises has at times on and off been bestowed upon
the subject of the bar and its supposed mysteries. Space at command will not allow of a dissertation
on this detail of the constitution of the violin. A few remarks will perhaps be sufficient
for present purposes. When violins were first sent forth by their inventor, Gasparo da Salo,
the bar was sometimes omitted, possibly in all the earliest ones, the strain on the upper table
being then slight as compared with that of the present day--at others it was very short and
weak. The substance of the upper table was considerable, and much over that which the later
and modern makers approve of, and thus there was a counter-balance.

At the present time still stronger bars are inserted, and very frequently without rule or reason. In
these line ahead attacks the rear usually straggled. Tromp, commanding the Dutch rear, saw his
chance to attack Smith, commanding the English rear, before his squadron was in proper formation.
Smith retreated, and Tromp, eager to win a victory all by himself, abandoned the rest of the
Dutch fleet and pursued Smith.

Thus the action broke into two widely separated parts. The English van and center succeeded in
forcing the corresponding Dutch divisions to retreat, and if Monk had turned to the help of
Smith he might have taken or destroyed all of the 39 ships in Tromp's division. Instead, he
and Rupert went careering on in pursuit of the enemy directly ahead of them. Eventually de Ruyter's
ships found refuge in shallow water and then Monk turned to catch Tromp. But the latter proved too
clever for his adversaries and slipped between them to an anchorage alongside of de Ruyter.

Although the victory was not nearly so decisive as it should have been with the opportunity offered,
nevertheless it served the need of the hour. De Ruyter was no longer able to blockade the Thames
and the Straits of Dover. And Monk, following up his success, carried the war to the enemy's
coast, where he burned a merchant fleet of 160 vessels in the roadstead
of the island of Terschelling, and destroyed one of the towns.

Early in 1666 active operations on both sides dwindled down, and Charles, anxious to use naval appropriations
for other purposes, allowed the fleet to fall into a condition of unreadiness for service.
One of the least scandals in this corrupt age was the unwillingness
or inability of the officials to pay the seamen their wages.



James, notwithstanding his lesser amount of artistic and scientific knowledge than the chief,
has been steadily improving in his own way, that of implicitly following directions put forward
for his guidance and given with so many axioms, the result of long experience and watchfulness.
It is a warm day and really heavy work would not be to the disposition of either master or man.

Looking through the doorway into the workshop at the back, James can be seen sitting as quietly
and contentedly as his master in the front. He is engaged on some fitting of small pieces into
some fractures of the upper table of a Stradivari. Having been told to do them neatly, cleanly
and with every precaution, experience and deft handling of tools, he has got these latter into
nice cutting order. The finest and even semi-transparent shavings will have to come from the
fractures and the portions of wood to be inserted therein. James has by this time acquired
considerable neatness in the treatment of "delicate jobs," as he calls such as the present.
His tools have had special attention in the keenness of their edge and he thinks that when
all is finished the violin will be as good as new, and very little of the damage done while
in charge of the owner will be perceptible unless hunted for. He argues within himself that
the greatest amount of expenditure of muscle work and fitting together of ever so many parts
has been done by himself, and therefore the honour ought to be principally his, in fact the
fiddle is more of his make than that of old Strad. His ruminations are stopped rather suddenly
by the voice of the chief, who calls out, "I say, James, what about the re-barring of the Maggini
that Miss Winks left a week back?"

"Well, sir, she called again yesterday, and said she didn't think it would be done, because
we seemed slow people, but intended to call again in three days."

"Perhaps you had better set to work, James. Have you got everything ready for placing the bar?"

"Yes, sir, everything except the bar itself, which is not cut to shape yet."

"Well, let me see it. Is it of nice straight grain and from the stock of that old Italian?"

"Yes, I've picked out a piece that appears to me just the thing; it only wants the curve cutting
to fit the upper table, and that is quite clean and regular without any slips of the tool in
cutting the old one out, which I think was the original one."

The chief gives two or three glances over the work, his accustomed eye being ready to catch
any little fault likely to have been made by his man.

"That surface, James, for a Maggini, is remarkably even; as often as not the gouge marks are
left, making a close fit of the bar an impossibility, let me see the bar."

The piece of wood is produced; the Maggini being a full fourteen inches in length of body,
the proposed bar is cut to ten and a half inches in length and seems to the chief to be satisfactory.

"You can now go on, James; let me see the bar before you glue it in."

The upper table of the Maggini and the bar are taken away by James, who goes at once to work
with the necessary preparation for placing the bar in position correctly.

With a rather soft lead pencil he marks off the length from each end of the table that the
bar will occupy, that is, a little over at the lower end than the upper, the exact distance
from the joint or central line, a trifle, perhaps eighth of an inch nearer at the upper part,
letting the middle or thickest part of the bar be at the spot where the foot of the bridge
will rest.

After this the bar, at present straight and about three-quarters of an inch high all along
its course, has marked upon the part that has to remain uppermost some indication to the fancy
of the operator that will keep in mind which end is to be placed at the upper part.

This being done, he commences with a chisel to cut away portions at each end, and tries on
the surface of the part to be fitted to. After two or three times the chiselling has to be
more finely done until the closest fit possible is obtained; it is then ready for fixing. The
bar is as yet quite straight along the upper part. With regard to the levelling of the bar
to the curve of the interior part of the upper table, there used to be a custom in the repairing
business of "putting the bar in with a spring" as it was termed. The repairers always spoke
of it as "the regular thing to do," but on being asked questions as to how much and under what
circumstances the "spring" would be best one way or the other, became somewhat reticent, possibly
from fear of being led into some scientific depths from which it might not be easy to extricate
themselves. James, however, has been taught differently in the management of this portion of
his work; he having found from close examination that the rise of the curving on the outside
on the bar side was quite high enough, went on with the operation.

Had the bar side been in a sunken condition, his chief would have required him to restore the
elevation by the wetting process before alluded to.

The accessories, glue and cramps being in readiness, two pieces of thick hard brown paper are
folded together to go over the varnished surface of the upper table. This will be quite thick
enough, as any more will cause a liability to press the bar into the wood when under the influence
of the damp of the glue. This result is often seen in violins that have been through the hands
of inexperienced repairers, there being an elevation at each end where the bar terminates when
the violin has been strung up.

Cramps are used of sufficient width for reaching over the border at each end and quite on to
the end of the bar. James, after his repeated trials as to the closeness of the relation of
the curve of the bar to that of the table, takes it to the chief as commanded, who expresses
his satisfaction and orders the completing process to be gone through.

The curved surface of the bar is wetted and some glue placed along, the part of the table with
which it is to be in contact is also wetted, but not much. After a few minutes for the glue
to soak in, the final glueing is done along the course on the table and the curved course of
the bar; the latter is then placed in position and first one cramp at one end is fixed, then
the other; the screwing down is very gently done, James, from experience, knowing just how
much and no more. The hard brown paper between the cramps and their padded or corked ends prevents
any injury to the varnish.

For the central and adjacent portions of the bar to be pressed, James uses at times wooden
cramps with a longer reach, and treating all parts of the bar with gentle but sufficient pressure,
being meanwhile careful that the pressure is not directed on one side but direct downwards;
he knows that if this is not strictly attended to, the bar will be twisted and when dry, or
even finished, will not appear straight but curved along its course. 

It was intense stupefaction, a kind of vague and vacant delirium. It seemed to me that I saw
faces grinning on the walls; I heard muffled voices. The cries of the victim, the cries uttered
before the struggle and during its wild moments continued to reverberate within me, and the air,
in whatever direction I turned, seemed to shake with convulsions. Do not imagine that I am
inventing pictures or aiming at verbal style.

I swear to you that I heard distinctly voices that were crying at me: "Murderer; Murderer!"

All
was quiet in the house. The tick-tick of the clock, very even, slow,
dryly metrical, increased the silence and solitude.

I put my ear to the door of the room, in hope of hearing a groan, a word, an insult, anything
that would be a sign of life, that might bring back peace to my conscience; I was ready to
let myself be struck ten, twenty, a hundred times, by the colonel's
hand. But, nothing--all was silent.

I began to pace the room aimlessly; I sat down, I brought my hands despairingly to my head;
I repented ever having come to the place.

"Cursed be the hour in which I ever accepted such a position," I cried. And I flamed with resentment
against the priest of Nichteroy, against the doctor, the vicar--against all those who had procured
the place for me and forced me to remain there so long. They, too, I convinced myself, were accomplices
in my crime.

As the silence finally terrified me, I opened a window, in the hope of hearing at least the
murmuring of the wind.

But no wind was blowing. The night was peaceful. The stars were sparkling with the indifference
of those who remove their hats before a passing funeral procession and continue to speak of
other things. I remained at the window for some time, my elbows on the sill, my gaze seeking
to penetrate the night, forcing myself to make a mental summary of
my life so that I might escape the present agony.

I believe it was only then that I thought clearly about the penalty of my crime. I saw myself
already being accused and threatened with dire punishment.

From this moment fear complicated my feeling of remorse. I felt my hair stand on end. A few
minutes later I saw three or four human shapes spying at me from
the terrace, where they seemed to be waiting in ambush; I withdrew;
the shapes vanished into the air; it had been an hallucination.

Before daybreak I bandaged the wounds that I had received in the face.

Then only did I pluck up enough courage to return to the other room. Twice I started, only
to turn back; but it must be done, so I entered. Even then, I did not at first go to the bed. My
legs shook, my heart pounded. I thought of flight; but that would have been a confession of
the crime.... It was on the contrary very important for me to hide all traces of it. I approached
the bed.

I looked at the corpse, with its widely distended eyes and its mouth gaping, as if uttering the
eternal reproach of the centuries: "Cain, what hast thou done with
thy brother?"

I discovered on the neck the marks of my nails; I buttoned the shirt
to the top, and threw the bed-cover up to the dead man's chin. Then
I called a servant and told him that the colonel had died towards
morning; I sent him to notify the vicar and the doctor. From his view this operation is to
be one of the most cautiously conducted ones in the whole series of joinings in connection
with the repairing or constructing of the violin.

As with other processes, there is more than one way of doing a thing and that well.

I recollect in early days being acquainted with an exceeding dexterous amateur in cabinet making,
the principal part of whose furniture, in a large house, was his own individual and unaided
workmanship. He also combined with this the making of violins, and of them I have a recollection
of their exceedingly neat workmanship, being, in fact, ahead in that respect of many professional
makers of the time. I often received from him hints as to the best methods of overcoming many
little mechanical difficulties.

Once I was telling him about the dexterous manipulation required in fixing accurately and swiftly
the upper table. There was the difficulty of getting perhaps the two end parts in position
and fixing with sufficient rapidity before the glue had stiffened or set at the other parts.

He asked me why I wanted "to do this all at once, instead of a part at a time? He never did it."

He then proceeded to show me that the glue might be applied to the two end blocks and the corresponding
parts of the table that were to be affixed, and these cramped exactly and with comparative
ease, in their proper position. This being done, a very thin worn table knife could be used
for working in glue at the other parts and the cramping down proceeded with as before.

Another way suggested itself to me some time after, which in careful hands would be still more
adapted for accurate fitting. It is as follows:--Having seen that the opposing surfaces or
parts that are to be affixed to each other are quite level, fit each other, have been cleaned
and are free from any oiliness or greasy particles, the glue is neatly brushed round the parts
requiring it, both upper table and ribs being treated. The corner and end blocks, if new, will
require more than one coating, and these to be allowed to dry, as the end of the grain is very
absorbent.

Assuming that the glue is sufficient in quantity all round, it may be allowed to dry.

The upper table can now be tested for a good fit by laying it, and noticing whether the marginal
projection over the ribs is regular or not; in some instances a little humouring or averaging
of this projection has to be made, especially when the instrument is very old, and bears evidence
of much trouble under the hands of repairers of different degrees of skill, experience and
patience.

This being found satisfactory, a slight brushing of thin glue over the upper and lower end
blocks will be enough before placing the table in position and cramping them down.

For the other parts the thin knife will be sufficient, wetted and worked between, the cramps
being applied as before.

This way of closing up dispenses with all cause for hurry. The exact amount of glue can be
calculated without danger of over-loading, and the next necessary opening for repairs can be
effected without the least risk of damage to the margin of the upper table. By this method
there is no occasion for wiping superfluous glue from underneath the over-lapping edge, as
there will not be any perceptible, or, indeed, present, when tidily done.

Sufficient time being allowed for drying--a little longer for the end blocks, these being more
hidden and slowly affected by the atmosphere--the cramps may be removed.

As a final process, the varnishing over the parts that have been repaired may be touched upon.

The success of this so much depends upon the natural talent of the operator for matching colours
and mixing of different gums for obtaining as close as possible resemblance to the surrounding
work, that any hard and fast rules concerning it cannot be laid down. 

Upon Spain, already tottering from inherent weakness, the Armada defeat had the effect of casting
down her pride and confidence as leader of the Catholic world.

Though it was not until three centuries later that she lost her last colonies, her hold on her vast
empire was at once shaken by this blow at her sea control. While she maintained large fleets
until after the Napoleonic Wars, she was never again truly formidable as a naval power. But
the victory lifted England more than it crushed Spain, inspiring an intenser patriotism, an
eagerness for colonial and commercial adventure, an exaltation of spirit manifested in the
men of genius who crowned the Elizabethan age.

The Last Years of the War

The war was not ended; and though Philip was restrained by the rise of Protestant power in France
under Henry of Navarre, he was still able to gather his sea forces on almost as grand a scale.
In the latter stages of the war the naval expeditions on both sides were either, like the Armada,
for the purpose of landing armies on foreign soil, or raids on enemy ports, colonies and commerce.
Thus Drake in 1589 set out with a force of 18,000 men, which attacked Corunna, moved thence upon
Lisbon, and lost a third or more of its number in a fruitless campaign on land. Both Drake and the
aged Hawkins, now his vice admiral, died in the winter of 1595-96
during a last and this time ineffective foray upon the Spanish Main.

It is owing to this latter fact that we hear of large flotillas dispatched by each side even
in the same year, yet not meeting in naval action. Thus in June of 1596 the Essex expedition,
with 17 English and 18 Dutch men-of-war and numerous auxiliaries, seized Cadiz and burned shipping
to the value of 11,000,000 ducats.

There was no naval opposition, though Philip in October of the same year had ready a hundred
ships and 16,000 men, which were dispersed with the loss of a quarter of their strength in
a gale off Finisterre. Storms also scattered Philip's fleet in the next year; in 1598, Spanish
transports landed 5,000 men at Calais; and England's fears were renewed in the year after that
by news of over 100 vessels fitting out for the Channel, which, however, merely protected the plate
fleet by a cruise to the Azores.

As late as 1601, Spain landed 3500 troops in Ireland.
But if these major operations seem to have missed contact, there
were many lively actions on a minor scale, the well-armed trading
vessels of the north easily beating off the galley squadrons guarding
Gibraltar and the routes past Spain. The stains ordinarily sold for colouring wood are quite useless
for present purposes, as they are absorbed between the threads, leaving these by contrast very
light and the reverse of what is desirable.

A very weak solution in water of bichromate of potash will lower the colour sufficiently for
most purposes, and when quite dry the wood will (having swelled with the moisture) require
the fine glass-papering again, after which, the next stage can be proceeded with.

The solution of nitric acid in water should be avoided, as, although giving a fairly good lowering
of the tint, it destroys the soft parts of the wood, and, further, causes an odour that may
cause annoyance to the musician and suspicion to the expert.

Another solution may be recommended, that of the black liquorice, which is a transparent brown,
and naturally hard. Judgment will have to be exercised in the management of either of the above
solutions that they are not put on too heavily.

The staining being effected, a slight coat of a diluted or light tint of the upper or deeply
coloured varnish may be painted over and left to dry.

If time is not an important item for consideration, a turpentine varnish may be applied.

An excellent first colouring can be effected with the transparent preparation of gamboge. This
material has for long, perhaps always, been in request for coloured varnish, as it can be used
with (after due preparation) either alcohol, turpentine or oil. If dissolved in the last, the
drying will take so long as to be practically useless to the repairer. The turpentine solution
is more rapid, but not sufficiently so for the restorer under ordinary circumstances.

It will be therefore plain that an alcoholic solution of gums or resins will have to be relied
on for obtaining the best results when time is limited.

The solution of gamboge in alcohol is, when used alone, too weak or insufficient in body; it
is therefore advisable to incorporate with it some other material of a resinous or gummy nature,
but such as will not impair the transparency. Among the most useful are the bleached or white
shellac. This, as it leaves the manufactory, is not always in a condition for immediate use
by the restorer; it should be washed in water and then dried well, pounded up and placed in
a bottle with about four-fifths of alcohol; after remaining in solution for some days the clear
portion can be poured into another bottle and retained for use.

This, when used alone in its colourless condition, will possibly have, when dry, too much glare
upon its surface, but the colouring matters put into it may oppose this sufficiently.

The use of a little gum guacum in solution will be found occasionally advantageous; this gum
is fairly hard and will lower the colour and prevent too much of an approach to gaudiness,
that is, if a highly coloured varnish has been found necessary. When it is desirable to dispense
with lac of any kind in the varnish, other materials can be found that will perhaps answer
the purpose as well, if not better; a solution of benzoin has no colour sufficient in itself
and therefore may be used as a priming or mixing with the gamboge or with dragon's blood if
that is desirable; the latter, like the gamboge, requires something to give it body.

Dragon's blood will soon let the operator know that its power of colouring to a staring degree
will require suppression. To lessen its strength the following may be taken as an excellent
means, and will reduce the violence ad libitum. With a lighted candle, wax for preference,
smoke a piece of clean glass, and with a camel hair brush remove the black and stir it carefully
with the coloured varnish. Care must be taken that too large a quantity is not put in, or an
unpleasant tone, even blackness, will be the result.

With regard to the strength of the red, the same precautions must be taken: on comparing the
varnish of a very red old master of Italy, say a Landolphi, with some made with a fairly strong
solution of resin and dragon's blood, the violence of colour in the latter will be very apparent.
At a little distance off the old master will look very modest while the other will seem coarse
and vulgar.

For softening purposes a very small quantity of gum thrus may be used, too much will result
in tackiness.

For hardening, sandarac has its place and usefulness, although, as with the naturally soft
gums and resins which return to their original condition after the solvent has evaporated,
great care must be taken to use a very small proportion.

A mixture of sandarac and shellac will result in an extremely hard and almost insoluble varnish,
a very undesirable covering for a musical instrument of any kind as it wears badly, that is,
suddenly and harshly with a rough fractured edge, instead of the gentle thinning-away under
usage, seen with a delicate yielding material.

Acroydes is an Australian "grass gum," with very little recommendation, as in any considerable
amount, it impairs the transparency of the other gums with which it may be mixed.

For a brown colour, a little burnt sugar will give a good tint, although too much will spoil
the consistency of the other ingredients, and the whole will be easily affected by damp. Aloes,
of which there are several kinds, have been used as a colouring ingredient, but the results
are not on the whole to be considered as good.

Of the different lacs, or as it ought to be termed, condition of the resin, as they are all
from the same source, seed lac and garnet lac, in proportion with other resins, will be found
to have considerable colouring matter and requiring very little in addition.

For our present purposes, those of varnishing fresh parts of injured violins, the above mentioned
component materials will be found, when in good proportion, according to the experience of
the operator, to be nearly all that would be desirable in imitating the surrounding work. 

The Dutch seaman was sailor, fighter, and trader combined. The merchant was truly, in the phrase
of the age, a "merchant adventurer," lucky indeed and enriched if, after facing the perils
of navigation in strange waters, the possible hostility of native rulers, and the still greater
danger from European rivals, half his ships returned. The last statement is no hyperbole; of 9 ships
sent to the East from Amsterdam in 1598, four came back, and just half of the 22 sent out from
the entire Netherlands.

From time to time, either to maintain the blockade of the Scheldt and assist in operations
on the Flanders coast, or to protect their trade and strike a direct
blow at Spain, the Dutch fitted out purely naval expeditions.

A few words more may be said in conclusion regarding the varnishing of new work on old violins;
it must not be supposed that for the imitation of the surrounding work an exact repetition
of the old Italian process with the identical substances used by the liutaros would be absolutely
necessary for perfect or near success; it must be borne in mind that old varnish near the spot
with its partial decay, probably from many causes, has to be imitated, and that what would
be a great success with regard to a small space, might in all probability prove a signal failure
when the whole instrument is so treated. 

As the Romans advanced, the Carthaginian center purposely gave way, drawing the advance wings
of their enemy away from the transports and the two squadrons in the rear. Then they faced
about and attacked. Meanwhile the two Carthaginian squadrons on the flanks swung round the Roman
wedge, the left wing engaging the Roman third squadron, which was
hampered by the transports, and driving it toward the shore.

At the same time the Carthaginian right wing attacked the fourth,
or reserve, squadron from the rear and drove it into the open sea.



This series of articles contains a minute critical analysis of this great maker's work, and
the author claims to have discovered in Andreas Gisalberti (a maker almost unknown at the present
day), the teacher of Joseph Guarnerius, a conclusion arrived at after the most convincing evidence,
which he puts forward in a very able and readable manner. Full page illustrations of violins
by Joseph Guarnerius and Andreas Gisalberti are given.

Selected Violin Solos and How to Play them. By BASIL ALTHAUS, F.C.V. Illustrated with music
examples. 6d., Post Free, 2s. 9d.

Advice to Pupils & Teachers of the Violin, BY BASIL ALTHAUS.

"The practical and lucid explanations given are assisted by numerous illustrations."--Reynold's
Newspaper.

