In order, therefore, rightly to appreciate "The Invasion of the Crimea," we must look upon
it as a great prose epic; its argument, machinery, actors, episodes, subordinate to a predominant
ever present hero.  In its fine preamble Lord Raglan sits enthroned high above generals, armies,
spectators, conflicts; on the quality of his mind the fate of two great hosts and the fame
of two great nations hang.  He checks St. Arnaud's wild ambition; overrules the waverings of
the Allies; against his own judgment, but in dutiful obedience to home instruction carries
out the descent upon the Old Fort coast.  The successful achievement of the perilous flank
march is ascribed to the undivided command which, during forty-eight hours, accident had conferred
upon him.  From his presence in council French and English come away convinced and strengthened;
his calm in action imparts itself to anxious generals and panic- stricken aides-de-camp. The frequent
failures in the Atlantic cities, of late, are mainly to be attributed to unsuccessful ship speculations;
and I am myself aware of more than one instance, where the freight
was so extremely low, as to do little more than cover the expenditure
of the voyage.  In the terrible crisis which sees the Russians breaking over the crest
of Inkerman, in the ill-fated attack on the Great Redan where Lacy Yea is killed, his apparent
freedom from anxiety infects all around him and achieves redemption from disaster. {16}  We
see him in his moments of vexation and discomfiture; dissembling pain and anger under the stress
of the French alliance, galled by Cathcart's disobedience, by the loss of the Light Brigade,
by Lord Panmure's insulting, querulous, unfounded blame.  We read his last despatch, framed
with wonted grace and clearness; then--on the same day--we see the outworn frame break down,
and follow mournfully two days later the afflicting details of his death.  As the generals
and admirals of the allied forces stand round the dead hero's form, as the palled bier, draped
in the flag of England, is carried from headquarters to the port, as the "Caradoc," steaming
away with her honoured freight, flies out her "Farewell" signal, the narrative abruptly ends.
The months of the siege which still remained might be left to other hands or lapse untold.

If the framework of the narrative is epic, its treatment is frequently dramatic.  The "Usage
of Europe" in the opening pages is not so much a record as a personification of unwritten Law:
the Great Eltchi tramps the stage with a majesty sometimes bordering on fustian.  Dramatic
is the story of the sleeping Cabinet.  "It was evening--a summer evening"--one thinks of a
world-famous passage in the "De Corona"--when the Duke of Newcastle carried to Richmond Lodge
the fateful despatch committing England to the war.  "Before the reading of the Paper had long
continued, all the members of the Cabinet except a small minority were overcome with sleep";
the few who remained awake were in a quiet, assenting frame of mind, and the despatch "received
from the Cabinet the kind of approval which is awarded to an unobjectionable Sermon."  Not
less dramatic is Nolan's death; the unearthly shriek of the slain corpse erect in saddle with
sword arm high in air, as the dead horseman rode still seated through the 13th Light Dragoons;
the "Minden Yell" of the 20th driving down upon the Iakoutsk battalion; the sustained and scathing
satire on the Notre Dame Te Deum for the Boulevard massacre.  A simple dialogue, a commonplace
necessary act, is staged sometimes for effect.  "Then Lord Stratford apprised the Sultan that
he had a private communication to make to him.  The pale Sultan listened." . . . "Whose was
the mind which had freshly come to bear upon this part of the fight?  Sir Colin Campbell was
sitting in his saddle, the veteran was watching his time." . . . "The Emperor Nicholas was
alone in his accustomed writing-room.  He took no counsel; he rang a bell.  Presently an officer
of his staff stood before him.  To him he gave his order for the occupation of the Principalities."
This overpasses drama--it is melodrama.

To the personal element which pervades the volumes great part of their charm is due.  The writer
never obtrudes himself, but leaves his presence to be discerned by the touches which attest
an eye- witness.  Through his observant nearness we watch the Chief's demeanour and hear his
words; see him "turn scarlet with shame and anger" when the brutal Zouaves carry outrage into
the friendly Crimean village, witness his personal succour of the wounded Russian after Inkerman,
hear his arch acceptance of the French courtesy, so careful always to yield the post of danger
to the English; his "Go quietly" to the excited aide-de-camp; {17} his good-humoured reception
of the scared and breathless messenger from D'Aurelle's brigade; the "five words" spoken to
Airey commanding the long delayed advance across the Alma; the "tranquil low voice" which gave
the order rescuing the staff from its unforeseen encounter with the Russian rear.  He records
Codrington's leap on his grey Arab into the breast-work of the Great Redoubt; Lacy Yea's passionate
energy in forcing his clustered regiment to open out; Miller's stentorian "Rally" in reforming
the Scots Greys after the Balaclava charge; Clarke losing his helmet in the same charge, and
creating amongst the Russians, as he plunged in bareheaded amongst their ranks, the belief
that he was sheltered by some Satanic charm.  He notes on the Alma the singular pause of sound
maintained by both armies just before the cannonade began; the first death--of an artilleryman
riding before his gun--a new sight to nine-tenths of those who witnessed it; {18} the weird
scream of exploding shells as they rent the air around.  He crossed the Alma close behind Lord
Raglan, cantering after him to the summit of a conspicuous hillock in the heart of the enemy's
position, whence the mere sight of plumed English officers scared the Russian generals, and,
followed soon by guns and troops, governed the issue of the fight.  The general's manner was
"the manner of a man enlivened by the progress of a great undertaking without being robbed
of his leisure.  He spoke to me, I remember, about his horse. Both are housed completely, and
in a condition to be launched in a few months, if necessary. They are constructed of the very
best materials, and in the most durable and solid manner. There are now being constructed,
seriatim, twenty-five ships of the line--one for every state in the Union. The government occasionally
sells the smaller vessels of war to merchants, in order to increase
the shipping, and to secure that those armed vessels which are afloat,
may be in the finest possible condition.

If Lord Raglan was the Hector of the Crimean Iliad, its Agamemnon was Lord Stratford:  "king
of men," as Stanley called him in his funeral sermon at Westminster; king of distrustful home
Cabinets, nominally his masters, of scheming European embassies, of insulting Russian opponents,
of presumptuous French generals, of false and fleeting Pashas (Le Sultan, c'est Lord Stratford,
said St. Arnaud), of all men, whatever their degree, who entered his ambassadorial presence.
Ascendency was native to the man; while yet in his teens we find Etonian and Cambridge friends
writing to him deferentially as to a critic and superior.  At four and twenty he became Minister
to a Court manageable only by high-handed authority and menace.  He owned, and for the most
part controlled, a violent temper; it broke bounds sometimes, to our great amusement as we
read to-day, to the occasional discomfiture of attaches or of dependents, {19} to the abject
terror of Turkish Sublimities who had outworn his patience. But he knew when to be angry; he
could pulverize by fiery outbreaks the Reis Effendi and his master, Abdu-l-Mejid; but as Plenipotentiary
to the United States he could "quench the terror of his beak, the lightning of his eye," disarming
by his formal courtesy and winning by his obvious sincerity the suspicious and irritable John
Quincy Adams.  When Menschikoff once insulted him, seeing that a quarrel at that moment would
be fatal to his purpose, he pretended to be deaf, and left the Russian in the belief that his
rude speech had not been heard.  Enthroned for the sixth time in Constantinople, at the dangerous
epoch of 1853, he could point to an unequalled diplomatic record in the past; to the Treaty
of Bucharest, to reunion of the Helvetic Confederacy shattered by Napoleon's fall, to the Convention
which ratified Greek independence, to the rescue from Austrian malignity of the Hungarian refugees.

His conduct of the negotiations preceding the Crimean War is justly called the cornerstone
of his career:  at this moment of his greatness Kinglake encounters and describes him:  through
the brilliant chapters in his opening volume, as more fully later on through Mr. Lane Poole's
admirable biography, the Great Eltchi is known to English readers.  He moves across the stage
with a majesty sometimes bordering on what Iago calls bombast circumstance; drums and trumpets
herald his every entrance; now pacing the shady gardens of the Bosphorus, now foiling, "in
his grand quiet way," the Czar's ferocious Christianity, or torturing his baffled ambassador
by scornful concession of the points which he formally demanded but did not really want; or
crushing with "thin, tight, merciless lips and grand overhanging Canning brow" the presumptuous
French commander who had dared to enter his presence with a plot for undermining England's
influence in the partnership of the campaign.  Was he, we ask as we end the fascinating description,
was he, what Bright and the Peace Party proclaimed him to be, the cause of the Crimean War?
The Czar's personal dislike to him--a caprice which has never been explained {20}--exasperated
no doubt to the mind of Nicholas the repulse of Menschikoff's demands; but that the precipitation
of the prince and his master had put the Russian Court absolutely in the wrong is universally
admitted.  It has been urged against him that his recommendation of the famous Vienna Note
to the Porte was official merely, and allowed the watchful Turks to assume his personal approbation
of their refusal. It may be so; his biographer does not admit so much:  but it is obvious that
the Turks were out of hand, and that no pressure from Lord Stratford could have persuaded them
to accept the Note. Further, the "Russian Analysis of the Note," escaping shortly afterwards
from the bag of diplomatic secrecy, revealed to our Cabinet the necessity of those amendments
to the Note on which the Porte had insisted.  And lastly, the passage of the Dardanelles by
our fleet, which more than any overt act made war inevitable, was ordered by the Government
at home against Lord Stratford's counsel. Between panic-stricken statesmen and vacillating
ambassadors, Lord Clarendon on one side, M. de la Cour on the other, the Eltchi stands like
Tennyson's promontory of rock,

"Tempest-buffeted, citadel-crowned."

