IMAGINATIONS AND REVERIES

By AE [George William Russell]

PREFACE

The publishers of this book thought that a volume of articles and tales written by me during
the past twenty-five years would have interest enough to justify publication, and asked me
to make a selection. I have not been able to make up a book with only one theme. My temperament
would only allow me to be happy when I was working at art. My conscience would not let me have
peace unless I worked with other Irishmen at the reconstruction of Irish life. Birth in Ireland
gave me a bias towards Irish nationalism, while the spirit which inhabits my body told me the
politics of eternity ought to be my only concern, and that all other races equally with my
own were children of the Great King. To aid in movements one must be orthodox. My desire to
help prompted agreement, while my intellect was always heretical. I had written out of every
mood, and could not retain any mood for long. If I advocated a national ideal I felt immediately
I could make an equal plea for more cosmopolitan and universal ideas. I have observed my intuitions
wherever they drew me, for I felt that the Light within us knows better than any other the
need and the way. So I have no book on one theme, and the only unity which connects what is
here written is a common origin. The reader must try a balance between the contraries which
exist here as they exist in us all, as they exist and are harmonized in that multitudinous
meditation which is the universe.--A.E.

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

To this edition four essays have been added. Two of these, "Thoughts for a Convention" and
"The New Nation," made some little stir when they first appeared. Ireland since then has passed
away from the mood which made it possible to consider the reconciliations suggested, and has
set its heart on more fundamental changes, and these essays have only interest as marking a
moment of transition in national life before it took a new road leading to another destiny.

CONTENTS

     NATIONALITY OR COSMOPOLITANISM
     STANDISH O'GRADY
     THE DRAMATIC TREATMENT OF LEGEND
     THE CHARACTER OF HEROIC LITERATURE
     A POET OF SHADOWS
     THE BOYHOOD OF A POET
     THE POETRY OF JAMES STEPHENS
     A NOTE ON SEUMAS O'SULLIVAN
     ART AND LITERATURE
     AN ARTIST OF GARLIC IRELAND
     TWO IRISH ARTISTS
     "ULSTER"
     IDEALS OF THE NEW RURAL SOCIETY
     THOUGHTS FOR A CONVENTION
     THE NEW NATION
     THE SPIRITUAL CONFLICT
     ON AN IRISH HILL
     RELIGION AND LOVE
     THE RENEWAL OF YOUTH
     THE HERO IN MAN
     THE MEDITATION OF ANANDA
     THE MIDNIGHT BLOSSOM
     THE CHILDHOOD OF APOLLO
     THE MASK OF APOLLO
     The CAVE OF LILITH
     THE STORY OF A STAR
     THE DREAM OF ANGUS OGE
     DEIRDRE

NATIONALITY OR COSMOPOLITANISM

As one of those who believe that the literature of a country is for ever creating a new soul
among its people, I do not like to think that literature with us must follow an inexorable
law of sequence, and gain a spiritual character only after the bodily passions have grown weary
and exhausted themselves. In the essay called The Autumn of the Body, Mr. Yeats seems to indicate
such a sequence. Yet, whether the art of any of the writers of the decadence does really express
spiritual things is open to doubt. The mood in which their work is conceived, a distempered
emotion, through which no new joy quivers, seems too often to tell rather of exhausted vitality
than of the ecstasy of a new life. However much, too, their art refines itself, choosing, ever
rarer and more exquisite forms of expression, underneath it all an intuition seems to disclose
only the old wolfish lust, hiding itself beneath the golden fleece of the spirit. It is not
the spirit breaking through corruption, but the life of the senses longing to shine with the
light which makes saintly things beautiful: and it would put on the jeweled raiment of seraphim,
retaining still a heart of clay smitten through and through with the unappeasable desire of
the flesh: so Rossetti's women, who have around them all the circumstance of poetry and romantic
beauty, seem through their sucked-in lips to express a thirst which could be allayed in no
spiritual paradise. Art in the decadence in our time might be symbolized as a crimson figure
undergoing a dark crucifixion: the hosts of light are overcoming it, and it is dying filled
with anguish and despair at a beauty it cannot attain. All these strange emotions have a profound
psychological interest. I do not think because a spiritual flaw can be urged against a certain
phase of life that it should remain unexpressed. The psychic maladies which attack all races
when their civilization grows old must needs be understood to be dealt with: and they cannot
be understood without being revealed in literature or art. But in Ireland we are not yet sick
with this sickness. As psychology it concerns only the curious. Our intellectual life is in
suspense. The national spirit seems to be making a last effort to assert itself in literature
and to overcome cosmopolitan influences and the art of writers who express a purely personal
feeling. It is true that nationality may express itself in many ways: it may not be at all
evident in the subject matter, but it may be very evident in the sentiment. But a literature
loosely held together by some emotional characteristics common to the writers, however great
it may be, does not fulfill the purpose of a literature or art created by a number of men who
have a common aim in building up an overwhelming ideal--who create, in a sense, a soul for
their country, and who have a common pride in the achievement of all. The world has not seen
this since the great antique civilizations of Egypt and Greece passed away. We cannot imagine
an Egyptian artist daring enough to set aside the majestic attainment of many centuries. An
Egyptian boy as he grew up must have been overawed by the national tradition, and have felt
that it was not to be set aside: it was beyond his individual rivalry. The soul of Egypt incarnated
in him, and, using its immemorial language and its mysterious lines, the efforts of the least
workman who decorated a tomb seem to have been directed by the same hand that carved the Sphinx.
This adherence to a traditional form is true of Greece, though to a less extent. Some little
Tanagra terra-cottas might have been fashioned by Phidias, and in literature Ulysses and Agamemnon
were not the heroes of one epic, but appeared endlessly in epic and drama. Since the Greek
civilization no European nation has had an intellectual literature which was genuinely national.
In the present century, leaving aside a few things in outward circumstance, there is little
to distinguish the work of the best English writers or artists from that of their Continental
contemporaries. Milliais, Leighton, Rossetti, Turner--how different from each other, and yet
they might have painted the same pictures as born Frenchmen, and it would not have excited
any great surprise as a marked divergence from French art. The cosmopolitan spirit, whether
for good or for evil, is hastily obliterating all distinctions. What is distinctly national
in these countries is less valuable than the immense wealth of universal ideas; and the writers
who use this wealth appeal to no narrow circle: the foremost writers, the Tolstois and Ibsens,
are conscious of addressing a European audience.

If nationality is to justify itself in the face of all this, it must be because the country
which preserves its individuality does so with the profound conviction that its peculiar ideal
is nobler than that which the cosmopolitan spirit suggests--that this ideal is so precious
to it that its loss would be as the loss of the soul, and that it could not be realized without
an aloofness from, if not an actual indifference to, the ideals which are spreading so rapidly
over Europe. Is it possible for any nationality to make such a defense of its isolation? If
not, let us read Goethe, Balzac, Tolstoi, men so much greater than any we can show, try to
absorb their universal wisdom, and no longer confine ourselves to local traditions. But nationality
was never so strong in Ireland as at the present time. It is beginning to be felt, less as
a political movement than as a spiritual force. It seems to be gathering itself together, joining
men who were hostile before, in a new intellectual fellowship: and if all these could unite
on fundamentals, it would be possible in a generation to create a national Ideal in Ireland,
or rather to let that spirit incarnate fully which began among the ancient peoples, which has
haunted the hearts and whispered a dim revelation of itself through the lips of the bards and
peasant story tellers.

Every Irishman forms some vague ideal of his country, born from his reading of history, or
from contemporary politics, or from imaginative intuition; and this Ireland in the mind it
is, not the actual Ireland, which kindles his enthusiasm. For this he works and makes sacrifices;
but because it has never had any philosophical definition or a supremely beautiful statement
in literature which gathered all aspirations about it, the ideal remains vague. This passionate
love cannot explain itself; it cannot make another understand its devotion. To reveal Ireland
in clear and beautiful light, to create the Ireland in the heart, is the province of a national
literature. Other arts would add to this ideal hereafter, and social life and politics must
in the end be in harmony. We are yet before our dawn, in a period comparable to Egypt before
the first of her solemn temples constrained its people to an equal mystery, or to Greece before
the first perfect statue had fixed an ideal of beauty which mothers dreamed of to mould their
yet unborn children. We can see, however, as the ideal of Ireland grows from mind to mind,
it tends to assume the character of a sacred land. The Dark Rosaleen of Mangan expresses an
almost religious adoration, and to a later writer it seems to be nigher to the spiritual beauty
than other lands:

     And still the thoughts of Ireland brood
     Upon her holy quietude.

The faculty of abstracting from the land their eyes beheld another Ireland through which they
wandered in dream, has always been a characteristic of the Celtic poets. This inner Ireland
which the visionary eye saw was the Tirnanoge, the Country of Immortal Youth, for they peopled
it only with the young and beautiful. It was the Land of the Living Heart, a tender name which
showed that it had become dearer than the heart of woman, and overtopped all other dreams as
the last hope of the spirit, the bosom where it would rest after it had passed from the fading
shelter of the world. And sure a strange and beautiful land this Ireland is, with a mystic
beauty which closes the eyes of the body as in sleep, and opens the eyes of the spirit as in
dreams and never a poet has lain on our hillsides but gentle, stately figures, with hearts
shining like the sun, move through his dreams, over radiant grasses, in an enchanted world
of their own: and it has become alive through every haunted rath and wood and mountain and
lake, so that we can hardly think of it otherwise than as the shadow of the thought of God.
The last Irish poet who has appeared shows the spiritual qualities of the first, when he writes
of the gray rivers in their "enraptured" wanderings, and when he sees in the jeweled bow which
arches the heavens--

     The Lord's seven spirits that shine through the rain

This mystical view of nature, peculiar to but one English poet, Wordsworth is a national characteristic;
and much in the creation of the Ireland in the mind is already done, and only needs retelling
by the new writers. More important, however, for the literature we are imagining as an offset
to the cosmopolitan ideal would be the creation of heroic figures, types, whether legendary
or taken from history, and enlarged to epic proportions by our writers, who would use them
in common, as Cuculain, Fionn, Ossian, and Oscar were used by the generations of poets who
have left us the bardic history of Ireland, wherein one would write of the battle fury of a
hero, and another of a moment when his fire would turn to gentleness, and another of his love
for some beauty of his time, and yet another tell how the rivalry of a spiritual beauty made
him tire of love; and so from iteration and persistent dwelling on a few heroes, their imaginative
images found echoes in life, and other heroes arose, continuing their tradition of chivalry.

That such types are of the highest importance, and have the most ennobling influence on a country,
cannot be denied. It was this idea led Whitman to exploit himself as the typical American.
He felt that what he termed a "stock personality" was needed to elevate and harmonize the incongruous
human elements in the States. English literature has always been more sympathetic with actual
beings than with ideal types, and cannot help us much. A man who loves Dickens, for example,
may grow to have a great tolerance for the grotesque characters which are the outcome of the
social order in England, but he will not be assisted in the conception of a higher humanity:
and this is true of very many English writers who lack a fundamental philosophy, and are content
to take man as he seems to be for the moment, rather than as the pilgrim of eternity--as one
who is flesh today but who may hereafter grow divine, and who may shine at last like the stars
of the morning, triumphant among the sons of God.

Mr. Standish O'Grady, in his notable epic of Cuculain, was in our time the first to treat the
Celtic tradition worthily. 16-18. [Footnote 1: Moabite idolatry, and intermarriage with the Midianites--
ultimately, it would seem, the same story. JE gives the beginning of it, vv. 1-5, and P the conclusion,
vv. 6-18.]

From this point to the end of the book the narrative is, with few exceptions, distinctly priestly
in complexion; the vivid scenes of the older narrative are absent, and their place is taken,
for the most part, either by statistics and legislative enactments or by narrative which is only
legislation in disguise. A census (xxvi.) was taken at the end, as at the beginning of the wanderings
(i.), which showed that, except Caleb and Joshua, the whole generation had perished (cf. xiv.
29, 34). Then follow sections on the law of inheritance of daughters, xxvii. 1-11, the announcement
of Moses' imminent death and the appointment of Joshua his successor, xxvii. 12-23, a priestly
calendar defining the sacrifices appropriate to each season (xxviii.,
xxix.), and the law of vows (xxx.).

     In accordance with the injunction of xxv. 16-18 a
     war of extermination was successfully undertaken
          against Midian (xxxi.).

The land east of the Jordan was allotted to Reuben, Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh, on condition
that they would help the other tribes to conquer the west (xxxii.). Following an itinerary
of the wanderings from the exodus to the plains of Moab (xxxiii.) is a description of the boundaries
of the land allotted to the various tribes (xxxiv.), directions for the Levitical cities and
the cities of refuge (xxxv.), and, last of all, a law in narrative form, determining that heiresses
who possessed landed property should marry into their own tribe (xxxvi.).

Even this brief sketch of the book of Numbers is enough to reveal the essential incoherence of
its plan, and the great divergence of the elements out of which it is composed. No book in
the Pentateuch makes so little the impression of a unity. The phenomena of Exodus are here repeated
and intensified; a narrative of the intensest moral and historical interest is broken at frequent
intervals by statistical and legal material, some of which, at least,
makes hardly any pretence to be connected with the main body of the
story.

By far the largest part of the book comes from P, and most of it is very easy to detect. No
possible doubt, e.g., can attach to i.-x., 28, with its interest in priests, Levites, tabernacle
and laws.
 And their fitness for literary use is not there determined by
their freshness but by their power of suggestion. Modern literature, where it is really literature
and not book-making, grows more subjective year after year, and the mind has a wider range
over time than the physical nature has. Many things live in it--empires which have never crumbled,
beauty which has never perished, love whose fires have never waned: and, in this formidable
competition for use in the artist's mind, today stands only its chance with a thousand days.
To question the historical accuracy of the use of such memories is not a matter which can be
rightly raised. The question is--do they express lofty things to the soul? If they do they
have justified themselves.

I have written at some length on the two paths which lie before us, for we have arrived at
a parting of ways. One path leads, and has already led many Irishmen, to obliterate all nationality
from their work. The other path winds upward to a mountain-top of our own, which may be in
the future the Mecca to which many worshippers will turn. To remain where we are as a people,
indifferent to literature, to art, to ideas, wasting the precious gift of public spirit we
possess so abundantly in the sordid political rivalries, without practical or ideal ends, is
to justify those who have chosen the other path, and followed another star than ours. I do
not wish any one to infer from this a contempt for those who, for the last hundred years, have
guided public opinion in Ireland. If they failed in one respect, it was out of a passionate
sympathy for wrongs of which many are memories, thanks to them, and to them is due the creation
of a force which may be turned in other directions, not without a memory of those pale sleepers
to whom we may turn in thought, placing--

     A kiss of fire on the dim brow of failure,
     A crown upon her uncrowned head.

1899

STANDISH O'GRADY

In this age we read so much that we lay too great a burden on the imagination. It is unable
to create images which are the spiritual equivalent of the words on the printed page, and reading
becomes for too many an occupation of the eye rather than of the mind. How rarely, out of the
multitude of volumes a man reads in his lifetime, can he remember where or when he read any
particular book, or with any vividness recall the mood it evoked in him. When I close my eyes,
and brood in memory over the books which most profoundly affected me, I find none excited my
imagination more than Standish O'Grady's epical narrative of Cuculain. Whitman said of his
Leaves of Grass: "Camerado, this is no book. Who touches this touches a man," and O'Grady might
have boasted of his Bardic History of Ireland, written with his whole being, that there was
more than a man in it, there was the soul of a people, its noblest and most exalted life symbolized
in the story of one heroic character.

With reference to Ireland, I was at the time I read like many others who were bereaved of the
history of their race. I was as a man who, through some accident, had lost memory of his past,
Who could recall no more than a few months of new life, and could not say to what songs his
cradle had been rocked, what mother had nursed him, who were the playmates of childhood, or
by what woods and streams he had wandered. When I read O'Grady I was as such a man who suddenly
feels ancient memories rushing at him, and knows he was born in a royal house, that he had
mixed with the mighty of heaven and earth and had the very noblest for his companions. It was
the memory of race which rose up within me as I read, and I felt exalted as one who learns
he is among the children of kings. That is what O'Grady did for me and for others who were
my contemporaries, and I welcome the reprints, of his tales in the hope that he will go on
magically recreating for generations yet unborn the ancestral life of their race in Ireland.
For many centuries the youth of Ireland as it grew up was made aware of the life of bygone
ages, and there were always some who remade themselves in the heroic mould before they passed
on. The sentiment engendered by the Gaelic literature was an arcane presence, though unconscious
of itself, in those who for the past hundred years had learned another speech. In O'Grady's
writings the submerged river of national culture rose up again, a shining torrent, and I realized
as I bathed in that stream, that the greatest spiritual evil one nation could inflict on another
was to cut off from it the story of the national soul. For not all music can be played upon
any instrument, and human nature for most of us is like a harp on which can be rendered the
music written for the harp but nor that written for the violin. The harp strings quiver for
the harp-player alone, and he who can utter his passion through the violin is silent before
an unfamiliar instrument. That is why the Irish have rarely been deeply stirred by English
literature, though it is one of the great literatures of the world. Our history was different
and the evolutionary product was a peculiarity of character, and the strings of our being vibrate
most in ecstasy when the music evokes ancestral moods or embodies emotions akin to these. I
am not going to argue the comparative worth of the Gaelic and English tradition. All that I
can say is that the traditions of our own country move us more than the traditions of any other.
Even if there was not essential greatness in them we would love them for the same reasons which
bring back so many exiles to revisit the haunts of childhood. But there was essential greatness
in that neglected bardic literature which O'Grady was the first to reveal in a noble manner.
He had the spirit of an ancient epic poet. He is a comrade of Homer, his birth delayed in time
perhaps that he might renew for a sophisticated people the elemental simplicity and hardihood
men had when the world was young and manhood was prized more than any of its parts, more than
thought or beauty or feeling. He has created for us, or rediscovered, one figure which looms
in the imagination as a high comrade of Hector, Achilles, Ulysses, Rama or Yudisthira, as great
in spirit as any. Who could extol enough his Cuculain, that incarnation of Gaelic chivalry,
the fire and gentleness, the beauty and heroic ardour or the imaginative splendor of the episodes
in his retelling of the ancient story. There are writers who bewitch you by a magical use of
words whose lines glitter like jewels, whose effects are gained by an elaborate art and who
deal with the subtlest emotions. Others again are simple as an Egyptian image, and yet are
more impressive, and you remember them less for the sentence than for a grandiose effect. They
are not so much concerned with the art of words as with the creation of great images informed
with magnificence of spirit. They are not lesser artists but greater, for there is a greater
art in the simplification of form in the statue of Memnon than there is in the intricate detail
of a bronze by Benvenuto Cellini. Standish O'Grady had in his best moments that epic wholeness
and simplicity, and the figure of Cuculain amid his companions of the Red Branch which he discovered
and refashioned for us is, I think, the greatest spiritual gift any Irishman for centuries
has given to Ireland.

I know it will be said that this is a scientific age, the world is so full of necessitous life
that it is waste of time for young Ireland to brood upon tales of legendary heroes, who fought
with enchanters, who harnessed wild fairy horses to magic chariots and who talked with the
ancient gods, and that it would be much better for youth to be scientific and practical. Do
not believe it, dear Irish boy, dear Irish girl, I know as well as any the economic needs of
our people. They must not be overlooked, but keep still in your hearts some desires which might
enter Paradise. Keep in your souls some images of magnificence so that hereafter the halls
of heaven and the divine folk may not seem altogether alien to the spirit. These legends have
passed the test of generations for century after century, and they were treasured and passed
on to those who followed, and that was because there was something in them akin to the immortal
spirit. Humanity cannot carry with it through time the memory of all its deeds and imaginations,
and it burdens itself only in a new era with what was highest among the imaginations of the
ancestors. What is essentially noble is never out of date. The figures carved by Pheidias for
the Parthenon still shine by the side of the greatest modern sculpture. There has been no evolution
of the human form to a greater beauty than the ancient Greek saw, and the forms they carved
are not strange to us, and if this is true of the outward form it is true of the indwelling
spirit. What is essentially noble is contemporary with all that is splendid today, and until
the mass of men are equal in spirit the great figures of the past will affect us less as memories
than as prophecies of the Golden Age to which youth is ever hurrying in its heart.

O'Grady in his stories of the Red Branch rescued from the past what was contemporary to the
best in us today, and he was equal in his gifts as a writer to the greatest of his bardic predecessors
in Ireland. His sentences are charged with a heroic energy, and, when he is telling a great
tale, their rise and fall is like the flashing and falling of the bright sword of some great
battle, or like the onset and withdrawal of Atlantic surges. He can at need be beautifully
tender and quiet. Who that has read his tale of the young Finn and the Seven Ancients will
forget the weeping of Finn over the kindness of the famine-stricken old men, and their wonder
at his weeping, and the self-forgetful pathos of their meditation unconscious that it was their
own sacrifice called forth the tears of Finn. "Youth," they said, "has many sorrows that cold
age cannot comprehend."

There are critics repelled by the abounding energy in O'Grady's sentences. It is easy to point
to faults due to excess and abundance, but how rare in literature is that heroic energy and
power. There is something arcane and elemental in it, a quality that the most careful stylist
cannot attain, however he uses the file, however subtle he is. O'Grady has noticed this power
in the ancient bards and we find it in his own writing. It ran all through the Bardic History,
the Critical and Philosophical History, and through the political books, The Tory Democracy
and All Ireland. There is this imaginative energy in the tale of Cuculain, in all its episodes,
the slaying of the hound, the capture of the Liath Macha, the hunting of the enchanted deer,
the capture of the Wild swans, the fight at the ford, and the awakening of the Red Branch.
In the later tale of Red Hugh which, he calls The Flight of the Eagle there is the same quality
of power joined with a shining simplicity in the narrative which rises into a poetic ecstasy
in that wonderful chapter where Red Hugh, escaping from the Pale, rides through the Mountain
Gates of Ulster and sees high above him Sheve Gullion, a mountain of the Gods, the birth-place
of legend "more mythic than Avernus"; and O'Grady evokes for us and his hero the legendary
past and the great hill seems to be like Mount Sinai, thronged with immortals, and it lives
and speaks to the fugitive boy, "the last great secular champion of the Gael," and inspires
him for the fulfillment of his destiny. We might say of Red Hugh, and indeed of all O'Grady's
heroes, that they are the spiritual progeny of Cuculain. From Red Hugh down to the boys who
have such enchanting adventures in Lost on Du Corrig and The Chain of Gold they have all a
natural and hardy purity of mind, a beautiful simplicity of character, and one can imagine
them all in an hour of need, being faithful to any trust like the darling of the Red Branch.
These shining lads never grew up amid books. They are as much children of nature as the Lucy
of Wordsworth's poetry. It might be said of them as the poet of the Kalevala sang of himself:
"Winds and waters my instructors."

These were O'Grady's own earliest companions, and no man can find better comrades than earth,
water, air and sun. 7. The universal and inexorable claims of the moral law have never had a
more relentless exponent than Amos; and, though there is in him a soul of pity, vii. 2, 5, it
was his peculiar task, not to proclaim the divine love, but to plead for social justice. God
is just and man must be so too. Perhaps Amos's message is all the more daring and refreshing that
he was not a professional prophet, vii. 14. His culture, though not
formal, is of the profoundest. He is familiar with distant peoples,
ix.
It must have been out of such a boyhood and such intimacies with natural and unsophisticated
people that there came to him the understanding of the heroes of the Red Branch. How pallid,
beside the ruddy chivalry who pass, huge and fleet and bright, through O'Grady's pages, appear
Tennyson's bloodless Knights of the Round Table, fabricated in the study to be read in the
drawing room, as anemic as Burne Jones' lifeless men in armour. The heroes of ancient Irish
legend reincarnated in the mind of a man who could breathe into them the fire of life, caught
from sun and wind, their ancient deities, and send them forth to the world to do greater deeds,
to act through many men and speak through many voices. What sorcery was in the Irish mind that
it has taken so many years to win but a little recognition for this splendid spirit; and that
others who came after him, who diluted the pure fiery wine of romance he gave us with literary
water, should be as well known or more widely read. For my own, part I can only point back
to him and say whatever is Irish in me he kindled to life, and I am humble when I read his
epic tale, feeling how much greater a thing it is for the soul of a writer to have been the
habitation of a demi-god than to have had the subtlest intellections.

We praise the man who rushes into a burning mansion and brings out its greatest treasure. So
ought we to praise this man who rescued from the perishing Gaelic tradition its darling hero
and restored him to us, and I think now that Cuculain will not perish, and he will be invisibly
present at many a council of youth, and he will be the daring which lifts the will beyond itself
and fires it for great causes, and he will be also the courtesy which shall overcome the enemy
that nothing else may overcome.

I am sure that Standish O'Grady would rather I should speak of his work and its bearing on
the spiritual life of Ireland, than about himself, and, because I think so, in this reverie
I have followed no set plan but have let my thoughts run as they will. But I would not have
any to think that this man was only a writer, or that he could have had the heroes of the past
for spiritual companions, without himself being inspired to fight dragons and wizardry. I have
sometimes regretted that contemporary politics drew O'Grady away from the work he began so
greatly. I have said to myself he might have given us an Oscar, a Diarmuid or a Caolte, an
equal comrade to Cuculain, but he could not, being lit up by the spirit of his hero, he merely
the bard and not the fighter, and no man in Ireland intervened in the affairs of his country
with a superior nobility of aim. He was the last champion of the Irish aristocracy, and still
more the voice of conscience for them, and he spoke to them of their duty to the nation as
one might imagine some fearless prophet speaking to a council of degenerate princes. When the
aristocracy failed Ireland he bade them farewell, and wrote the epitaph of their class in words
whose scorn we almost forget because of their sounding melody and beauty. When Jehovah reveals
His secret to the prophets, it is because He is about to do something (Amos iii. 7).

The concreteness of detail just alluded to is characteristic only of the second and third chapters.
Ch. i., however, is confessedly vague, and moves for the most part along the familiar lines of
theophanic descriptions. It is not plain in i. (cf. ii. 8) who are
the enemies to be destroyed, as i. 1 is probably a later addition.
Further, as far as v. 10 the prophecy is alphabetic: this circumstance
has given rise to the view that i., ii. When a man is in advance of his age, a generation,
unborn when he speaks, is born in due time and finds in him its inspiration. O'Grady may have
failed in his appeal to the aristocracy of his own time but he may yet create an aristocracy
of character and intellect in Ireland. The political and economic writings will remain to uplift
and inspire and to remind us that the man who wrote the stories of heroes had a bravery of
his own and a wisdom of his own. I owe so much to Standish O'Grady that I would like to leave
it on record that it was he made me conscious and proud of my country, and recalled to my mind,
that might have wandered otherwise over too wide and vague a field of thought, to think of
the earth under my feet and the children of our common mother. There hangs in the Municipal
Gallery of Dublin the portrait of a man with melancholy eyes, and scrawled on the canvas is
the subject of his bitter brooding: "'The Lost Land." I hope that O'Grady will find before
he goes back to Tir na noge that Ireland has found again through him what seemed lost for ever,
the law of its own being, and its memories which go back to the beginning of the world.

THE DRAMATIC TREATMENT OF LEGEND

     "The Red Branch ought not to be staged.... That
     literature ought not to be produced for popular consumption
     for the edification of the crowd.... I say to you drop
     this thing at your peril.... You may succeed in
     degrading Irish ideals, and banishing the soul of the land.
     ... Leave the heroic cycles alone, and don't bring them
     down to the crowd..."  (Standish O'Grady in All Ireland
     Review).

Years ago, in the adventurous youth of his mind, Mr. O'Grady found the Gaelic tradition like
a neglected antique dun with the doors barred, and there was little or no egress. Listening,
he heard from within the hum of an immense chivalry, and he opened the doors and the wild riders
went forth to work their will. Now he would recall them. But it is in vain. The wild riders
have gone forth, and their labors in the human mind are only beginning. They will do their
deeds over again, and now they will act through many men and speak through many voices. The
spirit of Cuculain will stand at many a lonely place in the heart, and he will win as of old
against multitudes. The children of Turann will start afresh still eager to take up and renew
their cyclic labors, and they will gain, not for themselves, the Apples of the Tree of Life,
and the Spear of the Will, and the Fleece which is the immortal body. All the heroes and demigods
returning will have a wider field than Erin for their deeds, and they will not grow weary warning
upon things that die but will be fighters in the spirit against immortal powers, and, as before,
the acts will be sometimes noble and sometimes base. They cannot be stayed from their deeds,
for they are still in the strength of a youth which is ever renewing itself. Not for all the
wrong which may be done should they be restrained. Mr. O'Grady would now have the tales kept
from the crowd to be the poetic luxury of a few. Yet would we, for all the martyrs who perished
in the fires of the Middle Ages, counsel the placing of the Gospels on the list of books to
be read only by a few esoteric worshippers?

The literature which should be unpublished is that which holds the secret of the magical powers.
The legends of Ireland are not of this kind. They have no special message to the aristocrat
more than to the man of the people. The men who made the literature of Ireland were by no means
nobly born, and it was the bards who placed the heroes, each in his rank, and crowned them
for after ages, and gave them their famous names. They have placed on the brow of others a
crown which belonged to themselves, and all the heroic literature of the world was made by
the sacrifice of the nameless kings of men who have given a sceptre to others they never wielded
while living, and who bestowed the powers, of beauty and pity on women who perhaps had never
uplifted a heart in their day, and who now sway us from the grave with a grace only imagined
in the dreaming soul of the poet. Mr. O'Grady has been the bardic champion of the ancient Irish
aristocracy. He has thrown on them the sunrise colors of his own brilliant spirit, and now
would restrain others from the use of their names lest a new kingship should be established
over them, and another law than that of his own will, lest the poets of the democracy looking
back on the heroes of the past should overcome them with the ideas of a later day, and the
Atticottic nature find a loftier spirit in those who felt the unendurable pride of the Fianna
and rose against it. Well, it is only natural he should try to protect the children of his
thought, but they need no later word from him. If writers of a less noble mind than his deal
with these things they will not rob his heroes of a single power to uplift or inspire. In Greece,
after Eschylus and his stupendous deities, came Sophocles, who restrained them with a calm
wisdom, and Euripides, who made them human, but still the mysterious Orphic deities remain
and stir us when reading the earlier page. Mr. O'Grady would not have the Red Branch cycle
cast in dramatic form or given to the people. They are too great to be staged; and he quotes,
mistaking the gigantic for the heroic, a story of Cuculain reeling round Ireland on his fairy
steed the Liath Macha. This may be phantasy or extravagance, but it is not heroism. Cuculain
is often heroic, but it is a quality of the soul and not of the body; it is shown by his tears
over Ferdiad, in his gentleness to women. A more grandiose and heroic figure than Cuculain
was seen on the Athenian stage; and no one will say that the Titan Prometheus, chained on the
rock in his age-long suffering for men, is not a nobler figure than Cuculain in any aspect
in which he appears to us in the tales. Divine traditions, the like of which were listened
to with awe by the Athenians, should not be too lofty for our Christian people, whose morals
Mr. O'Grady, here hardly candid, professes to be anxious about. What is great in literature
is a greatness springing out of the human heart. Though we fall short today of the bodily stature
of the giants of the prime, the spirit still remains and can express an equal greatness. I
can well understand how a man of our own day, by the enlargement of his spirit, and the passion
and sincerity of his speech, could express the greatness of the past. The drama in its mystical
beginning was the vehicle through which divine ideas, which are beyond the sphere even of heroic
life and passion, were expressed; and if the later Irish writers fail of such greatness, it
is not for that reason that the soul of Ireland will depart. I can hardly believe Mr. O'Grady
to be serious when he fears that many forbidden subjects will be themes for dramatic art, that
Maeve with her many husbands will walk the stage, and the lusts of an earlier age be revived
to please the lusts of today. The danger of art is not in its subjects, but in the attitude
of the artist's mind. The nobler influences of art arise, not because heroes are the theme,
but because of noble treatment and the intuition which perceives the inflexible working out
of great moral laws.

The abysses of human nature may well be sounded if the plummet be dropped by a spirit from
the heights. The lust which leads on to death may be a terrible thing to contemplate, but in
the event there is consolation; and the eye of faith can see even in the very exultation of
corruption how God the Regenerator is working His will, leading man onward to his destiny of
inevitable beauty. Mr. O'Grady in his youth had the epic imagination, and I think few people
realize how great and heroic that inspiration was; but the net that is spread for Leviathan
will not capture all the creatures of the deep, and neither epic nor romance will manifest
fully the power of the mythical ancestors of the modern Gael who now seek incarnation anew
in the minds of their children. Men too often forget, in this age of printed books, that literature
is, after all, only an ineffectual record of speech. The literary man has gone into strange
byways through long contemplation of books, and he writes with elaboration what could never
be spoken, and he loses that power of the bards on whom tongues of fire had descended, who
were masters of the magic of utterance, whose thoughts were not meant to be silently absorbed
from the lifeless page. For there never can be, while man lives in a body, a greater means
of expression for him than the voice of man affords, and no instrument of music will ever rival
in power the flowing of the music of the spheres through his lips. In all its tones, from the
chanting of the magi which compelled the elements, to those gentle voices which guide the dying
into peace, there is a power which will never be stricken from tympan or harp, for in all speech
there is life, and with the greatest speech the deep tones of another Voice may mingle. Has
not the Lord spoken through His prophets? And man, when he has returned to himself, and to
the knowledge of himself, may find a greater power in his voice than those which he has painfully
harnessed to perform his will, in steamship or railway. It is through drama alone that the
writer can summon, even if vicariously, so great a power to his aid; and it is possible we
yet may hear on the stage, not merely the mimicry of human speech, but the old forgotten music
which was heard in the duns of great warriors to bow low their faces in their hands. Dear O'Grady,
if we do not succeed it is not for you to blame us, for our aims are at least as high as your own. 

It is unfortunate that some of the noblest utterances on religion
in the book of Jeremiah have been, for reasons more or less convincing,
denied to him: e.g. the great passage which looks out upon a time
when the dearest material symbols of the ancient religion would no
longer be necessary; days would come when men would never think of
the ark of the covenant, and never miss it, iii.

16.

But even if it could be proved that these words were not Jeremiah's, it was a sound instinct that placed
them in his book. He certainly did not regard sacrifice as essential to the true religion, or
as possessing any specially divine sanction, vii. 22, and the thinker who could utter such a
word as vii. 22 is surely on the verge of a purely spiritual conception of religion, if indeed
he does not stand already within it. If the temple is not indispensable, vii. 4, neither could
the ark be.

This severely spiritual conception of religion is but the outcome of the intensely personal religious
experience of the prophet. There is no other prophet whose intercourse with the divine spirit is
so dramatically portrayed, or into the depths of whose heart we can so clearly see. He speaks
to God with a directness and familiarity that are startling, "Why hast Thou become to me as
a treacherous brook, as waters that are not sure?" xv. 18. He has little of the serene majesty
of Isaiah whose eyes had seen the king. His tender heart, ix. 1, is vexed and torn till he
curses not only his enemies, xi. 20ff., but the day on which he was born, xx. 14-18. He did not
choose his profession, he recoiled from it; but he was thrust into the arena of public life
by an impulse which he could not resist. The word, which he would fain have hidden in his heart,
was like a burning fire shut up in his bones, and it leaped into speech of flame, xx. 9.

As a poet, Jeremiah is one of the greatest. He knows the human heart to its depths, and he possesses
a power of remarkably terse and vivid expression.
 I do not know how to express this
loss otherwise than by saying we appear to have fallen away from our archetype. We find in
all the early stories the presence of one being who may be the genius of our land if that old
idea of race divinities be a true one. A strange similitude unites all the characters. We infer
an interior identity. The same spirit flashes out in hostile clans, and then Cuculain kisses
Ferdiad. They all confidently appeal to; it in each other. Maeve flying after the great battle
can ask a gift from her conqueror and obtains it. Fand and Emer dispute who shall make the
last sacrifice of love and give the beloved to a rival. The conflicts seem half in play or
in dream, and we do not know when an awakening of love will disarm the foes. In spite of the
bloodshed the heroes seem like children who fight steadily through a mock battle, but the night
will see these children at peace, and they will dream with arms around each other in the same
cot. No literature ever had a more beautiful heart of childhood in it. The bards could hate
no one consistently. If they took away the heroic chivalry from Conchobar in one tale they
restored it to him in another. They have the confident trust--and expectation of goodness that
children have, who may have suffered punishment, but who come later on and smile on the chastiser.
It is this quality which gives the tales their extraordinary charm. I know no other literature
which has it to the same degree. I do not like to speculate on the absence of this spirit in
our later literature, which was written under other influences. It cannot be because there
was a less spiritual life in the apostles than in the bards. We cannot compare Cuculain, the
most complete ideal of Gaelic chivalry, with that supreme figure whose coming to the world
was the effacement of whole pantheons of divinities, and yet it is true that since the thoughts
of men were turned from the old ideals our literature has been filled with a less noble life.
I think a due may be found in the withdrawal of thought from nature, the great mother who,
is the giver of all life, and without whose life ideals become inoperative and listless dwellers
in the heart. The eyes of the ancient Gael were fixed in wonder on the rocks and hills, and
the waste places of the earth were piled with phantasmal palaces where the Sidhe sat on their
thrones. Everywhere there was life, and as they saw so they felt. To conceive of nature in
any way, as beautiful and living, as friendly or hostile, is to receive from her in like measure
out of her fullness. With whatever face we approach the mirror a similar face approaches ours.
"Let him approach it, saying, 'This is the Mighty,' he becomes mighty," says an ancient scripture,
teaching us that as our aspiration is so will be our inspiration and power. Out of this comradeship
with earth there came a commingling of natures, and we do not know when we read who are the
Sidhe and who are human. The great energies are all in the heroes. They bound to themselves,
like the Talkend, the strength of the fire, the brightness of the sun, and the swiftness of
the wind. They seem truly the earth-born. The waves respond to their deeds; the elemental creatures
respond and there are clashing echoes and allies innumerable, and armies in the air continuing
their battles illimitably beyond: a proud race, who felt with bursting heart the heavens were
watching them, who defied their gods and exiled them to have free play for their own deeds.
A very different humanity indeed from those who have come to walk the earth with humility,
who are afraid of heaven and its rulers, and whose dread is the greatest of all sins, for in
it is a denial of their own divinity. Surely the sight heroes is more welcome to the King,
in whose heaven are sworded seraphim, than the bowed knees and the spirits who make themselves
as worms in His sight. In the symbolic expression of our spiritual life the eagle has become
a dove brooding peace. Oh, that it might rebecome the eagle and take to the upper airs!

A generosity and greatness of spirit are in the heroes of the Red Branch, and out of their
strength grows a bloom of beauty never fully revealed until Lady Gregory compiled these tales.
As we read our eyes are dazzled by strange graces of color flowing over the pages: everywhere
there is mystery and magnificence. Procession's pass by in Druid ritual, kings and queens,
and harpers who look like kings. When the wind passes over them and stirs their garments a
sweetness comes over the teller of the tale, who felt that delight in draperies blown over
shapely forms which is the inspiration of the Winged Victory and many Greek marbles. The bards
will not have the hands of those proud people touch anything which is not beautiful. "It was
a beautiful chessboard they had, all of white bronze, and the chessmen of gold and silver,
and a candlestick of precious stones lighting it." The wasting of time has spared us a few
things to show that this rare and intricate metal work was not a myth, and we are forced by
an inexorable logic to accept as mainly true the narration of the pride, the beauty, the generosity,
and the large lovable character of the ancient heroes. We may come to realize that, losing
their Druid vision of a more shining world mingling with this, we have lost the vision of that
life into the likeness of which it is the true labor of the spirit to transform this life.
For the Tirnanoge is that Garden where, in the mind of the Lord, the flowers and trees blossomed
before they grew in the fields, where man lived in the Golden Age before the outer darkness
of the earth was built and he was outcast from Paradise. There is no true art or literature
which has not some image of the Golden Life lurking within it, and through the archaic rudeness
of these legends the light shines as sunlight through the hoary branches of ancient oaks. Lady
Gregory has done her work, as compiler with a judgment which could hardly be too much praised,
and she has translated the stories into an idiom which is a reflection of the original Gaelic
and is full of charm. We are indebted to her for this labor as much as to any of those who
sang to sweeten Ireland's wrong.

1902

A POET OF SHADOWS

When I was asked to write "anything" about Yeats, our Irish poet, my thoughts were like rambling
flocks that have no shepherd, and without guidance my rambling thoughts have run anywhere.

I confess I have feared to enter or linger too long in the many-colored land of Druid twilights
and tunes. A beauty not our own, more perfect than we can ourselves conceive, is a danger to
the imagination. I am too often tempted to wander with Usheen in Timanoge and to forget my
own heart and its more rarely accorded vision of truth. I know I like my own heart best, but
I never look into the world of my friend without feeling that my region lies in the temperate
zone and is near the Arctic circle; the flowers grow more rarely and are paler, and the struggle
for existence is keener. Southward and in the warm west are the Happy Isles among the Shadowy
Waters. The pearly phantoms are dancing there with blown hair amid cloud tail daffodils. They
have known nothing but beauty, or at the most a beautiful unhappiness. Everything there moves
in procession or according to ritual, and the agony of grief, it is felt, must be concealed.
There are no faces blurred with tears there; some traditional gesture signifying sorrow is
all that is allowed. I have looked with longing eyes into this world. It is Ildathach, the
Many-Colored Land, but not the Land of the Living Heart. That island where the multitudinous
beatings of many hearts became one is yet unvisited; but the isle of our poet is the more beautiful
of all the isles the mystic voyagers have found during the thousands of years literature has
recorded in Ireland. What wonder that many wish to follow him, and already other voices are
singing amid its twilights.

They will make and unmake. They will discover new wonders; and will perhaps make commonplace
some beauty which but for repetition would have seemed rare. I would that no one but the first
discoverer should enter Ildathach, or at least report of it. No voyage to the new world, however
memorable, will hold us like the voyage of Columbus. I sigh sometimes thinking on the light
dominion dreams have over the heart. We cannot hold a dream for long, and that early joy of
the poet in his new-found world has passed. It has seemed to him too luxuriant. He seeks for
something more, and has tried to make its tropical tangle orthodox; and the glimmering waters
and winds are no longer beautiful natural presences, but have become symbolic voices and preach
obscurely some doctrine of their power to quench the light in the soul or to fan it to a brighter
flame.

I like their old voiceless motion and their natural wandering best, and would rather roam in
the bee-loud glade than under the boughs of beryl and chrysoberyl, where I am put to school
to learn the significance of every jewel. I like that natural infinity which a prodigal beauty
suggests more than that revealed in esoteric hieroglyphs, even though the writing be in precious
stones. Sometimes I wonder whether that insatiable desire of the mind for something more than
it has yet attained, which blows the perfume from every flower, and plucks the flower from
every tree, and hews down every tree in the valley until it goes forth gnawing itself in a
last hunger, does not threaten all the cloudy turrets of the Poet's soul. But whatever end
or transformation, or unveiling may happen, that which creates beauty must have beauty in its
essence, and the soul must cast off many vestures before it comes to itself. We, all of us,
poets, artists, and musicians, who work in shadows, must sometime begin to work in substance,
and why should we grieve if one labor ends and another begins? I am interested more in life
than in the shadows of life, and as Ildathach grows fainter I await eagerly the revelation
of the real nature of one who has built so many mansions in the heavens. The poet has concealed
himself under the embroidered cloths and has moved in secretness, and only at rare times, as
when he says, "A pity beyond all telling is hid in the heart of love," do we find a love which
is not the love of the Sidhe; and more rarely still do recognizable human figures, like the
Old Pensioner or Moll Magee, meet us. All the rest are from another world and are survivals
of the proud and golden races who move with the old stateliness and an added sorrow for the
dark age which breaks in upon their loveliness. They do not war upon the new age, but build
up about themselves in imagination the ancient beauty, and love with a love a little colored
by the passion of the darkness from which they could not escape. They are the sole inheritors
of many traditions, and have now come to the end of the ways, and so are unhappy. We know why
they are unhappy, but not the cause of a strange merriment which sometimes they feel, unless
it be that beauty within itself has a joy in its own rhythmic being. They are changing, too,
as the winds and waters have changed. They are not like Usheen, seekers and romantic wanderers,
but have each found some mood in themselves where all quest ceases; they utter oracles, and
even in the swaying of a hand or the dropping of hair there is less suggestion of individual
action than of a divinity living within them, shaping an elaborate beauty in dream for his
own delight, and for no other end than the delight in his dream. Other poets have written of
Wisdom overshadowing man and speaking through his lips, or a Will working within the human
will, but I think in this poetry we find for the first time the revelation of the Spirit as
the weaver of beauty. Hence it comes that little hitherto unnoticed motions are adored:

     You need but lift a pearl-pale hand,
     And bind up your long hair and sigh;
     And all men's hearts must burn and beat.

This woman is less the beloved than the priestess of beauty who reveals the divinity, not as
the inspired prophetesses filled with the Holy Breath did in the ancient mysteries, but in
casual gestures and in a waving of her white arms, in the stillness of her eyes, in her hair
which trembles like a faery flood of unloosed shadowy light over pale breasts, and in many
glimmering motions so beautiful that it is at once seen whose footfall it is we hear, and that
the place where she stands is holy ground. This, it seems to me, is what is essential in this
poetry, what is peculiar and individual in it--the revelation of great mysteries in unnoticed
things; and as not a sparrow may fall unconsidered by Him, so even in the swaying of a human
hand His sceptre may have dominion over the heart and His paradise be entered in the lifting
of an eyelid.

1902

THE BOYHOOD OF A POET

When I was a boy I knew another who has since become famous and who has now written Reveries
over Childhood and Youth. I searched the pages to meet the boy I knew and could not find him.
He has told us what he saw and what he remembered of others, but from himself he seems to have
passed away and remembers himself not. The boy I knew was darkly beautiful to look on, fiery
yet playful and full of lovely and elfin fancies. He was swift of response, indeed over-generous
to the fancies of others because a nature so charged with beauty could not but emit beauty
at every challenge. Even so water, however ugly the object we cast upon it, can but break out
in a foam of beauty and a bewilderment of lovely curves.

Our fancies were in reality nothing to him but the affinities which by the slightest similitude
evoked out of the infinitely richer being the prodigality of beautiful images with which it
was endowed and made itself conscious of itself. I have often thought how strange it is that
artist and poet have never yet revealed themselves to us except in verse and painting, that
there was among them no psychologist who could turn back upon himself to search for the law
of his own being, who could tell us how his brain first became illuminated with images, and
who tried to track the inspiration to its secret fount and the images to their ancestral beauty. In
Luther's fine paraphrase of Psalm lxxiii. 25, "If I have but Thee, I ask for nothing in heaven
or earth."

PROVERBS

Many specimens of the so-called Wisdom Literature are preserved for us in the book of Proverbs,
for its contents are by no means confined to what we call proverbs.
The first nine chapters constitute a continuous discourse, almost
in the manner of a sermon; and of the last two chapters, ch. xxx.
is largely made up of enigmas, and xxxi. is in part a description
of the good housewife. But poet and artist are rarely self-conscious of the processes of their own
minds. They deliver their message with exultation but they find nothing worth recording in
the descent upon them of the fiery tongues. So our poet has told us little about himself but
much about circumstance, and I recall in his pages the Dublin of thirty years ago, and note
how faithful the memory of eye and ear are, and how forgetful the heart is of its own fancies.
Is nature behind this distaste for intimate self-analysis in the poet? Are our own emanations
poisonous to us if we do not rapidly clear ourselves of them? Is it best to forget ourselves
and hurry away once the deed is done or the end is attained to some remoter valley in the Golden
World and look for a new beauty if we would continue to create beauty?

I know how readily our poet forgets his own songs. I once quoted to him some early verses of
his own as comment on something he had said. He asked eagerly "Who wrote that?" and when I
said "Do you not remember?" he petulantly waved the poem aside for he had forsaken his past.
Again at a later period he told me his early verses sometimes aroused him to a frenzy of dislike.
Of the feelings which beset the young poet of genius little or nothing is revealed in this
Reverie. Yet what would we not give for a book which would tell how beauty beset that youth
in his walks about Dublin and Sligo; how the sensitive response to color, form, music and tradition
began, how he came to recognize the moods which incarnated in him as immortal moods. Perhaps
it is too much to expect from the creative imagination that it shall also be capable of exact
and subtle analysis. In this work I walk down the streets of Dublin I walked with Yeats over
thirty years ago. I mix with the people who then were living in the city, O'Leary, Taylor,
Dowden, Hughes and the rest; but the poet himself does not walk with me. It is a new voice
speaking of the past of others, pointing out the doorways entered by dead youth. The new voice
has distinction and dignity of its own, and we are grateful for this history, others more so
than myself, because most of what is written therein I knew already, and I wanted a secret
which is not revealed. I wanted to know more about the working of the imagination which planted
the little snow-white feet in the sally garden, and which heard the kettle on the hob sing
peace into the breast, and was intimate with twilight and the creatures that move in the dusk
and undergrowths, with weasel, heron, rabbit, hare, mouse and coney; which plucked the Flower
of Immortality in the Island of Statues and wandered with Usheen in Timanogue. I wanted to
know what all that magic-making meant to the magician, but he has kept his own secret, and
I must be content and grateful to one who has revealed more of beauty than any other in his time.

1916

THE POETRY OF JAMES STEPHENS

For a generation the Irish bards have endeavored to live in a palace of art, in chambers hung
with the embroidered cloths and made dim with pale lights and Druid twilights, and the melodies
they most sought for were half soundless. The art of an early age began softly, to end its
songs with a rhetorical blare of sound. The melodies of the new school began close to the ear
and died away in distances of the soul. Even as the prophet of old was warned to take off his
shoes because the place he stood on was holy ground, so it seemed for a while in Ireland as
if no poet could be accepted unless he left outside the demesnes of poetry that very useful
animal, the body, and lost all concern about its habits. He could not enter unless he moved
with the light and dreamy foot-fall of spirit. 34-39, which is expressly assigned to Zedekiah's reign)
is suggested by reflection on the decisive influence which the battle
of Carchemish was bound to have on the fortunes of Western Asia, xlvi.
2. Nebuchadrezzar is alluded to, either expressly, xlix. But there crowded after
him a whole horde of verse-writers, who seized the most obvious symbols he used and standardized
them, and in their writings one wandered about, gasping for fresh air land sunlight, for the
Celtic soul seemed bound for ever pale lights of fairyland on the north and by the by the darkness
of forbidden passion on the south, and on the east by the shadowiness of all things human,
and on the west by everything that was infinite, without form, and void.

It was a great relief to me, personally, who had lived in the palace of Irish art for a time,
and had even contributed a little to its dimness, to hear outside the walls a few years ago
a sturdy voice blaspheming against all the formula, and violating the tenuous atmosphere with
its "Insurrections." There are poets who cannot write with half their being, and who must write
with their whole being, and they bring their poor relation, the body, with them wherever they
go, and are not ashamed of it. They are not at warfare with the spirit, but have a kind of
instinct that the clan of human powers ought to cling together as one family. With the best
poets of this school, like Shakespeare and Whitman, one rarely can separate body and soul,
for we feel the whole man is speaking. With Keats, Shelley, Swinburne, and our own Yeats, one
feels that they have all sought shelter from disagreeable actualities in the world of imagination.
James Stephens, as he chanted his Insurrections, sang with his whole being. Let no one say
I am comparing him with Shakespeare. One may say the blackbird has wings as well as the eagle,
without insisting that the bird in the hedgerows is peer of the winged creature beyond the
mountain-tops. Judah and her king, Manasseh, would seek in their desperation to win the favour
of the Oriental pantheon, and this no doubt explains the idolatry and worship of the host of
heaven which flourished during his reign even within the temple itself. It was just such a crisis
as this that would call out the fierce condemnation of the idolatrous high places which characterizes
Deuteronomy (cf. xii.) and create the imperative demand for such
a control of the worship as was only possible by centralizing it at
Jerusalem. Nature has an art of its own, and the natural emotions in their
natural and passionate expression have that kind of picturesque beauty which Marcus Aurelius,
tired, perhaps, of the severe orthodoxies of Greek and Roman art, referred to when he spoke
of the foam on the jaws of the wild boar and the mane of the lion.

There were evidences of such an art in Insurrections, the first book of James Stephens. In
the poem called "Fossils," the girl who flies and the boy who hunts her are followed in flight
and pursuit with a swift energy by the poet, and the lines pant and gasp, and the figures flare
up and down the pages. The energy created a new form in verse, not an orthodox beauty, which
the classic artists would have admitted, but such picturesque beauty as Marcus Aurelius found
in the foam on the jaws of the wild boar.

