A penny party furnishes amusement for an evening. With the invitations is sent a request for
each guest to bring a penny, not for an admission fee, but for use. For each guest there are
provided two cards and a pencil; one card is blank; the other has a list of the things to be
found on a penny. The list is numbered, and each person is expected to name as many as he can,
prizes being awarded for the best and poorest list.

Find-- 1. Top of hill. 2. Place of worship. 3. An animal. 4. A fruit. 5. A common fruit. 6.
Links between absent friends. 7. Union of youth and old age. 8. A vegetable. 9. Flowers. 10.
What we fight for. 11. Metal. 12. A messenger. 13. A weapon of defense. 14. A weapon of warfare.
15. A body of water. 16. A beverage. 17. What young ladies want. 18. The most popular State.
19, What men work for. 20. Sign of royalty. 21. A jolly dog.

The answers are: 1. Brow. 2. Temple. 3. Hare (hair). 4. Date. 5. Apple. 6. Letters. 7. 1894
(The date of the penny). 8. Ear. 9. Tulips (two lips). 10. Liberty. 11. Copper. 12. One cent
(sent). 13. Shield. 14. Arrow. 15. Sea (c). 16. Tea (t). 17. Beau (bow). 18. United States
(matrimony). 19. Money. 20. Crown. 21. A merry cur (America).

Usually a half hour is allowed for filling out the blank cards, and after that some time for
correcting the lists and awarding prizes.

A DOLL SHOW

This is a form of entertainment always liked by the younger children. It can be made amusing,
as well as instructive, by having those representing the show to take the part of dolls of
the different nations. When the invitations are sent out, it should be specified what part
each little guest will take. Some of the guests may be the audience if they prefer, or adults
may be the on-lookers. Each little guest receives a doll as a souvenir.

Another form of doll party is where the children bring dolls dressed by themselves. The doll
whose gown is most neatly made receives a prize.

There may also be dolls made of beets, carrots, potatoes, tomatoes, etc., by using sticks,
cloves, etc., with the vegetables named. The results are very funny. These are put on exhibition
on the table and an umpire decides for which prizes are to be given.

PEANUT GAME

The little hostess or host selects two leaders. These choose sides. Two large rugs are placed
near together on the floor. A bowl of peanuts is placed in the center of each. The little players
which can soonest dispose of their peanuts two inches apart on their rug, are the winners.
The hostess gives the signal at the beginning and end of the contest. The sides may work simultaneously
or singly, according as the game is played, individually or by sides as a whole. The peanuts
are eaten at the end of the game, and a prize of a box of candy is given the winning side or
child. This is passed about to the guests.

PEANUT HUNT

Some peanuts must be secretly hidden in out-of-the-way places--in bric-a-brac, etc. Give a
pretty bag or box to be used as a receptacle for the peanuts, and then the hunt begins. The
one getting the most peanuts, receives a prize. He may eat all the peanuts he finds, after
the contest is decided, but a lesson in unselfishness is here possible. The hostess may suggest
sharing the peanuts with one who tried hard to find many nuts, but did not succeed; or, if
there be a lame child, or one deformed, he or she should receive some of the nuts of the winners,
and of those the others find.

A PEANUT PARTY

The invitations have peanuts painted on them, so have little menu cards, which are placed at
each plate at the table. These designs are often funny, and even grotesque, as they represent
brownies, etc. Peanuts are strung as necklaces, bracelets, etc. Some of the sandwiches are
made of mashed peanuts--called peanut butter--and they are delicious. Peanut candy is served,
and at the end peanuts are jabbed for with hat pins. For this all gather at different little
tables, or turns are taken at one table, the peanuts being piled up in the center. A box of
candy is given the winner. This he or she, of course, passes among the guests.

A CHILDREN'S FAIR

This may be made not only enjoyable, but charitable as well. Tables holding fancy work--preferably
the work of the children--candies (home-made), groceries, aprons, pen-wipers, iron-holders,
hand-painted cards, capes, etc., etc., may be sold. Rebecca sits at the Well--a well of lemonade.
A grab-bag, an orange tree, with saleable parcels on it. A post-office, where letters are sold,
and finally a refreshment table or tables, the little girls and boys serving as waiters, in
costumes.

SOAP BUBBLES

Making bubbles requires no great effort of the mind or body. Clay pipes for the players are
furnished by the hostess. Bowls are filled with water which is quite soapy. The pipes show
the colors of the side or sides, being tied with ribbons of different colors. The game contest
may be decided in two ways. Either the one who makes the largest bubble is winner, or the one
making the most bubbles in a given time. The sides or individuals may play in turn.

A POP-CORN PARTY

A pop-corn party, of necessity, like a candy pull, must be held in the kitchen. This can be
decorated for the occasion. Each little guest brings an apron to be donned before the "popping"
begins.

First, shell the corn. Second, take a dipper full of corn and "pop" it. This popping is done
in a pan over a clear fire.

Third, divide into parts, when done.

Fourth, sprinkle some with cochineal, if pink corn is desired.

Fifth, string the pop-corn on threads. A needle is used to do this. Necklaces, bracelets, and
boys' chains may be so made.

Each child receives a handsome cornucopia or box as a receptacle for his popcorn.

CANDY PULL

Candy ready to pull may be bought at a candy store, or molasses may be boiled at home until
it is ready to pull, when the hands are greased and the pulling begins. As suggested for a
pop-corn party, the kitchen or dining-room is the best place in which to give a party of this
kind. It may be decorated to look well, and the children doubtless would enjoy their play here
more than in the parlor.

A BABY SHOW

This may be of dolls or real babies. You can borrow the babies for the occasion. A committee
decides which is the handsomest baby, which the best-natured, etc. Rattiers, toys, etc., are
given the babies, or you can have your parents and other lady friends take the part of babies.
Put a bib on them when they go to supper.

MISS CHILDREN

The little players sit or stand round the room in a circle. The leader assigns to each some
musical instrument, as harp, flute, violincello, trombone, etc., and also selects one for himself.
Some well-known tune is then given out, say "Yankee Doodle," and the players all begin to play
accordingly, each doing his best to imitate, both in sound and action, the instrument which
has been assigned to him, the effect being generally extremely harmonious. The leader commences
with his own instrument, but without any warning suddenly ceases, and begins instead to perform
on the instrument assigned to one of the players. Such player is bound to notice the change,
and forthwith to take the instrument just abandoned by the leader, incurring a forfeit if he
fails to do so.

THE COOK WHO DOESN'T LIKE PEAS

The fun of this game depends on a fair proportion of the players not being acquainted with
it. The leader begins, addressing the first player, "I have a cook who doesn't like peas (p's);
what will you give her for dinner?" The person addressed, if acquainted with the secret, avoids
the letter p in his answer, and, for example, says, "I will give her some walnuts." The question
is then asked of the second person, who, if unacquainted with the trick, is likely enough to
offer some delicacy which contains the letter p; e.g., potatoes, asparagus, pork, apple-pie,
pickled cabbage, peanuts, etc., etc. When this occurs, the offender is called upon to pay a
forfeit, but the precise nature of his offense is not explained to him. He is simply told,
in answer to his expostulations, that "the cook doesn't like p's." When a sufficient number
of forfeits has been extracted, the secret is revealed, and those who have not already guessed
it, are teased by being told (over and over again) that the cook did not like p's, and if they
would persist in giving them to her, they must, of course, take the consequences.

MAGIC MUSIC--ANY NUMBER OF PLAYERS

One player is sent from the room. The others decide upon something for him to do, but he is
not told what it is, though he is helped by a noise of some kind on metal, or on a musical
instrument. When he is near an object with which he is to perform some feat, the noise is loud.
If he touches the wrong object, the music is soft. Any one of the musical instruments commonly
used by children may be employed in this game.

ZOOLOGY--ANY NUMBER OF PLAYERS

The leader says: "Of what animal am I thinking?" He tells that the animal has a certain number
of legs, and gives other points of a like nature. From this description the guessing is done.
When a player guesses the animal correctly, he scores a point. Each player has a turn. The
game is played until it loses its interest. A score is made out. A prize is given the one getting
the best score.

Throwing the bean bag over the head is another form of Bean Bag Game. It must be caught by
one standing back of the tosser. The one who catches it becomes the tosser.

BOX BEAN BAG

This game consists of tosses of the bean bag into boxes. The player stands at a distance. The
one being successful in his throws the most times is the winner.

BEAN BAG GAMES

An equal number of players out of doors. Two parties are formed, divided by eight or ten feet
of space. The umpire gives a signal, and a player in one line runs to the other side--half
way, and tosses his bag to the one at the end of the line; he then takes his place next to
this one, and the line moves down.

This is continued, opposite sides taking turns. Then the game is reversed, until the player
who first played is in his original place.

BEAN BAG RACE

A bean bag is placed on the ground and another at some distance from it. Two players, at a
given signal, run to these bags. The one who can catch the bag and get to the staff placed
near the umpire is the winner. Sides may be scored instead of the individual players.

BEAN BAG AT THE SEASHORE

At the seashore stones or blocks of wood may be substituted for the bags. A ring is drawn on
the ground and the players take sides. The leader of each side toes a starting line across
the ground at a distance from the circle. Bean bags or stones are thrown into the center of
this, each one having a turn.

The side getting the biggest score is the winning one.

SKIPPING THE ROPE

Skipping the rope is an admirable exercise for girls and boys. There should be a spring in
doing this. When a jumper comes down on his heels, instead of jumping from his toes, he is
apt to make the skipping injurious by jarring his back. The players jump in turn over a long
rope turned by two of the players. Each has a turn. A score is kept of the number of times
a player can do this. Sides may be formed, or the jumpers may see how many times they can jump
over the rope in succession.

HOME TAG--ANY NUMBER OF PLAYERS

The chaser tries to tag the runners before they can "get home," or to a given place. If he
succeeds, the one tagged is "It."

SECRET TAG

Is played by not telling who is "It." He chases the other players and tries to tag one of them.
If he succeeds, the one who was tagged becomes "It."

JAPANESE TAG

In this game the one tagged must place his hand on the spot of his body where the tagger tagged
him; doing this, he must chase the other players until he tags one of them.

CROSSING THE BROOK

This is a favorite game with little children.

A place is marked off and named "The Brook"--we will say it is three feet wide.

The players run and try to jump the brook. When all have jumped over, they stand and jump backwards.
The one who jumps into the brook instead of across it is out of the game. The conductor names
his players for instruments, and tells them in pantomime how to play. He then orders them to
tune up. They do so, producing a terrible discord. Then the baton is waved by the conductor,
and the musicians imitate the sounds of their instruments, while also imitating the movements
assigned them by the conductor. The result is very funny.

CHARLEY OVER THE WATER

A player becomes "Charlie." He stands in the center; the others form a circle about him, and
dance, repeating the rhyme:

  "Charlie over the water,
  Charlie over the sea,
  Charlie caught a black-bird,
  He can't catch me."

When the verse is ended, all the players try to stop before Charlie can tag them. If they succeed
in doing this, Charlie remains in the ring and the verse is repeated, etc. The tagged one takes
his place and he enters the ring.

JACK BE NIMBLE

  "Jack, be nimble,
  Jack, be quick,
  Jack jumped over the candlestick."

A candlestick is placed on the floor. The players in turn jump over it, using both feet in
so doing. Any other object may be substituted for the candlestick. One of the players sings
the verse and when the last line is reached the jump is made.

MARY'S LITTLE LAMB

This is a great favorite with the young folks. When everything else has become tiresome, some
one starts the first line of the verse:

  Mary had a little lamb,
  Fleece as white as snow, etc.

All sing, and on the second verse being reached the last syllable of the first line is dropped,
then the next to the last, the third, the fourth, and so on, until the line is totally omitted.
The aim of the singers is to keep exact time, counting a beat for each omitted syllable, and
any one whose voice breaks in when all should be silent, pays a forfeit. The same can be done
with "John Brown's Body," repeating the first verse and omitting syllable after syllable at
the end of the first line until there is nothing left to sing but the chorus.

THE SNAIL

Holding hands, the children form a line, singing the following words; they wind up in a spiral,
following the first child, who is the largest one, and represents the snail's head. The others
huddle together to form the shell into which the snail creeps. The motion is slow, for the
saying "creeps like a snail," is proverbial.

With the last verse the creeping out of the shell is accomplished.

OATS, PEAS, BEANS

A circle is formed. One player stands in the center. After singing the first four lines, all
drop their hands. After this they imitate the motions suggested by the song. At the end of
the verse they turn around several times, and then, joining hands, sing the chorus, standing
still, for the last two lines. Then the one in the center chooses "one in," and returns herself
to the circle. The game goes on as before.

FARMER IN THE DELL

The players stand in a circle. One of their number is in the center.

SINGING GAMES FOR SMALL CHILDREN

MOON AND MORNING STARS

This is a Spanish game. A player represents the moon; the rest are stars. The moon is placed
in the shadow of a tree or house.

The morning stars dance about a child, standing on a chair with extended arms, to represent
the sun just risen.

WEE BOLOGNA MAN

Two to forty players. The leader recites:

  I'm a wee Bologna Man;
  Always do the best you can
  To follow the wee Bologna Man.

While doing this he imitates an instrument of an orchestra. The others imitate him.

This game may be varied, the Bologna man imitating animals or birds, or making any sound he
wishes to make, or he can hop and croak like a frog, or imitate the motions and noise of an
angry cat, or the like.

DRAW A BUCKET OF WATER

This game is played in groups of four. It will here be proper to name the person who lends
him the money, and to beg the one who makes the calculation to do it with great care, as he
may readily fall into an error, especially the first time. Then say to the person: "I do not
lend you, but give you $10; add them to the former sum." Continue in this manner: "Give the
half to the poor, and retain in your memory the other half." Then add: "Return to the gentleman,
or lady, what you borrowed, and remember that the sum lent you was exactly equal to the number
thought of." Ask the person if he knows exactly what remains; he will answer "Yes". You must
then say: "And I know also the number that remains; it is equal to what I am going to conceal
in my hand." Put into one of your hands 5 pieces of money, and desire the person to tell how
many you have got. He will answer 5; upon which open your hand and show him the 5 pieces. You
may then say: "I well knew that your result was 5; but if you had thought of a very large number,
for example, two or three millions, the result would have been much greater, but my hand would
not have held a number of pieces equal to the remainder." The person then supposing that the
result of the calculation must be different, according to the difference of the number thought
of, will imagine that it is necessary to know the last number in order to guess the result;
but this idea is false, for, in the case which we have here supposed, whatever be the number
thought of, the remainder must always be 5. The reason of this is as follows: The sum, the
half of which is given to the poor, is nothing else than twice the number thought of, plus
10; and when the poor have received their part, there remains only the number thought of plus
5; but the number thought of is cut off when the sum borrowed is returned, and consequently
there remains only 5. The result may be easily known, since it will be the half of the number
given in the third part of the operation; for example, whatever be the number thought of, the
remainder will be 36 or 25, according as 72 or 50 have been given. If this trick be performed
several times successively, the number given in the third part of the operation must be always
different; for if the result were several times the same, the deception might be discovered.
When the five first parts of the calculation for obtaining a result are finished, it will be
best not to name it at first, but to continue the operation, to render it more complex, by
saying for example: "Double the remainder, deduct two, add three, take the fourth part," etc.;
and the different steps of the calculation may be kept in mind, in order to know how much the
first result has been increased or diminished. This irregular process never fails to confound
those who attempt to follow it.

ANOTHER WAY

Tell the person to take 1 from the number thought of, and then double the remainder; desire
him to take 1 from this double, and to add to it the number thought of, in the last place,
ask him the number arising from this addition, and, if you add 3 to it, the third of the sum
will be the number thought of. The application of this rule is so easy that it is needless
to illustrate it by an example.

A THIRD WAY

Ask the person to add 1 to the triple of the number thought of, and to multiply the sum by
three; then bid him add to this product the number thought of, and the result will be a sum
from which if 3 be subtracted, the remainder will be ten times the number required; and if
the cipher on the right be cut off from the remainder, the other figure will indicate the number
sought.

Example--Let the number thought of be 6, the triple of which is 18; and if 1 be added, it makes
19; the triple of this last number is 57, and if 6 be added it makes 63, from which if 3 be
subtracted, the remainder will be 60; now, if the cipher on the right be cut off, the remaining
figure, 6, will be the number required.

A FOURTH WAY

Tell the person to multiply the number thought of by itself; then desire him to add 1 to the
number thought of, and to multiply it also by itself; in the last place, ask him to tell the
difference of these two products, which will certainly be an odd number, and the least half
of it will be the number required.

Let the number thought of, for example, be 10; which, multiplied by itself, gives 100; in the
next place, 10 increased by 1 is 11; which, multiplied by itself makes 121; and the difference
of these two squares is 21, the least half of which, being 10, is the number thought of.

HOW TO TELL NUMBERS THOUGHT OF

If one or more numbers thought of be greater than 9, we must distinguish two cases; that in
which the number or the numbers thought of is odd, and that in which it is even. In the first
case, ask the sum of the first and second; of the second and third; the third and fourth; and
so on to the last; and then the sum of the first and the last. Having written down all these
sums in order, add together all those, the places of which are odd, as the first, the third,
the fifth, etc.; make another sum of all those, the places of which are even, as the second,
the fourth, the sixth, etc.; subtract this sum from the former, and the remainder will be the
double of the first number. Let us suppose, for example, that the five following numbers are
thought of: 3, 7, 13, 17, 20, which, when added two and two as above, give 10, 20, 30, 37,
23; the sum of the first, third, and fifth is 63, and that of the second and fourth is 57;
if 57 be subtracted from 63, the remainder 6, will be the double of the first number, 3. Now,
if 3 be taken from 10, the first of the sums, the remainder 7, will be the second number; and
by proceeding in this manner, we may find all the rest.

In the second case, that is to say, if the number or the numbers thought of be even, you must
ask and write down as above, the sum of the first and second; that of the second and third;
and so on, as before; but instead of the sum of the first and the last, you must take that
of the second and last; then add together those which stand in the even places, and form them
into a new sum apart; add also those in the odd places, the first excepted, and subtract this
sum from the former, the remainder will be double of the second number; and if the second number,
thus found, be subtracted from the sum of the first and second, you will have the first number;
if it be taken from that of the second and third, it will give the third; and so of the rest.
Let the numbers thought of be, for example, 3, 7, 13, 17; the sums formed as above are 10,
20, 30, 24; the sum of the second and fourth is 44, from which if 30, the third, be subtracted,
the remainder will be 14, the double of 7, the second number. The first therefore is 3, third
13, and the fourth 17.

When each of the numbers thought of does not exceed 9, they may be easily found in the following
manner:

Having made the person add 1 to the double of the first number thought of, desire him to multiply
the whole by 5, and to add to the product the second number. If there be a third, make him
double this first sum, and add 1 to it, after which, desire him to multiply the new sum by
5, and to add to it the third number. If there be a fourth, proceed in the same manner, desiring
him to double the preceding sum; to add to it 1; to multiply by 5; to add the fourth number;
and so on.

