In the second chapter of the REVELATION, verses 18 to 29 is Thyatira the type of the Roman
Catholic Church. In the 24th and 25th verses to those Roman Catholics "who have not known the
depths of Satan," who has brought them so on the surface and perverted the truth of the doctrine,
that they keep the shadow for truth, it is said: "I will put upon you none other burden. But
that which ye have, hold fast till I come," REVEL. ii: 24 and 25. They have to keep the heavy
burden of ceremonies, feasts and fasts, and all kinds of other practices which are not proficient
to intellectual and moral perfection[F] of man, although they are connected with enormous expenses
for the support of Priests and many others, and for all the buildings, vessels, and all kinds
of instruments, not knowing what is in their depth, till Christ comes. And will I give him
the morning star," REVEL. ii: 26, 27 and 28.

Here in the quoted verses at Christ's coming Christ's relation to him who overcometh, is such
as the relation of a father to his son, who inherits from the father all things which the father
possesses. Christ has not been known in the churches of Babylon, as he is made known in our
mission to introduce the New Jerusalem. Christ in his appearance in flesh was the Head, that
is the representative of his body of followers; but they could not establish his peaceable
reign. It was necessary, that through the course of centuries matters should be so developed,
as Prophets of the Bible as well as in the subsequent ages did prophesy; and I, to be qualified
for my present mission, had to go not only through the usual studies of the Roman Catholic
Church, but I had also to study continuously, with all sincerity of my heart, the sources of
human knowledge and the investigations of different parties and sects, to support the Roman
Catholic Church against the assaults of her adversaries, and was found qualified to be public
Imperial Royal Professor of Bibical Literature in that Church. In the charge of my Professorship
I considered myself peculiarly bound to defend with the use of the Bible that church against
all aggressions of the adversaries. I did not know at that time, that the spirit of my Lord
was preparing me through all stages of my life for my present office. But while I was investigating
the depth of the "burden," of that church, comparing it with the Jewish and Heathen antiquities
and with the developement of the mysteries of those antiquities through the centuries of the
Christian Era, when I was duly prepared and the time of the last development of preparations
for the Millennial glory arrived, I was called by messengers of the Heavenly Congress to "the
works," which were to be performed and explained by my instrumentality, and, under the direction
of Heavenly leaders, who were most qualified to be my leaders in "those works," I overcame
all difficulties and I kept the "works of my spiritual Father Jesus Christ unto the end," until
all has been performed and explained, that belongs to the commencement of the Millennial glory,
or what is the same, for the New Era or the New Jerusalem.

And we, that is, the whole body of messengers whom I represent, have received "the iron rod
and the morning star," the two symbols of our mission. The first symbol testifies, that nations
which reject our message of Peace, will be broken to pieces. We do not break them, but we announce
to them judgments by which they will be broken. But we are laboring to save nations, that they
as god's people might come out from Babylon, that they be not partakers of her sins and receive
not of her plagues, REVEL. xviii: 4. If people hear our voice, they will be partakers of the
Heavenly blessings prepared for them in the New Era or in the New Jerusalem, and while they
will be saved, their political and ecclesiastical systems "as the vessels of a potter will
be broken to shivers." Systems that could not bring better fruits than those which the political
and ecclesiastical history and the experience of our days shows, are founded in delusion and
deception, which were generating continuous destruction of human life and property and all
the misery which is founded in political and ecclesiastical follies. But enlightened men and
women of all ages and amongst all nations have seen a new day, and to us has been entrusted
"the Morning Star," the symbol testifying that we have received all that is needed for the
new day, the New Era, which our morning star is announcing.

All my published works and all my manuscripts are testifying, that it is impossible to save
this country from the yoke of monarchs and from the most abject degradation and servitude,
by any weapons except those which have been entrusted to our charge by Christ's spirit. And
those who study this whole book from the commencement to the end, in the same order in which
the documents are placed in it, so that they understand each portion separately and the connection
of it with all that precedes, to be prepared for the right understanding of what follows, to
comprehend at length the whole, will be as convinced as I am, that we, that is I and all my
visible and invisible fellow laborers, have truly received the great commission to move nations
for the introduction of the promised New Era, which will be the universal Republic of Truth
and Justice, Harmony and Peace amongst all nations, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times,
in which all in Heaven and on Earth will be gathered together in Christ, Ephes, 1: 10.

Readers must keep in mind, that all that is written in this book is only a preparation to the
"monthly theological course" which is appointed at the end. In the "monthly course" the system
or the chain to bind the Dragon REVEL. xx: 2 will be explained and that will be made manifest,
which is mentioned in this book but cannot be explained. And our proceedings in that monthly
course will be then published in different languages for a testimony to all nations, to move
them for co-operation, that all in Heaven and on Earth might be brought to Harmony and Peace.

President Buchanan! allow me to close this treatise with some important words to you! For you
we need no more testimonies than those partly printed partly written documents which I have
sent at different critical occasions by the mail directly to you, if they had been handed to
you, and you had studied them with such attention, as they deserved to be studied by the President
of the United States. Those testimonies would have been sufficient to convince you, that no
other weapons can be used for the victory against your enemies and the enemies of the true
Republican cause, by whom this country is overflowed, and who in Europe are preaching crusades
against you and the supporters of the cause entrusted to your care, except the weapons of Christ's
spirit entrusted to our care. Those who are with the Lamb, called, chosen and faithful, will
overcome the Beast and its ten Horns. REVEL. xvii: 14. This will not take place with preparations
for war and with armies of soldiers; but we have the Heavenly armies upon white horses, REVEL.
xix: 14, and offer to all our enemies reconciliation with Heaven and temporal and eternal most
precious blessings. But if they reject the Heavenly gifts, all infernal hosts are subject to
our Heavenly armies, and by these executioners of divine judgments as many of our enemies will
be destroyed as sufficient, to move the rest of them to repentance. Although I could give thousands
of instances of destruction of enemies of our cause, who have been cast into the inferior regions,
because they have rejected the Heavenly gifts offered them by our instrumentality, I will mention
only one instance for a peculiar warning to you.

A.D. 1849 at our appointment of a Latin convention in the City of New-York for an examination
of the magnetic chain shown by our instrumentality to bind the Dragon, REVEL. XX: 2, I sent
to President Zach. Taylor a copy of my printed English circular in which that convention was
appointed, and a copy of my large Latin letter, taken from the copy which was directed and
sent to the Archbishop of Baltimore to be read to all Bishops of the United States, who were
at that time assembling their Synod in Baltimore. To those copies I added my English letter
in which I addressed President Taylor showing to him, that our message is as important for
all political as for all ecclesiastical governments and especially for the government of the
United States to stop the Papal Imperal Royal or monarchial influence and to restore the true
Republican cause, and that therefore he, President Zach. Taylor, was in duty bound to send
to said convention qualified Latin scholars to attend it. In my printed and written documents
as many items have been concentrated as would have been sufficient to move the President to
do what was required, if President Taylor had been qualifyed for his post. We have warned him
most solemnly, that he as the twelfth President, should not be a traitor of the Republican
cause, as Judas Jscariot was a traitor of Christ's cause. But my warnings were not regarded
by President Taylor.

After the destruction of the armies of those who were deceived in Europe by their leaders that
they were fighting with carnal weapons for the Republican cause, I wrote again to President
Taylor showing, that he was responsible for all destruction of human life and property, which
would have been saved, if he had not neglected to fulfil his highest duty which has been shown
to him in my documents; but that, notwithstanding this, according to divine mercy, to save
him and by his instrumentality many others, I was again authorized to apply to him and to show,
what he ought to do in those circumstances, to open the way for spreading our message of Peace
amongst all nations. But when all my efforts to move the President for an energetic action
for the support of the true Republican cause remained without effect, I committed him to the
judgment of the Heavenly Congress.

On the 9th day of July, 1850, at 5 o'clock A.M., shortly after my arrival in Cleveland Ohio,
an Angel of the Lord, a holy martyr, came to me and said, that I should write directly to the
Congress and show that President Taylor had neglected to fulfil his highest duty and deserves
on this account the severest judgment. After having finished my writing on that day, I was
looking to find in Cleveland somebody acquainted with a congressman to whom we could entrust
my document. But on that day I could not find such a man. On the 10th I went to a "free soil"
minister with the expectation, that he might know such a man. That minister was not at home;
but his wife said, that he had gone to the Post Office and was soon expected to return. He
returned with the message, that President Taylor died at 10 o'clock P.M. of the preceding night.
Then I understood the mystery, that my writing was not prepared for the Congress of the United
States in Washington but for the Heavenly Congress, and I have shown to that minister my writing
directed to the Congress of the United States. I did not hear before, that the President had
been taken sick, although I have heard afterwards, that his sickness was very short, and that
his last words were, that he was departing with the consciousness, that he had fulfilled his
duties. This is the consolation which ministers of darkness impart to such destroyers as General
and President Zach. Taylor was. If he had had any regard for the lives of his fellow beings
and for their true happiness, he would have understood my documents and have done what was
his duty for the destruction of the Beast, its image and the false prophet, which destroy every
year an enormous amount of human life and property. Although I have mentioned in this treatise
several strange facts, some of the following will appear more strange; but they will be the
more comprehended, the more this whole book shall be understood. Not only the order which I
received in the morning of the day on which Zach. Taylor departed, to write to the congress
that he had neglected to fulfill his highest duty, but also the day and hour, in which he daparted,
were most suitable for the celebration of the mystery of Zach. Taylor's death, and the tremendous
fire in Philadelphia at 4 o'clock P.M. or 6 hours before Taylor's death, was a prophetical
precursor of his death. In that fire a number of persons were killed by a terrible powder explosion
commemorating the fact that the privileged murderer had been nominated President in that city.
All that happened by the dreadful influence of infernal demons under the control of messengers
from our congress, who have given at the exact hours on the proper day signs of a great warning.
As soon as I heard of President Taylor's death, I understood, that I was ordered to write to
the Heavenly Congress of the United States, that is, the congress of the holy prophets and
martyrs who have the commission to unite finally all states of all governments on the globe
in Christ's peaceable reign or the universal Republic of Truth and Justice, according to the
prophecies which have been given by their mediumship, while they were yet in their mortal bodies.
My writing to the congress was copied by one of our departed messengers, and when President
Taylor departed, my writing was shown to him. Such things would not appear strange to Bible
readers, if they would understand what they read. Here is no room to explain the actions of
the departed, amongst which there is also writing and reading. When the departed President
was reading my document showing that he had neglected to fulfil his highest duty, his animal
passion of murder was aroused, to kill the writer. That privilege was granted to him only under
the condition, if he succeeds by taking a toad in possession, and by its instrumentality poisoning
the water of the well at the house in which I used to stop. The water was poisoned; the prophetess
and her husband with whom I boarded, when I was in that section of the country, were by drinking
the water, taken sick, and they recovered as soon as they ceased to use the water, but they
could not catch the toad. It happened before my arrival with them. And when I arrived in their
house and would drink of that excellent water, they warned me. But I did not care about their
warning and drank, and was straightway taken sick and continued to be sick, till a Heavenly
messenger came at the right hour and took the sickness away. At length the toad was caught
and killed the right day and hour by the husband of the prophetess, who was a zealous Democrat.
He was in many battles with Generals of Napoleon I. and killed men and animals; but he assured
us oftentimes, that he never had so much trouble in killing any creature, as with that toad,
and never heard so pitiful lamentations as have been poured out by that toad when it was dying.
Zach. Taylor, when he was compelled to leave the toad and to enter into the infernal regions
of his inner life, into his torments, resisted as long as he could; but when the right day
and hour came, he could not resist longer. If you study this whole book so, as you need to
study it, you will not be surprised at such unexpected events. You read in the fifth chapter
of Mark, that a whole legion of demons, that is a whole regiment of soldiers who have been
destroyed in a battle, have been permitted to enter into a heard of hogs. But they could not
remain there, and were compelled to enter into the depth of the lake. And General Taylor who
had destroyed many people, after having despised reconciliation and apostleship offered to
him by virtue of our mission, was at length not allowed to be with a toad, but was compelled
to descend into the abyss.

I have given here only some hints of strange events which are in connection with other events
which could not be mentioned here, nor can we explain what we have mentioned without enlarging
this treatise. But we have written a peculiar treatise in which President Taylor's spirit manifestation
by the instrumentality of a toad is circumstantially explained in a manuscript which will be
published when required. But here we have mentioned as much as we could in this confined space,
and we hope, that not only you, President Buchanan, but also Emperor Napoleon as well as your
friends and enemies in general will reflect upon such things with earnestness.

On the 24th day of June 1839, I returned from Philadelphia to Boston with many collections
to write the third of my five German volumes, and to show, that the memorable events which
have been reported in my first and second volumes, happened according to prophecies, as signs
testifying our mission. When, on that day, as is reported in my 3d volume, I was praying in
my room and preparing to write the 3d volume, Emperor Napoleon, in his Imperial splendour stood
before me with the invitation, that I might become his medium. I looked into his inner state,
and the magnetic outward splendor disappeared, and his inner wretchedness and distress were
manifest, and he could not stand any longer before me, and, with an explosion like a powerful
thunderclap, he left me and took the direction to Europe. The title of my third volume, if
we translate it from German into English, reads:

"Memorable events in the life of Andrew Bernardus Smolnikar. Third volume containing the Explanation
of Prophecies, by which Christ the Lord, has confirmed that he has appeared unto us for the
fulfilling of his promises, in order to restore his reign upon the whole earth and to give
his peace to all nations, and has at his appearance appointed the author as an extraordinary
messenger, and performed by him all the mysteries for the foundation of that peace &c., New-York,
1840." EPHES. vi: 11 and 12. These are the secret enemies whom we must know, and we must stand
on a ground, on which they cannot come, and from which we will conquer them. When Napoleon
was allowed to approach me with the invitation, that I should follow him, that is, that I should
become his medium, he was allowed in a like manner, as the tempter or devil in the 4th chapter
of MATTHEW was allowed to tempt Jesus. Napoleon was one of the dragons or devils, who was permitted
to do so for a great instruction to all rulers on the globe. There is not one, but there are
many dragons or devils, leading each his sphere of infernal demons or degraded departed spirits.
You will understand the more the mystery, the farther you proceed in studying this book. Now
is renewed and fulfilled, what is written in the gospels, and what in the Bible was not understood,
receives light by our experience. Jesus could not descend from his height, to become a medium
of one of these rulers of darkness. And likewise I could not do this. This dragon, this spirit
of delusion and destruction, when I commenced to look into his interiors was made manifest,
and he could not stand any longer. He was compelled to leave me instantly and to be tormented
seeking another medium. At length[H], because our message of Peace has been rejected and people
were so degraded, that the European Revolution of 1848 opened the way to the throne of Napoleon
III, Napoleon I. could have this as a suitable medium to delude and destroy nations. And to
this dragon so much of human life and property has been sacrificed, that for the celebration
of the birth of the Papal Imperial Royal Mary on the 8th September 1855, thirty thousand soldiers
have been murdered at the taking of Sebastopol. Nobody who does not see human affairs from
our position, can duly appreciate the criminality of such a tremendous madness, from which
to deliver Napoleon III. and his armies, you, President Buchanan, are able to give us a powerful
assistance. I do not despair of the conversion of Napoleon III himself. When people descend
so deep into the society of infernal spirits that there is no other remedy than destruction
of many to save the remnant, then according to divine judgment people receive such rulers as
are connected with one or the other of the infernal dragons, to inspire them with the infernal
furies to destroy each other. Great warriors are great mediums of the princes of darkness.
But if they are reached by our instrumentality, they when they are studying our message of
Peace, are drawing their leading spirits from their depth of misery into a better condition.
Napoleon III. if he could be moved to study our message of Peace and to act accordingly, could
reach his uncle Napoleon, and draw him into the pacification. What we mention here, is explained
in our system for the promised New Era.

This is the joyful message, which is to be communicated by your instrumentality, President
Buchanan, to Emperor Napoleon and other monarchs, that they might study our message of Peace
and become our fellow laborers to draw their living and departed friends into the New Era,
or the New Jerusalem, which is to be introduced by our instrumentality. And you, President
Buchanan, are powerfully exhorted, to prepare for the Kingdom of our Lord and his Christ, REVEL.
xi: 15. Editors and translators of the New Testament were so ignorant of the true Christian
principles that they took instead of "the kingdom of our Lord and his Christ" the wrong reading
"the kingdoms" in plural number; but there will be one kingdom, that is, one government of
our Lord, and his Christ. And this will be a true Republican government--to give explanations
about which there is no room here, but we remark, that this great truth will become self-evident
to those who comprehend this book. And we expect, that you, respected President Buchanan, will
comprehend it and then you will take the spiritual weapons, which are comprehended in our message,
for the conversion of monarchs into true republicans, which is the same, as true Christians.
But in the first place bishops and priests in America are to be moved, to attend our monthly
theological course and then assist us at the conversion of monarchs; And we expect that by
your good example and your assistance bishops and priests will learn at length to comprehend
their highest duty. Matters come to maturity; but we will not expatiate, because we have already
extended this treatise so far: nothing but our duty to do all in our power for the pacification
of nations, moved us to write it according to our mission for the redemption of oppressed humanity.

Postscript to the first treatise. I arrived the last time in Washington City at the end of
March, this year, 1859, and remained there until the 8th of April. Then I walked to Baltimore
and wrote to hon. Hicks, Governor of Maryland, and invited him, to study the documents which
I had offered to President Buchanan, but he had no time to study them, although they contain
matters of great importance for all governments to remove War and establish Peace on the whole
globe. I mentioned many items in my letter that I expected to move the Governor to accept my
offer; but, received no answer. The same time a great sign was given so that I was sent speedily
from Baltimore to the Western Reserve of Ohio. At my arrival there the Spring was changed in
a severe Winter, and I commenced to write during a great storm and snow on Easter Saturday,
April 23d 1859, a new treatise exhibiting wonders and signs in connexion with Presidents and
other high Officers of the Federal Government of the United States and showing, how they are
subjugated by the Beast with seven Heads and are supporting the ten Horns of that Beast, and
that there will be a great destruction of human life and property in this country, as there
is in Europe, if it shall not be stopped by receiving and spreading our Heavenly message of
Peace, which is developed by our mediumship. Since my public appearance in my present mission
there was continuous correspondence of memorable events connected with the Government of the
United States and memorable events connected with the steps of my mission, containing most
solemn warnings to this Government, and many striking instances are concentrated in said treatise
which was intended to occupy the second place in this book. But we found that the book would
become too large, to be bought and studied by many who might be attracted to study this and
then to co-operate with us for the fulfilment of the prophecy which was given by the disappearance
of the Steamboat President and all persons, who were in it at the same time in which President
Harrison died in such connexion with what was set in type at the same time for my 4th volume,
entitled: "The one thing Needfull," and with the documents which were at the same time sent
from Europe for our use, and explained in said volume in such correspondence with the disappearance
of the Steamboat President and the death of President Harrisson, that the prophecy contained
in those events is manifest, by which the spirit assures us, that he will sweep away the antichristian
government of the United States as well as other governments. Knowing this, people of the United
States and their Officers may avoid all the dreadful destruction, which is in Europe preparing
the way, that at length governments and people will pay attention to our message and learn
how to establish perfect peace on the whole globe.

After the disappearance of President Harrison and of the prophetical Steamboat President, solemn
warnings were repeated under all following Presidents in correspondence with what happened
in our mission; and in this respect President Buchanan is peculiarly remarkable, and in said
treatise memorable events of great warnings connected with his administration have been explained.
But we must delay their publication, and every reader will find in the following treatises
of this book superabundance of solemn warnings, that all might become our zealous fellow laborers
for the accomplishment of the glorious promises, and that especially President Buchanan might
give to others good example and come from patching the old house which must crumble to pieces,
in our peace union and give powerful assistance for the introduction of the promised New Era.
Great mercy was shown through him to the country while he is yet in Babylon, but was quenching
the fire which would have consumed the country, if his antagonist had been elected President.
Therefore, notwithstanding his having neglected the one thing needful until this hour we expect,
that he will arrive at length on our ground and co-operate with us in building the New Jerusalem.

This treatise, to which I add this postscript June 22d 1859, was written in February last,
and the tremendous war and destruction in Italy broke out two or three months afterwards, exactly[I]
while I was explaining the thrilling prophecy given by Daniel or Judgement of God performed
by Sickles under the control of our Leader in the 14th verse of the 14th chap, of the REVEL.,
"having in his hand a sharp sickle." He gave to the destroying Spirit the permission to seize
the medium and to show prophetically what he will do in hundreds of thousands of cases, if
the right order shown in our Plan, will not be restored. There is a depth in the mystery of
the unexpected tragedy, in which all actors have most suitable names and offices, each for
the post he occupies; and the most suitable spot as well as the most suitable day and hour
were selected for the performance, with all the preceding, accompanying and following circumstances
in correspondence with our doing on the same Sunday Sexagesima on which this year the tragedy
was perpetrated, as well as what happened in the preceding years since my first public appearance
in my present mission on that Sunday A.D. 1838, and the initiation which has been imparted
to me on that Sunday for my present ministry, by the martyr on the white cloud, who has in
his hand a sharp sickle, REVEL. xiv. 14. I give here only some hints; but the explanation is
given in connexion with many other cases of a great warning to this government in the treatise,
the publication of which must be delayed; for we expect that the contents of the following
treatises of this book will be strong enough to awaken the enemies of President Buchanan to
give us assistance to awaken him from his lethargy, if he should not be sooner aroused to assist
us to deliver them from their wrong course, by which they injure the great cause of the true
Freedom of nations.

In the great ignorance in which people are regarding the inner life of man and the spirit world,
they are reading many signs of the times, without understanding what they read.

I mentioned above, that I started on the 8th April from Washington. It is to be understood
that so many signs and wonders took place and so many secrets were disclosed, while I was trying
spirits in Washington, that a book of this size would be too small to comprehend them. On the
8th April 1859, I finished all work which I had to perform in Washington, at the same hour,
in which four men were, all at once in Baltimore, hung by the neck, till dead, although the
black struggled some minutes longer with death than his white companions. As soon as my work
was finished in Washington, I started and walked to Baltimore, and arrived in that city on
the 9th April, when all newspapers were filled with reports of the execution, and with biographies
of the executed. I had to read the reports of that execution which belongs to the links of
the chain to bind the dragon REVEL. xx., 2. That reading occasioned my above mentioned letter
to governor Hicks. I thought, that perhaps after the execution of some champions of his party,
he and other leaders of that party might be more prepared to receive lessons from us, than
they were prepared in former times, while I was applying to them in Baltimore, Annapolis, and
in hundreds of other cities and villages, exhorting and warning them, to study our message
of Peace, and co-operate with us for the true American, or, what is the same, the true Republican
cause. But they have despised our warnings. At length matters arrived so far that, if all other
warnings of this book should not be sufficient, we expect that the spirit manifestations which
are connected with that execution and are mentioned in the fourth treatise of this book, will
move them to become our worthy fellow labourers for the fulfilment of the grandest promises.
But we repeat, that every reader should study this book in the same order in which it is written,
weighing with great attention and earnestness every sentence, till he understands it and retains
in his mind all that preceded. If you have studied in this manner this treatise, you are prepared
for studying the second treatise.

SECOND TREATISE.

