"'God first created the earth as an idea. Then He quickened it; energy atoms came into being.
He coordinated the atoms into this solid sphere. All its molecules are held together by the
will of God. When He withdraws His will, the earth again will disintegrate into energy.  Energy
will dissolve into consciousness; the earth-idea will disappear from objectivity.

"'The substance of a dream is held in materialization by the subconscious thought of the dreamer.
When that cohesive thought is withdrawn in wakefulness, the dream and its elements dissolve.
A man closes his eyes and erects a dream-creation which, on awakening, he effortlessly dematerializes.
He follows the divine archetypal pattern.  Similarly, when he awakens in cosmic consciousness,
he will effortlessly dematerialize the illusions of the cosmic dream.

"'Being one with the infinite all-accomplishing Will, Babaji can summon the elemental atoms
to combine and manifest themselves in any form. This golden palace, instantaneously created,
is real, even as this earth is real. Pot-Pourri Mixed by Two (SMITH, ELDER) is a book to live with,
but not to be read at a sitting. After spending some hours with Mrs. C. W. EARLE and Miss
ETHEL CASE I found that my critical palate was unequal to the demands of so liberal and varied
a banquet; and when I had finished a poem by Mr. MASEFIELD, and found
that it was followed by a recipe for cucumber soup, I wanted badly
to laugh out loud.

My advice, therefore, to readers is to take a snack from time to time, but not to make a square meal
of it.
 {FN34-5} Whoever realizes himself
as a son of God, even as Babaji has done, can reach any goal by the infinite powers hidden
within him. A common stone locks within itself the secret of stupendous atomic energy; {FN34-6}
even so, a mortal is yet a powerhouse of divinity.'

"The sage picked up from a near-by table a graceful vase whose handle was blazing with diamonds.
'Our great guru created this palace by solidifying myriads of free cosmic rays,' he went on.
'Touch this vase and its diamonds; they will satisfy all the tests of sensory experience.'

"I examined the vase, and passed my hand over the smooth room-walls, thick with glistening
gold. Each of the jewels scattered lavishly about was worthy of a king's collection. While dissenting from
some of Mrs. EARLE'S opinions--I do not, for instance, think that the paper she mentions is
"the best of all evening papers"--there is no getting away from her
sincerity or from a certain indefinable charm which prevents her from
causing irritation even when she is proclaiming her very pronounced
views.

Miss CASE, the other mixer, supplies some really valuable hints on gardens. These are drawn
from her practical experience and are given succinctly enough.
 I knelt on the shining floor at his feet.

"'Lahiri, are you still feasting on your dream desires for a golden palace?' My guru's eyes
were twinkling like his own sapphires. 'Wake!  All your earthly thirsts are about to be quenched
forever.' He murmured some mystic words of blessing. 'My son, arise. Receive your initiation
into the kingdom of God through KRIYA YOGA.'

"Babaji stretched out his hand; a HOMA (sacrificial) fire appeared, surrounded by fruits and
flowers. I received the liberating yogic technique before this flaming altar.

"The rites were completed in the early dawn. I felt no need for sleep in my ecstatic state,
and wandered around the palace, filled on all sides with treasures and priceless OBJETS D'ART.
Descending to the gorgeous gardens, I noticed, near-by, the same caves and barren mountain
ledges which yesterday had boasted no adjacency to palace or flowered terrace.

"Reentering the palace, fabulously glistening in the cold Himalayan sunlight, I sought the
presence of my master. He was still enthroned, surrounded by many quiet disciples.

