We could hear the roar of the Gros Ventre as it tumbled grumblingly over its rocky bed. To
our right rose mile after mile of red cliffs. As the last of the quaking asp leaves have fallen,
there were no golden groves. In their places stood silvery patches against the red background
of the cliffs. High overhead a triangle of wild geese harrowed the blue sky.

I was plumb out of breath, but men who are most gallant elsewhere are absolutely heartless
on a hunt. I was scarcely through panting before we began to descend. We received instructions
as to how we should move so as to keep out of range of each other's guns; then Mr. Haynes and
myself started one way, and Mr. Struble and Mrs. O'Shaughnessy the other. We were to meet where
the valley terminated in a broad pass. We felt sure we could get a chance at what elk there
might be in the valley. We were following fresh tracks, and a little of the hunter's enthusiasm
seized me.

We had not followed them far when three cows and a "spike" came running out of the pines a
little ahead of us. Instantly Mr. Haynes's gun flew to his shoulder and a deafening report
jarred our ears. He ran forward, but I stood still, fascinated by what I saw. Our side of the
valley was bounded by a rim of rock. Over the rim was a sheer wall of rock for two hundred
feet, to where the Gros Ventre was angrily roaring below; on the other side of the stream rose
the red cliffs with their jagged crags. At the report of the gun two huge blocks of stone almost
as large as a house detached themselves and fell. At the same instant one of the quaking asp
groves began to move slowly. I couldn't believe my eyes. I shut them a moment, but when I looked
the grove was moving faster. It slid swiftly, and I could plainly hear the rattle of stones
falling against stones, until with a muffled roar the whole hillside fell into the stream.

Mr. Haynes came running back. "What is the matter? Are you hurt? Why didn't you shoot?" he asked.

I waved my hand weakly toward where the great mound of tangled trees and earth blocked the
water. "Why," he said, "that is only a landslide, not an earthquake. You are as white as a
ghost. Come on up here and see my fine elk."

I sat on a log watching him dress his elk. We have found it best not to remove the skin, but
the elk have to be quartered so as to load them on to a horse. Mrs. O'Shaughnessy and Mr. Struble
came out of the woods just then. They had seen a big bunch of elk headed by a splendid bull,
but got no shot, and the elk went out of the pass. They had heard our shot, and came across
to see what luck.

"What iver is the matter with ye?" asked Mrs. O'Shaughnessy. Mr. Haynes told her. They had
heard the noise, but had thought it thunder. Mr. Haynes told me that if I would "chirk up"
he would give me his elk teeth. Though I don't admire them, they are considered valuable; however,
his elk was a cow, and they don't have as nice teeth as do bulls.

We had lunch, and the men covered the elk with pine boughs to keep the camp robbers from pecking
it full of holes. Next day the men would come with the horses and pack it in to camp. We all
felt refreshed; so we started on the trail of those that got away.

For a while walking was easy and we made pretty good time; then we had a rocky hill to get
over. We had to use care when we got into the timber; there were marshy places which tried
us sorely, and windfall so thick that we could hardly get through. We were obliged to pick
our way carefully to avoid noise, and we were all together, not having come to a place where
it seemed better to separate. We had about resolved to go to our horses when we heard a volley
of shots.

"That is somebody bunch-shooting," said Mr. Struble. "They are in Brewster Lake Park, by the
sound. That means that the elk will pass here in a short time and we may get a shot. The elk
will be here long before the men, since the men have no horses; so let's hurry and get placed
along the only place they can get out. We'll get our limit."

We hastily secreted ourselves along the narrow gorge through which the elk must pass. We were
all on one side, and Mr. Haynes said to me, "Rest your gun on that rock and aim at the first
rib back of the shoulder. If you shoot haphazard you may cripple an elk and let it get away
to die in misery. So make sure when you fire."

It didn't seem a minute before we heard the beat of their hoofs and a queer panting noise that
I can't describe. First came a beautiful thing with his head held high; his great antlers seemed
to lie half his length on his back; his eyes were startled, and his shining black mane seemed
to bristle. I heard the report of guns, and he tumbled in a confused heap. He tried to rise,
but others coming leaped over him and knocked him down. Some more shots, and those behind turned
and went back the way they had come.

Mr. Haynes shouted to me, "Shoot, shoot; why don't you shoot!"

So I fired my Krag, but next I found myself picking myself up and wondering who had struck
me and for what. I was so dizzy I could scarcely move, but I got down to where the others were
excitedly admiring the two dead elk that they said were the victims of Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's
gun. She was as excited and delighted as if she had never declared she would not kill anything.
"Sure, it's many a meal they'll make for little hungry mouths," she said. She was rubbing her
shoulder ruefully. "I don't want to fire any more big guns. I thought old Goliar had hit me
a biff with a blackthorn shilaley," she remarked.

Mr. Haynes turned to me and said, "You are a dandy hunter! you didn't shoot at all until after
the elk were gone, and the way you held your gun it is a wonder it didn't knock your head off,
instead of just smashing your jaw."

The men worked as fast as they could at the elk, and we helped as much as we could, but it
was dark before we reached camp. Supper was ready, but I went to bed at once. They all thought
it was because I was so disappointed, but it was because I was so stiff and sore I could hardly
move, and so tired I couldn't sleep. Next morning my jaw and neck were so swollen that I hated
any one to see me, and my head ached for two days. It has been snowing for a long time, but
Clyde says he will take me hunting when it stops. I don't want to go but reckon I will have
to, because I don't want to come so far and buy a license to kill an elk and go back empty-handed,
and partly to get a rest from Mr. Murry's everlasting accordion.

Mr. Murry is an old-time acquaintance of Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's. He has a ranch down on the river
somewhere. Mrs. O'Shaughnessy has not seen him for years,--didn't know he lived up here. He
had seen the game-warden from whom she had procured her license, and so hunted up our camp.
He is an odd-looking individual, with sad eyes and a drooping mouth which gives his face a
most hopeless, reproachful expression. His nose, however, seems to upset the original plan,
for it is long and thin and bent slightly to one side. His neck is long and his Adam's apple
seems uncertain as to where it belongs. At supper Jerrine watched it as if fascinated until
I sent her from the table and went out to speak to her about gazing.

"Why, mamma," she said, "I had to look; he has swallowed something that won't go either up
or down, and I'm 'fraid he'll choke."

Although I can't brag about Mr. Murry's appearance, I can about his taste, for he admires Mrs.
O'Shaughnessy. It seems that in years gone by he has made attempts to marry her.

As he got up from supper the first night he was with us, he said, "Mary Ellen, I have a real
treat and surprise for you. Just wait a few minutes, an' I'll bet you'll be happy."

