BOY LIFE

STORIES AND READINGS SELECTED FROM THE WORKS OF

WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS

AND ARRANGED FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS BY

PERCIVAL CHUBB

DIRECTOR OF ENGLISH IN THE ETHICAL CULTURE SCHOOL, NEW YORK

ILLUSTRATED

HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

    NEW YORK AND LONDON
    MCMIX

HARPER'S MODERN SERIES

OF SUPPLEMENTARY READERS FOR THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS

Each, Illustrated, 16mo, 50 Cents School.

     "The literary culture which we are trying to give our boys and
     girls is not sufficiently contemporaneous, and it is not
     sufficiently national and American....

     "Among the living writers there is no one whose work has a more
     distinctively American savor than that of William Dean
     Howells.... The juvenile books of Mr. Howells' contain some of
     the very best pages ever written for the enjoyment of young
     people."--PERCIVAL CHUBB.

(Others in Preparation.)

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

Copyright, 1909, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

All rights reserved.

Published September, 1909.

CONTENTS

                                                                   PAGE

INTRODUCTION                                                         ix

I. ADVENTURES IN A BOY'S TOWN

  HOW PONY BAKER CAME PRETTY NEAR RUNNING OFF WITH A CIRCUS           3

  THE CIRCUS MAGICIAN                                                13

  JIM LEONARD'S HAIR-BREADTH ESCAPE                                  23

II. LIFE IN A BOY'S TOWN

  THE TOWN                                                           41

  EARLIEST MEMORIES                                                  45

  HOME LIFE                                                          47

  THE RIVER                                                          51

  SWIMMING                                                           55

  SKATING                                                            61

  MANNERS AND CUSTOMS                                                64

  GIRLS                                                              68

  MOTHERS                                                            69

  A BROTHER                                                          73

  A FRIEND                                                           79

III. GAMES AND PASTIMES

  MARBLES                                                            89

  RACES                                                              91

  A MEAN TRICK                                                       93

  TOPS                                                               96

  KITES                                                              98

  THE BUTLER GUARDS                                                 103

  PETS                                                              108

  INDIANS                                                           124

  GUNS                                                              129

  NUTTING                                                           138

  THE FIRE-ENGINES                                                  145

IV. GLIMPSES OF THE LARGER WORLD

  THE TRAVELLING CIRCUS                                             151

  PASSING SHOWS                                                     163

  THE THEATRE COMES TO TOWN                                         168

  THE WORLD OPENED BY BOOKS                                         171

V. THE LAST OF A BOY'S TOWN                                         183

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

KITE-TIME                                              Frontispiece

HE BEGAN BEING COLD AND STIFF WITH HER THE VERY NEXT MORNING                              
5

THE FIRST LOCK                                                     43

THE BUTLER GUARDS                                                 105

ALL AT ONCE THERE THE INDIANS WERE                                127

NUTTING                                                           141

INTRODUCTION

There are two conspicuous faults in the literary culture which we are trying to give to our
boys and girls in our elementary and secondary schools: it is not sufficiently contemporaneous,
and it is not sufficiently national and American. Hence it lacks vitality and actuality. So
little of it is carried over into life because so little of it is interpretative of the life
that is. It is associated too exclusively in the child's mind with things dead and gone--with
the Puritan world of Miles Standish, the Revolutionary days of Paul Revere, the Dutch epoch
of Rip Van Winkle; or with not even this comparatively recent national interest, it takes the
child back to the strange folk of the days of King Arthur and King Robert of Sicily, of Ivanhoe
and the Ancient Mariner. Thus when the child leaves school his literary studies do not connect
helpfully with those forms of literature with which--if he reads at all--he is most likely
to be concerned: the short story, the sketch, and the popular essay of the magazines and newspapers;
the new novel, or the plays which he may see at the theatre. He has not been interested in
the writers of his own time, and has never been put in the way of the best contemporary fiction.
Hence the ineffectualness and wastefulness of much of our school work: it does not lead forward
into the life of to-day, nor help the young to judge intelligently of the popular books which
later on will compete for their favor.

To be sure, not a little of the material used in our elementary schools is drawn from Longfellow,
Whittier, and Holmes, from Irving and Hawthorne; but because it is often studied in a so-called
thorough and, therefore, very deadly way--slowly and laboriously for drill, rather than briskly
for pleasure--there is comparatively little of it read, and almost no sense gained of its being
part of a national literature. In the high school, owing to the unfortunate domination of the
college entrance requirements, the situation is not much better. Our students leave with a
scant and hurried glimpse--if any glimpse at all--of Emerson, Thoreau, and Whitman, or of Lowell,
Lanier, and Poe; with no intimate view of Hawthorne, our great classic; none at all of Parkman
and Fiske, our historians; or of writers like Howells, James, and Cable, or Wilkins, Jewett,
and Deland, and a worthy company of story-tellers.

We may well be on our guard against a vaunting nationalism. It retards our culture. There should
be no confusion of the second-rate values of most of our American products with the supreme
values of the greatest British classics. We may work, of course, toward an ultimate appreciation
of these greatest things. We fail, however, in securing such appreciation because we have failed
to enlist those forms of interest which vitalize and stimulate literary studies--above all,
the patriotic or national interest. Concord and Cambridge should be dearer, as they are nearer,
to the young American than even Stratford and Abbotsford; Hawthorne should be as familiar as
Goldsmith; and Emerson, as Addison or Burke. Ordinarily it is not so; and we suffer the consequences
in the failure of our youth to grasp the spiritual ideals and the distinctively American democratic
spirit which find expression in the greatest work of our literary masters, Emerson and Whitman,
Lowell and Lanier. Our culture and our nationalism both suffer thereby. Our literature suffers
also, because we have not an instructed and interested public to encourage excellence. His
two books for boys--A Boy's Town and The Flight of Pony Baker--rank with such favorites as
Tom Sawyer and The Story of a Bad Boy.

These should be introductory to the best of Mr. Howells' novels and essays in the high school;
for Mr. Howells, it need scarcely be said, is one of our few masters of style: his style is
as individual and distinguished as it is felicitous and delicate. More important still, from
the educational point of view, he is one of our most modern writers: the spiritual issues and
social problems of our age, which our older high-school pupils are anxious to deal with, are
alive in his books. Our young people should know his Rise of Silas Lapham and A Hazard of New
Fortunes, as well as his social and literary criticism. As stimulating and alluring a volume
of selections may be made for high-school students as this volume will be, we venture to predict,
for the younger boys and girls of the elementary school.

In this little book of readings we have made, we believe, an entirely legitimate and desirable
use of the books named above. A Boy's Town is a series of detachable pictures and episodes
into which the boy--or the healthy girl who loves boys' books--may dip, as the selections here
given will, we believe, tempt him to do. The same is true of The Flight of Pony Baker. The
volume is for class-room enjoyment; for happy hours of profitable reading--profitable, because
happy. Much of it should be read aloud rather than silently, and dramatic justice be done to
the scenes and conversations which have dramatic quality.

                              PERCIVAL CHUBB. His
father and mother were coming home from a walk, in the evening; it was
so hot nobody could stay in the house, and just as they were coming to
the front steps Pony stole up behind them and tossed a snowball which he
had got out of the garden at his mother, just for fun. The flower struck
her very softly on her hair, for she had no bonnet on, and she gave a
jump and a hollo that made Pony laugh; and then she caught him by the
arm and boxed his ears.

"Oh, my goodness! It was you, was it, you good-for-nothing boy? I thought it was a bat!" she
said, and she broke out crying and ran into the house, and would not mind his father, who was
calling after her, "Lucy, Lucy, my dear child!"

Pony was crying, too, for he did not intend to frighten his mother, and when she took his fun
as if he had done something wicked he did not know what to think. He stole off to bed, and
he lay there crying in the dark and expecting that she would come to him, as she always did,
to have him say that he was sorry when he had been wicked, or to tell him that she was sorry
when she thought she had not been quite fair with him. But she did not come, and after a good
while his father came and said: "Are you awake, Pony? I am sorry your mother misunderstood
your fun. But you mustn't mind it, dear boy. She's not well, and she's very nervous."

"I don't care!" Pony sobbed out. "She won't have a chance to touch me again!" For he had made
up his mind to run off with the circus which was coming the next Tuesday.

He turned his face away, sobbing, and his father, after standing by his bed a moment, went
away without saying anything but "Don't forget your prayers, Pony. You'll feel differently
in the morning, I hope."

Pony fell asleep thinking how he would come back to the Boy's Town with the circus when he
was grown up, and when he came out in the ring riding three horses bareback he would see his
father and mother and sisters in one of the lower seats. They would not know him, but he would
know them, and he would send for them to come to the dressing-room, and would be very good
to them, all but his mother; he would be very cold and stiff with her, though he would know
that she was prouder of him than all the rest put together, and she would go away almost crying.

He began being cold and stiff with her the very next morning, although she was better than
ever to him, and gave him waffles for breakfast with unsalted butter, and tried to pet him
up. That whole day she kept trying to do things for him, but he would scarcely speak to her;
and at night she came to him and said, "What makes you act so strangely, Pony? Are you offended
with your mother?"

"Yes, I am!" said Pony, haughtily, and he twitched away from where she was sitting on the side
of his bed, leaning over him.

"On account of last night, Pony?" she asked, softly.

"I reckon you know well enough," said Pony, and he tried to be disgusted with her for being
such a hypocrite, but he had to set his teeth hard, hard, or he would have broken down crying.

"If it's for that, you mustn't, Pony dear. You don't know how you frightened me. When your
snowball hit me, I felt sure it was a bat, and I'm so afraid of bats, you know. I didn't mean
to hurt my poor boy's feelings so, and you mustn't mind it any more, Pony."

She stooped down and kissed him on the forehead, but he did not move or say anything; only,
after that he felt more forgiving toward his mother. He made up his mind to be good to her
along with the rest when he came back with the circus. But still he meant to run off with the
circus. He did not see how he could do anything else, for he had told all the boys that day
that he was going to do it; and when they just laughed, and said, "Oh yes. Think you can fool
your grandmother! It'll be like running off with the Indians," Pony wagged his head, and said
they would see whether it would or not, and offered to bet them what they dared.

The morning of the circus day all the fellows went out to the corporation line to meet the
circus procession. There were ladies and knights, the first thing, riding on spotted horses;
and then a band-chariot, all made up of swans and dragons. There were about twenty baggage-wagons;
but before you got to them there was the greatest thing of all. It was a chariot drawn by twelve
Shetland ponies, and it was shaped like a big shell, and around in the bottom of the shell
there were little circus actors, boys and girls, dressed in their circus clothes, and they
all looked exactly like fairies. They scarce seemed to see the fellows, as they ran alongside
of their chariot, but Hen Billard and Archy Hawkins, who were always cutting up, got close
enough to throw some peanuts to the circus boys, and some of the little circus girls laughed,
and the driver looked around and cracked his whip at the fellows, and they all had to get out
of the way then.

Jim Leonard said that the circus boys and girls were all stolen, and nobody was allowed to
come close to them for fear they would try to send word to their friends. Some of the fellows
did not believe it, and wanted to know how he knew it; and he said he read it in a paper; after
that nobody could deny it. But he said that if you went with the circus men of your own free
will they would treat you first-rate; only they would give you burnt brandy to keep you little;
nothing else but burnt brandy would do it, but that would do it, sure.

Pony was scared at first when he heard that most of the circus fellows were stolen, but he
thought if he went of his own accord he would be all right. Still, he did not feel so much
like running off with the circus as he did before the circus came. He asked Jim Leonard whether
the circus men made all the children drink burnt brandy; and Archy Hawkins and Hen Billard
heard him ask, and began to mock him. They took him up between them, one by his arms and the
other by the legs, and ran along with him, and kept saying, "Does it want to be a great big
circus actor? Then it shall, so it shall," and, "We'll tell the circus men to be very careful
of you, Pony dear!" till Pony wriggled himself loose and began to stone them.

After that they had to let him alone, for when a fellow began to stone you in the Boy's Town
you had to let him alone, unless you were going to whip him, and the fellows only wanted to
have a little fun with Pony. But what they did made him all the more resolved to run away with
the circus, just to show them.

He helped to carry water for the circus men's horses, along with the boys who earned their
admission that way. He had no need to do it, because his father was going to take him in, anyway;
but Jim Leonard said it was the only way to get acquainted with the circus men. Still, Pony
was afraid to speak to them, and he would not have said a word to any of them if it had not
been for one of them speaking to him first, when he saw him come lugging a great pail of water,
and bending far over on the right to balance it.

"That's right," the circus man said to Pony. "If you ever fell into that bucket you'd drown, sure."

He was a big fellow, with funny eyes, and he had a white bulldog at his heels; and all the
fellows said he was the one who guarded the outside of the tent when the circus began, and
kept the boys from hooking in under the curtain.

Even then Pony would not have had the courage to say anything, but Jim Leonard was just behind
him with another bucket of water, and he spoke up for him. "He wants to go with the circus."

They both set down their buckets, and Pony felt himself turning pale when the circus man came
toward them. "Wants to go with the circus, heigh? Let's have a look at you." He took Pony by
the shoulders and turned him slowly round, and looked at his nice clothes, and took him by
the chin. "Orphan?" he asked.

Pony did not know what to say, but Jim Leonard nodded; perhaps he did not know what to say,
either; but Pony felt as if they had both told a lie.

"Parents living?" The circus man looked at Pony, and Pony had to say that they were.

He gasped out, "Yes," so that you could scarcely hear him, and the circus man said:

"Well, that's right. When we take an orphan, we want to have his parents living, so that we
can go and ask them what sort of a boy he is."

He looked at Pony in such a friendly, smiling way that Pony took courage to ask him whether
they would want him to drink burnt brandy.

"What for?"

"To keep me little."

"Oh, I see." The circus man took off his hat and rubbed his forehead with a silk handkerchief,
which he threw into the top of his hat before he put it on again. "No, I don't know as we will.
We're rather short of giants just now. How would you like to drink a glass of elephant milk
every morning and grow into an eight-footer?"

Pony said he didn't know whether he would like to be quite so big; and then the circus man
said perhaps he would rather go for an India-rubber man; that was what they called the contortionists
in those days.

"Let's feel of you again." The circus man took hold of Pony and felt his joints. "You're put
together pretty tight; but I reckon we could make you do if you'd let us take you apart with
a screw-driver and limber up the pieces with rattlesnake oil. Wouldn't like it, heigh? Well,
let me see!" The circus man thought a moment, and then he said: "How would double-somersaults
on four horses bareback do?"

Pony said that would do, and then the circus man said: "Well, then, we've just hit it, because
our double-somersault, four-horse bareback is just going to leave us, and we want a new one
right away. Now, there's more than one way of joining a circus, but the best way is to wait
on your front steps with your things all packed up, and the procession comes along at about
one o'clock in the morning and picks you up. Which'd you rather do?"

Pony pushed his toe into the turf, as he always did when he was ashamed, but he made out to
say he would rather wait out on the front steps.

"Well, then, that's all settled," said the circus man. "We'll be along," and he was going away
with his dog, but Tim Leonard called after him:

"You hain't asked him whereabouts he lives?"

The circus man kept on, and he said, without looking around, "Oh, that's all right. We've got
somebody that looks after that."

"It's the magician," Jim Leonard whispered to Pony, and they walked away.

THE CIRCUS MAGICIAN

A crowd of the fellows had been waiting to know what the boys had been talking about to the
circus man, but Jim Leonard said, "Don't you tell, Pony Baker!" and he started to run, and
that made Pony run, too, and they both ran till they got away from the fellows.

"You have got to keep it a secret; for if a lot of fellows find it out the constable'll get
to know it, and he'll be watching out around the corner of your house, and when the procession
comes along and he sees you're really going he'll take you up, and keep you in jail till your
father comes and bails you out. Now, you mind!"

Pony said, "Oh, I won't tell anybody," and when Jim Leonard said that if a circus man was to
feel him over, that way, and act so kind of pleasant and friendly, he would be too proud to
speak to anybody, Pony confessed that he knew it was a great thing all the time.

"The way'll be," said Jim Leonard, "to keep in with him, and he'll keep the others from picking
on you; they'll be afraid to, on account of his dog. You'll see, he'll be the one to come for
you to-night; and if the constable is there the dog won't let him touch you. I never thought
of that."

Perhaps on account of thinking of it now Jim Leonard felt free to tell the other fellows how
Pony was going to run off, for when a crowd of them came along he told them. They said it was
splendid, and they said that if they could make their mothers let them, or if they could get
out of the house without their mothers knowing it, they were going to sit up with Pony and
watch out for the procession, and bid him good-bye.

At dinner-time he found out that his father was going to take him and all his sisters to the
circus, and his father and mother were so nice to him, asking him about the procession and
everything, that his heart ached at the thought of running away from home and leaving them.
But now he had to do it; the circus man was coming for him, and he could not back out; he did
not know what would happen if he did. It seemed to him as if his mother had done everything
she could to make it harder for him. She had stewed chicken for dinner, with plenty of gravy,
and hot biscuits to sop in, and peach preserves afterward; and she kept helping him to more,
because she said boys that followed the circus around got dreadfully hungry. The eating seemed
to keep his heart down; it was trying to get into his throat all the time; and he knew that
she was being good to him, but if he had not known it he would have believed his mother was
just doing it to mock him.

Pony had to go to the circus with his father and sisters, and to get on his shoes and a clean
collar. But a crowd of the fellows were there at the tent door to watch out whether the circus
man would say anything to him when he went in; and Jim Leonard rubbed against him, when the
man passed with his dog and did not even look at Pony, and said: "He's just pretending. He
don't want your father to know. He'll be round for you, sure. I saw him kind of smile to one
of the other circus men."

It was a splendid circus, and there were more things than Pony ever saw in a circus before.
But instead of hating to have it over, it seemed to him that it would never come to an end.
He kept thinking and thinking, and wondering whether he would like to be a circus actor; and
when the one came out who rode four horses bareback and stood on his head on the last horse,
and drove with the reins in his teeth, Pony thought that he never could learn to do it; and
if he could not learn he did not know what the circus men would say to him. It seemed to him
that it was very strange he had not told that circus man that he didn't know whether he could
do it or not; but he had not, and now it was too late.

A boy came around calling lemonade, and Pony's father bought some for each of the children,
but Pony could hardly taste his.

"What is the matter with you, Pony? Are you sick?" his father asked.

"No. I don't care for any; that's all. I'm well," said Pony; but he felt very miserable.

After supper Jim Leonard came round and went up to Pony's room with him to help him pack, and
he was so gay about it and said he only wished he was going, that Pony cheered up a little.
Jim had brought a large square of checked gingham that he said he did not believe his mother
would ever want, and that he would tell her he had taken if she asked for it. He said it would
be the very thing for Pony to carry his clothes in, for it was light and strong and would hold
a lot. He helped Pony to choose his things out of his bureau drawers: a pair of stockings and
a pair of white pantaloons and a blue roundabout, and a collar, and two handkerchiefs. That
was all he said Pony would need, because he would have his circus clothes right away, and there
was no use taking things that he would never wear.

Jim did these up in the square of gingham, and he tied it across cater-cornered twice, in double
knots, and showed Pony how he could put his hand through and carry it just as easy. He hid
it under the bed for him, and he told Pony that if he was in Pony's place he should go to bed
right away or pretty soon, so that nobody would think anything, and maybe he could get some
sleep before he got up and went down to wait on the front steps for the circus to come along.
He promised to be there with the other boys and keep them from fooling or making a noise, or
doing anything to wake his father up, or make the constable come. "You see, Pony," he said,
"if you can run off this year, and come back with the circus next year, then a whole lot of
fellows can run off. Don't you see that?"

Pony said he saw that, but he said he wished some of the other fellows were going now, because
he did not know any of the circus boys and he was afraid he might feel kind of lonesome. But
Jim Leonard said he would soon get acquainted, and, anyway, a year would go before he knew
it, and then if the other fellows could get off he would have plenty of company.

As soon as Jim Leonard was gone Pony undressed and got into bed. He was not sleepy, but he
thought maybe it would be just as well to rest a little while before the circus procession
came along for him; and, anyway, he could not bear to go down-stairs and be with the family
when he was going to leave them so soon, and not come back for a whole year.

After a good while, or about the time he usually came in from playing, he heard his mother
saying: "Where in the world is Pony? Has he come in yet? Have you seen him, girls? Pony! Pony!"
she called.

But somehow Pony could not get his voice up out of his throat; he wanted to answer her, but
he could not speak. He heard her say, "Go out to the front steps, girls, and see if you can
see him," and then he heard her coming up the stairs; and she came into his room, and when
she saw him lying there in bed, she said: "Why, I believe in my heart the child's asleep! Pony!
Are you awake?"

Pony made out to say no, and his mother said: "My! what a fright you gave me! Why didn't you
answer me? Are you sick, Pony? Your father said you didn't seem well at the circus; and you
didn't eat any supper, hardly."

Pony said he was first-rate, but he spoke very low, and his mother came up and sat down on
the side of his bed.

"What is the matter, child?" She bent over and felt his forehead. "No, you haven't got a bit
of fever," she said, and she kissed him, and began to tumble his short black hair in the way
she had, and she got one of his hands between her two, and kept rubbing it. "But you've had
a long, tiresome day, and that's why you've gone to bed, I suppose. But if you feel the least
sick, Pony, I'll send for the doctor."

Pony said he was not sick at all; just tired; and that was true; he felt as if he never wanted
to get up again.

His mother put her arm under his neck, and pressed her face close down to his, and said very
low: "Pony dear, you don't feel hard toward your mother for what she did the other night?"

He knew she meant boxing his ears, when he was not to blame, and he said: "Oh no," and then
he threw his arms round her neck and cried; and she told him not to cry, and that she would
never do such a thing again; but she was really so frightened she did not know what she was doing.

When he quieted down, she said: "Now say your prayers, Pony, 'Our Father,'" and she said, "Our
Father" all through with him, and after that, "Now I lay me," just as when he was a very little
fellow. After they had finished she stooped over and kissed him again, and when he turned his
face into his pillow she kept smoothing his hair with her hand for about a minute. Then she
went away.

Pony could hear them stirring about for a good while down-stairs. His father came in from uptown
at last, and asked: "Has Pony come in?"

And his mother said; "Yes, he's up in bed. I wouldn't disturb him, Henry. He's asleep by this
time."

His father said: "I don't know what to make of the boy. If he keeps on acting so strangely
I shall have the doctor see him in the morning."

Pony felt dreadfully to think how far away from them he should be in the morning, and he would
have given anything if he could have gone down to his father and mother and told them what
he was going to do. But it did not seem as if he could.

By-and-by he began to be sleepy, and then he dozed off, but he thought it was hardly a minute
before he heard the circus band, and knew that the procession was coming for him. He jumped
out of bed and put on his things as fast as he could; but his roundabout had only one sleeve
to it, somehow, and he had to button the lower buttons of his trousers to keep it on. He got
his bundle and stole down to the front door without seeming to touch his feet to anything,
and when he got out on the front steps he saw the circus magician coming along. By that time
the music had stopped and Pony could not see any procession. The magician had on a tall, peaked
hat, like a witch. He took up the whole street, he was so wide in the black glazed gown that
hung from his arms when he stretched them out, for he seemed to be groping along that way,
with his wand in one hand, like a blind man.

He kept saying in a kind of deep, shaking voice, "It's all glory; it's all glory," and the
sound of those words froze Pony's blood. He tried to get back into the house again, so that
the magician should not find him, but when he felt for the door-knob there was no door there
anywhere; nothing but a smooth wall. Then he sat down on the steps and tried to shrink up so
little that the magician would miss him; but he saw his wide goggles getting nearer and nearer;
and then his father and the doctor were standing by him looking down at him, and the doctor said:

"He has been walking in his sleep; he must be bled," and he got out his lancet, when Pony heard
his mother calling: "Pony, Pony! What's the matter? Have you got the nightmare?" and he woke
up, and found it was just morning.

The sun was shining in at his window, and it made him so glad to think that by this time the
circus was far away and he was not with it, that he hardly knew what to do.

He was not very well for two or three days afterward, and his mother let him stay out of school
to see whether he was really going to be sick or not. When he went back most of the fellows
had forgotten that he had been going to run off with the circus. Some of them that happened
to think of it plagued him a little and asked how he liked being a circus actor.

Hen Billard was the worst; he said he reckoned the circus magician got scared when he saw what
a whaler Pony was, and told the circus men that they would have to get a new tent to hold him;
and that was the reason why they didn't take him. Archy Hawkins said: "How long did you have
to wait on the front steps, Pony dear?" But after that he was pretty good to him, and said
he reckoned they had better not any of them pretend that Pony had not tried to run off if they
had not been up to see.

Pony himself could never be exactly sure whether he had waited on the front steps and seen
the circus magician or not. Sometimes it seemed all of it like a dream, and sometimes only
part of it. Jim Leonard tried to help him make it out, but they could not. He said it was a
pity he had overslept himself, for if he had come to bid Pony good-bye, the way he said, then
he could have told just how much of it was a dream and how much was not.

JIM LEONARD'S HAIR-BREADTH ESCAPE

Jim Leonard's stable used to stand on the flat near the river, and on a rise of ground above
it stood Jim Leonard's log-cabin. The boys called it Jim Leonard's log-cabin, but it was really
his mother's, and the stable was hers, too. It was a log stable, but up where the gable began
the logs stopped, and it was weather-boarded the rest of the way, and the roof was shingled.

Jim Leonard said it was all logs once, and that the roof was loose clapboards, held down by
logs that ran across them, like the roofs in the early times, before there were shingles or
nails, or anything, in the country. But none of the oldest boys had ever seen it like that,
and you had to take Jim Leonard's word for it if you wanted to believe it. The little fellows
nearly all did; but everybody said afterward it was a good thing for Jim Leonard that it was
not that kind of roof when he had his hair-breadth escape on it. He said himself that he would
not have cared if it had been; but that was when it was all over, and his mother had whipped
him, and everything, and he was telling the boys about it.

He said that in his Pirate Book lots of fellows on rafts got to land when they were shipwrecked,
and that the old-fashioned roof would have been just like a raft, anyway, and he could have
steered it right across the river to Delorac's Island as easy! Pony Baker thought very likely
he could, but Hen Billard said:

"Well, why didn't you do it, with the kind of a roof you had?"

Some of the boys mocked Jim Leonard; but a good many of them thought he could have done it
if he could have got into the eddy that there was over by the island. If he could have landed
there, once, he could have camped out and lived on fish till the river fell.

It was that spring, about fifty-four years ago, when the freshet, which always came in the
spring, was the worst that anybody could remember. The country above the Boy's Town was under
water for miles and miles. The river-bottoms were flooded so that the corn had to be all planted
over again when the water went down. The freshet tore away pieces of orchard, and apple-trees
in bloom came sailing along with logs and fence-rails and chicken-coops, and pretty soon dead
cows and horses. There was a dog chained to a dog-kennel that went by, howling awfully; the
boys would have given anything if they could have saved him, but the yellow river whirled him
out of sight behind the middle pier of the bridge, which everybody was watching from the bank,
expecting it to go any minute. The water was up within four or five feet of the bridge, and
the boys believed that if a good big log had come along and hit it, the bridge would have been
knocked loose from its piers and carried down the river.

Perhaps it would, and perhaps it would not. The boys all ran to watch it as soon as school
was out, and stayed till they had to go to supper. After supper some of their mothers let them
come back and stay till bedtime, if they would promise to keep a full yard back from the edge
of the bank. They could not be sure just how much a yard was, and they nearly all sat down
on the edge and let their legs hang over.

Jim Leonard was there, holloing and running up and down the bank, and showing the other boys
things away out in the river that nobody else could see; he said he saw a man out there. He
had not been to supper, and he had not been to school all day, which might have been the reason
why he would rather stay with the men and watch the bridge than go home to supper; his mother
would have been waiting for him with a sucker from the pear-tree. He told the boys that while
they were gone he went out with one of the men on the bridge as far as the middle pier, and
it shook like a leaf; he showed with his hand how it shook.

Jim Leonard was a fellow who believed he did all kinds of things that he would like to have
done; and the big boys just laughed. That made Jim Leonard mad, and he said that as soon as
the bridge began to go, he was going to run out on it and go with it; and then they would see
whether he was a liar or not! They mocked him and danced round him till he cried. But Pony
Baker, who had come with his father, believed that Jim Leonard would really have done it; and
at any rate, he felt sorry for him when Jim cried.

He stayed later than any of the little fellows, because his father was with him, and even all
the big boys had gone home except Hen Billard, when Pony left Jim Leonard on the bank and stumbled
sleepily away, with his hand in his father's.

When Pony was gone, Hen Billard said: "Well, going to stay all night, Jim?"

And Jim Leonard answered back, as cross as could be, "Yes, I am!" And he said the men who were
sitting up to watch the bridge were going to give him some of their coffee, and that would
keep him awake. But perhaps he thought this because he wanted some coffee so badly. He was
awfully hungry, for he had not had anything since breakfast, except a piece of bread-and-butter
that he got Pony Baker to bring him in his pocket when he came down from school at noontime.

Hen Billard said, "Well, I suppose I won't see you any more, Jim; good-bye," and went away
laughing; and after a while one of the men saw Jim Leonard hanging about, and asked him what
he wanted there at that time of night; and Jim could not say he wanted coffee, and so there
was nothing for him to do but go. There was nowhere for him to go but home, and he sneaked
off in the dark.

When he came in sight of the cabin he could not tell whether he would rather have his mother
waiting for him with a whipping and some supper, or get to bed somehow with neither. He climbed
softly over the back fence and crept up to the back door, but it was fast; then he crept round
to the front door, and that was fast, too. There was no light in the house, and it was perfectly
still.

All of a sudden it struck him that he could sleep in the stable-loft, and he thought what a
fool he was not to have thought of it before. The notion brightened him up so that he got the
gourd that hung beside the well-curb and took it out to the stable with him; for now he remembered
that the cow would be there, unless she was in somebody's garden-patch or cornfield.

He noticed as he walked down toward the stable that the freshet had come up over the flat,
and just before the door he had to wade. But he was in his bare feet, and he did not care;
if he thought anything, he thought that his mother would not come out to milk till the water
went down, and he would be safe till then from the whipping he must take, sooner or later,
for playing hooky.

Sure enough, the old cow was in the stable, and she gave Jim Leonard a snort of welcome and
then lowed anxiously. He fumbled through the dark to her side, and began to milk her. She had
been milked only a few hours before, and so he got only a gourdful from her. But it was all
strippings, and rich as cream, and it was smoking warm. It seemed to Jim Leonard that it went
down to his very toes when he poured it into his throat, and it made him feel so good that
he did not know what to do.

There really was not anything for him to do but to climb up into the loft by the ladder in
the corner of the stable, and lie down on the old last year's fodder. The rich, warm milk made
Jim Leonard awfully sleepy, and he dropped off almost as soon as his head touched the cornstalks.
The last thing he remembered was the hoarse roar of the freshet outside, and that was a lulling
music in his ears.

The next thing he knew, and he hardly knew that, was a soft, jolting, sinking motion, first
to one side and then to the other; then he seemed to be going down, down, straight down, and
then to be drifting off into space. He rubbed his eyes and found it was full daylight, although
it was the daylight of early morning; and while he lay looking out of the stable-loft window
and trying to make out what it all meant, he felt a wash of cold water along his back, and
his bed of fodder melted away under him and around him, and some loose planks of the loft floor
swam weltering out of the window. Then he knew what had happened. The flood had stolen up while
he slept, and sapped the walls of the stable; the logs had given way, one after another, and
had let him down, with the roof, into the water.

He got to his feet as well as he could, and floundered over the rising and falling boards to
the window in the floating gable. One look outside showed him his mother's log-cabin safe on
its rise of ground, and at the corner the old cow, that must have escaped through the stable
door he had left open, and passed the night among the cabbages. She seemed to catch sight of
Jim Leonard when he put his head out, and she lowed to him.

Jim Leonard did not stop to make any answer. He clambered out of the window and up onto the
ridge of the roof, and there, in the company of a large gray rat, he set out on the strangest
voyage a boy ever made. In a few moments the current swept him out into the middle of the river,
and he was sailing down between his native shore on one side and Delorac's Island on the other.

All round him seethed and swirled the yellow flood in eddies and ripples, where drift of all
sorts danced and raced. His vessel, such as it was, seemed seaworthy enough. It held securely
together, fitting like a low, wide cup over the water, and perhaps finding some buoyancy from
the air imprisoned in it above the window. But Jim Leonard was not satisfied, and so far from
being proud of his adventure, he was frightened worse even than the rat which shared it. As
soon as he could get his voice, he began to shout for help to the houses on the empty shores,
which seemed to fly backward on both sides while he lay still on the gulf that swashed around
him, and tried to drown his voice before it swallowed him up. At the same time the bridge,
which had looked so far off when he first saw it, was rushing swiftly toward him, and getting
nearer and nearer.

He wondered what had become of all the people and all the boys. He thought that if he were
safe there on shore he should not be sleeping in bed while somebody was out in the river on
a roof, with nothing but a rat to care whether he got drowned or not.

Where was Hen Billard, that always made fun so; or Archy Hawkins, that pretended to be so good-natured;
or Pony Baker, that seemed to like a fellow so much? He began to call for them by name: "Hen
Billard--O Hen! Help, help! Archy Hawkins--O Archy! I'm drowning! Pony, Pony--O Pony! Don't
you see me, Pony?"

He could see the top of Pony Baker's house, and he thought what a good, kind man Pony's father
was. Surely he would try to save him; and Jim Leonard began to yell: "O Mr. Baker! Look here,
Mr. Baker! It's Jim Leonard, and I'm floating down the river on a roof! Save me, Mr. Baker,
save me! Help, help, somebody! Fire! Fire! Fire! Murder! Fire!"

By this time he was about crazy, and did not half know what he was saying. Just in front of
where Hen Billard's grandmother lived, on the street that ran along the top of the bank, the
roof got caught in the branches of a tree which had drifted down and stuck in the bottom of
the river so that the branches waved up and down as the current swashed through them. Jim Leonard
was glad of anything that would stop the roof, and at first he thought he would get off on
the tree. That was what the rat did. Perhaps the rat thought Jim Leonard really was crazy and
he had better let him have the roof to himself; but the rat saw that he had made a mistake,
and he jumped back again after he had swung up and down on a limb two or three times. Jim Leonard
felt awfully when the rat first got into the tree, for he remembered how it said in the Pirate
Book that rats always leave a sinking ship, and now he believed that he certainly was gone.
But that only made him hollo the louder, and he holloed so loud that at last he made somebody hear.

It was Hen Billard's grandmother, and she put her head out of the window with her nightcap
on, to see what the matter was. Jim Leonard caught sight of her, and he screamed: "Fire, fire,
fire! I'm drownding, Mrs. Billard! Oh, do somebody come!"

Hen Billard's grandmother just gave one yell of "Fire! The world's a-burnin' up, Hen Billard,
and you layin' there sleepin' and not helpin' a bit! Somebody's out there in the river!" and
she rushed into the room where Hen was, and shook him.

He bounced out of bed and pulled on his pantaloons, and was down-stairs in a minute. He ran
bareheaded over to the bank, and when Jim Leonard saw him coming he holloed ten times as loud:
"It's me, Hen! It's Jim Leonard! Oh, do get somebody to come out and save me! Fire!"

As soon as Hen heard that, and felt sure it was not a dream, which he did in about half a second,
he began to yell, too, and to say: "How did you get there? Fire, fire, fire! What are you on?
Fire! Are you in a tree, or what? Fire, fire! Are you in a flat-boat? Fire, fire, fire! If
I had a skiff--fire!"

He kept racing up and down the bank, and back and forth between the bank and the houses. The
river was almost up to the top of the bank, and it looked a mile wide. Down at the bridge you
could hardly see any light between the water and the bridge.

Pretty soon people began to look out of their doors and windows, and Hen Billard's grandmother
kept screaming: "The world's a-burnin' up! The river's on fire!" Then boys came out of their
houses; and then men with no hats on; and then women and girls, with their hair half down.
The fire-bells began to ring, and in less than five minutes both the fire companies were on
the shore, with the men at the brakes and the foremen of the companies holloing through their
trumpets.

Then Jim Leonard saw what a good thing it was that he had thought of holloing fire. He felt
sure now that they would save him somehow, and he made up his mind to save the rat, too, and
pet it, and maybe go around and exhibit it. He would name it Bolivar; it was just the color
of the elephant Bolivar that came to the Boy's Town every year. These things whirled through
his brain while he watched two men setting out in a skiff toward him.

They started from the shore a little above him, and they meant to row slanting across to his
tree, but the current, when they got fairly into it, swept them far below, and they were glad
to row back to land again without ever getting anywhere near him. At the same time, the tree-top
where his roof was caught was pulled southward by a sudden rush of the torrent; it opened,
and the roof slipped out, with Jim Leonard and the rat on it. They both joined in one squeal
of despair as the river leaped forward with them, and a dreadful "Oh!" went up from the people
on the bank.

Some of the firemen had run down to the bridge when they saw that the skiff was not going to
be of any use, and one of them had got out of the window of the bridge onto the middle pier,
with a long pole in his hand. It had an iron hook at the end, and it was the kind of pole that
the men used to catch driftwood with and drag it ashore. When the people saw Blue Bob with
that pole in his hand, they understood what he was up to. He was going to wait till the water
brought the roof with Jim Leonard on it down to the bridge, and then catch the hook into the
shingles and pull it up to the pier. The strongest current set close in around the middle pier,
and the roof would have to pass on one side or the other. That was what Blue Bob argued out
in his mind when he decided that the skiff would never reach Jim Leonard, and he knew that
if he could not save him that way, nothing could save him.

Blue Bob must have had a last name, but none of the little fellows knew what it was. Everybody
called him Blue Bob because he had such a thick, black beard that when he was just shaved his
face looked perfectly blue. He knew all about the river and its ways, and if it had been of
any use to go out with a boat, he would have gone. That was what all the boys said, when they
followed Blue Bob to the bridge and saw him getting out on the pier. He was the only person
that the watchman had let go on the bridge for two days.

The water was up within three feet of the floor, and if Jim Leonard's roof slipped by Blue
Bob's guard and passed under the bridge, it would scrape Jim Leonard off, and that would be
the last of him.

All the time the roof was coming nearer the bridge, sometimes slower, sometimes faster, just
as it got into an eddy or into the current; once it seemed almost to stop, and swayed completely
round; then it just darted forward.

Blue Bob stood on the very point of the pier, where the strong stone-work divided the current,
and held his hooked pole ready to make a clutch at the roof, whichever side it took. Jim Leonard
saw him there, but although he had been holloing and yelling and crying all the time, now he
was still. He wanted to say, "O Bob, save me!" but he could not make a sound.

It seemed to him that Bob was going to miss him when he made a lunge at the roof on the right
side of the pier; it seemed to him that the roof was going down the left side; but he felt
it quiver and stop, and then it gave a loud crack and went to pieces, and flung itself away
upon the whirling and dancing flood. At first Jim Leonard thought he had gone with it; but
it was only the rat that tried to run up Blue Bob's pole, and slipped off into the water; and
then somehow Jim was hanging onto Blue Bob's hands and scrambling onto the bridge.

Blue Bob always said he never saw any rat, and a good many people said there never was any
rat on the roof with Jim Leonard; they said that he just made the rat up.

He did not mention the rat himself for several days; he told Pony Baker that he did not think
of it at first, he was so excited.

Pony asked his father what he thought, and Pony's father said that it might have been the kind
of rat that people see when they have been drinking too much, and that Blue Bob had not seen
it because he had signed the temperance pledge.

But this was a good while after. At the time the people saw Jim Leonard standing safe with
Blue Bob on the pier, they set up a regular election cheer, and they would have believed anything
Jim Leonard said. They all agreed that Blue Bob had a right to go home with Jim and take him
to his mother, for he had saved Jim's life, and he ought to have the credit of it.

Before this, and while everybody supposed that Jim Leonard would surely be drowned, some of
the people had gone up to his mother's cabin to prepare her for the worst. I was answered through
the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh. It rang on my ears long and heavily;
the mountains re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable
existence but that my vow was heard and that I was reserved for vengeance.

The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed
me in an audible whisper, "I am satisfied, miserable wretch! You have determined to live,
and I am satisfied."

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly
the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly
and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed.

I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.

Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but
vainly.

The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the
fiend enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black
Sea.

I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track.
Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he
himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die, left some mark
to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white
plain. To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined
to endure; I was cursed by some devil and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a
spirit of good followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate
me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank
under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited
me.

The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but I will not doubt
that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry,
the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
few drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the daemon generally avoided these,
as it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings
were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had
money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some
food that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had
provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during sleep alone that I could taste
joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me
even to rapture. The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments,
or rather hours, of happiness that I might retain strength to fulfil
my pilgrimage.

Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships.

During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my friends,
my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the
silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied
by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come and that
I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends. What agonizing fondness did I
feel for them! How did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking
hours, and persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments vengeance, that burned within
me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the daemon more as a
task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious,
than as the ardent desire of my soul. What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know. Sometimes,
indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided me
and instigated my fury. "My reign is not yet over"--these words were legible in one of these
inscriptions--"you live, and my power is complete.

    Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will
feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am impassive.

You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed.
Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must
you endure until that period shall arrive."

Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture
and death.

Never will I give up my search until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join
my Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil
and horrible pilgrimage!

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree
almost too severe to support. The peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the
most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places
to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus
I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with
the difficulty of my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words: "Prepare! Your
toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey
where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred."

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words;
I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support
me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary
of the horizon.

Oh! How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south! Covered with ice, it was only to be
distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when
they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of
their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for
conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary's gibe, to
meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus traversed the snows
with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found
that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that when
I first saw the ocean he was but one day's journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him
before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days
arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants
concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.

A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance.
He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he
had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to
the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction
that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking
of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair. He had escaped me, and
I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the
ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of
a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea that the fiend should
live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every
other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round and
instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for
one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of
provisions, I departed from land.

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have endured misery which nothing but
the eternal sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to support.
Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard the thunder
of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the paths
of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that I had passed three weeks
in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung
bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes.

Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of
a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before
me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained
my sight to discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge
and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did
hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might
not intercept the view I had of the daemon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops,
until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave
them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary,
and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible,
nor did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short time some ice-rock concealed
it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days'
journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart
bounded within me.

But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than
I had ever done before.

A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath
me, became every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose;
the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in a few minutes a tumultuous
sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was
continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous death. In this manner many appalling
hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation
of distress when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour
and life. I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the
sight. I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled,
with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of your ship. I had determined, if
you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon
my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could pursue my enemy. But
your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should
soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task
is unfulfilled.

Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the daemon, allow me the rest I so much
desire; or must I die, and he yet live?

If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him and satisfy my
vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure
the hardships that I have undergone? No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should
appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall not live--swear
that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the list of his dark
crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiend-like malice.
Hear him not; call on the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the
wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the steel
aright.

Walton, in continuation.

August 26th, 17--

You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal
with horror, like that which even now curdles mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could
not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the
words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now
subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance
and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every
mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an
expression of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that
the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen
from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet
I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the
particulars of his creature's formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. "Are you mad,
my friend?" said he. "Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create
for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not seek
to increase your own." Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked
to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally
in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. "Since you have
preserved my narration," said he, "I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity."

Thus
has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest tale
that ever imagination formed.

My thoughts and every feeling of my soul have been drunk up by the
interest for my guest which this tale and his own elevated and gentle
manners have created.

I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every
hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can now know will be when he composes
his shattered spirit to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends and derives from
that communion consolation for his miseries or excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the
creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a remote
world. This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and
interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes. On every point
of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension.
His eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident
or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature
must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin!
He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.

"When younger," said he, "I believed myself destined for some great
enterprise.

My feelings are profound, but I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious
achievements. This sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been
oppressed, for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that might
be useful to my fellow creatures. When I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a one
than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal, I could not rank myself with the herd
of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now
serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing,
and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination
was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities
I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot recollect without
passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting
in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high
hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once was,
you would not recognize me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart;
a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise." Must I then
lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought one who would sympathize
with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained
him only to know his value and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the
idea.

"I thank you, Walton," he said, "for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when
you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone?
Can any man be to me as Clerval was, or any woman another Elizabeth? Even where the affections
are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess
a certain power over our minds which hardly any later friend can
obtain.

They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never
eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to the integrity
of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown
early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly he may
be attached, may, in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends,
dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am,
the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of Clerval will be ever whispered in
my ear. They are dead, and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life.
If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow
creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the
being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die."

September 2nd

My beloved Sister,

I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England
and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no
escape and threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows whom I have persuaded
to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly
appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is terrible to
reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered through me.

If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not
hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. Years
will pass, and you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured
by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt
expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death.

But
you have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy. Heaven bless
you and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest
compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life
were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same
accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this
sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even
the sailors feel the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they
no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his
voice they believe these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which
will vanish before the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory;
each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost
dread a mutiny caused by this despair.

September 5th

A scene has
just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly
probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear
recording it.

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still
in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is
excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found
a grave amidst this scene of desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined
in health; a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted,
and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again
into apparent lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears
I entertained of a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching the wan
countenance of my friend--his eyes half closed and his limbs hanging
listlessly--I was roused by half a dozen of the sailors, who demanded
admission into the cabin. It was his brother, I suppose, who taught him to
abhor it; and perhaps it was his own suffering from it in part; for he, too, sometimes shed
bitter tears over such a knot, as I have seen hapless little wretches do, tearing at it with
their nails and gnawing at it with their teeth, knowing that the time was passing when they
could hope to hide the fact that they had been in swimming, and foreseeing no remedy but to
cut off the sleeve above the knot, or else put on their clothes without the shirt, and trust
to untying the knot when it got dry.

There must have been a lurking anxiety in all the boys' hearts when they went in without leave,
or, as my boy was apt to do, when explicitly forbidden. He was not apt at lying, I dare say,
and so he took the course of open disobedience. He could not see the danger that filled the
home hearts with fear for him, and he must have often broken the law and been forgiven, before
Justice one day appeared for him on the river-bank and called him away from his stolen joys.
It was an awful moment, and it covered him with shame before his mates, who heartlessly rejoiced,
as children do, in the doom which they are escaping. That sin, at least, he fully expiated;
and I will whisper to the young people here at the end of the chapter that somehow, soon or
late, our sins do overtake us, and insist upon being paid for. That is not the best reason
for not sinning, but it is well to know it, and to believe it in our acts as well as our thoughts.
You will find people to tell you that things only happen so and so. It may be; only, I know
that no good thing ever happened to happen to me when I had done wrong.

SKATING

I am afraid that the young people will think I am telling them too much about swimming. But
in the Boy's Town the boys really led a kind of amphibious life, and as long as the long summer
lasted they were almost as much in the water as on the land. The Basin, however, unlike the
river, had a winter as well as a summer climate, and one of the very first things that my boy
could remember was being on the ice there. He learned to skate, but he did not know when, any
more than he knew just the moment of learning to read or to swim. He became passionately fond
of skating, and kept at it all day long when there was ice for it, which was not often in those
soft winters. They made a very little ice go a long way in the Boy's Town; and began to use
it for skating as soon as there was a glazing of it on the Basin. None of them ever got drowned
there; though a boy would often start from one bank and go flying to the other, trusting his
speed to save him, while the thin sheet sank and swayed, but never actually broke under him.
Usually the ice was not thick enough to have a fire built on it; and it must have been on ice
which was just strong enough to bear that my boy skated all one bitter afternoon at Old River,
without a fire to warm by. At first his feet were very cold, and then they gradually felt less
cold, and at last he did not feel them at all. He thought this very nice, and he told one of
the big boys. "Why, your feet are frozen!" said the big boy, and he dragged off my boy's skates,
and the little one ran all the long mile home, crazed with terror, and not knowing what moment
his feet might drop off there in the road. His mother plunged them in a bowl of ice-cold water,
and then rubbed them with flannel, and so thawed them out; but that could not save him from
the pain of their coming to: it was intense, and there must have been a time afterward when
he did not use his feet.

His skates themselves were of a sort that I am afraid boys would smile at nowadays. When you
went to get a pair of skates forty or fifty years ago, you did not make your choice between
a Barney & Berry and an Acme, which fastened on with the turn of a screw or the twist of a
clamp. You found an assortment of big and little sizes of solid wood bodies with guttered blades
turning up in front with a sharp point, or perhaps curling over above the toe. In this case
they sometimes ended in an acorn; if this acorn was of brass, it transfigured the boy who wore
that skate; he might have been otherwise all rags and patches, but the brass acorn made him
splendid from head to foot. When you had bought your skates, you took them to a carpenter,
and stood awe-strickenly about while he pierced the wood with strap-holes; or else you managed
to bore them through with a hot iron yourself. Then you took them to a saddler, and got him
to make straps for them; that is, if you were rich, and your father let you have a quarter
to pay for the job. If not, you put strings through, and tied your skates on. They were always
coming off, or getting crosswise of your foot, or feeble-mindedly slumping down on one side
of the wood; but it did not matter, if you had a fire on the ice, fed with old barrels and
boards and cooper's shavings, and could sit round it with your skates on, and talk and tell
stones, between your flights and races afar; and come whizzing back to it from the frozen distance,
and glide, with one foot lifted, almost among the embers.

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS

I sometimes wonder how much these have changed since my boy's time. Of course they differ somewhat
from generation to generation, and from East to West and North to South, but not so much, I
believe, as grown people are apt to think. Everywhere and always the world of boys is outside
of the laws that govern grown-up communities, and it has its unwritten usages, which are handed
down from old to young, and perpetuated on the same level of years, and are lived into and
lived out of, but are binding, through all personal vicissitudes, upon the great body of boys
between six and twelve years old. No boy can violate them without losing his standing among
the other boys, and he cannot enter into their world without coming under them. He must do
this, and must not do that; he obeys, but he does not know why, any more than the far-off savages
from whom his customs seem mostly to have come. His world is all in and through the world of
men and women, but no man or woman can get into it any more than if it were a world of invisible
beings. It has its own ideals and superstitions, and these are often of a ferocity, a depravity,
scarcely credible in after-life. It is a great pity that fathers and mothers cannot penetrate
that world; but they cannot, and it is only by accident that they can catch some glimpse of
what goes on in it. No doubt it will be civilized in time, but it will be very slowly; and
in the mean while it is only in some of its milder manners and customs that the boy's world
can be studied.

The first great law was that, whatever happened to you through another boy, whatever hurt or
harm he did you, you were to right yourself upon his person if you could; but if he was too
big, and you could not hope to revenge yourself, then you were to bear the wrong, not only
for that time, but for as many times as he chose to inflict it. To tell the teacher or your
mother, or to betray your tormentor to any one outside of the boys' world, was to prove yourself
a cry-baby, without honor or self-respect, and unfit to go with the other fellows. They would
have the right to mock you, to point at you, and call "E-e-e, e-e-e, e-e-e!" at you, till you
fought them. After that, whether you whipped them or not, there began to be some feeling in
your favor again, and they had to stop.

Every boy who came to town from somewhere else, or who moved into a new neighborhood, had to
fight the old residents. There was no reason for this, except that he was a stranger, and there
appeared to be no other means of making his acquaintance. If he was generally whipped he became
subject to the local tribe, as the Delawares were to the Iroquois in the last century; if he
whipped the other boys, then they adopted him into their tribe, and he became a leader among
them. When you moved away from a neighborhood you did not lose all your rights in it; you did
not have to fight when you went back to see the boys, or anything; but if one of them met you
in your new precincts you might have to try conclusions with him; and perhaps, if he was a
boy who had been in the habit of whipping you, you were quite ready to do so. When my boy's
family left the Smith house, one of the boys from that neighborhood came up to see him at the
Falconer house, and tried to carry things with a high hand, as he always had done. Then my
boy fought him, quite as if he were not a Delaware and the other boy not an Iroquois, with
sovereign rights over him. My boy was beaten, but the difference was that, if he had not been
on new ground, he would have been beaten without daring to fight. His mother witnessed the
combat, and came out and shamed him for his behavior, and had in the other boy, and made them
friends over some sugar-cakes. But after that the boys of the Smith neighborhood understood
that my boy would not be whipped without fighting. The home instruction was all against fighting;
my boy was taught that it was not only wicked but foolish; that if it was wrong to strike,
it was just as wrong to strike back; that two wrongs never made a right, and so on. But all
this was not of the least effect with a hot temper amid the trials and perplexities of life
in the Boy's Town.

Their fights were mostly informal scuffles, on and off in a flash, and conducted with none
of the ceremony which I have read of concerning the fights of English boys. It was believed
that some of the fellows knew how to box, and all the fellows intended to learn, but nobody
ever did. The fights sprang usually out of some trouble of the moment; but at times they were
arranged to settle some question of moral or physical superiority. Then one boy put a chip
on his shoulder and dared the other to knock it off. It took a great while to bring the champions
to blows, and I have known the mere preparatory insults of a fight of this kind to wear out
the spirit of the combatants and the patience of the spectators, so that not a blow was struck,
finally, and the whole affair fell through.

GIRLS

Though they were so quarrelsome among themselves, the boys that my boy went with never molested
girls. They mostly ignored them; but they would have scorned to hurt a girl almost as much
as they would have scorned to play with one. Of course, while they were very little, they played
with girls; and after they began to be big boys, eleven or twelve years old, they began to
pay girls some attention; but for the rest they simply left them out of the question, except
at parties, when the games obliged them to take some notice of the girls. Even then, however,
it was not good form for a boy to be greatly interested in them; and he had to conceal any
little fancy he had about this girl or that unless he wanted to be considered soft by the other
fellows. When they were having fun they did not want to have any girls around; but in the back-yard
a boy might play teeter or seesaw, or some such thing, with his sisters and their friends,
without necessarily losing caste, though such things were not encouraged. On the other hand,
a boy was bound to defend them against anything that he thought slighting or insulting; and
you did not have to verify the fact that anything had been said or done; you merely had to
hear that it had.

MOTHERS

The boys had very little to do with the inside of one another's houses. They would follow a
boy to his door, and wait for him to come out; and they would sometimes get him to go in and
ask his mother for crullers or sugar-cakes; when they came to see him they never went indoors
for him, but stood on the sidewalk and called him with a peculiar cry, something like "E-oo-we,
e-oo-we!" and threw stones at trees, or anything, till he came out. If he did not come after
a reasonable time, they knew he was not there, or that his mother would not let him come. A
fellow was kept in that way, now and then. If a fellow's mother came to the door the boys always
ran.

The mother represented the family sovereignty; the father was seldom seen, and he counted for
little or nothing among the outside boys. It was the mother who could say whether a boy might
go fishing or in swimming, and she was held a good mother or not according as she habitually
said yes or no. There was no other standard of goodness for mothers in the boy's world, and
could be none; and a bad mother might be outwitted by any device that the other boys could
suggest to her boy. Such a boy was always willing to listen to any suggestion, and no boy took
it hard if the other fellows made fun when their plan got him into trouble at home. If a boy
came out after some such experience with his face wet, and his eyes red, and his lips swollen,
of course you had to laugh; he expected it, and you expected him to stone you for laughing.

When a boy's mother had company, he went and hid till the guests were gone, or only came out
of concealment to get some sort of shy lunch. If the other fellows' mothers were there, he
might be a little bolder, and bring out cake from the second table. But he had to be pretty
careful how he conformed to any of the usages of grown-up society. A fellow who brushed his
hair, and put on shoes, and came into the parlor when there was company, was not well seen
among the fellows; he was regarded in some degree as a girl-boy; a boy who wished to stand
well with other boys kept in the woodshed, and only went in as far as the kitchen to get things
for his guests in the back-yard. Yet there were mothers who would make a boy put on a collar
when they had company, and disgrace him before the world by making him stay round and help;
they acted as if they had no sense and no pity; but such mothers were rare.

Most mothers yielded to public opinion and let their boys leave the house, and wear just what
they always wore. I have told how little they wore in summer. Of course in winter they had
to put on more things. In those days knickerbockers were unknown, and if a boy had appeared
in short pants and long stockings he would have been thought dressed like a circus-actor. Boys
wore long pantaloons, like men, as soon as they put off skirts, and they wore jackets or roundabouts
such as the English boys still wear at Eton. When the cold weather came they had to put on
shoes and stockings, or rather long-legged boots, such as are seen now only among lumbermen
and teamsters in the country. Most of the fellows had stoga boots, as heavy as iron and as
hard; they were splendid to skate in, they kept your ankles so stiff. Sometimes they greased
them to keep the water out; but they never blacked them except on Sunday, and before Saturday
they were as red as a rusty stovepipe. At night they were always so wet that you could not
get them off without a boot-jack, and you could hardly do it anyway; sometimes you got your
brother to help you off with them, and then he pulled you all round the room. In the morning
they were dry, but just as hard as stone, and you had to soap the heel of your woollen sock
(which your grandmother had knitted for you, or maybe some of your aunts) before you could
get your foot in, and sometimes the ears of the boot that you pulled it on by would give way,
and you would have to stamp your foot in and kick the toe against the mop-board. Then you gasped
and limped round, with your feet like fire, till you could get out and limber your boots up
in some water somewhere. About noon your chilblains began.

I have tried to give some notion of the general distribution of comfort, which was never riches,
in the Boy's Town; but I am afraid that I could not paint the simplicity of things there truly
without being misunderstood in these days of great splendor and great squalor. Everybody had
enough, but nobody had too much; the richest man in town might be worth twenty thousand dollars.
There were distinctions among the grown people, and no doubt there were the social cruelties
which are the modern expression of the savage spirit otherwise repressed by civilization; but
these were unknown among the boys. Savages they were, but not that kind of savages. They valued
a boy for his character and prowess, and it did not matter in the least that he was ragged
and dirty. Their mothers might not allow him the run of their kitchens quite so freely as some
other boys, but the boys went with him just the same, and they never noticed how little he
was washed and dressed. The best of them had not an overcoat; and underclothing was unknown
among them. When a boy had buttoned up his roundabout, and put on his mittens, and tied his
comforter round his neck and over his ears, he was warmly dressed.

A BROTHER

My boy was often kept from being a fool, and worse, by that elder brother of his; and I advise
every boy to have an elder brother. Have a brother about four years older than yourself, I
should say; and if your temper is hot, and your disposition revengeful, and you are a vain
and ridiculous dreamer at the same time that you are eager to excel in feats of strength and
games of skill, and to do everything that the other fellows do, and are ashamed to be better
than the worst boy in the crowd, your brother can be of the greatest use to you, with his larger
experience and wisdom. My boy's brother seemed to have an ideal of usefulness, while my boy
only had an ideal of glory--to wish to help others, while my boy only wished to help himself.
My boy would as soon have thought of his father's doing a wrong thing as of his brother's doing
it; and his brother was a calm light of common-sense, of justice, of truth, while he was a
fantastic flicker of gaudy purposes which he wished to make shine before men in their fulfilment.
His brother was always doing for him and for the younger children; while my boy only did for
himself; he had a very gray mustache before he began to have any conception of the fact that
he was sent into the world to serve and to suffer, as well as to rule and enjoy. But his brother
seemed to know this instinctively; he bore the yoke in his youth, patiently if not willingly;
he shared the anxieties as he parted the cares of his father and mother. Yet he was a boy among
boys, too; he loved to swim, to skate, to fish, to forage, and passionately, above all, he
loved to hunt; but in everything he held himself in check, that he might hold the younger boys
in check; and my boy often repaid his conscientious vigilance with hard words and hard names,
such as embitter even the most self-forgiving memories. He kept mechanically within certain
laws, and though in his rage he hurled every other name at his brother, he would not call him
a fool, because then he would be in danger of hell-fire. If he had known just what Raca meant,
he might have called him Raca, for he was not so much afraid of the council; but, as it was,
his brother escaped that insult, and held through all a rein upon him, and governed him through
his scruples as well as his fears.

His brother was full of inventions and enterprises beyond most other boys, and his undertakings
came to the same end of nothingness that awaits all boyish endeavor. He intended to make fireworks
and sell them; he meant to raise silkworms; he prepared to take the contract of clearing the
new cemetery grounds of stumps by blasting them out with gunpowder. Besides this, he had a
plan with another big boy for making money, by getting slabs from the saw-mill, and sawing
them up into stove-wood, and selling them to the cooks of canal-boats. The only trouble was
that the cooks would not buy the fuel, even when the boys had a half-cord of it all nicely
piled up on the canal-bank; they would rather come ashore after dark and take it for nothing.
He had a good many other schemes for getting rich that failed; and he wanted to go to California
and dig gold; only his mother would not consent. He really did save the Canal-Basin once, when
the banks began to give way after a long rain. He saw the break beginning, and ran to tell
his father, who had the fire-bells rung. The fire companies came rushing to the rescue, but
as they could not put the Basin out with their engines, they all got shovels and kept it in.
They did not do this before it had overflowed the street, and run into the cellars of the nearest
houses. The water stood two feet deep in the kitchen of my boy's house, and the yard was flooded
so that the boys made rafts and navigated it for a whole day. My boy's brother got drenched
to the skin in the rain, and lots of fellows fell off the rafts.

He belonged to a military company of big boys that had real wooden guns, such as the little
boys never could get, and silk oil-cloth caps, and nankeen roundabouts, and white pantaloons
with black stripes down the legs; and once they marched out to a boy's that had a father that
had a farm, and he gave them all a free dinner in an arbor before the house: bread-and-butter,
and apple-butter, and molasses and pound cake, and peaches and apples; it was splendid. When
the excitement about the Mexican War was the highest, the company wanted a fort; and they got
a farmer to come and scale off the sod with his plough, in a grassy place there was near a
piece of woods, where a good many cows were pastured. They took the pieces of sod, and built
them up into the walls of a fort about fifteen feet square; they intended to build them higher
than their heads, but they got so eager to have the works stormed that they could not wait,
and they commenced having the battle when they had the walls only breast high. There were going
to be two parties: one to attack the fort, and the other to defend it, and they were just going
to throw sods; but one boy had a real shot-gun, that he was to load up with powder and fire
off when the battle got to the worst, so as to have it more like a battle. He thought it would
be more like yet if he put in a few shot, and he did it on his own hook. It was a splendid
gun, but it would not stand cocked long, and he was resting it on the wall of the fort, ready
to fire when the storming-party came on, throwing sods and yelling and holloing; and all at
once his gun went off, and a cow that was grazing broadside to the fort gave a frightened bellow,
and put up her tail, and started for home. When they found out that the gun, if not the boy,
had shot a cow, the Mexicans and Americans both took to their heels; and it was a good thing
they did so, for as soon as that cow got home, and the owner found out by the blood on her
that she had been shot, though it was only a very slight wound, he was so mad that he did not
know what to do, and very likely he would have half killed those boys if he had caught them.
He got a plough, and he went out to their fort, and he ploughed it all down flat, so that not
one sod remained upon another.

My boy's brother went to all sorts of places that my boy was too shy to go to; and he associated
with much older boys, but there was one boy who, as I have said, was the dear friend of both
of them, and that was the boy who came to learn the trade in their father's printing-office,
and who began an historical romance at the time my boy began his great Moorish novel. The first
day he came he was put to roll, or ink, the types, while my boy's brother worked the press,
and all day long my boy, from where he was setting type, could hear him telling the story of
a book he had read. It was about a person named Monte Cristo, who was a count, and who could
do anything. My boy listened with a gnawing literary jealousy of a boy who had read a book
that he had never heard of. He tried to think whether it sounded as if it were as great a book
as the Conquest of Granada, or Gesta Romanorum; and for a time he kept aloof from this boy
because of his envy. Afterward they came together on Don Quixote, but though my boy came to
have quite a passionate fondness for him, he was long in getting rid of his grudge against
him for his knowledge of Monte Cristo. He was as great a laugher as my boy and his brother,
and he liked the same sports, so that two by two, or all three together, they had no end of
jokes and fun. He became the editor of a country newspaper, with varying fortunes but steadfast
principles, and when the war broke out he went as a private soldier. He soon rose to be an
officer, and fought bravely in many battles. Then he came back to a country-newspaper office
where, ever after, he continued to fight the battles of right against wrong, till he died not
long ago at his post of duty--a true, generous, and lofty soul. He was one of those boys who
grow into the men who seem commoner in America than elsewhere, and who succeed far beyond our
millionaires and statesmen in realizing the ideal of America in their nobly simple lives. If
his story could be faithfully written out, word for word, deed for deed, it would be far more
thrilling than that of Monte Cristo, or any hero of romance; and so would the common story
of any common life. But we cannot tell these stories, somehow.

A FRIEND

My boy's closest friend was a boy who was probably never willingly at school in his life, and
who had no more relish of literature or learning in him than the open fields, or the warm air
of an early spring day. I dare say it was a sense of his kinship with Nature that took my boy
with him, and rested his soul from all its wild dreams and vain imaginings. He was like a piece
of the genial earth, with no more hint of toiling or spinning in him; willing for anything,
but passive, and without force or aim. He lived in a belated log-cabin that stood in the edge
of a cornfield on the river-bank, and he seemed, one day when my boy went to find him there,
to have a mother, who smoked a cob-pipe, and two or three large sisters who hulked about in
the one dim, low room. But the boys had very little to do with each other's houses, or, for
that matter, with each other's yards. His friend seldom entered my boy's gate, and never his
door; for with all the toleration his father felt for every manner of human creature, he could
not see what good the boy was to get from this queer companion. It is certain that he got no
harm; for his companion was too vague and void even to think evil. Socially, he was as low
as the ground under foot, but morally he was as good as any boy in the Boy's Town, and he had
no bad impulses. He had no impulses at all, in fact, and of his own motion he never did anything,
or seemed to think anything. When he wished to get at my boy, he simply appeared in the neighborhood,
and hung about the outside of the fence till he came out. He did not whistle, or call "E-oo-we!"
as the other fellows did, but waited patiently to be discovered, and to be gone off with wherever
my boy listed. He never had any plans himself, and never any will but to go in swimming; he
neither hunted nor foraged; he did not even fish; and I suppose that money could not have hired
him to run races. He played marbles, but not very well, and he did not care much for the game.
The two boys soaked themselves in the river together, and then they lay on the sandy shore,
or under some tree, and talked; but my boy could not have talked to him about any of the things
that were in his books, or the fume of dreams they sent up in his mind. He must rather have
soothed against his soft, caressing ignorance the ache of his fantastic spirit, and reposed
his intensity of purpose in that lax and easy aimlessness. Their friendship was not only more
innocent than any other friendship my boy had, but it was wholly innocent; they loved each
other, and that was all; and why people love one another there is never any satisfactory telling.
But this friend of his must have had great natural good in him; and if I could find a man of
the make of that boy I am sure I should love him.

My boy's other friends wondered at his fondness for him, and it was often made a question with
him at home, if not a reproach to him; so that in the course of time it ceased to be that comfort
it had been to him. He could not give him up, but he could not help seeing that he was ignorant
and idle, and in a fatal hour he resolved to reform him. I am not able to say now just how
he worked his friend up to the point of coming to school, and of washing his hands and feet
and face, and putting on a new check shirt to come in. But one day he came, and my boy, as
he had planned, took him into his seat, and owned his friendship with him before the whole
school. This was not easy, for though everybody knew how much the two were together, it was
a different thing to sit with him as if he thought him just as good as any boy, and to help
him get his lessons, and stay him mentally as well as socially. He struggled through one day,
and maybe another; but it was a failure from the first moment, and my boy breathed freer when
his friend came one half-day, and then never came again. The attempted reform had spoiled their
simple and harmless intimacy. They never met again upon the old ground of perfect trust and
affection. Perhaps the kindly earth-spirit had instinctively felt a wound from the shame my
boy had tried to brave out, and shrank from their former friendship without quite knowing why.
Perhaps it was my boy who learned to realize that there could be little in common but their
common humanity between them, and could not go back to that. At any rate, their friendship
declined from this point; and it seems to me, somehow, a pity.

Among the boys who were between my boy and his brother in age was one whom all the boys liked,
because he was clever with everybody, with little boys as well as big boys. He was a laughing,
pleasant fellow, always ready for fun, but he never did mean things, and he had an open face
that made a friend of every one who saw him. He had a father that had a house with a lightning-rod,
so that if you were in it when there was a thunder-storm you could not get struck by lightning,
as my boy once proved by being in it when there was a thunder-storm and not getting struck.
This in itself was a great merit, and there were grape-arbors and peach-trees in his yard which
added to his popularity, with cling-stone peaches almost as big as oranges on them. He was
a fellow who could take you home to meals whenever he wanted to, and he liked to have boys
stay all night with him; his mother was as clever as he was, and even the sight of his father
did not make the fellows want to go and hide. His father was so clever that he went home with
my boy one night about midnight when the boy had come to pass the night with his boys, and
the youngest of them had said he always had the nightmare and walked in his sleep, and as likely
as not he might kill you before he knew it. My boy tried to sleep, but the more he reflected
upon his chances of getting through the night alive the smaller they seemed; and so he woke
up his potential murderer from the sweetest and soundest slumber, and said he was going home,
but he was afraid; and the boy had to go and wake his father. Very few fathers would have dressed
up and gone home with a boy at midnight, and perhaps this one did so only because the mother
made him; but it shows how clever the whole family was.

It was their oldest boy whom my boy and his brother chiefly went with before that boy who knew
about Monte Cristo came to learn the trade in their father's office. One Saturday in July they
three spent the whole day together. It was just the time when the apples are as big as walnuts
on the trees, and a boy wants to try whether any of them are going to be sweet or not. The
boys tried a great many of them, in an old orchard thrown open for building-lots behind my
boy's yard; but they could not find any that were not sour; or that they could eat till they
thought of putting salt on them; if you put salt on it, you could eat any kind of green apple,
whether it was going to be a sweet kind or not. They went up to the Basin bank and got lots
of salt out of the holes in the barrels lying there, and then they ate all the apples they
could hold, and after that they cut limber sticks off the trees, and sharpened the points,
and stuck apples on them and threw them. You could send an apple almost out of sight that way,
and you could scare a dog almost as far as you could see him.

On Monday my boy and his brother went to school, but the other boy was not there, and in the
afternoon they heard he was sick. Then, toward the end of the week they heard that he had the
flux; and on Friday, just before school let out, the teacher--it was the one that whipped so,
and that the fellows all liked--rapped on his desk, and began to speak very solemnly to the
scholars. He told them that their little mate, whom they had played with and studied with,
was lying very sick, so very sick that it was expected he would die; and then he read them
a serious lesson about life and death, and tried to make them feel how passing and uncertain
all things were, and resolve to live so that they need never be afraid to die.

Some of the fellows cried, and the next day some of them went to see the dying boy, and my
boy went with them. His spirit was stricken to the earth, when he saw his gay, kind playmate
lying there, white as the pillow under his wasted face, in which his sunken blue eyes showed
large and strange. The sick boy did not say anything that the other boys could hear, but they
could see the wan smile that came to his dry lips, and the light come sadly into his eyes,
when his mother asked him if he knew this one or that; and they could not bear it, and went
out of the room.

In a few days they heard that he was dead, and one afternoon school did not keep, so that the
boys might go to the funeral. Most of them walked in the procession; but some of them were
waiting beside the open grave, that was dug near the grave of that man who believed there was
a hole through the earth from pole to pole, and had a perforated stone globe on top of his
monument.

III

GAMES AND PASTIMES

MARBLES

In the Boy's Town they had regular games and plays, which came and went in a stated order.
The first thing in the spring, as soon as the frost began to come out of the ground, they had
marbles which they played till the weather began to be pleasant for the game, and then they
left it off. There were some mean-spirited fellows who played for fun, but any boy who was
anything played for keeps: that is, keeping all the marbles he won. As my boy was skilful at
marbles, he was able to start out in the morning with his toy, or the marble he shot with,
and a commy, or a brown marble of the lowest value, and come home at night with a pocketful
of white-alleys and blood-alleys, striped plasters and bull's-eyes, and crystals, clear and
clouded. His gambling was not approved of at home, but it was allowed him because of the hardness
of his heart, I suppose, and because it was not thought well to keep him up too strictly; and
I suspect it would have been useless to forbid his playing for keeps, though he came to have
a bad conscience about it before he gave it up. There were three kinds of games at marbles
which the boys played: one with a long ring marked out on the ground, and a base some distance
off, which you began to shoot from; another with a round ring, whose line formed the base;
and another with holes, three or five, hollowed in the earth at equal distances from each other,
which was called knucks. You could play for keeps in all these games; and in knucks, if you
won, you had a shot or shots at the knuckles of the fellow who lost, and who was obliged to
hold them down for you to shoot at. Fellows who were mean would twitch their knuckles away
when they saw your toy coming, and run; but most of them took their punishment with the savage
pluck of so many little Sioux. As the game began in the raw cold of the earliest spring, every
boy had chapped hands, and nearly every one had the skin worn off the knuckle of his middle
finger from resting it on the ground when he shot. You could use a knuckle-dabster of fur or
cloth to rest your hand on, but is was considered effeminate, and in the excitement you were
apt to forget it, anyway. Marbles were always very exciting, and were played with a clamor
as incessant as that of a blackbird roost. A great many points were always coming up: whether
a boy took-up, or edged, beyond the very place where his toy lay when he shot; whether he knuckled
down, or kept his hand on the ground, in shooting; whether, when another boy's toy drove one
marble against another and knocked both out of the ring, he holloed "Fen doubs!" before the
other fellow holloed "Doubs!" whether a marble was in or out of the ring, and whether the umpire's
decision was just or not. The gambling and the quarrelling went on till the second-bell rang
for school, and began again as soon as the boys could get back to their rings when school let
out. The rings were usually marked on the ground with a stick, but when there was a great hurry,
or there was no stick handy, the side of a fellow's boot would do, and the hollows for knucks
were always bored by twirling round on your boot-heel. This helped a boy to wear out his boots
very rapidly, but that was what his boots were made for, just as the sidewalks were made for
the boys' marble-rings, and a citizen's character for cleverness or meanness was fixed by his
walking round or over the rings. Cleverness was used in the Virginia sense for amiability;
a person who was clever in the English sense was smart.

RACES

When the warm weather came on in April, and the boys got off their shoes for good, there came
races, in which they seemed to fly on wings. Life has a good many innocent joys for the human
animal, but surely none so ecstatic as the boy feels when his bare foot first touches the breast
of our mother earth in the spring. Something thrills through him then from the heart of her
inmost being that makes him feel kin with her, and cousin to all her dumb children of the grass
and trees. His blood leaps as wildly as at that kiss of the waters when he plunges into their
arms in June; there is something even finer and sweeter in the rapture of the earlier bliss.
The day will not be long enough for his flights, his races; he aches more with regret than
with fatigue when he must leave the happy paths under the stars outside, and creep into his
bed. It is all like some glimpse, some foretaste of the heavenly time when the earth and her
sons shall be reconciled in a deathless love, and they shall not be thankless, nor she a stepmother
any more.

About the only drawback to going barefoot was stumping your toe, which you were pretty sure
to do when you first took off your shoes and before you had got used to your new running weight.
When you struck your toe against a rock, or anything, you caught it up in your hand, and hopped
about a hundred yards before you could bear to put it to the ground. Then you sat down, and
held it as tight as you could, and cried over it, till the fellows helped you to the pump to
wash the blood off. Then, as soon as you could, you limped home for a rag, and kept pretty
quiet about it so as to get out again without letting on to your mother.

A MEAN TRICK

There were shade-trees all along the street, that you could climb if you wanted to, or that
you could lie down under when you had run yourself out of breath, or play mumble-the-peg. My
boy distinctly remembered that under one of these trees his elder brother first broached to
him that awful scheme of reform about fibbing, and applied to their own lives the moral of
The Trippings of Tom Pepper; he remembered how a conviction of the righteousness of the scheme
sank into his soul, and he could not withhold his consent. Under the same tree, and very likely
at the same time, a solemn conclave of boys, all the boys there were, discussed the feasibility
of tying a tin can to a dog's tail, and seeing how he would act. They had all heard of the
thing, but none of them had seen it; and it was not so much a question of whether you ought
to do a thing that on the very face of it would be so much fun, and if it did not amuse the
dog as highly as anybody, could certainly do him no harm, as it was a question of whose dog
you should get to take the dog's part in the sport. It was held that an old dog would probably
not keep still long enough for you to tie the can on; he would have his suspicions; or else
he would not run when the can was tied on, but very likely just go and lie down somewhere.
The lot finally fell to a young yellow dog belonging to one of the boys, and the owner at once
ran home to get him, and easily lured him back to the other boys with flatteries and caresses.
The flatteries and caresses were not needed, for a dog is always glad to go with boys, upon
any pretext, and so far from thinking that he does them a favor, he feels himself greatly honored.
But I dare say the boy had a guilty fear that if his dog had known why he was invited to be
of that party of boys, he might have pleaded a previous engagement. As it was, he came joyfully,
and allowed the can to be tied to his tail without misgiving. If there had been any question
with the boys as to whether he would enter fully into the spirit of the affair, it must have
been instantly dissipated by the dogs behavior when he felt the loop tighten on his tail, and
looked round to see what the matter was. The boys hardly had a chance to cheer him before he
flashed out of sight round the corner, and they hardly had time to think before he flashed
into sight again from the other direction. He whizzed along the ground, and the can hurtled
in the air, but there was no other sound, and the cheers died away on the boys' lips. The boy
who owned the dog began to cry, and the other fellows began to blame him for not stopping the
dog. But he might as well have tried to stop a streak of lightning; the only thing you could
do was to keep out of the dog's way. As an experiment it was successful beyond the wildest
dreams of its projectors, though it would have been a sort of relief if the dog had taken some
other road, for variety, or had even reversed his course. But he kept on as he began, and by
a common impulse the boys made up their minds to abandon the whole affair to him. They all
ran home and hid, or else walked about and tried to ignore it. But at this point the grown-up
people began to be interested; the mothers came to their doors to see what was the matter.
Yet even the mothers were powerless in a case like that, and the enthusiast had to be left
to his fate. He was found under a barn at last, breathless, almost lifeless, and he tried to
bite the man who untied the can from his tail. Eventually he got well again, and lived to be
a solemn warning to the boys; he was touchingly distrustful of their advances for a time, but
he finally forgot and forgave everything. They did not forget, and they never tried tying a
tin can to a dog's tail again, among all the things they tried and kept trying. Once was enough;
and they never even liked to talk of it, the sight was so awful. They were really fond of the
dog, and if they could have thought he would take the matter so seriously, they would not have
tried to have that kind of fun with him. It cured them of ever wanting to have that kind of
fun with any dog.

TOPS

As the weather softened, tops came in some weeks after marbles went out, and just after foot-races
were over, and a little before swimming began. At first the boys bought their tops at the stores,
but after a while the boy whose father had the turning-shop on the Hydraulic learned to turn
their tops, and did it for nothing, which was cheaper than buying tops, especially as he furnished
the wood, too, and you only had to get the metal peg yourself. I believe he was the same boy
who wanted to be a pirate and ended by inventing a steam-governor. He was very ingenious, and
he knew how to turn a top out of beech or maple that would outspin anything you could get in
a store. The boys usually chose a firm, smooth piece of sidewalk, under one of the big trees
in the Smith neighborhood, and spun their tops there. A fellow launched his top into the ring,
and the rest waited till it began to go to sleep--that is, to settle in one place, and straighten
up and spin silently, as if standing still. Then any fellow had a right to peg at it with his
top, and if he hit it, he won it; and if he split it, as sometimes happened, the fellow that
owned it had to give him a top. The boys came with their pockets bulged out with tops, but
before long they had to go for more tops to that boy who could turn them. From this it was
but another step to go to the shop with him and look on while he turned the tops; and then
in process of time the boys discovered that the smooth floor of the shop was a better place
to fight tops than the best piece of sidewalk. They would have given whole Saturdays to the
sport there, but when they got to holloing too loudly the boy's father would come up, and then
they would all run. It was considered mean in him, but the boy himself was awfully clever,
and the first thing the fellows knew they were back there again. Some few of the boys had humming-tops,
but though these pleased by their noise, they were not much esteemed, and could make no head
against the good old turnip-shaped tops, solid and weighty, that you could wind up with a stout
cotton cord, and launch with perfect aim from the flat button held between your forefinger
and middle finger. Some of the boys had a very pretty art in the twirl they gave the top, and
could control its course, somewhat as a skilful pitcher can govern that of a baseball.

KITES

I do not know why a certain play went out, but suddenly the fellows who had been playing ball,
or marbles, or tops, would find themselves playing something else. Kites came in just about
the time of the greatest heat in summer, and lasted a good while; but could not have lasted
as long as the heat, which began about the first of June, and kept on well through September;
no play could last so long as that, and I suppose kite-flying must have died into swimming
after the Fourth of July. The kites were of various shapes: bow kites, two-stick kites, and
house kites. A bow kite could be made with half a barrel hoop carried over the top of a cross,
but it was troublesome to make, and it did not fly very well, and somehow it was thought to
look babyish; but it was held in greater respect than the two-stick kite, which only the smallest
boys played with, and which was made by fastening two sticks in the form of a cross. Any fellow
more than six years old who appeared on the Commons with a two-stick kite would have been met
with jeers, as a kind of girl.

The favorite kite, the kite that balanced best, took the wind best, and flew best, and that
would stand all day when you got it up, was the house kite, which was made of three sticks,
and shaped nearly in the form of the gable of a gambrel-roofed house, only smaller at the base
than at the point where the roof would begin. The outline of all these kites was given, and
the sticks stayed in place by a string carried taut from stick to stick, which was notched
at the ends to hold it; sometimes the sticks were held with a tack at the point of crossing,
and sometimes they were mortised into one another; but this was apt to weaken them. The frame
was laid down on a sheet of paper, and the paper was cut an inch or two larger, and then pasted
and folded over the string. Most of the boys used a paste made of flour and cold water; but
my boy and his brother could usually get paste from the printing-office; and when they could
not they would make it by mixing flour and water cream-thick, and slowly boiling it. That was
a paste that would hold till the cows came home, the boys said, and my boy was courted for
his skill in making it. But after the kite was pasted, and dried in the sun, or behind the
kitchen stove, if you were in very much of a hurry (and you nearly always were), it had to
be hung, with belly-bands and tail-bands; that is, with strings carried from stick to stick
over the face and at the bottom, to attach the cord for flying it and to fasten on the tail
by. This took a good deal of art, and unless it were well done the kite would not balance,
but would be always pitching and darting. Then the tail had to be of just the right weight;
if it was too heavy the kite kept sinking, even after you got it up where otherwise it would
stand; if too light, the kite would dart, and dash itself to pieces on the ground. A very pretty
tail was made by tying twists of paper across a string a foot apart, till there were enough
to balance the kite; but this sort of tail was apt to get tangled, and the best tail was made
of a long streamer of cotton rags, with a gay tuft of dog-fennel at the end. Dog-fennel was
added or taken away till just the right weight was got; and when this was done, after several
experimental tests, the kite was laid flat on its face in the middle of the road, or on a long
stretch of smooth grass; the bands were arranged, and the tail stretched carefully out behind,
where it would not catch on bushes. You unwound a great length of twine, running backward,
and letting the twine slip swiftly through your hands till you had run enough out; then you
seized the ball, and with one look over your shoulder to see that all was right, started swiftly
forward. The kite reared itself from the ground, and swaying gracefully from side to side,
rose slowly into the air, with its long tail climbing after it till the fennel tuft swung free.
If there was not much surface wind you might have to run a little way, but as soon as the kite
caught the upper currents it straightened itself, pulled the twine taut, and steadily mounted,
while you gave it more and more twine; if the breeze was strong, the cord burned as it ran
through your hands; till at last the kite stood still in the sky, at such a height that the
cord holding it sometimes melted out of sight in the distance.

If it was a hot July day the sky would be full of kites, and the Commons would be dotted over
with boys holding them, or setting them up, or winding them in, and all talking and screaming
at the tops of their voices under the roasting sun. One might think that kite-flying, at least,
could be carried on quietly and peaceably; but it was not. Besides the wild debate of the rival
excellences of the different kites, there were always quarrels from getting the strings crossed;
for, as the boys got their kites up, they drew together for company and for an easier comparison
of their merits. It was only a mean boy who would try to cross another fellow's string; but
sometimes accidents would happen; two kites would become entangled and both would have to be
hauled in, while their owners cried and scolded, and the other fellows cheered and laughed.
Now and then the tail of a kite would part midway, and then the kite would begin to dart violently
from side to side, and then to whirl round and round in swifter and narrower circles till it
dashed itself to the ground. Sometimes the kite-string would break, and the kite would waver
and fall like a bird shot in the wing; and the owner of the kite, and all the fellows who had
no kites, would run to get it where it came down, perhaps a mile or more away. It usually came
down in a tree, and they had to climb for it; but sometimes it lodged so high that no one could
reach it; and then it was slowly beaten and washed away in the winds and rains, and its long
tail left streaming all winter from the naked bough where it had caught. It was so good for
kites on the Commons, because there were no trees there, and not even fences, but a vast open
stretch of level grass, which the cows and geese kept cropped to the earth; and for the most
part the boys had no trouble with their kites there. Some of them had paper fringe pasted round
the edges of their kites; this made a fine rattling as the kite rose, and when the kite stood,
at the end of its string, you could hear the humming if you put your ear to the twine. But
the most fun was sending up messengers. The messengers were cut out of thick paper, with a
slit at one side, so as to slip over the string, which would be pulled level long enough to
give the messenger a good start, and then released, when the wind would catch the little circle,
and drive it up the long curving incline till it reached the kite.

It was thought a great thing in a kite to pull, and it was a favor to another boy to let him
take hold of your string and feel how your kite pulled. If you wanted to play mumble-the-peg,
or anything, while your kite was up, you tied it to a stake in the ground, or gave it to some
other fellow to hold; there were always lots of fellows eager to hold it. But you had to be
careful how you let a little fellow hold it; for, if it was a very powerful kite, it would
take him up. It was not certain just how strong a kite had to be to take a small boy up, and
nobody had ever seen a kite do it, but everybody expected to see it.

THE BUTLER GUARDS

The Butler Guards were the finest military company in the world. I do not believe there was
a fellow in the Boy's Town who even tried to imagine a more splendid body of troops: when they
talked of them, as they did a great deal, it was simply to revel in the recognition of their
perfection. I forget just what their uniform was, but there were white pantaloons in it, and
a tuft of white-and-red cockerel plumes that almost covered the front of the hat, and swayed
when the soldier walked, and blew in the wind. I think the coat was gray, and the skirts were
buttoned back with buff, but I will not be sure of this; and somehow I cannot say how the officers
differed from the privates in dress; it was impossible for them to be more magnificent. They
walked backward in front of the platoons, with their swords drawn, and held in their white-gloved
hands at hilt and point, and kept holloing, "Shoulder-r-r--arms! Carry--arms! Present--arms!"
and then faced round, and walked a few steps forward, till they could think of something else
to make the soldiers do.

Every boy intended to belong to the Butler Guards when he grew up; and he would have given
anything to be the drummer or the marker. These were both boys, and they were just as much
dressed up as the Guards themselves, only they had caps instead of hats with plumes. It was
strange that the other fellows somehow did not know who these boys were; but they never knew,
or at least my boy never knew. They thought more of the marker than of the drummer; for the
marker carried a little flag, and when the officers holloed out, "By the left flank--left!
Wheel!" he set his flag against his shoulder, and stood marking time with his feet till the
soldiers all got by him, and then he ran up to the front rank, with the flag fluttering behind
him. The fellows used to wonder how he got to be marker, and to plan how they could get to
be markers in other companies, if not in the Butler Guards. There were other companies that
used to come to town on the Fourth of July and Muster Day, from smaller places round about;
and some of them had richer uniforms: one company had blue coats with gold epaulets, and gold
braid going down in loops on the sides of their legs; all the soldiers, of course, had braid
straight down the outer seams of their pantaloons. One Muster Day a captain of one of the country
companies came home with my boy's father to dinner; he was in full uniform, and he put his
plumed helmet down on the entry table just like any other hat.

There was a company of Germans, or Dutchmen, as the boys always called them; and the boys believed
that they each had hay in his right shoe, and straw in his left, because a Dutchman was too
dumb, as the boys said for stupid, to know his feet apart any other way; and that the Dutch
officers had to call out to the men when they were marching, "Up mit de hay-foot, down mit
de straw-foot--links, links, links!" (left, left, left!). But the boys honored even these imperfect
intelligences so much in their quality of soldiers that they would any of them have been proud
to be marker in the Dutch company; and they followed the Dutchmen round in their march as fondly
as any other body of troops. Of course, school let out when there was a regular muster, and
the boys gave the whole day to it; but I do not know just when the Muster Day came. They fired
the cannon a good deal on the river-bank, and they must have camped somewhere near the town,
though no recollection of tents remained in my boy's mind. He believed with the rest of the
boys that the right way to fire the cannon was to get it so hot you need not touch it off,
but just keep your thumb on the touch-hole, and take it away when you wanted the cannon to
go off. Once he saw the soldiers ram the piece full of dog-fennel on top of the usual charge,
and then he expected the cannon to burst. But it only roared away as usual.

PETS

As there are no longer any Whig boys in the world, the coon can no longer be kept anywhere
as a political emblem, I dare say. Even in my boy's time the boys kept coons just for the pleasure
of it, and without meaning to elect Whig governors and presidents with them. I do not know
how they got them--they traded for them, perhaps, with fellows in the country that had caught
them, or perhaps their fathers bought them in market; some people thought they were very good
to eat, and, like poultry and other things for the table, they may have been brought alive
to market. But, anyhow, when a boy had a coon, he had to have a store-box turned open side
down to keep it in, behind the house; and he had to have a little door in the box to pull the
coon out through when he wanted to show it to other boys, or to look at it himself, which he
did forty or fifty times a day, when he first got it. He had to have a small collar for the
coon, and a little chain, because the coon would gnaw through a string in a minute. The coon
himself never seemed to take much interest in keeping a coon, or to see much fun or sense in
it. He liked to stay inside his box, where he had a bed of hay, and whenever the boy pulled
him out, he did his best to bite the boy. He had no tricks; his temper was bad; and there was
nothing about him except the rings round his tail and his political principles that anybody
could care for. He never did anything but bite, and try to get away, or else run back into
his box, which smelled, pretty soon, like an animal-show; he would not even let a fellow see
him eat.

My boy's brother had a coon, which he kept a good while, at a time when there was no election,
for the mere satisfaction of keeping a coon. During his captivity the coon bit his keeper repeatedly
through the thumb, and upon the whole seemed to prefer him to any other food; I do not really
know what coons eat in a wild state, but this captive coon tasted the blood of nearly that
whole family of children. Besides biting and getting away, he never did the slightest thing
worth remembering; as there was no election, he did not even take part in a Whig procession.
He got away two or three times. The first thing his owner would know when he pulled the chain
out was that there was no coon at the end of it, and then he would have to poke round the inside
of the box pretty carefully with a stick, so as not to get bitten; after that he would have
to see which tree the coon had gone up. It was usually the tall locust-tree in front of the
house, and in about half a second all the boys in town would be there, telling the owner of
the coon how to get him. Of course the only way was to climb for the coon, which would be out
at the point of a high and slender limb, and would bite you awfully, even if the limb did not
break under you, while the boys kept whooping and yelling and holloing out what to do, and
Tip the dog just howled with excitement. I do not know how that coon was ever caught, but I
know that the last time he got away he was not found during the day, but after nightfall he
was discovered by moonlight in the locust-tree. His owner climbed for him, but the coon kept
shifting about, and getting higher and higher, and at last he had to be left till morning.
In the morning he was not there, nor anywhere.

It had been expected, perhaps, that Tip would watch him, and grab him if he came down, and
Tip would have done it probably if he had kept awake. He was a dog of the greatest courage,
and he was especially fond of hunting. He had been bitten oftener by that coon than anybody
but the coon's owner, but he did not care for biting. He was always getting bitten by rats,
but he was the greatest dog for rats that there almost ever was. The boys hunted rats with
him at night, when they came out of the stables that backed down to the Hydraulic, for water;
and a dog who liked above all things to lie asleep on the back-step, by day, and would no more
think of chasing a pig out of the garden than he would think of sitting up all night with a
coon, would get frantic about rats, and would perfectly wear himself out hunting them on land
and in the water, and keep on after the boys themselves were tired. He was so fond of hunting,
anyway, that the sight of a gun would drive him about crazy; he would lick the barrel all over,
and wag his tail so hard that it would lift his hind legs off the ground.

I do not know how he came into that family, but I believe he was given to it full grown by
somebody. It was some time after my boy failed to buy what he called a Confoundland dog, from
a colored boy who had it for sale, a pretty puppy with white and black spots which he had quite
set his heart on; but Tip more than consoled him. Tip was of no particular breed, and he had
no personal beauty; he was of the color of a mouse or an elephant, and his tail was without
the smallest grace; it was smooth and round, but it was so strong that he could pull a boy
all over the town by it, and usually did; and he had the best, and kindest, and truest ugly
old face in the world. He loved the whole human race, and as a watch-dog he was a failure through
his trustful nature; he would no more have bitten a person than he would have bitten a pig;
but where other dogs were concerned, he was a lion. He might be lying fast asleep in the back-yard,
and he usually was, but if a dog passed the front of the house under a wagon, he would be up
and after that dog before you knew what you were about. He seemed to want to fight country
dogs the worst, but any strange dog would do. A good half the time he would come off best;
but, however he came off, he returned to the back-yard with his tongue hanging out, and wagging
his tail in good-humor with all the world. Nothing could stop him, however, where strange dogs
were concerned. He was a Whig dog, of course, as any one could tell by his name, which was
Tippecanoe in full, and was given him because it was the nickname of General Harrison, the
great Whig who won the battle of Tippecanoe. The boys' Henry Clay Club used him to pull the
little wagon that they went about in singing Whig songs, and he would pull five or six boys,
guided simply by a stick which he held in his mouth, and which a boy held on either side of
him. But if he caught sight of a dog that he did not know, he would drop that stick and start
for that dog as far off as he could see him, spilling the Henry Clay Club out of the wagon
piecemeal as he went, and never stopping till he mixed up the strange dog in a fight where
it would have been hard to tell which was either champion and which was the club wagon. When
the fight was over Tip would come smilingly back to the fragments of the Henry Clay Club, with
pieces of the vehicle sticking about him, and profess himself, in a dog's way, ready to go
on with the concert.

Any crowd of boys could get Tip to go off with them, in swimming, or hunting, or simply running
races. He was known through the whole town, and beloved for his many endearing qualities of
heart. As to his mind, it was perhaps not much to brag of, and he certainly had some defects
of character. He was incurably lazy, and his laziness grew upon him as he grew older, till
hardly anything but the sight of a gun or a bone would move him. He lost his interest in politics,
and, though there is no reason to suppose that he ever became indifferent to his principles,
it is certain that he no longer showed his early ardor. He joined the Free-Soil movement in
1848, and supported Van Buren and Adams, but without the zeal he had shown for Henry Clay.
Once a year, as long as the family lived in the Boy's Town, the children were anxious about
Tip when the dog-law was put in force, and the constables went round shooting all the dogs
that were found running at large without muzzles. At this time, when Tip was in danger of going
mad and biting people, he showed a most unseasonable activity, and could hardly be kept in
bounds. A dog whose sole delight at other moments was to bask in the summer sun, or dream by
the winter fire, would now rouse himself to an interest in everything that was going on in
the dangerous world, and make forays into it at all unguarded points. The only thing to do
was to muzzle him, and this was done by my boy's brother with a piece of heavy twine, in such
a manner as to interfere with Tip's happiness as little as possible. It was a muzzle that need
not be removed for either eating, drinking, or fighting; but it satisfied the law, and Tip
always came safely through the dog-days, perhaps by favor or affection with the officers who
were so inexorable with some dogs.

While Tip was still in his prime the family of children was further enriched by the possession
of a goat; but this did not belong to the whole family, or it was, at least nominally, the
property of that eldest brother they all looked up to. I do not know how they came by the goat,
any more than I know how they came by Tip; I only know that there came a time when it was already
in the family, and that before it was got rid of it was a presence there was no mistaking.
Nobody who has not kept a goat can have any notion of how many different kinds of mischief
a goat can get into, without seeming to try, either, but merely by following the impulses of
its own goatishness. This one was a nanny-goat, and it answered to the name of Nanny with an
intelligence that was otherwise wholly employed in making trouble. It went up and down stairs,
from cellar to garret, and in and out of all the rooms, like anybody, with a faint, cynical
indifference in the glance of its cold gray eyes that gave no hint of its purposes or performances.
In the chambers it chewed the sheets and pillow-cases on the beds, and in the dining-room,
if it found nothing else, it would do its best to eat the table-cloth. Washing-day was a perfect
feast for it, for then it would banquet on the shirt-sleeves and stockings that dangled from
the clothes-line, and simply glut itself with the family linen and cotton. In default of these
dainties, Nanny would gladly eat a chip-hat; she was not proud; she would eat a split-basket,
if there was nothing else at hand. Once she got up on the kitchen table, and had a perfect
orgy with a lot of fresh-baked pumpkin-pies she found there; she cleaned all the pumpkin so
neatly out of the pastry shells that, if there had been any more pumpkin left, they could have
been filled up again, and nobody could have told the difference. The grandmother, who was visiting
in the house at the time, declared to the mother that it would serve the father and the boys
just right if she did fill these very shells up and give them to the father and the boys to
eat. But I believe this was not done, and it was only suggested in a moment of awful exasperation,
and because it was the father who was to blame for letting the boys keep the goat. The mother
was always saying that the goat should not stay in the house another day, but she had not the
heart to insist on its banishment, the children were so fond of it. I do not know why they
were fond of it, for it never showed them the least affection, but was always taking the most
unfair advantages of them, and it would butt them over whenever it got the chance. It would
try to butt them into the well when they leaned down to pull up the bucket from the curb; and
if it came out of the house, and saw a boy cracking nuts at the low flat stone the children
had in the back-yard to crack nuts on, it would pretend that the boy was making motions to
insult it, and before he knew what he was about it would fly at him and send him spinning head
over heels. It was not of the least use in the world, and could not be, but the children were
allowed to keep it till, one fatal day, when the mother had a number of other ladies to tea,
as the fashion used to be in small towns, when they sat down to a comfortable gossip over dainty
dishes of stewed chicken, hot biscuit, peach-preserves, sweet tomato-pickles, and pound-cake.
That day they all laid off their bonnets on the hall table, and the goat, after demurely waiting
and watching with its faded eyes, which saw everything and seemed to see nothing, discerned
a golden opportunity, and began to make such a supper of bonnet-ribbons as perhaps never fell
to a goat's lot in life before. It was detected in its stolen joys just as it had chewed the
ribbon of a best bonnet up to the bonnet, and was chased into the back-yard; but, as it had
swallowed the ribbon without being able to swallow the bonnet, it carried that with it. The
boy who specially owned the goat ran it down in a frenzy of horror and apprehension, and managed
to unravel the ribbon from its throat, and get back the bonnet. Then he took the bonnet in
and laid it carefully down on the table again, and decided that it would be best not to say
anything about the affair. But such a thing as that could not be kept. The goat was known at
once to have done the mischief; and this time it was really sent away. All the children mourned
it, and the boy who owned it the most used to go to the house of the people who took it, and
who had a high board fence round their yard, and try to catch sight of it through the cracks.
When he called "Nanny!" it answered him instantly with a plaintive "Baa!" and then, after a
vain interchange of lamentations, he had to come away, and console himself as he could with
the pets that were left him.

But all were trifling joys, except maybe Tip and Nanny, compared with the pony which the boys
owned in common, and which was the greatest thing that ever came into their lives. I cannot
tell just how their father came to buy it for them, or where he got it; but I dare say he thought
they were about old enough for a pony, and might as well have one. It was a Mexican pony, and
as it appeared on the scene just after the Mexican war, some volunteer may have brought it
home. One volunteer brought home a Mexican dog, that was smooth and hairless, with a skin like
an elephant, and that was always shivering round with the cold; he was not otherwise a remarkable
dog, and I do not know that he ever felt even the warmth of friendship among the boys; his
manners were reserved and his temper seemed doubtful. But the pony never had any trouble with
the climate of Southern Ohio (which is indeed hot enough to fry a salamander in summer); and
though his temper was no better than other ponies', he was perfectly approachable. I mean that
he was approachable from the side, for it was not well to get where he could bite you or kick
you. He was of a bright sorrel color, and he had a brand on one haunch.

My boy had an ideal of a pony, conceived from pictures in his reading-books at school, that
held its head high and arched its neck, and he strove by means of checks and martingales to
make this real pony conform to the illustrations. But it was of no use; the real pony held
his neck straight out like a ewe, or, if reined up, like a camel, and he hung his big head
at the end of it with no regard whatever for the ideal. His caparison was another mortification
and failure. What the boy wanted was an English saddle, embroidered on the morocco seat in
crimson silk, and furnished with shining steel stirrups. What he had was the framework of a
Mexican saddle, covered with rawhide, and cushioned with a blanket; the stirrups were Mexican,
too, and clumsily fashioned out of wood. The boys were always talking about getting their father
to get them a pad, but they never did it, and they managed as they could with the saddle they
had. For the most part they preferred to ride the pony barebacked, for then they could ride
him double, and when they first got him they all wanted to ride him so much that they had to
ride him double. They kept him going the whole day long; but after a while they calmed down
enough to take him one at a time, and to let him have a chance for his meals.

They had no regular stable, and the father left the boys to fit part of the cow-shed up for
the pony, which they did by throwing part of the hen-coop open into it. The pigeon-cots were
just over his head, and he never could have complained of being lonesome. At first everybody
wanted to feed him as well as ride him, and if he had been allowed time for it he might have
eaten himself to death, or if he had not always tried to bite you or kick you when you came
in with his corn. After a while the boys got so they forgot him, and nobody wanted to go out
and feed the pony, especially after dark; but he knew how to take care of himself, and when
he had eaten up everything there was in the cow-shed he would break out and eat up everything
there was in the yard.

The boys got lots of good out of him. When you were once on his back you were pretty safe,
for he was so lazy that he would not think of running away, and there was no danger unless
he bounced you off when he trotted; he had a hard trot. The boys wanted to ride him standing
up, like circus-actors, and the pony did not mind, but the boys could not stay on, though they
practised a good deal, turn about, when the other fellows were riding their horses, standing
up, on the Commons. He was not of much use in Indian fights, for he could seldom be lashed
into a gallop, and a pony that proposed to walk through an Indian fight was ridiculous. Still,
with the help of imagination, my boy employed him in some scenes of wild Arab life, and hurled
the Moorish javelin from him in mid-career, when the pony was flying along at the mad pace
of a canal-boat. The pony early gave the boys to understand that they could get very little
out of him in the way of herding the family cow. He would let them ride him to the pasture,
and he would keep up with the cow on the way home, when she walked, but if they wanted anything
more than that they must get some other pony. They tried to use him in carrying papers, but
the subscribers objected to having him ridden up to their front doors over the sidewalk, and
they had to give it up.

When he became an old story, and there was no competition for him among the brothers, my boy
sometimes took him into the woods, and rode him in the wandering bridle-paths, with a thrilling
sense of adventure. He did not like to be alone there, and he oftener had the company of a
boy who was learning the trade in his father's printing-office. This boy was just between him
and his elder brother in age, and he was the good comrade of both; all the family loved him,
and made him one of them, and my boy was fond of him because they had some tastes in common
that were not very common among the other boys. They liked the same books, and they both began
to write historical romances. My boy's romance was founded on facts of the Conquest of Granada,
which he had read of again and again in Washington Irving, with a passionate pity for the Moors,
and yet with pride in the grave and noble Spaniards. He would have given almost anything to
be a Spaniard, and he lived in a dream of some day sallying out upon the Vega before Granada,
in silk and steel, with an Arabian charger under him that champed its bit. In the mean time
he did what he could with the family pony, and he had long rides in the woods with the other
boy, who used to get his father's horse when he was not using it on Sunday, and race with him
through the dangling wild grape-vines and pawpaw thickets, and over the reedy levels of the
river, their hearts both bounding with the same high hopes of a world that could never come true.

INDIANS

There was not a boy in the Boy's Town who would not gladly have turned from the town and lived
in the woods if his mother had let him; and in every vague plan of running off the forest had
its place as a city of refuge from pursuit and recapture. The pioneer days were still so close
to those times that the love of solitary adventure which took the boys' fathers into the sylvan
wastes of the great West might well have burned in the boys' hearts; and if their ideal of
life was the free life of the woods, no doubt it was because their near ancestors had lived
it. At any rate, that was their ideal, and they were always talking among themselves of how
they would go farther West when they grew up, and be trappers and hunters. I do not remember
any boy but one who meant to be a sailor; they lived too hopelessly far from the sea; and I
dare say the boy who invented the marine-engine governor, and who wished to be a pirate, would
just as soon have been a bandit of the Osage. In those days Oregon had just been opened to
settlers, and the boys all wanted to go and live in Oregon, where you could stand in your door
and shoot deer and wild turkey, while a salmon big enough to pull you in was tugging away at
the line you had set in the river that ran before the log-cabin.

If they could, the boys would rather have been Indians than anything else, but, as there was
really no hope of this whatever, they were willing to be settlers, and fight the Indians. They
had rather a mixed mind about them in the mean time, but perhaps they were not unlike other
idolaters in both fearing and adoring their idols; perhaps they came pretty near being Indians
in that, and certainly they came nearer than they knew. When they played war, and the war was
between the whites and the Indians, it was almost as low a thing to be white as it was to be
British when there were Americans on the other side; in either case you had to be beaten. The
boys lived in the desire, if not the hope, of some time seeing an Indian, and they made the
most of the Indians in the circus, whom they knew to be just white men dressed up; but none
of them dreamed that what really happened one day could ever happen. This was at the arrival
of several canal-boat loads of genuine Indians from the Wyandot Reservation in the northwestern
part of the State, on their way to new lands beyond the Mississippi. The boys' fathers must
have known that these Indians were coming, but it just shows how stupid the most of fathers
are, that they never told the boys about it. All at once there the Indians were, as if the
canal-boats had dropped with them out of heaven. There they were, crowding the decks, in their
blankets and moccasins, braves and squaws and pappooses, standing about or squatting in groups,
not saying anything, and looking exactly like the pictures. The squaws had the pappooses on
their backs, and the men and boys had bows and arrows in their hands; and as soon as the boats
landed the Indians, all except the squaws and pappooses, came ashore, and went up to the courthouse
yard, and began to shoot with their bows and arrows. It almost made the boys crazy.

Of course they would have liked to have the Indians shoot at birds, or some game, but they
were mighty glad to have them shoot at cents and bits and quarters that anybody could stick
up in the ground. The Indians would all shoot at the mark till some one hit it, and the one
who hit it had the money, whatever it was. The boys ran and brought back the arrows; and they
were so proud to do this that I wonder they lived through it. My boy was too bashful to bring
the Indians their arrows; he could only stand apart and long to approach the filthy savages,
whom he revered; to have touched the border of one of their blankets would have been too much.
Some of them were rather handsome, and two or three of the Indian boys were so pretty that
the Boy's Town boys said they were girls. They were of all ages, from old, withered men to
children of six or seven, but they were all alike grave and unsmiling; the old men were not
a whit more dignified than the children, and the children did not enter into their sport with
more zeal and ardor than the wrinkled sages who shared it. In fact they were, old and young
alike, savages, and the boys who looked on and envied them were savages in their ideal of a
world where people spent their lives in hunting and fishing and ranging the woods, and never
grew up into the toils and cares that can alone make men of boys. They wished to escape these,
as many foolish persons do among civilized nations, and they thought if they could only escape
them they would be happy; they did not know that they would be merely savage, and that the
great difference between a savage and a civilized man is work. They would all have been willing
to follow these Indians away into the Far West, where they were going, and be barbarians for
the rest of their days; and the wonder is that some of the fellows did not try it.

GUNS

After the red men had flitted away like red leaves, their memory remained with the boys, and
a plague of bows and arrows raged among them, and it was a good while before they calmed down
to their old desire of having a gun. But they came back to that at last, for that was the normal
desire of every boy in the Boy's Town who was not a girl-boy, and there were mighty few girl-boys
there. Up to a certain point a pistol would do, especially if you had bullet-moulds, and could
run bullets to shoot out of it; only your mother would be sure to see you running them, and
just as likely as not would be so scared that she would say you must not shoot bullets. Then
you would have to use buckshot, if you could get them anywhere near the right size, or small
marbles; but a pistol was always a makeshift, and you never could hit anything with it, not
even a board fence; it always kicked, or burst, or something.

Very few boys ever came to have a gun, though they all expected to have one. But seven or eight
boys would go hunting with one shot-gun, and take turn-about shooting; some of the little fellows
never got to shoot at all, but they could run and see whether the big boys had hit anything
when they fired, and that was something. This was my boy's privilege for a long time before
he had a gun of his own, and he went patiently with his elder brother, and never expected to
fire the gun, except, perhaps, to shoot the load off before they got back to town; they were
not allowed to bring the gun home loaded. It was a gun that was pretty safe for anything in
front of it, but you never could tell what it was going to do. It began by being simply an
old gun-barrel, which my boy's brother bought of another boy who was sick of it for a fip,
as the half-real piece was called, and it went on till it got a lock from one gunsmith and
a stock from another, and was a complete gun. But this took time; perhaps a month; for the
gunsmiths would only work at it in their leisure; they were delinquent subscribers, and they
did it in part pay for their papers. When they got through with it my boy's brother made himself
a ramrod out of a straight piece of hickory, or at least as straight as the gun-barrel, which
was rather sway-backed, and had a little twist to one side, so that one of the jour printers
said it was a first-rate gun to shoot round a corner with. Then he made himself a powder-flask
out of an ox-horn that he got and boiled till it was soft (it smelt the whole house up), and
then scraped thin with a piece of glass; it hung at his side; and he carried his shot in his
pantaloons pocket. He went hunting with this gun for a good many years, but he had never shot
anything with it, when his uncle gave him a smooth-bore rifle, and he in turn gave his gun
to my boy, who must then have been nearly ten years old.

It seemed to him that he was quite old enough to have a gun; but he was mortified the very
next morning after he got it by a citizen who thought differently. He had risen at daybreak
to go out and shoot kildees on the Common, and he was hurrying along with his gun on his shoulder
when the citizen stopped him and asked him what he was going to do with that gun. He said to
shoot kildees, and he added that it was his gun. This seemed to surprise the citizen even more
than the boy could have wished. He asked him if he did not think he was a pretty small boy
to have a gun; and he took the gun from him, and examined it thoughtfully, and then handed
it back to the boy, who felt himself getting smaller all the time. The man went his way without
saying anything more, but his behavior was somehow so sarcastic that the boy had no pleasure
in his sport that morning; partly, perhaps, because he found no kildees to shoot at on the
Common. He only fired off his gun once or twice at a fence, and then he sneaked home with it
through alleys and by-ways, and whenever he met a person he hurried by for fear the person
would find him too small to have a gun.

Afterward he came to have a bolder spirit about it, and he went hunting with it a good deal.
It was a very curious kind of gun; you had to snap a good many caps on it, sometimes, before
the load would go off; and sometimes it would hang fire, and then seem to recollect itself,
and go off, maybe, just when you were going to take it down from your shoulder. The barrel
was so crooked that it could not shoot straight, but this was not the only reason why the boy
never hit anything with it. He could not shut his left eye and keep his right eye open; so
he had to take aim with both eyes, or else with the left eye, which was worse yet, till one
day when he was playing shinny (or hockey) at school, and got a blow over his left eye from
a shinny-stick. At first he thought his eye was put out; he could not see for the blood that
poured into it from the cut above it. He ran homeward wild with fear, but on the way he stopped
at a pump to wash away the blood, and then he found his eye was safe. It suddenly came into
his mind to try if he could not shut that eye now, and keep the right one open. He found that
he could do it perfectly; by help of his handkerchief, he stanched his wound, and made himself
presentable, with the glassy pool before the pump for a mirror, and went joyfully back to school.
He kept trying his left eye, to make sure it had not lost its new-found art, and as soon as
school was out he hurried home to share the joyful news with his family.

He went hunting the very next Saturday, and at the first shot he killed a bird. It was a suicidal
sap-sucker, which had suffered him to steal upon it so close that it could not escape even
the vagaries of that wandering gun-barrel, and was blown into such small pieces that the boy
could bring only a few feathers of it away. In the evening, when his father came home, he showed
him these trophies of the chase, and boasted of his exploit with the minutest detail. His father
asked him whether he had expected to eat this sap-sucker, if he could have got enough of it
together. He said no, sap-suckers were not good to eat. "Then you took its poor little life
merely for the pleasure of killing it," said the father. "Was it a great pleasure to see it
die?" The boy hung his head in shame and silence; it seemed to him that he would never go hunting
again. Of course he did go hunting often afterward, but his brother and he kept faithfully
to the rule of never killing anything that they did not want to eat. To be sure, they gave
themselves a wide range; they were willing to eat almost anything that they could shoot, even
blackbirds, which were so abundant and so easy to shoot. But there were some things which they
would have thought it not only wanton but wicked to kill, like turtle-doves, which they somehow
believed were sacred, nor robins either, because robins were hallowed by poetry, and they kept
about the house, and were almost tame, so that it seemed a shame to shoot them. They were very
plentiful, and so were the turtle-doves, which used to light on the Basin bank, and pick up
the grain scattered there from the boats and wagons.

There were a good many things you could do with a gun: you could fire your ramrod out of it,
and see it sail through the air; you could fill the muzzle up with water, on top of a charge,
and send the water in a straight column at a fence. The boys all believed that you could fire
that column of water right through a man, and they always wanted to try whether it would go
through a cow, but they were afraid the owner of the cow would find it out. There was a good
deal of pleasure in cleaning your gun when it got so foul that your ramrod stuck in it and
you could hardly get it out. You poured hot water into the muzzle and blew it through the nipple,
till it began to show clear; then you wiped it dry with soft rags wound on your gun-screw,
and then oiled it with greasy tow. Sometimes the tow would get loose from the screw, and stay
in the barrel, and then you would have to pick enough powder in at the nipple to blow it out.
Of course I am talking of the old muzzle-loading shot-gun, which I dare say the boys never
use nowadays.

But the great pleasure of all, in hunting, was getting home tired and footsore in the evening,
and smelling the supper almost as soon as you came in sight of the house. Take four hard-boiled
eggs, cut them in two lengthwise, and put them on a platter; pour over them the peas as a sauce.

EGGS
"ALLA MILANESE"

Hard boil four eggs, cut them in four pieces each, put them in a platter, and pour over them
the following sauce:

CREAM OF LEMON SAUCE

Take one cup of cold water, and pour one-half of it in a bowl with one tablespoon of starch,
stir well until starch is dissolved. Pour the other one-half onto one heaping tablespoon of powered
sugar and boil for a few moments--until sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Allow it to cool, and then
add the starch, and one cup of milk, a pinch of salt, a little grated lemon-rind, and two yolks
of eggs. Mix all thoroughly, then strain through a sieve, then put on the stove again, and over a
moderate fire, stir it constantly, always in the same direction,
until it has assumed the thickness you desire.

EGGS "ALLA SCIARMANTE"

Hard boil four eggs; cut into several pieces. Then prepare the following:

Boil down to a syrup one heaping tablespoon of sugar, rind of one-quarter of lemon, one scant
cup of water, and a little piece of cinnamon. Then remove the lemon-rind and the cinnamon, and
add one cup of milk or cream. When heated through, take off of fire, and add the yolks of four
eggs, beating well together. Then pour the sauce over the hard-boiled eggs in a shallow baking-dish,
put it in a very moderate oven, and bake. Before serving squeeze on a little lemon juice and
garnish with squares of fried bread.

EGGS WITH PIQUANTE SAUCE

Chop up fine one pickled pepper, one teaspoon of capers, one-half small pickled onion and one
pickle, and some parsley. Dissolve in boiling water one tablespoon of butter, add the juice of
one-half of lemon, a pinch of flour to give a little body, and the chopped pickles. If too
sour add some sugar.

Hard boil four eggs, cut them in four, and pour over them the sauce.

EGGS "ALLA MONACHILE"

Hard boil four eggs, divide them in half, and pour over them the following sauce: Put two tablespoons
of vinegar into a saucepan and one tablespoon of sugar (brown or
white), fifteen almonds chopped up fine, and a small piece of candied
citron.

Let it boil for a little while, then add a pinch of cinnamon, cloves, pepper, and salt, and
if too acid add a little water.

Before taking off the stove add a little flour to give body to the sauce. Pour over the eggs and
serve.

EGGS "ALLA FIORENTINA"

Hard boil four eggs. Let them cool in a bowl of cold water. Peel them and divide them in half.
Take the yolks and mix with them one heaping tablespoon of butter, one tablespoon of Parmesan
cheese grated, and a little salt and pepper.

Put this mixture into a saucepan with the yolks of two raw eggs, and one-half of the white
of one egg. Stir well until the mixture becomes thick. Then fill the hard-boiled whites of the
eggs with the stuffing; if any stuffing remains over, spread it on the platter under the eggs.
Then put one-half cup of milk in a saucepan with one-half tablespoon of butter and one-half
tablespoon of flour, salt, and pepper. Boil for a few moments, stirring well, then pour over
the eggs, sprinkle well with grated Parmesan cheese, and put in the oven and brown.

LIGHTNING OMELETTE

Butter a baking-dish and put in the bottom of it slices of stale bread (brown bread is better
than white) which have been dipped in milk. Then put in a layer of very thin slices of Gruyere
cheese. Take two eggs, beat them up to a froth, add salt and pepper, pour them into a baking-dish
on top of the bread and cheese, then put it in the oven until it is browned on top. Serve
hot.

EGGS "ALLA PIACENTINA"

Take the whites of four eggs, and beat until stiff. Then add the yolks and one rounded tablespoon
of melted butter, and a little salt and pepper. Take a small baking-dish, butter it well, and
put in the bottom a layer or two of very thin slices of cheese, Parmesan or Gruyere. Put into
the oven for a few moments until thoroughly heated, then pour on the whites of eggs mixed with
the other ingredients, put back in the oven, and serve when the eggs are a golden brown.

EGGS "ALLA BENEDETTINA"

Roast two small peppers, take off their skins, remove the seeds, and cut into strips. Take two
tomatoes (not too ripe), boil them, remove the skins and seeds, and cut into thin strips also.
Then wash two anchovies, remove the bones, and cut also into strips. Take a small baking-dish,
put in the strips of peppers and tomatoes and the anchovies. Add two tablespoons of good olive-oil
and put on the top of the stove until the ingredients boil. Then break into the dish four
eggs, taking care to keep the yolks whole. Add salt and pepper, and put the dish into the oven
until the eggs are cooked.

EGGS "ALLA ROMANA"

Beat four eggs, whites and yolks together. Add one tablespoon of milk or cream, salt and pepper,
one tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese, and a little chopped-up parsley. With this make three
or four omelettes about the thickness of a ten-cent piece. As the omelettes are finished lay
them on a napkin to cool; then cut them transversely into strips
about one-quarter of an inch wide.

Then put the strips into a saucepan with some heated butter. Heat them through thoroughly and
serve with grated cheese and the following meat sauce poured over them:

MEAT SAUCE

Chop up some ham fat with a little onion, celery, carrot, and parsley. Add a small piece of beef
and cook until beef is well colored. Then add one and one-half tablespoons of red wine (or white),
cook until wine is absorbed, then add one tablespoon of tomato paste diluted with water, or four
fresh tomatoes, and boil fifteen minutes.

FISH

CODFISH "ALLA GIARDINIERA"

Take one pound of salted codfish, boil it, remove the skin and bones, and shred it. Then take
one good carrot, one-half a turnip, scrape them, cut them into slices, and boil them for a few
moments. Then drain off the water, and put them into a saucepan with one and one-half tablespoons
of butter and finish cooking them, adding from time to time a little
boiling water.

When the vegetables are cooked add the codfish, mix well, and serve.

CODFISH WITH EGG SAUCE

Take one pound of salt codfish. Boil it and remove the skin and bones. Then fry lightly in butter,
adding chopped-up parsley, salt, and pepper.

Stir about constantly, and add from time to time a little boiling water, until the fish is thoroughly
cooked. Then beat up the yolks of two eggs and add them with a little flour, and cook for a
few moments more. Squeeze on some lemon juice and serve.

CODFISH "ALLA MARINAIA"

Take one pound of salt codfish. Boil slightly until you can remove the skin and bones. Chop
up fine a piece of onion, and parsley, and fry them in a saucepan with three tablespoons of
best olive-oil, then put in the codfish with salt, pepper, and a pinch of allspice. While
this is cooking, put into another saucepan three tablespoons of best
vinegar, two tablespoons of fish broth, and one-half bay-leaf.

Add a little flour to give body to the sauce, stir well, then remove the bay-leaf, and take
the saucepan off the fire. Arrange the platter with pieces of fried bread in a layer on the
bottom, then the codfish, and then the sauce poured over it.

FRESH CODFISH "AL VINO BIANCO"

Remove the bones from three-quarters of a pound of fresh codfish. Cut into slices lengthwise.
Butter a baking-dish, put in the fish, put more butter on top of
it, salt and pepper, and one-half glass of dry white wine.

Cook for twenty minutes in a hot oven, then place the fish on a platter,
take the juice left over in the baking-dish, put it into a saucepan,
add a little flour, some more butter, and the juice of half a lemon.

Before taking off the fire, add some chopped-up parsley, and then
pour the sauce over the fish, and serve.

CODFISH WITH GREEN PEPPERS

Take one-half pound of salted codfish which has been soaked to remove the saltiness. Remove the
skin and bones, and cut the codfish into small squares. Then dip it again into fresh water,
and put the squares onto a napkin to dry. The fish may either be left as it is, or before proceeding,
you may roll it in flour and fry it in lard or oil.

Then take two good-sized green peppers, roast them on top of the stove, remove the skins and seeds,
wash them, dry them, and cut them in narrow strips. When this is done put three generous tablespoons
of olive-oil into a saucepan with one onion cut up small, and fry
the onion over a slow fire.

Take two big tomatoes, skin them, remove the seeds and hard parts, and cut them into small pieces.
When the onion has taken a good color, add the tomatoes, and cook until they sputter, then
add the peppers and a little salt and pepper. If the sauce is too thick add a little water. When
the peppers are half cooked, add some chopped-up parsley and the codfish. Cover up the saucepan
and let it simmer until the fish is cooked.

This dish is also good cold.

VEGETABLES

ONIONS "ALLA PARMEGIANA"

Take six onions. Take out the centers with an apple-corer and fill them up with the following stuffing:
One tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese mixed with two hard-boiled eggs and chopped parsley.
Boil them first, then roll them in flour and fry them in olive-oil or butter. Then put them in
a baking-dish with one-half tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese and one tablespoon of melted butter.
Put them in the oven and bake until golden.

ONIONS "ALLA VENEZIANA"

Take six small onions, remove the centers with an apple-corer. Boil them for a few moments, drain
them, and stuff them with the following: Take a piece of bread, dip it in milk, squeeze out
the milk, and mix the bread with one tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese, the yolks of two hard-boiled
eggs. Mix well together, then add some fine-chopped parsley, a pinch of sugar, salt and pepper,
and the yolk of one raw egg; mix again well, and then stuff the onions with the mixture. Then dip
them in flour and in egg, and fry them in lard.

Put them on a platter and serve with a piquante sauce, made as follows: Chop up fine some pickles,
capers, and pickled pepper, and add one-half cup of water. When these are cooked, add one tablespoon
of butter and cook a little while longer, then pour over the onions and serve.

LIMA BEANS WITH HAM

Take three-quarters of a pound of lima beans, very tender young ones. Put them in boiling water for
about five minutes to whiten them. Then put into a saucepan one heaping tablespoon of butter,
some chopped parsley, and one small onion chopped up fine. When the onion is fried, add three
ounces of raw ham, also chopped up. When the ham is fried put in the lima beans, and a little
while before they are cooked add two or three tablespoons of stock. Serve with dice of fried bread.

FRIED
SQUASH, PARSNIPS, CELERY, AND MUSHROOMS

Take two small squash, the smallest size possible; cut off the two ends, divide them in two,
and slice them in fine slices lengthwise. Put them in an earthen dish and sprinkle well with
salt. Take one parsnip, scrape it, wash it, and boil it slightly,
slice it, add it to the squash with more salt.

Take the heart of celery, boil for a moment, and slice as with the other vegetables. Lastly,
take some mushrooms, not very large ones, clean them, boil them a moment, and add them to the rest.
Then dry all the vegetables with a clean towel, mix them all together, roll them thoroughly in
flour, dip in egg, and fry in hot lard, dropping them in carelessly. Serve them in a hot dish
with a napkin under them.

PUMPKIN "ALLA PARMEGIANA"

Take a slice of pumpkin, remove the rind and the seeds, cut into square pieces, and then slice these
into slivers about the thickness of a ten-cent piece. Boil these for a moment in salted water,
drain and put them into a saucepan, and fry in butter, with a little salt and a pinch of allspice.
Serve with grated Parmesan cheese and melted butter. Or, if preferred, when the pumpkin is
fried, put it in a baking-dish, add thin slices of cheese (Parmesan or Gruyere), and put it into
the oven until browned.

FRIED PUMPKIN

Take a slice of pumpkin, remove the rind and the seeds. Cut it into strips as for French fried
potatoes, only finer. Roll in flour and dip in egg, and fry in boiling lard or olive-oil.

If
desired as garnishing for meat, cut the pumpkin exceedingly fine, roll in flour, but not in
egg, and fry.

SPINACH "ALLA ROMANA"

Clean and prepare the spinach. Put one pint of cold water with one tablespoon of salt on to
boil, and when it boils put in the spinach. When the spinach is cooked--in about ten minutes--drain
it in a colander, and turn onto it the cold water from the faucet
for a few moments.

Then squeeze out all the water with the hands. Put three tablespoons of olive-oil into a frying-pan;
when this is thoroughly hot add the spinach, salt, and pepper. Cook for a few moments, stirring
well with a fork and spoon, so the oil will permeate the spinach; then serve. Do not chop the
spinach.

SPINACH SOUFFLE

Wash the spinach in several waters, put it in a covered saucepan on a good fire. Stir now and
then to prevent burning, and after fifteen minutes add one tablespoon of salt. Cook five minutes
more; drain and squeeze out the water. Then chop up very fine. Put into a saucepan one generous
tablespoon of butter, three-quarters tablespoon of flour, stir, and when they are half cooked,
add the spinach and a little salt and pepper. Cook for five minutes, then pour in four or five tablespoons
of cream, stirring constantly to prevent burning. Take a cup of spinach, prepared as above,
beat up the yolk of one egg, mix it with the spinach, and stir over the fire until the egg
is set; then let it cool, and before serving stir the well-beaten whites of three eggs lightly
into it. Fill china cups or buttered papered forms half full, put them into a hot oven for
ten or fifteen minutes, and serve at once. If too little baked or not served at once, the
souffle will be spoiled.

SPINACH "IN RICCIOLI"

Boil the spinach and pass it through a fine colander. Beat up two eggs, add salt and pepper, and
mix enough spinach into them to make them green. Put a little olive-oil into a frying-pan,
and when it is thoroughly heated (but not boiling), pour a little of the egg, turning the pan about
so that the pancake should be as thin as a piece of paper and dry. Toss if necessary. Take it
out; repeat with the rest of the egg. Then take the pancakes, place them one on top of the other,
and cut them into pieces the width of a finger and about two inches long. Fry them in butter, and
grate a little Parmesan cheese over them. They make a very nice garnish.

SPINACH IN A MOLD WITH MUSHROOMS

Boil the spinach for a few moments, drain, squeeze out the water,
then pound it well, and pass it through a fine colander.

Put it into a saucepan with a lump of butter and a few drops of lemon juice. Let it boil for
a few moments, then turn it into a dish and allow it to cool. When cold mix with it the beaten-up
yolks of two eggs. Put them into a buttered mold, leaving an empty space in the middle. Bake in
a slow oven for about an hour. When cooked turn it out onto a dish, and fill up the empty space
with mushrooms, which you have prepared as follows: Wash and clean a sufficient quantity of mushrooms
and put them into a saucepan with a good-sized lump of butter, a little flour, salt, and pepper.
Cook over a brisk fire for ten minutes. Then add stock or milk as desired, slowly--one cup for
every tablespoon of butter or flour--and stir until smooth. Squeeze the juice of half a lemon
on the mushrooms, put them with their sauce into the spinach, and serve.

FLAN OF VEGETABLES

Wash, chop up fine, and boil several vegetables,
a potato, some spinach, a carrot, and a small beet, etc., then boil
them again in a saucepan with some stock; then add a half a cup of
cream or milk, stir well together, take them off the stove, and let
them cool. When cool add the yolks of two eggs, some grated cheese,
and the whites of the eggs beaten up. Put the vegetables into a mold
which has been well buttered and lined with bread crumbs, and cook
in the oven.

LETTUCE IN THE OVEN

Take several young lettuces, wash
them and remove their wilted leaves, tie the tops together, and lay
the lettuces side by side in a baking-pan and pour in one and one-half
inches of stock. Cover the pan, and put it in a moderate oven for
one-half an hour, adding stock when necessary. Place a fork under
the middle of each lettuce, raise and drain, and lay them doubled
up on a hot dish. Season the gravy in the pan with butter, salt, and
pepper, thicken with one beaten egg, and pour it over the lettuce.
Serve hot.

CUCUMBERS "ALLA TOSCANA"

Peel and blanch three or four
cucumbers in boiling salted water for five minutes. Drain and cut
them into pieces one inch thick and put them into a frying-pan with
one ounce of butter, a little flour, and one-half pint of veal broth,
stir well, and add some salt and pepper. Reduce for about fifteen
minutes, stirring until it boils, add one teaspoon of chopped parsley,
one-half a teaspoon of grated nutmeg, one-half a cup of cream, and
the beaten-up yolks of two eggs. Put on the fire again for three or
four minutes. Do not let boil, and serve hot.

CAULIFLOWER "IN STUFATO"

Remove
the outer leaves and clean a fine cauliflower. Cut it into several
pieces and wash them well with cold water, put them into a pot of
boiling salted water, and cook quickly for twenty or thirty minutes,
until they are quite tender. Take them out without breaking, and place
them on pieces of buttered toast, then put some butter in a frying-pan,
add a little flour mixed with some stock, stir well until it boils,
then add several finely chopped mushrooms, and cook a little more.
Take it off the fire, and add the yolks of two eggs which have been
well beaten, salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, and the juice of one lemon.
Pour this sauce over and round the cauliflower, and serve. The sauce
must not be boiled after adding the eggs.

CELERY FRIED

Cut off the
green leaves, and cut the stalks of the celery in pieces about an
inch long. Wash them and then put them into boiling water for fifteen
minutes. Then dry on a napkin. Beat up an egg with a little stock,
or hot water, add salt and pepper, dip the celery in, then roll it
in bread crumbs, and fry in boiling lard.

CELERY WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Cut
off the green leaves, clean and wash the celery stalks, and then throw
them into boiling water and boil fast for twenty minutes. Drain, dry
well, put them on a dish, and pour a pint of tomato sauce, or tomato
paste diluted with hot water, over them.

TOMATOES "ALLA PIEMONTESE"

Take
four rather unripe tomatoes of about the same size, put them into
boiling water and boil for a few minutes. Cut off the stem part, and
take out some of the inside with as many seeds as you can. Fill them
with boiled rice and some mushrooms chopped up small. Pour over them
the yolks of two eggs, place them in the oven to color; serve hot.

TOMATOES
"ALLA SPAGNUOLA"

Take three or four large ripe tomatoes and boil
them. Lay them on a sieve to drain until wanted, and then pass them
through a fine hair sieve. Put them in a stew-pan and stir until all
the liquid is evaporated. Then add a small piece of butter and three
or four raw eggs, stirring them quickly with the tomatoes. When the
eggs are cooked, turn all out into a dish and serve hot.

TOMATOES
WITH EGGS

Choose round tomatoes of about equal size and peel them.
Cut off their tops, take out their insides, and drop a raw egg into
each, replacing the top as cover. Put the tomatoes in a baking-dish
and bake for about ten minutes, until the eggs are set. Serve up in
the baking-dish very hot, with Bechamel sauce (see Sauces, page 29),
or some brown gravy.

TOMATO PUDDING

Scald, peel, and slice eight
tomatoes. Squeeze out three-quarters of their juice into a bowl through
cheese-cloth, and put it to one side; then chop up the pulp of the
tomatoes with two tablespoons of bread crumbs, a little salt, sugar,
and pepper, and a tablespoon of melted butter. Pour them in a buttered
mold, place the mold in a double boiler, and put on the cover, and
boil hard for one hour. Then turn out on a dish. Meanwhile take the
juice of the tomatoes, season with sugar, salt, and pepper, mix in
one tablespoon of butter rolled in flour. Boil one minute, then pour
over the pudding and serve.

STRING-BEANS "IN FRICASSEA"

Cut off
the ends and string some young string-beans. Cook them in salted water,
then drain them well. Put them in a saucepan with some butter, parsley,
and chopped onion. Be careful to add occasionally some broth if the
beans dry up before they are completely cooked. Boil slowly, and a
few moments before taking them off the fire add the yolks of one or
two eggs (according to the quantity of beans) well beaten up with
a little water, the juice of a lemon, and some grated Parmesan cheese.
Stir from time to time, and never allow them to boil, or the eggs
will set. To keep the beans a good color put a pinch of soda into
the water with the salt.

STRING-BEANS WITH TOMATOES

Take some young
string-beans, cut off the ends, and string them. Wash them in cold
water, drain, and while still wet put them into a baking-dish with
some good olive-oil, some chopped onion and parsley, salt, and pepper.
Put the dish on the fire with its cover on, and cook slowly. As the
beans dry add the juice of some tomatoes, or some good tomato conserve.
Take care they do not burn.

FRIED BREAD WITH RAISINS

Take some rather
stale bread, cut it into slices, removing the crust. Fry the bread
in lard, and then arrange it on a platter; meanwhile prepare the raisins
as follows: Take a small saucepan and put into it two tablespoons
of good raisins, a good slice of raw ham chopped into small pieces,
and a leaf of sage, also chopped up, one tablespoon of granulated
sugar, and two tablespoons of good vinegar. Put these ingredients
on the fire, and as soon as you have a syrup (stir constantly) pour
the raisins onto the pieces of fried bread, and the sauce over and
around them. Served with cold meat these are very nice.

MEATS

FRIED
SWEETBREADS, CROQUETTES, LIVER, ETC. (Fritto Misto alla Romana)

Golden
Bread, Brains, Sweetbreads, Croquettes of Chicken and Veal and Eggs,
Calf's Liver and Pumpkin--all these different ingredients should be
fried each in its own manner as follows, a small quantity of each,
and served all together on one platter with slices of lemon.

GOLDEN
BREAD

Choose bread which is elastic, but has no holes in it. Remove
the crust and cut it in slices about one inch thick, and from these
slices cut little pieces about three inches long and about one inch
wide. Trim them off well, so they will not be ragged or uneven. Put
these pieces into a bowl and throw on them some boiling water, then
remove them immediately and throw them into a big bowl of cold water.
This operation should be done quickly, so as to make the bread feel
the impression of heat and cold, one directly after the other. Then
take the bread between the hands and gently squeeze out the water
without breaking the pieces or deforming them. Place them on a napkin
to dry. Then dip them in egg which has been beaten up and seasoned
with salt and pepper. The country-jake comes stumbling awkwardly into the ring, but he is perfectly sober,
and he boldly leaps astride the mule, which tries all its arts to shake him off, plunging,
kicking, rearing. He sticks on, and everybody cheers him, and the owner of the mule begins
to get mad and to make it do more things to shake the country-jake off. At last, with one convulsive
spring, it flings him from its back, and dashes into the dressing-room, while the country-jake
picks himself up and vanishes among the crowd.

A man mounted on a platform in the ring is imploring the ladies and gentlemen to keep their
seats, and to buy tickets for the negro-minstrel entertainment which is to follow, but which
is not included in the price of admission. The boys would like to stay, but they have not the
money, and they go out clamoring over the performance, and trying to decide which was the best
feat. As to which was the best actor, there is never any question; it is the clown, who showed
by the way he turned a double somersault that he can do anything, and who chooses to be clown
simply because he is too great a creature to enter into rivalry with the other actors.

There will be another performance in the evening, with real fights outside between the circus
men and the country-jakes, and perhaps some of the Basin rounders, but the boys do not expect
to come; that would be too much. The boy's brother once stayed away in the afternoon, and went
at night with one of the jour printers; but he was not able to report that the show was better
than it was in the afternoon. He did not get home till nearly ten o'clock, though, and he saw
the sides of the tent dropped before the people got out; that was a great thing; and what was
greater yet, and reflected a kind of splendor on the boy at second hand, was that the jour
printer and the clown turned out to be old friends. After the circus, the boy actually saw
them standing near the centre-pole talking together; and the next day the jour showed the grease
that had dripped on his coat from the candles. Otherwise the boy might have thought it was
a dream, that some one he knew had talked on equal terms with the clown. The boys were always
intending to stay up and see the circus go out of town, and they would have done so, but their
mothers would not let them. This may have been one reason why none of them ever ran off with
a circus.

As soon as a circus had been in town, the boys began to have circuses of their own, and to
practise for them. Everywhere you could see boys upside down, walking on their hands or standing
on them with their legs dangling over, or stayed against house walls. It was easy to stand
on your head; one boy stood on his head so much that he had to have it shaved, in the brain-fever
that he got from standing on it; but that did not stop the other fellows. Another boy fell
head downward from a rail where he was skinning-the-cat, and nearly broke his neck, and made
it so sore that it was stiff ever so long. Another boy, who was playing Samson, almost had
his leg torn off by the fellows that were pulling at it with a hook; and he did have the leg
of his pantaloons torn off. Nothing could stop the boys but time, or some other play coming
in; and circuses lasted a good while. Some of the boys learned to turn hand-springs; anybody
could turn cart-wheels; one fellow, across the river, could just run along and throw a somersault
and light on his feet; lots of fellows could light on their backs; but if you had a spring-board,
or shavings under a bank, like those by the turning-shop, you could practise for somersaults
pretty safely.

All the time you were practising you were forming your circus company. The great trouble was
not that any boy minded paying five or ten pins to come in, but that so many fellows wanted
to belong there were hardly any left to form an audience. You could get girls, but even as
spectators girls were a little too despicable; they did not know anything; they had no sense;
if a fellow got hurt they cried. Then another thing was, where to have the circus. Of course
it was simply hopeless to think of a tent, and a boy's circus was very glad to get a barn.
The boy whose father owned the barn had to get it for the circus without his father knowing
it; and just as likely as not his mother would hear the noise and come out and break the whole
thing up while you were in the very middle of it. Then there were all sorts of anxieties and
perplexities about the dress. You could do something by turning your roundabout inside out,
and rolling your trousers up as far as they would go; but what a fellow wanted to make him
a real circus-actor was a long pair of white cotton stockings, and I never knew a fellow that
got a pair; I heard of many a fellow who was said to have got a pair; but when you came down
to the fact, they vanished like ghosts when you try to verify them. I believe the fellows always
expected to get them out of a bureau-drawer or the clothes-line at home, but failed. In most
other ways, a boy's circus was always a failure, like most other things boys undertake. They
usually broke up under the strain of rivalry; everybody wanted to be the clown or ring-master;
or else the boy they got the barn of behaved badly, and went into the house crying, and all
the fellows had to run.

PASSING SHOWS

There were only two kinds of show known by that name in the Boy's Town: a nigger show, or a
performance of burnt-cork minstrels; and an animal show, or a strolling menagerie; and the
boys always meant a menagerie when they spoke of a show, unless they said just what sort of
show. The only perfect joy on earth in the way of an entertainment, of course, was a circus,
but after the circus the show came unquestionably next. It made a processional entry into the
town almost as impressive as the circus's, and the boys went out to meet it beyond the corporation
line in the same way. It always had two elephants, at least, and four or five camels, and sometimes
there was a giraffe. These headed the procession, the elephants in the very front, with their
keepers at their heads, and then the camels led by halters dangling from their sneering lips
and contemptuous noses. After these began to come the show-wagons, with pictures on their sides,
very flattered portraits of the wild beasts and birds inside; lions first, then tigers (never
meaner than Royal Bengal ones, which the boys understood to be a superior breed), then leopards,
then pumas and panthers; then bears, then jackals and hyenas; then bears and wolves; then kangaroos,
musk-oxen, deer, and such harmless cattle; and then ostriches, emus, lyre-birds, birds-of-Paradise,
and all the rest.

From time to time the boys ran back from the elephants and camels to get what good they could
out of the scenes in which these hidden wonders were dramatized in acts of rapine or the chase,
but they always came forward to the elephants and camels again. Even with them they had to
endure a degree of denial, for although you could see most of the camels' figures, the elephants
were so heavily draped that it was a kind of disappointment to look at them. The boys kept
as close as they could, and came as near getting under the elephants' feet as the keepers would
allow; but, after all, they were driven off a good deal and had to keep stealing back. They
gave the elephants apples and bits of cracker and cake, and some tried to put tobacco into
their trunks, though they knew very well that it was nearly certain death to do so; for any
elephant that was deceived that way would recognize the boy that did it, and kill him the next
time he came, if it was twenty years afterward. The boys used to believe that the Miami bridge
would break down under the elephants if they tried to cross it, and they would have liked to
see it do it, but no one ever saw it, perhaps because the elephants always waded the river.
Some boys had seen them wading it, and stopping to drink and squirt the water out of their
trunks. If an elephant got a boy that had given him tobacco into the river, he would squirt
water on him till he drowned him. Still, some boys always tried to give the elephants tobacco,
just to see how they would act for the time being.

A show was not so much in favor as a circus, because there was so little performance in the
ring. You could go round and look at the animals, mostly very sleepy in their cages, but you
were not allowed to poke them through the bars, or anything; and when you took your seat there
was nothing much till Herr Driesbach entered the lions' cage, and began to make them jump over
his whip. It was some pleasure to see him put his head between the jaws of the great African
King of Beasts, but the lion never did anything to him, and so the act wanted a true dramatic
climax. The boys would really rather have seen a bareback-rider, like James Rivers, turn a
back-somersault and light on his horse's crupper, any time, though they respected Herr Driesbach,
too; they did not care much for a woman who once went into the lions' cage and made them jump
round.

The boys had their own beliefs about the different animals, and one of these concerned the
inappeasable ferocity of the zebra. I do not know why the zebra should have had this repute,
for he certainly never did anything to deserve it; but, for the matter of that, he was like
all the other animals. Bears were not much esteemed, but they would have been if they could
have been really seen hugging anybody to death. It was always hoped that some of the fiercest
animals would get away and have to be hunted down, and retaken after they had killed a lot
of dogs. If the elephants, some of them, had gone crazy, it would have been something, for
then they would have roamed up and down the turnpike smashing buggies and wagons, and had to
be shot with the six-pound cannon that was used to celebrate the Fourth of July with.

Another thing that was against the show was that the animals were fed after it was out, and
you could not see the tigers tearing their prey when the great lumps of beef were thrown them.
There was somehow not so much chance of hooking into a show as a circus, because the seats
did not go all round, and you could be seen under the cages as soon as you got in under the
canvas. I never heard of a boy that hooked into a show; perhaps nobody ever tried.

But the great reason of all was that you could not have an animal show of your own as you could
a circus. You could not get the animals; and no boy living could act a camel, or a Royal Bengal
tiger, or an elephant so as to look the least like one.

Of course you could have negro shows, and the boys often had them; but they were not much fun,
and you were always getting the black on your shirt-sleeves.

THE THEATRE COMES TO TOWN

A great new experience which now came to the boy was the theatre, which he had sometimes heard
his father speak of. There had once been a theatre in the Boy's Town, when a strolling company
came up from Cincinnati, and opened for a season in an empty pork-house. But that was a long
time ago, and, though he had written a tragedy, all that the boy knew of a theatre was from
a picture in a Sunday-school book where a stage scene was given to show what kind of desperate
amusements a person might come to in middle life if he began by breaking the Sabbath in his
youth. His brother had once been taken to a theatre in Pittsburg by one of their river-going
uncles, and he often told about it; but my boy formed no conception of the beautiful reality
from his accounts of a burglar who jumped from a roof and was chased by a watchman with a pistol
up and down a street with houses painted on a curtain.

The company which came to the Boy's Town in his time was again from Cincinnati, and it was
under the management of the father and mother of two actresses, afterward famous, who were
then children, just starting upon their career. These pretty little creatures took the leading
parts in Bombastes Furioso the first night my boy ever saw a play, and he instantly fell impartially
in love with both of them, and tacitly remained their abject slave for a great while after.
When the smaller of them came out with a large pair of stage boots in one hand and a drawn
sword in the other, and said:

    "Whoever dares these boots displace
    Shall meet Bombastes face to face,"

if the boy had not already been bereft of his senses by the melodrama preceding the burlesque,
he must have been transported by her beauty, her grace, her genius. He, indeed, gave her and
her sister his heart, but his mind was already gone, rapt from him by the adorable pirate who
fought a losing fight with broadswords, two up and two down--click-click, click-click--and
died all over the deck of the pirate ship in the opening piece. This was called the Beacon
of Death, and the scene represented the forecastle of the pirate ship with a lantern dangling
from the rigging, to lure unsuspecting merchantmen to their doom. Afterward the boy remembered
nothing of the story, but a scrap of the dialogue meaninglessly remained with him; and when
the pirate captain appeared with his bloody crew and said, hoarsely, "Let us go below and get
some brandy!" the boy would have bartered all his hopes of bliss to have been that abandoned
ruffian. In fact, he always liked, and longed to be, the villain, rather than any other person
in the play, and he so glutted himself with crime of every sort in his tender years at the
theatre that he afterward came to be very tired of it, and avoided the plays and novels that
had very marked villains in them.

He was in an ecstasy as soon as the curtain rose that night, and he lived somewhere out of
his body as long as the playing lasted, which was well on to midnight; for in those days the
theatre did not meanly put the public off with one play, but gave it a heartful and its money's
worth with three. On his first night my boy saw The Beacon of Death, Bombastes Furioso, and
Black-Eyed Susan, and he never afterward saw less than three plays each night, and he never
missed a night, as long as the theatre languished in the unfriendly air of that mainly Calvinistic
community, where the theatre was regarded by most good people as the eighth of the seven deadly
sins. The whole day long he dwelt in a dream of it that blotted out, or rather consumed with
more effulgent brightness, all the other day-dreams he had dreamed before, and his heart almost
burst with longing to be a villain like those villains on the stage, to have a mustache--a
black mustache--such as they wore at a time when every one off the stage was clean shaven,
and somehow to end bloodily, murderously, as became a villain.

I dare say this was not quite a wholesome frame of mind for a boy of ten years; but I do not
defend it; I only portray it. Being the boy he was, he was destined somehow to dwell half the
time in a world of dreamery; and I have tried to express how, when he had once got enough of
villany, he reformed his ideals and rather liked virtue.

THE WORLD OPENED BY BOOKS

Every boy is two or three boys, or twenty or thirty different kinds of boys in one; he is all
the time living many lives and forming many characters; but it is a good thing if he can keep
one life and one character when he gets to be a man. He may turn out to be like an onion when
he is grown up, and be nothing but hulls, that you keep peeling off, one after another, till
you think you have got down to the heart, at last, and then you have got down to nothing.

All the boys may have been like my boy in the Boy's Town, in having each an inward being that
was not the least like their outward being, but that somehow seemed to be their real self,
whether it truly was so or not. But I am certain that this was the case with him, and that
while he was joyfully sharing the wild sports and conforming to the savage usages of the boy's
world about him, he was dwelling in a wholly different world within him, whose wonders no one
else knew. Cut them into four pieces, put these pieces onto a plate, and season with a little olive-oil,
some lemon juice, and chopped parsley. When you are ready to fry, roll in flour, dip in egg, and
fry the brain over a moderate fire for seven or eight minutes in olive-oil, lard, or butter.

CALF'S
LIVER FRIED

Remove the skin, and cut into slices large but thin, roll in flour, dip in egg, and fry in boiling
lard, allowing them to remain in the frying-pan only a couple of
minutes; then drain on a napkin, sprinkle on a little salt, and serve.

POLENTA CROQUETTES

Boil one-half cup of corn-meal rather hard, and before removing from the fire add a piece of
butter and a little grated cheese and mix well. Take it then by spoonfuls and let it fall
onto a marble-top table, or a bread-pan which has been wet a little with cold water. These spoonfuls
should form little balls about the size of a hen's egg.

    On each of these croquettes
    place a very thin slice of Gruyere cheese, so that the cheese will
adhere to the corn-meal.

Then allow them to cool, and when cold dip into egg, then into bread crumbs, and fry in boiling
lard.

EGG CROQUETTES

Hard boil two eggs, remove the shells, dry them, and cut the eggs in minute pieces. Put one
tablespoon of butter into a saucepan, and when it is melted add one and one-half tablespoons
of flour; stir constantly for a few moments over a slow fire with a wooden spoon, taking care that
the flour does not color. Then pour in one-third of a cup of milk, in which you have put salt
and pepper. Cool this sauce for eight or ten minutes, stirring continually to make it smooth, then
remove from the fire, put in the chopped-up egg, some parsley chopped fine, and one-half tablespoon
of grated Parmesan cheese. When you have mixed these ingredients well together, spread them out
on a plate or marble and allow to cool. When this has become cold and hardened, with a wooden
spoon divide it into little portions about the size of a nut. Take these and roll them in dried
bread crumbs and a little flour. Roll them all then, one at a time, with a rotary motion, and
then elongate the balls until they are the shape of ordinary corks, then dip the croquettes
into the egg, one at a time, then into bread crumbs again, and a few moments before serving
fry in boiling lard.

As soon as they are colored remove them immediately from the lard, otherwise they will break
to pieces.

Polenta Fritters, Fried Pumpkin, Fried Squash, and Parsnips may also be added or substituted if
desired.

LITTLE FILETS "ALLA NAPOLITANA"

Butter well a frying-pan, and sprinkle over the bottom a piece of lean ham (raw if possible)
chopped up fine. Then a layer of mushrooms chopped fine, then a layer of minced parsley. The
bottom of the pan should be entirely covered with these three ingredients. Then from a filet
of beef cut some little slices, about one-half an inch thick and
round in shape.

Put these in the frying-pan, one piece near the other, so the bottom shall be covered. Sprinkle
on salt and pepper, and put it on the fire. When the filets are cooked on one side, turn them
over on the other, but with care, so the ingredients at the bottom of the pan will stick to
the meat. When the filets are cooked on both sides, squeeze on the juice of half a lemon, and
add a little meat stock. Put the filets on a platter, and pour over them their sauce, and
serve with croutons (fried bread).

INVOLTINI OF BEEF "ALLA SICILIANA"

Take three-quarters of a pound of beef, two ounces of ham, one tablespoon of butter (or one-half
tablespoon of lard), some bread, some parsley, and a piece of onion.
Chop up the onion fine and put it in a saucepan with the butter (or
lard). When it is colored, put in the parsley and the ham cut up into
little pieces, at the same time add the bread cut up into three or
four small dice, salt, pepper, and a dash of nutmeg. Mix all together
well. Cut the meat into six slices, pound them to flatten out; salt
slightly, and when the other ingredients are cooked, put a portion
on each slice of meat. Then roll up the meat like sausages, put them
on skewers, alternating with a piece of fried bread of the same size.
Butter well, roll in fresh bread crumbs, and broil on the gridiron
over a slow fire. These are nice served with salad.

POLPETTONE "ALLA
NAPOLITANA"

Take three-quarters of a pound of lean beef without skin
or bones from the rump-steak, flatten it out with a knife in a manner
to widen it without tearing the meat. Salt and pepper it. Then take
one and one-half ounces of ham, fat and lean, and chop it up fine
with a little piece of onion, some parsley, and some thyme, then add
twice its volume of fresh bread crumbs (which have been dipped in
water and squeezed out). When the bread has been well mixed add the
yolk of one egg and mix again well, spread this mixture all over the
surface of the beef, leveling it off with a knife. Then sprinkle on
a few raisins, and then roll up the meat like a cigar, but bigger
in the middle than at the ends.

Somehow they did not think of the Arabs in this narrative as of the same race and faith with
the Arabs of Bagdad and the other places in the Arabian Nights. They did not think whether
these were Mohammedans or not; they naturalized them in the fairy world where all boys are
citizens, and lived with them there upon the same familiar terms as they lived with Robinson
Crusoe. Their father once told them that Robinson Crusoe had robbed the real narrative of Alexander
Selkirk of the place it ought to have held in the remembrance of the world; and my boy had
a feeling of guilt in reading it, as if he were making himself the accomplice of an impostor.

He liked the Arabian Nights, but oddly enough these wonderful tales made no such impression
on his fancy as the stories in a wretchedly inferior book made. He did not know the name of
this book, or who wrote it; from which I imagine that much of his reading was of the purblind
sort that ignorant grown-up people do, without any sort of literary vision. He read this book
perpetually, when he was not reading his Greek and Roman Mythology; and then suddenly, one
day, as happens in childhood with so many things, it vanished out of his possession as if by
magic. Perhaps he lost it; perhaps he lent it; at any rate it was gone, and he never got it
back, and he never knew what book it was till thirty years afterward, when he picked up from
a friend's library-table a copy of Gesta Romanorum, and recognized in this collection of old
monkish legends the long-missing treasure of his boyhood.

These stories, without beauty of invention, without art of construction or character, without
spirituality in their crude materialization, which were read aloud in the refectories of mediæval
cloisters while the monks sat at meat, laid a spell upon the soul of the boy that governed
his life. He conformed his conduct to the principles and maxims which actuated the behavior
of the shadowy people of these dry-as-dust tales; he went about drunk with the fumes of fables
about Roman emperors that never were, in an empire that never was; and, though they tormented
him by putting a mixed and impossible civilization in the place of that he knew from his Goldsmith,
he was quite helpless to break from their influence. He was always expecting some wonderful
thing to happen to him as things happened there in fulfilment of some saying or prophecy; and
at every trivial moment he made sayings and prophecies for himself, which he wished events
to fulfil. One Sunday when he was walking in an alley behind one of the stores, he found a
fur cap that had probably fallen out of the store-loft window. He ran home with it, and in
his simple-hearted rapture he told his mother that as soon as he picked it up there came into
his mind the words, "He who picketh up this cap picketh up a fortune," and he could hardly
wait for Monday to come and let him restore the cap to its owner and receive an enduring prosperity
in reward of his virtue. Heaven knows what form he expected this to take; but when he found
himself in the store, he lost all courage; his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, and he
could not utter a syllable of the fine phrases he had made to himself. He laid the cap on the
counter without a word; the storekeeper came up and took it in his hand. "What's this?" he
said. "Why, this is ours," and he tossed the cap into a loose pile of hats by the showcase,
and the boy slunk out, cut to the heart and crushed to the dust. It was such a cruel disappointment
and mortification that it was rather a relief to have his brother mock him, and come up and
say from time to time, "He who picketh up this cap picketh up a fortune," and then split into
a jeering laugh. At least he could fight his brother, and, when he ran, could stone him; and
he could throw quads and quoins, and pieces of riglet at the jour printers when the story spread
to them, and one of them would begin, "He who picketh--"

He could not make anything either of Byron or Cowper; and he did not even try to read the little
tree-calf volumes of Homer and Virgil which his father had in the versions of Pope and Dryden;
the small copper-plates with which they were illustrated conveyed no suggestion to him. Afterward
he read Goldsmith's Deserted Village, and he formed a great passion for Pope's Pastorals, which
he imitated in their easy heroics; but till he came to read Longfellow, and Tennyson, and Heine,
he never read any long poem without more fatigue than pleasure. His father used to say that
the taste for poetry was an acquired taste, like the taste for tomatoes, and that he would
come to it yet; but he never came to it, or so much of it as some people seemed to do, and
he always had his sorrowful misgivings as to whether they liked it as much as they pretended.
I think, too, that it should be a flavor, a spice, a sweet, a delicate relish in the high banquet
of literature, and never a chief dish; and I should not know how to defend my boy for trying
to make long poems of his own at the very time when he found it so hard to read other people's
long poems.

V

THE LAST OF A BOY'S TOWN

THE LAST OF A BOY'S TOWN

My boy was twelve years old, and was already a swift compositor, though he was still so small
that he had to stand on a chair to reach the case in setting type on Taylor's inaugural message.
But what he lacked in stature he made up in gravity of demeanor; and he got the name of "The
Old Man" from the printers as soon as he began to come about the office, which he did almost
as soon as he could walk. His first attempt in literature, an essay on the vain and disappointing
nature of human life, he set up and printed off himself in his sixth or seventh year; and the
printing-office was in some sort his home, as well as his school, his university. He could
no more remember learning to set type than he could remember learning to read; and in after-life
he could not come within smell of the ink, the dusty types, the humid paper, of a printing-office
without that tender swelling of the heart which so fondly responds to any memory-bearing perfume:
his youth, his boyhood, almost his infancy came back to him in it. He now looked forward eagerly
to helping on the new paper, and somewhat proudly to living in the larger place the family
were going to. The moment it was decided he began to tell the boys that he was going to live
in a city, and he felt that it gave him distinction. He had nothing but joy in it, and he did
not dream that as the time drew near it could be sorrow. But when it came at last, and he was
to leave the house, the town, the boys, he found himself deathly homesick.

The parting days were days of gloom; the parting was an anguish of bitter tears. Nothing consoled
him but the fact that they were going all the way to the new place in a canal-boat, which his
father chartered for the trip. My boy and his brother had once gone to Cincinnati in a canal-boat,
with a friendly captain of their acquaintance, and, though they were both put to sleep in a
berth so narrow that when they turned they fell out on the floor, the glory of the adventure
remained with him, and he could have thought of nothing more delightful than such another voyage.
The household goods were piled up in the middle of the boat, and the family had a cabin forward,
which seemed immense to the children. They played in it and ran races up and down the long
canal-boat roof, where their father and mother sometimes put their chairs and sat to admire
the scenery.

They arrived safely at their journey's end, without any sort of accident. They had made the
whole forty miles in less than two days, and were all as well as when they started, without
having suffered for a moment from seasickness. The boat drew up at the tow-path just before
the stable belonging to the house which the father had already taken, and the whole family
at once began helping the crew put the things ashore. The boys thought it would have been a
splendid stable to keep the pony in, only they had sold the pony; but they saw in an instant
that it would do for a circus as soon as they could get acquainted with enough boys to have one.

The strangeness of the house and street, and the necessity of meeting the boys of the neighborhood,
and paying with his person for his standing among them, kept my boy interested for a time,
and he did not realize at first how much he missed the Boy's Town and all the familiar fellowships
there, and all the manifold privileges of the place. Then he began to be very homesick, and
to be torn with the torment of a divided love. His mother, whom he loved so dearly, so tenderly,
was here, and wherever she was, that was home; and yet home was yonder, far off, at the end
of those forty inexorable miles, where he had left his life-long mates. The first months there
was a dumb heartache at the bottom of every pleasure and excitement.

After a while he was allowed to revisit the Boy's Town. It could only have been three or four
months after he had left it, but it already seemed a very long time; and he figured himself
returning as stage heroes do to the scenes of their childhood, after an absence of some fifteen
years. He fancied that if the boys did not find him grown, they would find him somehow changed,
and that he would dazzle them with the light accumulated by his residence in a city. He was
going to stay with his grandmother, and he planned to make a long stay; for he was very fond
of her, and he liked the quiet and comfort of her pleasant house. He must have gone back by
the canal-packet, but his memory kept no record of the fact, and afterward he knew only of
having arrived, and of searching about in a ghostly fashion for his old comrades. They may
have been at school; at any rate, he found very few of them; and with them he was certainly
strange enough; too strange, even. They received him with a kind of surprise; and they could
not begin playing together at once in the old way. He went to all the places that were so dear
to him; but he felt in them the same kind of refusal, or reluctance, that he felt in the boys.
His heart began to ache again, he did not quite know why; only it ached. When he went up from
his grandmother's to look at the Faulkner house, he realized that it was no longer home, and
he could not bear the sight of it. There were other people living in it; strange voices sounded
from the open doors, strange faces peered from the windows.

He came back to his grandmother's, bruised and defeated, and spent the morning indoors reading.
After dinner he went out again, and hunted up that queer earth-spirit who had been so long
and closely his only friend. He at least was not changed; he was as unwashed and as unkempt
as ever; but he seemed shy of my poor boy. He had probably never been shaken hands with in
his life before; he dropped my boy's hand; and they stood looking at each other, not knowing
what to say. My boy had on his best clothes, which he wore so as to affect the Boy's Town boys
with the full splendor of a city boy. After all, he was not so very splendid, but his presence
altogether was too much for the earth-spirit, and he vanished out of his consciousness like
an apparition.

After school was out in the afternoon, he met more of the boys, but none of them knew just
what to do with him. The place that he had once had in their lives was filled; he was an outsider,
who might be suffered among them, but he was no longer of them. He did not understand this
at once, nor well know what hurt him. But something was gone that could not be called back,
something lost that could not be found.

At tea-time his grandfather came home and gravely made him welcome; the uncle who was staying
with them was jovially kind. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I
have turned loose upon society, still exists.

You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life or
death, to his destruction."

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a frenzy in my manner, and something,
I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed.
But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion
and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe
me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is
you say."

I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.

Chapter
24

My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed
up and lost.

I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded
my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death
would have been my portion.
My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever; my country, which,
when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity,
became hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with
a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed. And now
my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. I have traversed
a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which
travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How
I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing
limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept
me alive; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being.

When I
quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might
trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But he became
more and more aware that the past was gone from him forever, and that he could not return to
it. He did not forget it, but cherished its memories the more fondly for that reason.

There was no bitterness in it, and no harm that he could not hope would easily be forgiven
him. He had often been foolish, and sometimes he had been wicked; but he had never been such
a little fool or such a little sinner but he had wished for more sense and more grace. There
are some great fools and great sinners who try to believe in after-life that they are the manlier
men because they have been silly and mischievous boys, but he has never believed that. He is
glad to have had a boyhood fully rounded out with all a boy's interests and pleasures, and
he is glad that his lines were cast in the Boy's Town; but he knows, or believes he knows,
that whatever is good in him now came from what was good in him then; and he is sure that the
town was delightful chiefly because his home in it was happy. The town was small, and the boys
there were hemmed in by their inexperience and ignorance; but the simple home was large with
vistas that stretched to the ends of the earth, and it was serenely bright with a father's
reason and warm with a mother's love.

THE END

