Zehru of Xollar

By Hal K. Wells

  Three Earthlings are whisked on an
 inter-dimensional journey to the den
      of the Scientist Zehru.

When the rolling thunder of infra-bass first came to their ears, Robert Blake and Helen Lawton
were standing on the platform of a New York subway station waiting for the arrival of an uptown
express to bear them to their homes.

They made a strikingly attractive couple as they stood there. New York had not had time as
yet to remove the bronze tan of an outdoor life from Blake's ruggedly good-looking face. His
tall athletic figure was still conspicuous for the lithe strength that had made him an All-Western
tackle less than two years ago.

Standing beside Blake's husky figure, Helen Lawton looked like a tiny, very perfect, blonde
doll, with an exquisitely molded face framed in curly bobbed hair that was the clear golden-amber
hue of orange honey. There was a diamond sparkling on the ring finger of the girl's slim left
hand, placed there by Blake.

It was well after midnight, and the only other passenger waiting on the station was a burly
chap leaning against one of the white pillars on the other side of the platform. After a casual
glance at the fellow, with his derby hat shoved far back from a low forehead, his blatantly
conspicuous clothing, and the suspicious bulge under one arm-pit, Blake had mentally set him
down as a minor gangster, probably a strong-arm man for some beer mob.

Blake and Helen had been standing there but a few minutes when the strange sound first became
audible. For a moment Blake thought it was merely the rumbling roar of an express approaching
far down the tunnel. Then he realized that no subway train could possibly produce a sound effect
so oddly disturbing and strangely alien.

It was like no sound that Blake had ever heard before. Vibrant with colossal power, it suggested
a sustained note struck from a giant organ, a note so low in pitch that it seemed a full octave
below the lowest bass note ever struck. Whatever it was, the thundering vibration of infra-bass
was coming nearer with startling swiftness.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was impossible to locate the source of the mighty pulsing note. It seemed to be coming simultaneously
from all directions, like a great hollow sphere of invisible sound waves closing in with the
station platform as its central focal point.

Helen's face was white with dread as she shrank closer into Blake's embrace. Blake noted that
the gangster across the platform was standing tensely at bay with his back against the pillar
and his right hand thrust under his coat as he stared wildly about him in an effort to discover
the cause of the disturbance.

The rolling thunder closed in upon them with a final rush that brought it so near that their
very bodies seemed to vibrate in harmony with that mighty note of shuddering bass. Then with
startling abruptness the green net came.

Out from the walls and down from the roof spurted scores of quivering ribbons of blinding green
flame. Swiftly the radiant tendrils rushed in upon the shrinking three from every side, while
the infra-bass thundered in mighty crescendo.

Blake instinctively swept Helen close within the shelter of his arms in an effort to protect
her with his own body against the searing menace of those onrushing green flames. The next
moment the fiery ribbons were upon them, lashing about their bodies, crossing and crisscrossing
in the air above and around them in a great tangled web of interlacing lines of flame that
filled the entire platform.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a shock of relief Blake found that there was no heat in those strange flames, but his
relief was short-lived as the next second brought him realization of the real menace of the
radiant ribbons. There was a solidity and strength in those glowing streamers that held them
as helplessly captive as though they were gripped in ribbons of steel. Dazed and helpless,
the three struggled for a moment in the meshes of the weird net of flame like fish caught in
the strands of some giant cosmic seine.

The trembling thunder of infra-bass abruptly changed to a thin whining note so high in pitch
that it seemed the nearly soundless ghost of a metallic scream. With the change in sound Blake
became aware of a new and astounding change in his surroundings.

The walls and roof of the station seemed closing in upon him as though he were growing in size
at an incredible rate. The next moment he shot through the roof, hurtling on and upward with
the velocity of a rocket. The sensation was one that his reeling brain could not even grasp.
His body seemed to be inside every stone, iron bar, and lump of earth, yet at the same time
every exterior object seemed within his body. It was an eery chaos of a dozen different dimensions
blending to form a Space in which there was no known dimension.

As they flashed on out to the surface Blake had one hazy glimpse of Manhattan's glowing lights
spread all about them. Then the speed of their progress leaped into a new and terrible acceleration
that blotted out every tangible sensation from Blake's brain.

Time and Space alike seemed to vanish as their hurtling flight sent them rocketing on for distances
inconceivably vast through a bleak and appalling Nothingness, where neither sight nor sound
existed.

Then abruptly the speed of their flight seemed to be lessening. Sensation returned to Blake.
He again heard the thin high-pitched metallic wail, now swiftly deepening to the familiar growl
of rolling bass. He again noted the presence of the glowing green ribbons of the net that still
encircled them.

       *       *       *       *       *

A blindingly brilliant purple mist was now closing in upon them from every direction, bringing
with it a nameless and agonizing force that seemed to be shaking the very atoms in Blake's
body asunder. Then they dropped swiftly down out of the purple mists, and the strange agony
at once vanished. Blake felt their downward progress come to an end with the gentle arrival
of his feet upon firm ground.

The encircling net of green flame glowed dazzlingly brighter for a brief moment, then swiftly
vanished into thin air, while the mutter of bass vibrations simultaneously died away into silence. 

To the west, overlooking the sandy bed of the Rhone, which sometimes hides among small forest
of willows and poplars wilderness of steep bowls, runs Ardeche mountains, sad and barren, consisting
of a series of rocky hills and burned in cut away at intervals of some open. They lack any vegetation
because of the raging winds of the Alps ground, and barely visible, far away, and some giant ruins
of feudal castles dominate the highest eminences as going over the abyss and climbed mountains rise
from small populations to receive protection from these castles, and each on a large eagle's
nest attached to the top of the rocks.

In between the two orographic formations look so different, it takes opulence
valley, crossed by small tributaries of the Rhone, including Durance,
Provence brings poetic waters.

Queen find the most careful cultivation of the valley to do some kind of endless garden. It is
now more mulberry dwarf, which provides their food from the producer of silk worm, and makes
a beautiful contrast of dark green and vigorous, arranged in intersecting streets in all directions,
with vivid green and yellow almond, or most of the vineyards intermediaries beginning to open
their first leaves. Then, as you move away from Lyon, is looking to reduce the number of mulberry
trees gradually replaced the beautiful olive groves of Provence gray as gray ink, melancholy in the extreme,
stands out as a huge pall movent carpet wheat planted in the middle of the green olive wide
streets.

From Lyon to Marseille train passes of the game in many cities and towns, some of them rich
in ancient monuments, Roman and feudal traditions and memories of great
importance for the history.

The purpose of the enclosure seemed to be to maintain an area of clear air in the midst of
the swirling purple vapors that pressed in against it from the top and from every side. The
three captives stood near the center.

Fencing in the enclosure at twenty-yard intervals and reaching upward to the ceiling were slender
posts of some lusterless black metal. Between these posts streamed unbroken, nearly transparent
sheets of some unknown force, the only visible sign of which was the presence of countless
millions of tiny shimmering golden flecks which danced like dust motes in a ray of sunlight.
It was obviously this thin sheet of unknown force that was keeping the purple mists at bay,
for fan-like antennae at the top of each post spread a similar shimmering sheet that formed
a ceiling for the clear-aired area.

       *       *       *       *       *

The three Earthlings were facing one of the side walls of the big enclosures. The purple mists
outside made it hard to see clearly for any distance, but Blake had an impression that the
surrounding terrain was featured by the same barren, nearly desert bleakness that characterized
the interior of the enclosure, where scattered clumps of dead, spiky black branches of shrub-like
vegetation were the only sign of plant life.

Just within the distant end wall at their right there was a low platform surmounted by a wide
arch some ten feet in height, both constructed of silver-colored metal. There was nothing between
them and the end wall to their left, but they could see that the ground sloped sharply upward
from the barrier-sheet, and on the crest of the ridge a gigantic cone-shaped structure of solid
black could be seen dimly through the intervening mists.

The cone-building seemed to be the source of the power that kept the enclosure intact. Slender
cables of black metal ran down the slope from it into the clear-aired space, spreading out
over the dusty gray-blue ground to the base of each of the tall posts, with a heavier copper-colored
cable running on the silver arch. From within the windowless interior of the cone there was
audible a low hum as of tremendous power being generated there.

"Gee, what a rummy joint this place is!" There was frank awe in the gangster's voice as he
at last broke the silence. "That guy with the green net sure took us for one sweet ride. Mebbe
we're on the Moon now, or on Mars, huh?"

Blake shook his head. "No, we're completely out of our entire solar system. Those twin purple
suns up there prove that. We may even be in another universe, or another dimension from our
own. A piece of apparatus that could whisk us up through fifty feet of earth and masonry as
that green net did obviously works in dimensions of which we've never dreamed. The only thing
we're sure of is that we were brought to this purple world deliberately and intentionally by
an intelligent being of some kind, scooped up like tadpoles from a mud-puddle and dumped here
in this elaborate enclosure It had already prepared for us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake nodded to where the black cone-building loomed through the purple mists outside the end
wall. "Whoever or whatever the thing was that brought us here, I have a hunch It's there in
that power-house watching us. I'd suggest that we walk down toward that end of the enclosure
for a closer look. We may at least find out whether we're guests or prisoners."

"Listens good to me, fellah," agreed Mapes, sliding a hand up to his shoulder holster and bringing
out a squat black automatic pistol of heavy caliber. "We'll do a prowl, over that way, and
if His Nibs tries any more funny business mebbe a few slugs outta this rod will change his
mind for him."

"Better go easy with the gun, Mapes," advised Blake as the three of them started slowly toward
the cone-building. "From what we've already seen, there must be weapons in this world that
would make your pistol look like a kid's pop-gun. We'd better go easy till--wait, what's that?"

The thin high-pitched whine, followed promptly by the familiar growling thunder of infra-bass,
had again become audible. At the same moment a long pencil-like beam of green light glowed
into visibility, extending from the tip of the cone to a point high within the enclosure just
back of them. As they halted abruptly and watched, they saw the interlacing meshes of the green
flame-net materialize suddenly at the end of the beam.

The beam curved into an arc that dropped the net swiftly to the ground some thirty yards from
them. Its meshes were packed nearly full of dark, writhing figures.

"Looks like some more tadpoles arriving for our pond!" Mapes exclaimed. "I wonder what part
of N' Yawk His Nibs yanked these babies from?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake's answer died on his lips as the net and beam glowed blindingly brighter for a brief
second, then disappeared, leaving the dark figures in full view. Helen choked back a gasp of
horror. Mapes swore in consternation and hurriedly swung his pistol into line with those writhing
shapes.

The net's latest captives were not from New York, nor were they from any other part of the
planet Earth. Hideous spawn of some unknown world out in the black void of Space, they writhed
for a moment in a nightmare chaos of countless brown-furred bodies, then swiftly disentangled
themselves before the staring eyes of the three Earthlings.

The things were apparently too low in the mental scale to have any reaction to their situation
other than a blind instinct to attack any other living being within reach, for they promptly
headed for the three captives from Earth.

As the creatures came shambling rapidly forward on powerful bowed legs, and with the tips of
their long hairy arms brushing the ground, they looked like grotesquely distorted apes. The
crowning horror of those shambling figures, however, lay in the fact that they were completely
headless!

Even when the things approached to a distance of less than ten feet before halting in momentary
indecision, Blake could detect no sign of any normal skull in the blunt space at the top of
the powerful hairy torso. There was a furry-lipped mouth opening of some kind in the hollow
between the bulging shoulders, but of eyes, ears, nose, or brain cavity there was no discernible
trace.

For a long moment the headless ape-things and the three human beings stood silently facing
each other. Mapes' pistol was leveled pointblank at the nearest of the creatures, but their
overwhelming numbers made the gangster hold his fire.

There were two distinct groups of the things. At least twenty members of each group were in
the crowd facing the Earthlings. To the rear of these attackers two oddly repulsive objects
were carried and carefully shielded by picked guards of four unusually large and powerful ape-things.

       *       *       *       *       *

The nature of those two guarded objects puzzled Blake. They looked like large eggs of dirty-gray
jelly, about a yard in length. They were obviously alive, for their gelatinous masses quivered
and trembled in constant activity. Blake noted that there seemed to be a curious connection
between the ebb and flow of pulsations in the egg-masses and the movements of the ape-things.

His attention was abruptly recalled to the headless things in front of him as they suddenly
began shambling forward again. There was no possible mistaking the intention of those advancing
horrors. They were moving to the attack.

They reached barely to Blake's shoulders, but he realized that their enormous numbers and hook-taloned
hands would make the result of the battle almost a foregone conclusion. The fact that the headless
things were without eyes was no handicap to them. The swift certainty of their movements proved
that they had a sense of sight of some kind that was in every way as efficient as eyesight.

Blake looked hurriedly around him, seeking a place where they might be at the best possible
advantage in the impending battle. There was a small dense thicket of the spiky dead branches
half a dozen yards to their right. At Blake's low command, the three made a dash for the thicket.
Arriving there, they ranged themselves against it, with their backs at least partially protected
from attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

The maneuver seemed to puzzle the ape-things for a moment. They stood passively watching the
retreat of the three until they had reached the thicket. Then the creatures again began slowly
closing in upon them. Blake snatched up a dead branch from the ground near the thicket, and
was delighted to find that its weight and tough fiber made it an excellent club. 

The church at Ainay is all that remains of the Merovingian times and is the oldest one in Lyon. In
it are three naves that are just about as wide as they are long. It also contains gorgeous
mosaic glass and tiles that tell ancient stories. It is remembered for four giant granite columns
in a lovely blue that came from a Roman column found near Lyon.
 Mapes'
pistol sent a bullet crashing squarely into the nearest attacker. The creature staggered momentarily,
then came lurching on again, apparently not even crippled. Blake swung his heavy club in a
whistling arc that sent two of his adversaries broken and writhing to the ground.

He heard Mapes' pistol bark four times more as the things closed in. Then the gun was knocked
from the gangster's grip by a groping talon-armed hand. Mapes tried to batter back his assailants
with his naked fists, but the flailing arms of the horde knocked him from his feet. His limp
body was promptly tramped into unconsciousness by the milling feet of the close-packed group.

Blake lashed the heavy club about him with a burst of savage fury that for the moment sent
the furred horrors reeling backward. Their retreat ended after a scant two yards. Reforming
their ranks, they again began cautiously shambling forward in a new attack that Blake realized
would probably mean the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was easy enough to batter the things to ground, but it seemed impossible to seriously hurt
them. Their incredible vitality and their overwhelming numbers made them almost invincible.
Grimly Blake set himself to battle as long as he could in that last desperate effort to keep
the hordes at bay.

He noticed idly that the two groups still kept their oddly separated formation. Behind them
the two egg-masses of jelly were now seething in new activity after a brief lessening of their
gruesome shivering. Blake now saw that there was a direct and unmistakable connection between
the activity of the jelly and the corresponding activity of the ape-things.

