A LIFE TRAGEDY

    A pistol-shot rings round and round the world:
      In pitiful defeat a warrior lies.
    A last defiance to dark Death is hurled,
      A last wild challenge shocks the sunlit skies.
      Alone he falls with wide, wan, woeful eyes:
    Eyes that could smile at death--could not face shame.

    Alone, alone he paced his narrow room,
      In the bright sunshine of that Paris day;
    Saw in his thought the awful hand of doom;
      Saw in his dream his glory pass away;
      Tried in his heart, his weary heart, to pray:
    "O God! who made me, give me strength to face
    The spectre of this bitter, black disgrace."

           *       *       *       *       *

    The burn brawls darkly down the shaggy glen,
      The bee-kissed heather blooms around the door;
    He sees himself a barefoot boy again,
      Bending o'er page of legendary lore.
      He hears the pibroch, grips the red claymore,
    Runs with the Fiery Cross a clansman true,
    Sworn kinsman of Rob Roy and Roderick Dhu.

    Eating his heart out with a wild desire,
      One day, behind his counter trim and neat,
    He hears a sound that sets his brain afire--
      The Highlanders are marching down the street.
      Oh, how the pipes shrill out, the mad drums beat!
    "On to the gates of Hell, my Gordons gay!"
    He flings his hated yardstick far away.

    He sees the sullen pass, high-crowned with snow,
      Where Afghans cower with eyes of gleaming hate.
    He hurls himself against the hidden foe.
      They try to rally--ah, too late, too late!
      Again, defenceless, with fierce eyes that wait
    For death, he stands, like baited bull at bay,
    And flouts the Boers, that mad Majuba day.

    He sees again the murderous Soudan,
      Blood-slaked and rapine swept. He seems to stand
    Upon the gory plain of Omdurman.
      Then Magersfontein, and supreme command
      Over his Highlanders. To shake his hand
    A King is proud, and princes call him friend,
    And glory crowns his life--and now the end.

    The awful end. His eyes are dark with doom;
      He hears the shrapnel shrieking overhead:
    He sees the ravaged ranks, the flame-stabbed gloom.
      Oh, to have fallen! the battle-field his bed,
      With Wauchope and his glorious brother-dead.
    Why was he saved for this, for this? And now
    He raises the revolver to his brow. 

           Mrs. SNOOKS' Dinner, to meet Mr. STANLEY.

    
      
    Friday.--Nothing particular, except meeting
      Mr. STANLEY.
      
    Saturday.--Close time for Salmon in Serpentine
    begins. Mrs. NEMO'S first dance with Mr. STANLEY.

    
      
    Sunday.--Everyone in Hyde Park to meet Mr. STANLEY.
      Rev. Dr. HONEYMAN'S Sermon to Mr. STANLEY. Museums
      closed. Flowers open, free.
    
    Monday and Tuesday.--Much as usual. To meet Mr. STANLEY.

General
Forecast.--Weather unsettled at first. More so afterwards. N.E.E.
Gales to meet Mr. STANLEY. Snow, followed by violent Cyclones, unless
dry, warm, and 91° in the shade. Depression over the whole of the
British Dominions.

Wednesday.--Depression entirely relieved by appearance
of Mr. Punch. Rejoicings all day. Squibs, Fireworks at night.

THE WOMAN AND THE ANGEL

    An angel was tired of heaven, as he lounged in the golden street;
    His halo was tilted sideways, and his harp lay mute at his feet;
    So the Master stooped in His pity, and gave him a pass to go,
    For the space of a moon, to the earth-world, to mix with the men below.

    He doffed his celestial garments, scarce waiting to lay them straight;
    He bade goodbye to Peter, who stood by the golden gate;
    The sexless singers of heaven chanted a fond farewell,
    And the imps looked up as they pattered on the red-hot flags of hell.

    Never was seen such an angel: eyes of a heavenly blue,
    Features that shamed Apollo, hair of a golden hue;
    The women simply adored him, his lips were like Cupid's bow;
    But he never ventured to use them--and so they voted him slow.

    Till at last there came One Woman, a marvel of loveliness,
    And she whispered to him: "Do you love me?" And he answered that
          woman, "Yes."
    And she said: "Put your arms around me, and kiss me, and hold me--so--"
    But fiercely he drew back, saying: "This thing is wrong, and I know."

    Then sweetly she mocked his scruples, and softly she him beguiled:
    "You, who are verily man among men, speak with the tongue of a child.
    We have outlived the old standards; we have burst, like an
          over-tight thong,
    The ancient, outworn, puritanic traditions of Right and Wrong."

    Then the Master feared for His angel, and called him again to His side,
    For oh, the woman was wondrous, and oh, the angel was tried.
    And deep in his hell sang the Devil, and this was the strain of his
          song:
    "The ancient, outworn, puritanic traditions of Right and Wrong."

THE RHYME OF THE RESTLESS ONES

    We couldn't sit and study for the law;
      The stagnation of a bank we couldn't stand;
    For our riot blood was surging, and we didn't need much urging
    To excitements and excesses that are banned.
    So we took to wine and drink and other things,
      And the devil in us struggled to be free;
    Till our friends rose up in wrath, and they pointed out the path,
    And they paid our debts and packed us o'er the sea.

    Oh, they shook us off and shipped us o'er the foam,
    To the larger lands that lure a man to roam;
            And we took the chance they gave
            Of a far and foreign grave,
    And we bade goodbye for evermore to home.

    And some of us are climbing on the peak,
      And some of us are camping on the plain;
    By pine and palm you'll find us, with never claim to bind us,
    By track and trail you'll meet us once again.

    We are fated serfs to freedom--sky and sea;
      We have failed where slummy cities overflow;
    But the stranger ways of earth know our pride and know our worth,
    And we go into the dark as fighters go.

    Yes, we go into the night as brave men go,
    Though our faces they be often streaked with woe;
            Yet we're hard as cats to kill,
            And our hearts are reckless still,
    And we've danced with death a dozen times or so.

    And you'll find us in Alaska after gold,
      And you'll find us herding cattle in the South.
    We like strong drink and fun; and when the race is run,
      We often die with curses in our mouth.

    We are wild as colts unbroke, but never mean;
      Of our sins we've shoulders broad to bear the blame;
    But we'll never stay in town, and we'll never settle down,
      And we'll never have an object or an aim.

    No, there's that in us that time can never tame;
    And life will always seem a careless game;
            And they'd better far forget--
            Those who say they love us yet--
    Forget, blot out with bitterness our name.

NEW YEAR'S EVE

    It's cruel cold on the water-front, silent and dark and drear;
      Only the black tide weltering, only the hissing snow;
    And I, alone, like a storm-tossed wreck, on this night of the glad
          New Year,
      Shuffling along in the icy wind, ghastly and gaunt and slow.

    They're playing a tune in McGuffy's saloon, and it's cheery and
          bright in there
      (God! but I'm weak--since the bitter dawn, and never a bite of food);
    I'll just go over and slip inside--I mustn't give way to despair--
      Perhaps I can bum a little booze if the boys are feeling good.

    They'll jeer at me, and they'll sneer at me, and they'll call me a
          whiskey soak;
      ("Have a drink? Well, thankee kindly, sir, I don't mind if I do.")
    A drivelling, dirty gin-joint fiend, the butt of the bar-room joke;
      Sunk and sodden and hopeless--"Another? Well, here's to you!"

    McGuffy is showing a bunch of the boys how Bob Fitzsimmons hit;
      The barman is talking of Tammany Hall, and why the ward boss got
          fired;
    I'll just sneak into a corner, and they'll let me alone a bit;
      The room is reeling round and round ... O God, but I'm tired, I'm
          tired....

           *       *       *       *       *

    Roses she wore on her breast that night. Oh, but their scent was sweet;
      Alone we sat on the balcony, and the fan-palms arched above;
    The witching strain of a waltz by Strauss came up to our cool retreat,
      And I prisoned her little hand in mine, and I whispered my plea of
          love.

    Then sudden the laughter died on her lips, and lowly she bent her head;
      And oh, there came in the deep, dark eyes a look that was heaven
          to see
    And the moments went, and I waited there, and never a word was said,
      And she plucked from her bosom a rose of red, and shyly gave it to
          me. 

    Bah! I've written things just as good as these."
          
      "A most amusing Article, but a little of it goes a long way;" i.e.,
          Is tired
    of his subject, and wants to turn his attention to something else.

SOCIAL.

"It's
      a very curious fact;" i.e., "Now to pile on the embroidery."
          

    "Now, do drop all formality, and look in to dinner quite in a friendly
          way. But
      you must take us just as you find us;" i.e., "It counts as a formal
          invitation,
    and he's sure not to come."
      
          "You can't come!

    Oh, I'm so sorry!" i.e., "Didn't even know I'd asked her."

PLATFORMULARS.

"If
at any time, by one jot, or one tittle, or one hair's breadth, or
in the very slightest degree, or in the least;" i.e., "What, oh, what
was I going to say? Can't go on like this for ever."
      The red, red rose is faded now, and it's fifty years ago.
    'Twere better to die a thousand deaths than live each day as I live!
      I have sinned, I have sunk to the lowest depths--but oh, I have
          suffered so!

    Hark! Oh hark! I can hear the bells!... Look! I can see her there,
      Fair as a dream ... but it fades ... And now--I can hear the
          dreadful hum
    Of the crowded court ... See! the Judge looks down ... NOT GUILTY,
          my Lord, I swear ...
      The bells, I can hear the bells again ... Ethel, I come, I come!...

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Rouse up, old man, it's twelve o'clock. You can't sleep here, you
          know.
      Say! ain't you got no sentiment? Lift up your muddled head;
    Have a drink to the glad New Year, a drop before you go--
      You darned old dirty hobo ... My God! Here, boys! He's DEAD!"

COMFORT

    Say! You've struck a heap of trouble--
      Bust in business, lost your wife;
    No one cares a cent about you,
      You don't care a cent for life;
    Hard luck has of hope bereft you,
      Health is failing, wish you'd die--
    Why, you've still the sunshine left you,
      And the big, blue sky.

            Sky so blue it makes you wonder
              If it's heaven shining through;
            Earth so smiling 'way out yonder,
              Sun so bright it dazzles you;
            Birds a-singing, flowers a-flinging
              All their fragrance on the breeze;
            Dancing shadows, green, still meadows--
              Don't you mope, you've still got these.

    These, and none can take them from you;
      These, and none can weigh their worth.
    What! you're tired and broke and beaten?--
      Why, you're rich--you've got the earth!
    Yes, if you're a tramp in tatters,
      While the blue sky bends above,
    You've got nearly all that matters,
      You've got God, and God is love.

PREMONITION

