Too surprised to disobey, the guard threw the televisor switch, and in a moment Strom's stern
face appeared on the screen. He comprehended the situation immediately.

"Do as she says," he ordered brusquely. "Stoddard is coming to take care of that man of hers
that Gore beat up."

A few minutes later she was tearfully assisting the ship's doctor to put the man with the dislocated
shoulders on a stretcher.

"Your husband?" asked Stoddard, who resembled a starved gray rat.

"My brother," she exclaimed simply.

"Want to take care of him?" And at her eager assent, he said, "Can't afford to let him die.
Your family got money?"

"Yes, yes! They will pay anything--anything--to get him back safely."

The doctor grinned with satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Memory returned to Quirl with the realization that he was lying on a metal bunk in an outside
stateroom, where he could see the orderly procession of the stars through the floor ports as
the ship rotated. His body was racked with pain, and his head seemed enormous. His sensation,
he discovered, was due to a thick swathing of bandages.

As he stirred something moved in an adjoining bunk, and Dr. Stoddard's peaked face came into view.

"How do you feel?" he asked professionally.

"Rotten!"

"We'll fix that." He left, returning a few minutes later with a portable apparatus somewhat
resembling its progenitor, the diathermy generator. He disposed a number of insulated loops
about Quirl's body and head, connecting them through flexible cables to his machine. As a gentle
humming began, Quirl was conscious of an agreeable warmth, of a quickening all over his body.
A great lassitude followed, and he slept.

When he awoke again Captain Strom was standing beside him. He had taken off his coat, and his
powerful body filled the blouse he was wearing. He had evidently just come off duty, for he
still had on his blue trousers, with the stripes of gold braid down the sides.

"It may interest you, Mr. Finner, that I have selected you as one of the chosen," he remarked
casually.

"One of the chosen what?"

"The chosen race. You didn't take me for an out-and-out damned pirate, did you?"

"Excuse me if I seem dumb!" Quirl hoisted himself on his elbow. "Yes, I figure you're a pirate.
What else?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Strom's stern face relaxed in a smile. It was a strange smile, inscrutably melancholy. It revealed,
beneath the hardness of a warrior, something else; the idealism of a poet. When he spoke again
it was with a strange gentleness:

"To attain one's end, one must make use of many means, and sometimes to disguise one's purpose.
For instance, it is perfectly proper for an officer of the I.F.P. to disguise himself like
a son of the idle rich in order to lay the infamous 'Scourge' by the heels, isn't it?"

Quirl felt himself redden. And a cold fear seemed to overwhelm him. He realized that Strom
was a zealot, and he knew he would not hesitate to kill. This prompt penetration of his disguise
was something he had not bargained for.

"What makes you think," he asked shortly, "that I'm an I.F.P. man?"

"The fight you gave Gore and his men. Do you expect me to think that a coupon clipper could
have done that? I know the way of--"

He checked himself. Quirl said:

"My people have money. I don't know what you mean about--"

"Oh, yes, you do," Strom interrupted. "If you were what you claim to be perhaps I would let
you go for the ransom, though you took my eye from the first."

"The ransom will be paid."

"It will not. You will be one of those who do not return. There is only one price I will accept
from you."

"Yes? What is that?"

"The formula of the new etheric ray."

"I don't know the I.F.P. secrets. I told you that."

"You know how to operate the ray. All its men do. I want you to tell me what you know. I can
deduce the rest."

       *       *       *       *       *

Quirl thought rapidly. Strom was right. The I.F.P. had developed a new ray that was far superior
to the ionizer ray, for the latter required an atmosphere of some kind for its operation, while
the new one would work equally well in a vacuum.

"I never heard of any," he lied stubbornly. "Anyway, what do you want a ray for? Your guns,
with no gravity to interfere and no air to stop the bullets, have just about unlimited range,
haven't they?"

"Spoken like a soldier!" Again Strom permitted himself a brief triumphant smile. "And we have
the further advantage of invisibility. The ship is surrounded by a net of wires that create
a field of force which bend light rays around us. That explains why your men have never caught
us. But to get back to our subject. I will tell you something. Do you know who I am?"

Quirl looked at him. Strom appeared to be at least sixty years old. But the fine, erect figure,
the rugged features told nothing.

"Did you ever hear of Lieutenant Burroughs?" Strom asked casually.

"Burroughs--the man without a planet!" Quirl ejaculated. "Are you Burroughs, the traitor?"
Immediately he regretted his heedlessness. Strom's face darkened in anger, and for a moment
the pirate captain did not reply. When he did he was a little calmer.

"Traitor they called me!" he exclaimed vehemently. "I a traitor--the most loyal man in the
solar system guard. Surrounded by rottenness and intrigue--

"But you wouldn't know. You were but a lad learning to fly your first toy helics when that
happened. Years later the Martian Cabal was exposed, and the leading plotters--the traitors--were
punished. But that was not till later, and the court's irreversible decree against me had been
carried out. I, the unsuspecting messenger, the loyal, eager dupe, was made the cat's-paw.
I was put on an old, condemned freighter, with food and supplies supposed to last me a lifetime,
but with no power capsules and no means of steering the ship. I was set adrift in a derelict
on a lonely orbit of exile around the sun--the man without a planet!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Picture that, lad. That rusty, dead old cylinder, coursing around and around the sun, and
inside, sitting on his bales and boxes, a young man like you. A young man in the pride and
prime of his life, expiating the treason that had betrayed him. Day after day, through the
thick ports, I saw the same changeless scene. And every two years, when I drew near the Earth,
I watched the beautiful green ball of it, with what bitter longings! As I watched it dwindle
away again into the blackness of space, I thought of the fortunate, selfish, stupid and cruel
beings who lived on it, and hated them. They had banished me, an innocent man, to whirl forever
and ever around the sun, in my steel tomb!

"But that cruel judgment was never executed. Seven years ago this Gore found me. He is an escaped
convict, and he came in a little five-man rocket he had stolen. We loaded up all of the supplies
the little ship would hold, for Gore had no food, and escaped to Titan, landing on an island
on the side opposite to where the mines are.

"Gore wanted to become a pirate, and as he could get men, I consented. He scraped them up,
fugitives from justice, every one of them. We built this ship, and I invented the invisibility
field of force--"

"Just a moment," Quirl interrupted, vastly interested. "I saw your ship through the ports that
day."

"True. The presence of your ship in the field distorted it so much that it was ineffective.
But at all other times--right now--we are utterly invisible. One of the I.F.P. patrols may
pass within a mile of us and never see us.

