At last, after a great many hesitations, Zouhra, who is the bravest of them all, ventured to
go out with me, buried in the recesses of a brougham, and protected by a very thick kind of
mantilla, which after all was hardly any less impenetrable than a yashmak. Then they grew bolder,
and impelled by curiosity, their coquetry getting the better of their bashful timidity, they
took a drive one day in a landau to the Bois with Mohammed. I mounted on horseback and met
them, without appearing to know them. Everything went off as well as could be.

The carriage which I had purchased is severely simple in style, as is suitable for a foreigner
of distinction. In his European disguise Mohammed maintains that expression of serene dignity
which so excellently suits his part of a father escorting his three daughters. There is, in
short, nothing about the latter to excite attention. If a dark pair of eyes is sometimes distinguishable
through the embroidered veils, the fashion, at any rate, permits the features to be sufficiently
disguised to conceal the beauty of my sultanas from over-bold glances.

Of course poor Kondjé-Gul, still living away from the others, does not take part in these frolics;
but we thus gain some hours of liberty. On the second day, while my wives were driving in the
Bois, we took our opportunity of going out, like true lovers, arm in arm; it was most delightful!

We went on foot to the Boulevards. You may guess what raptures Kondjé-Gul was in each step
we took. It was the first time she had been out with me alone, the first time she had felt
herself free and released from the imprisonment of the harem. Many an inquisitive fellow, seeing
us pass, and struck with her dignified manner, stopped of a sudden, and tried to distinguish
her features through the veil. We quietly laughed at his disappointment.

When we arrived at the Rue de la Paix, we went into some of the well-known jewellers' shops.
At the sight of so many marvels, you may guess how she was dazzled. She felt as if in a dream.
We spoke in Turkish; and the puzzled shop-keepers gazed in astonishment upon this strange display
of Asiatic charms, which they had evidently met with for the first time. All this amused us;
and it is unnecessary to add that I quitted these haunts of temptation with a considerably
lighter purse than when I entered them.

We have already had several of these little sprees, and nothing can be more fascinating than
Kondjé-Gul's childish delight; everything is new to her. Transported, as if by magic, from
her monotonous existence at El-Nouzha into the midst of these splendours, this free life, and
this animated world, she feels like one walking in a dream; the whole atmosphere intoxicates her.

We form plans innumerable. In the first place we have decided that her position in regard to
my wives shall be definitely fixed, and that she shall live henceforth separated from them
in another part of the house, where she shall have private attendants. We shall thus be able
to see each other without any constraint, and she will no longer be subjected to the sneers
of my silly houris, who have been treating her apparent disgrace too brutally since our arrival
at Paris. My proud Kondjé-Gul, in the consciousness of her ascendency over me, would be sure
to make a scene with them some day.

Besides, as I have already told you, she furnishes me every day with a more and more engrossing
subject of study. I should like you to understand what sweet and seductive labour this progressive
initiation is; I am watching the development of a mind which I am myself forming. There is
no subject in regard to her, not even her receptive intelligence, which fails to afford me
innumerable surprises. Sometimes I discover original views and opinions of hers upon matters
connected with our European civilisation, at the correctness of which I am absolutely amazed.
Her progress is surprising, and she wishes to learn everything, knowing how much is required
in order to become "civilised," as she calls it.

My uncle and my aunt are in Paris.

A month without any news, you say. And you talk sarcastically about my leisure, and rally me
upon the subject of that famous system, which I used to boast was a simplification of life.
If I might judge from your twaddle, you imagine me to be saddled with the very cares and worries
from which I justly boasted that I was exempt. You picture me running backwards and forwards,
and incessantly occupied with my four wives, so that I have not even time to write to you.

Absurd fancy: this is my real situation. 

With scarcely an exception they were all clearheaded, able, and moderate men. Virginia sent Washington,
Madison, Edmund Randolph; Pennsylvania sent Benjamin Franklin, Robert Morris, and James Wilson;
New York sent Alexander Hamilton; New Jersey, Patterson; and South Carolina, the two Pinckneys.
Washington was chosen President of the Convention. Two rules were adopted: 1st, proceedings
were to be secret, and 2d, one vote was to be given to each State, thus making it of no importance
whether a State had a large or small delegation. No, in my rôle of sultan my amours are modestly hidden
from profane eyes in the recesses of my harem, and there I am always welcome whenever I choose
to come. I keep the key in my pocket. At any hour of the day or night I can go there in my
quality of owner without having to leave my club, my friends, my work, or my amusements a moment
earlier than I desire.

Such, then, is the "anxious existence" which you attribute to me. Find me a husband who can
act in the same way.

Still, as might have been foreseen, great changes have taken place in the internal arrangements
of my household, where it became necessary that the Turkish elements should be partially replaced
by others more adapted to the exigencies of western civilization.

A memorable event has occurred.

Hadidjé, Nazli, and Zouhra went the other day to the opera. It is needless to say that I was
there. I must admit that their nervousness was so extreme at making this bold experiment that,
watching them from my own stall as they came in, I thought for a moment that they were going
to run away again.

Already in their walks they were getting into training, and in regard to their veils exhibited
a certain amount of coquetry; but now it became necessary to disregard the law of Mahomet entirely.
They had never seen the inside of a theatre before, so you can imagine that when they found
themselves in the box, with their unveiled faces exposed to the gaze of a multitude of infidel
eyes, all the bold resolutions which they had made for this decisive effort were put to the
rout. Strange as such Mohammedan bashfulness may seem to us, they felt, as they afterwards
told me, that appearing there unveiled, was "just like exhibiting themselves naked."

However, as soon as this first impression was overcome, thanks chiefly to the exhortations
of Mohammed, who was almost at his wits' ends to manage them, they succeeded in putting on
sufficient assurance to dissemble their very sincere dread, so that at a distance it looked
merely like excessive shyness. The lifting of the curtain for the first act of "Don Juan" fortunately
changed the current of their emotions. During the entr'acte their box became the object of
attraction to the subscribers and the frequenters of first night's performances. Their indolent,
oriental type of beauty, notwithstanding the partial disguise effected by their present costumes,
could not fail to produce a sensation.

Who, it was asked, was this old gentleman with his three daughters of such surprising beauty?
In the Jockey Club's box, where I went to hear the gossip, everyone was talking about them,
as of some important political event; Mohammed was an American millionaire, according to some,
a Russian prince, or a Rajah just arrived from India, according to others. When I smiled in
a significant manner (as I began to do, on purpose), they immediately surmised that I fancied
I knew more about the matter than the rest of them, thereupon they surrounded me, and pressed
me with questions.

I had already come to the conclusion that it would be better to calm their minds, and thus
avoid all inconvenient enquiries. I therefore gave them an account, which after all was not
far from the truth, namely, that Omer-Rashid-Effendi was a rich Turk, "whose acquaintance I
had the honour of making at Damascus, and who had come to stay at Paris with his family." I
thus insured myself against any suspicion of mystery arising in connection with my visits to
the house in the Rue de Monsieur, in the event of these coming to light by any chance.

Our relations, you will see, were thus defined once for all. This new life is nothing but a
succession of delights to my almées; and I have really now attained the ideal in the way of
harems, through the absence of that monotony which is the inevitable result of the system of
rigid seclusion. Under the influence of our civilized surroundings, the ideas of my houris
are undergoing a gradual transformation. They have French lady's maids, and their study of
our refinements of fashion has opened out quite a new world of coquettish charms to them. My
"little animals" have grown into women: this single word will convey to you the whole delicious
significance of this story of mine, the secret of which you alone in the whole world possess.

As we had decided, Kondjé-Gul has been separated from her over-jealous companions. Hadidjé,
Zouhra, and Nazli have taken this measure to be a confirmation of her disgrace, and knowing
that she lives in a sequestered corner of the house, they fancy their triumph more assumed
than ever. I can place implicit confidence in the discretion of my servants--who wait on us
like mutes in a seraglio: consequently Kondjé-Gul and I are as free as possible. When I want
to go out with her, I pay a short visit to my wives, and after a quarter of an hour's talk,
leave them and go off in my carriage, in the recesses of which my darling reclines. Now you
see what a simple device it is and how ingenious; still it involves a certain amount of constraint
for me, and an isolation hard to endure for Kondjé-Gul. She reads and devours everything that
I bring her in the way of books; but the days are long, and Mohammed, with his time taken up
by the others, cannot accompany her out of doors. I therefore conceived the idea of taking
her away from the harem altogether, and thus relieving her of the contemptuous insults which
my other silly women still find opportunities of inflicting upon her. The difficulty was to
procure a chaperon for her, some kind of suitable and reliable duenna whom I could leave with
her in a separate establishment; this duenna has been found.

The other day Kondjé-Gul and I were talking together about a little house which I had discovered
in the upper part of the Champs Elysées, and of an English governess, who seemed to me to possess
the right qualifications for a pretended mother:

"If you like," said Kondjé-Gul, "I can tell you a much simpler arrangement."

"Well?" I replied.

"Instead of this governess whom I don't know, I would much rather have my mother. I should
be so happy at seeing her again!"

"Your mother?" I exclaimed with surprise; "do you know where she is then?"

"Oh, yes! for I often write to her."

She then told me all her past history, which I had never before thought of asking her, believing
that she had been left alone in the world. It afforded me a complete revelation of those Turkish
customs which seem so strange to us. Kondjé-Gul's mother, as I have told you, was a Circassian,
who came to Constantinople to enter the service of a cadine of the Sultan. Kondjé-Gul being
a very pretty child, her mother had, in her ambitious fancy, anticipated from her beauty a
brilliant career for her. In order to realise this expectation, she left her at twelve years
old with a family who were instructed to bring her up better than she could have done herself,
until Kondjé-Gul was old enough to be sought after as a cadine or a wife.

This hope on the part of her mother was accomplished, as you know, for the girl was purchased
for a good round sum by Mohammed. Thus poor Kondjé-Gul fulfilled her destiny. Then she related
to me how her mother, several years ago, had found a better situation for herself with a French
consul at Smyrna, and had learnt French there.

Kondjé-Gul's idea was a happy one, and I was inclined to entertain it. I consented to her writing
to Smyrna, and some days later she received an answer to the effect that in about a couple
of months her mother would be able to join her providing the requisite means were sent her
for this purpose. I have a house in view where they can live together. It is a little house
belonging to Count de Téral, who is on his way back to Lisbon: one might really fancy he had
got it ready on purpose for me.

What have you to say to this, you profound moralist?

CHAPTER VIII.

Again you complain of my silence, in a letter written with the object of overwhelming me with
abuse; and you mix up sarcasms (through which your childish curiosity is very transparent)
with philosophical remarks which reveal the snobbishness of your nature. In fact, from the
tone of your letters, one might imagine I was threatened by strange complications, and that
you were hoping every morning to read the account of some catastrophe. For once in a way your
longing for an important event will not be disappointed, for I have a weighty piece of news
for you. As it belongs to the most strictly moral order of events, you may listen without any
anxiety.

As you are aware, my aunt and uncle came to Paris a fortnight ago, and will stay here all the
winter. The house in the Rue de Varennes has resumed its gay honours; we give receptions, dinners,
and everything else that you are familiar with, but embellished this time by the presence of
the charming Countess of Monteclaro, who supplies that lively element of family life which
we rather missed formerly. My aunt has discovered here a young cousin of hers, Count Daniel
Kiusko, a capital fellow, whom I have quite made friends with.

Having given you these details, I will now proceed with my story.

The other morning, after breakfast, as I was about to return to my room (for whatever you may
believe, I am working hard just now), my uncle stopped me, and without any further preliminaries
began:

"By the way, André, I expect Madame Saulnier and my god-daughter Anna Campbell, your betrothed,
to dinner this, evening. I should not mind letting you make her acquaintance. If you happen
to be curious to see her, don't make any engagements at the club, and come home punctually."

"Really!" exclaimed my aunt with a laugh, and without giving me time to answer: "from the way
you put it, one might think you were talking of some doll that you intended to offer André
for his birthday!"

"What the deuce do you mean by that, my dear?" asked the captain in his imperturbable way.

"I mean," said my aunt, "that this little acquaintance which you wish they should make with
each other before you marry them, seems to me a very necessary preliminary."

"Pooh! They've still a good year before them! Besides, this little matter has nothing to do
with romance." Then turning to me he continued; "Well, if that suits you for to-day, I have
given you notice."

"Capital!" added my aunt. "Well, André! How does it suit you?"

"Why, aunt," I said, laughing in my turn at their little dispute; "I think my uncle may rely
equally with you upon the pleasure it will give me."

"All right, that's settled!" continued my aunt in an inimitable tone of hilarity; "at seven
o'clock punctually, my dear nephew, you will come and fall in love."

My uncle took no more notice of this last ironical shaft than of the rest, but occupied himself
with selecting a cigar, remarking that what he had were too dry. My aunt availed herself of
the opportunity of continuing her conversation with me.

"Between you and me," she said, "I may tell you that you are not much to be pitied, for she
is a charming girl, and you would really lose a good deal by not making her acquaintance."

"I was only waiting for my uncle to decide the question."

"You must at any rate be grateful to him for letting you meet by chance before your wedding-day,"
she continued.

"Oh, dear! one might think I wanted to marry them at a minute's notice!" said my uncle at these
words. "Just like a woman's exaggerations! Perhaps you would have liked me to have introduced
her to him before my last voyage, when she was a lass of fourteen, thin, awkward, and gawkish,
as you all are at that age." 

The facts which had tended to keep them apart had been the difficulty
of travel and communication between the colonies, the lack of commercial
intercourse, but more than all, their local jealousies.

The small States feared the larger; commercial jealousies were very
keen.

In 1756 Georgia and South Carolina actually came to blows over a dispute as to the navigation of the
Savannah river. Other disputes about boundaries were frequent.

Colonies with good harbors and seaports desired to keep the benefits of them exclusively to themselves.


"Ta, ta, ta!" continued my uncle; "I have made a fine, healthy, solid young woman of her, who
promises to make just the right sort of wife for André! And I maintain, in spite of your ideas
on the subject, that I have done well to bring them up at a distance from each other, in order
to preserve the freshness of their feelings, and avoid the necessity of that awkward and painful
transformation of the affections which is so difficult for a couple who have grown up together
and eaten their bread and butter together as brats in the nursery. To-day they will find each
other just as they ought to before they become husband and wife. All the rest of the business
must be left to them. If they like each other very much they will make a love-match, if not,
a mariage de raison, which is just as good."

My uncle having concluded thus, it only remained for me to signify my compliance with his wishes.
As you may well understand, I awaited with impatience the hour for this first interview, and
I was in the drawing-room that evening some time before my fiancée's arrival. My aunt was in
the heaven of delight, just like every woman looking forward to a romantic incident, and she
did not fail to remark my eagerness. As to the captain, like a being superior to such sentimental
trifles, he was quietly reading his paper. He was just commencing a political discussion when
the servant opened the folding doors and announced:

"Madame Saulnier and Mademoiselle Campbell."

To tell the truth, I must admit that I felt somewhat nervous. A lady of about forty years old
came in, accompanied by a young person in a regulation convent dress. I stood up, while my
uncle went forward to meet his god-daughter, and kissed her affectionately on the forehead.
Then he led me to her by the hand, in a dignified and ceremonious manner, and said without
more ado:

"Anna, this is André! André, this is Anna! Kiss each other!"

This form of introduction, with its laconic precision, had at least the advantage that it left
no uncertainty between us, and at once indicated to us our proper course of procedure. Too
well trained to my uncle's habits, I did not hesitate a moment, but kissed my betrothed; after
which I said, "How do you do?" which, of course, gave me a nice opportunity of looking at her.

Anna Campbell is at the present time just seventeen. She is neither short nor tall, thin nor
stout--although the great blue ribbon which she wears over her neck, with a cross suspended
from it, already sets off the plump outlines of her bosom. She is neither fair nor dark; her
chin is round, her face oval, her nose, mouth, and forehead are all medium-sized, and she has
rather pretty blue eyes. Generally speaking, she is more pleasant-looking than handsome, and
her features on the whole suggest a very gentle disposition united with good health. My uncle
took care to impress upon me that she will continue to develop, since her feet and hands are
still large for her age, and promise a handsome completion of her growth.

In short, my lot is far from a disagreeable one--quite the contrary. As my uncle expresses
it, "All the symptoms are good."

Our dinner was a very lively one. Anna Campbell, although rather subdued in my presence, did
not show any embarrassment. Nothing seemed to be new to her; her manners and deportment, and
everything about her, revealed the familiar assurance of a child of the family who had come
to take a holiday there, and felt herself as much at home as I did. I perceived that she knew
the house as well as if she had been brought up in it, and I learnt that during the time when
I was at college she and Madame Saulnier had really lived there for three years.

The result of all this was that Anna Campbell exhibited a pleasant sort of familiarity with
my aunt and uncle which I did not at all expect to see. Brought up away from each other, and
without any previous acquaintance, we were now meeting for the first time at this common centre
of our affections, which, unknown to us, had united us since our childhood. This was both original
and sweet to think of.

Once, when my uncle asked for the pickles, Anna said:

"They are near André."

When the meal was over we left the dining-room. Following a Russian fashion which my aunt had
introduced among us, when we entered the drawing-room, I pressed her hand to my lips, while
she kissed me on the forehead. Anna did the same; then, without even appearing to think what
she was doing, she quietly held up her two cheeks for me to kiss, and afterwards offered them
to her godfather. She then ran to the piano, and sat down to it, while we were taking our coffee.

"Well, what do you think of her?" my uncle asked me.

"She is very nice," I replied.

"Yes, isn't she? Just the thing for you, my boy," he observed, as he stirred his cup, with
the tranquillity of a pure conscience. "Go and talk with her," he continued; "you will find
she is not stupid."

I went to sit down by Anna.

"Come, play the bass!" she said, moving aside to make room for me, as if we had often played
in duet together before.

When the piece was finished, we talked about her convent, her friends, and the Mother Superior,
Sainte Lucie, whom she was much attached to; and she spoke about everything in a confident
tone of familiarity, which showed me that she had often talked of me, and had been used to
think of me as an absent brother. The understanding is that, on account of her youth, our betrothal
is to remain a family secret, which will only be made public when the right time arrives.

The evening concluded without any other special incident. At ten o'clock Anna went home to
her convent. As she was putting her things on, she held out her hand to me, and said:

"Good-bye, André!"

"Good-bye, Anna!" I replied; and then my uncle took me away with him to the club, where he
sat down to his party at whist.

While I am on the subject of my uncle, I must tell you about an adventure which he has just
had. He is dead, as you are aware, for I have inherited his property. This privilege he will
not give up, because the registration fees have been paid. The result of this peculiar situation
is that he is under certain legal incapacities, which, without troubling him more seriously,
do nevertheless cause him some annoyance. Three months ago at Férouzat, he had to renew his
gun-license, which he had taken out seven years before; but as his decease had been formally
entered at the prefecture, they would not accept this document, bearing the signature of a
defunct person. As you may imagine, he did very well without it, and began to shoot as if nothing
had happened!

The other morning, however, it chanced, as my uncle was passing our banker's, that he wanted
to draw twenty thousand francs for his pocket-money. The cashier, who had known him years ago,
was very much surprised to see him in the flesh, but represented to him that it was now quite
impossible for him to open an account in his name, as he was legally dead and buried. My uncle,
like a law-abiding man, admitted the justice of this observation, and I had to intervene in
order to arrange the matter for him. He took no further notice of it; only as he never does
anything by halves, he had his visiting cards printed with "The late Barbassou" on them; and
this was the way he signed himself at our banker's, by which means he pretended that he conformed
with all requirements.

"You see how simple the whole thing is," he said to me.

My amours with Kondjé-Gul have certainly taken a very remarkable turn. The other day I took
her to Versailles for an educational and historical excursion; she is continuing her course
of civilization, you know. After visiting the palace and the museum, we went into the park.
She was in the best of spirits, still excited with the fresh air and freedom which she was
enjoying like an escaped prisoner from the harem, and was asking me questions about everything
with that charming simplicity of hers which delights me so much, when we arrived in front of
Diana's Bath, where we found a group of three young women most brilliantly dressed, two of
whom, as I saw at the first glance, were old acquaintances of mine, very well known in the
gay world. Young Lord B---- accompanied them, and they all recognised me; but Lord B----, with
the well-bred tact of a man of the world, seeing the company I was in, only nodded slightly
to me. With like discretion, as is usual on such occasions, the women made no movement of recognition;
yet they could not help--being struck no doubt with the remarkable beauty of my companion--evincing
such evident curiosity, that Kondjé-Gul observed it. I, of course, passed without appearing
to notice them. Kondjé-Gul and I then took a turn up the walk, while I expounded the mythology
of the bath to her, and then we went out.

"Who are those ladies?" she asked me as soon as we were at a good distance from them; "they
know you, I could see."

"Oh, yes," I replied in an indifferent tone, "I have met them several times."

"And the young man who was with them also looked at you as if he was one of your friends; why
did not you speak to him?"

"For discretion's sake, because you were with me, and he was walking with them."

"Ah! I understand," she said; "no doubt they are the women of his harem?"

"Just so," I answered quite coolly, "and, as I have often told you, according to our customs,
the harem is always----"

I was trying to think of the right word, when she burst out laughing quite loud.

"What are you laughing at, you silly thing?" I asked.

"I am laughing at all those stories about your harems which you still make up for me just as
you used to do for that idiot Hadidjé. I listen to them all, because,--whatever does it matter
to me now that I love you! I prefer the happiness of remaining your slave to that of these
women, who have no doubt been your mistresses, and whom you don't even condescend to notice
when you meet them."

"What?" I exclaimed in astonishment; "have you got to know so much already, you little humbug,
and have concealed it from me?"

"After all you have given me to read to form my mind according to your ideas, surely it was
natural that I should some day discover the truth! I only waited for an opportunity of confirming
my new knowledge," she continued with a smile. "There are still a lot of things in your country
which I cannot understand. But you will teach me them now, won't you?" she added in a coaxing tone.

"Oh, you young flirt! It seems to me you know everything already!"

"Why, yes, I feel I know that, for all you may say, I am still no more than a curious toy in
your eyes--a strange creature, like some rare bird that you are rather fond of, perhaps, for
her pretty plumage."

"Ah! you're right upon the last point at any rate!" I replied with a laugh.

"Yes, sir!" she continued in a satisfied tone of pride, "I know that I am handsome!--Now don't
laugh at me," she added with a charming reproachful look; "what I have to say is quite serious,
for it comes from my heart. I was born for a different life, for different sentiments to yours,
and I know that I possess none of those qualities which they say make the women of your country
so attractive. Their ideas and associations are very different to mine, which you call the
superstitions of a young barbarian, and which I want to forget in order to learn to understand
you and to have no rivals."

"Are you quite sure that you would not lose by the change?"

"Thank you," said Kondjé-Gul; "that's what I call a compliment."

"The fact is," I replied, "the very thing I like about you is that you do not in any way resemble
the women whom we have just met."

"Oh!" she said, with an indescribable gesture of pride, "it's not those women I envy! But I
see others whom I would like to resemble--in their manners and tone, of course. If you're a
nice fellow, do you know what you will do for me?"

"What?"

"It's a dream, a scheme which I have been continually thinking over. You won't laugh at me,
will you?"

"No. Let's hear your grand scheme."

"Well, then, if you would like to make me very happy, place me for a few months in one of those
convents where your young ladies are educated. You would come and see me every day, so that
I should not be too dull away from you."

"That's the queerest idea I have ever heard from you; fancy a Mahommedan girl at a convent!"
I said, with a laugh.

I took a great deal of trouble in explaining to her what a foolish project this was; but the
result of my attempts at demonstrating the serious obstacles which such ambitious aspirations
would encounter, was that in the end I myself entered into her views. The experiment might
indeed prove a most instructive one. With Kondjé-Gul's character, there was an extremely interesting
psychological experiment before me. I had found her to be endowed with marvellous natural qualities.
With her ardour and enthusiasm, what would be the effect upon her simple imagination of a sudden
transition from the ideas of the harem to the subtle refinements of our own society?

Certainly, I was obliged to admit that such a trial was not without its dangers; but then,
was not Kondjé-Gul already aware that the marital yoke which my houris still believed in was
only imaginary? And was it not better, such being the case, for me to complete this work of
regeneration, the fruits of which I should in the end reap for myself?

So I submitted to Kondjé-Gul's wishes, and as soon as we returned to Paris this important matter
was settled. 

The genera Ornithoptera and Leptocircus are highly characteristic of Malayan entomology, but
are uniform in character and of small extent.

The genus Papilio, on the other hand, presents a great variety of
forms, and is so richly represented in the Malay Islands, that more
than one-fourth of all the known species are found there.

It becomes necessary, therefore, to divide this genus into natural
groups before we can successfully study its geographical distribution.

 He has not given me the slightest
hint on this point.

While awaiting this addition to our family, Barbassou-Pasha pursues his eccentric career in
a manner that beats description. This visit to Paris has brought out more than ever the quaint
independence of his character. One is reminded of a man who stands on a bridge watching the
river flow by, but now and then takes a header into it to cool himself. The other day at the
club, he lost sixty-three thousand francs to me at baccarat, just for a little distraction.
The evening after, he was entertaining at our house his late Lieutenant Rabassu, whom he always
speaks of as "the cause of his death," and who has come here upon some business. He won eleven
francs from him at piquet, playing for a franc the hundred points. For the moment I felt quite
alarmed for the poor victim! But my mind was soon set at ease; for Rabassu, who is used to
his captain's play, knows how to cheat as cleverly as his master. Their losses soon balanced
each other.

Putting aside little dissipations of this kind, I should add that "the late Barbassou" is really
very steady-going for a man of his temperament. He takes everything which comes in the routine
of our fashionable life so naturally, that nobody would imagine he had spent several years
at the hulks in Turkey.

My aunt Eudoxia, of whom he stands in wholesome awe, and who keeps him in check, forces him
to cultivate the vanities of this world. He escorts her to balls and fêtes with all that ceremony
with which you are familiar; and quitting the lofty regions of his own philosophical existence,
without however permitting anything to disturb his self-possession, he goes forth into the
gay and hurried throngs of Paris with as little concern as he would into any village street.
In short, he is in exquisite form, and--but for the legal disabilities which deprive him of
his rights of citizenship--you would find him still exactly what he was when you knew him five
years ago.

However, the other day he received a little shock in connection with a very simple incident,
which might have been perfectly anticipated.

We were in my aunt's box at the Opera. The pasha, seated by her side, was listening to a singer
who was rather more buxom than elegant; and he appeared to be calculating what her nett weight
would be, after making deduction for her queen's crown and robes of state. After a minute or
so, he seemed to have solved this equation and lost all further interest in the problem, for
he began to examine the audience. All of a sudden he shouted out, quite forgetting himself,
in his Provençal brogue:

"Té! What's that I see?"

"Hush!" said my aunt, nudging him with her elbow, without turning round.

"But, bagasse! it's Mohammed!" he added, in a lower tone.

It was indeed Mohammed, who attracted some attention as he walked with my houris into their
famous box.

"Well, you're right," replied my aunt. "I recognise his charming daughters."

You may be sure my uncle put up his glasses. When all my people were settled down in their
box, he surveyed them carefully, interrupting his examination occasionally in order to take
a furtive scowl at me. But my aunt's presence kept him quiet. His composure was perfect for
that matter, except that he seemed extremely puzzled. There were only three of them--that evidently
was not the right number for him. As for me, prudence dictated that I should get out of the
way as quickly as possible, leaving him to make what observations he pleased.

As I was slipping away quietly to the back of the box, I heard my aunt saying:

"Are you going to speak to him?"

"No; we have had a quarrel!" he growled, looking again for me at his side.

But slam went the door, and I was out in the passage, whence I escaped to the back of the scenes
and to the green-room. There he joined me during the entr'acte. But, as you are aware, "Turks
do not discuss harem matters." All I could see clearly was that he was in a fury with me.

To turn, however, to other things, my perseverance on behalf of Kondjé-Gul is at last rewarded
with complete success.

After I had spent a whole week in looking about, I found, in the Beaujou district, an institution
for young ladies presided over by a Madame Montier, a kind woman of polished manners. She had
suffered a reverse of fortune, which seems to have prepared her for the express purpose of
civilizing my Kondjé-Gul. There are never more than three or four boarders in the house: at
the present moment two American girls, daughters of a commodore who is on a mission to the
King of Siam, are finishing their education there. Nothing could suit my purpose better.

When the time arrived, however, for putting my plan into execution, I must confess that I could
not help feeling considerable embarrassment. I could certainly have introduced Kondjé-Gul as
a young foreign lady, prematurely widowed, who was anxious to qualify herself for French society;
but I soon found that this would create an unnecessary complication. Decidedly the better course
would be for Mahommed to introduce her either as his ward or his daughter. Under any circumstances
it was desirable that I should explain to her the necessity of extreme prudence.

At last, one evening, when I thought she was about to revert to this great object of her ambition,
I started the subject myself.

"I am going to announce an important piece of news," I said to her; "I have found a convent
for you where you can stay pending your mother's arrival."

"Really!" she exclaimed, kissing me. "Oh, my dear André, how kind you are!"

"Yes; but I must warn you. This realisation of your dream is only possible at the cost of sacrifices,
which will perhaps be hard for you to make."

"What sacrifices? Tell me, quick!"

"First, assiduous work, and next, the sacrifice of your liberty; for during the whole time
you remain at this establishment, you won't be able to leave the place."

"What does that matter?" she exclaimed, "provided I can see you every day!"

"But that's exactly what will be impossible."

"Why?" she asked, in her simplicity.

"Because, according to our customs, bachelors are never admitted into young ladies' schools,"
I replied, with a laugh.

"But as I belong to you," she continued, with an astonished look, "they will not be surprised
at your coming; are not you my master?"

"This reason, my dear, although a convincing one for you, would constitute the greatest obstacle;
for they must not be allowed on any account to suspect that you are my wife. Mohammed alone
will introduce you either as his daughter or as a young lady under his charge, and, for conventional
reasons, which you will understand later on, this period of study will be a period of separation
for us."

I then let her know the whole truth about certain of our social conventionalities, concerning
which she was still in ignorance. When she learned that our laws declared her free, and the
equal of any Frenchwoman, and that I had no longer any rights over her, she looked inexpressibly
pained.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed, throwing herself into my arms, "what do you mean? Am I free,
and my own mistress, and not yours for ever?"

"You are mine, because I love you," I said to her very quickly, seeing her agitation; "and
so long as you do not want to leave me--"

"Leave you! But what would become of me, then, without you?"

And her eyes filled with tears.

