]

[Footnote 33: Sayce: The Religion of the Babylonians.]

Moses is said to have led his people out of bondage. He was the writer to whom the Pentateuch
has been ascribed. But he was also a prophet. In Babylon, the god of prophecy was Nebo. It
was on Mount Nebo that Jahveh commanded the prophet of Israel to die. Moreover, the divinity
that had Masû for cognomen was, as is shown by a Babylonian text, the primitive god of the
sun at Nippur, but the sun at noon, at the period of its greatest effulgence, at the hour when
it wars with whatever opposes, when it wars as Jahveh did, or as the latter may be assumed
to have warred, since Isaiah represented him as a mighty man, roaring at his enemies, exciting
the fury of the fight, marching personally to the conflict, and, in the Fourth Roll of the
Law (Numbers), there is mention of a book entitled: The Wars of Jahveh.

Whether, then, Moses is but a composite of things Babylonian fused in an effort to show a link
between a god and a people, is conjectural. But it is also immaterial. The one instructive
fact is that, in a retrospect, the god, immediately after the exodus, became dictator.

Yet even in the later age, when the retrospect was effected, conceptions were evidently immature.
On one occasion the god met Moses, tried to kill him, but finally let him go. The picture is
that of a personal struggle.[34] Again, the spectacle of his back which he vouchsafed to Moses
is construable only as an arrière-pensée, unless it be profound philosophy, unless it be taken
that the face of God represents Providence, to see which would be to behold the future, whereas
the back disclosed the past.

[Footnote 34: Exodus iv. 24-26.]

It is, however, hardly probable that that construction occurred to the editors of the Pentateuch,
who, elsewhere, represented Jahveh as a butcher, insatiable, jealous, vindictive, treacherous,
and vain, one that consigned all nations other than Israel to ruin and whom a poet represented
trampling people in anger, making them drunk with his fury, and defiling his raiment with blood.[35]

[Footnote 35: Isaiah lxiii. 1-6.]

But in the period related in Exodus, Jahveh was but the tutelary god of an itinerant tribe
that, in its gipsy lack of territorial possessions, was not even a nation. Like his people
he too was a vagrant. Like them he had no home. Other gods had temples and altars. He lacked
so much as a shrine. In prefigurement of the Wandering Jew, each day he moved on. The threats
of a land that never smiled were reflected in his face. The sight of him was death. Certainly
he was terrible.

This conception, corrected by later writers, was otherwise revised. In the interim Jahveh himself
was transformed. He became El, the god; presently El Shaddai, God Almighty. In the ascension
former traits disappeared. He developed into the deity of emphatic right. Morality, hitherto
absent from religion, entered into it. Israel, who perhaps had been careless, who, like Solomon,
had followed Ishtar, became austere. Thereafter, Judaism, of which Christianity and Muhammadanism
were the after thoughts, was destined to represent almost the sum total of the human conscience.

But in Kanaan, during the rude beginnings, though Jahveh was jealous, Ishtar, known locally
as Ashtoreth, allured. Conjointly with Baal, the indigenous term for Bel, circumadjacently
she ruled. The propitiatory rites of these fair gods were debauchery and infanticide, the loosening
of the girdles of girls, the thrusting of children into fires. It may be that these ceremonies
at first amazed the Hebrews. But conscientiously they adopted them, less perhaps through zeal
than politeness; because, in this curious epoch, on entering a country it was thought only
civil to serve the divinities that were there, in accordance with the ritual that pleased them.

With the mere mortal inhabitants, Israel was less ceremonious. Commanded by Jahveh to kill,
extermination was but an act of piety. It was then, perhaps, that the Wars of Jahveh were sung,
a pæan that must have been resonant with cries, with the death-rattle of kingdoms, with the
shouts of the invading host. From the breast-plates of the chosen, the terror of Sinai gleamed.
Men could not see their faces and live. The moon was their servant. To aid them the sun stood
still. They encroached, they slaughtered, they quelled. In the conquest a nation was born.
From that bloody cradle the God of Humanity came. But around and about it was vacancy. In emerging
from one solitude the Jews created another. They have never left it. The desert which they
made destined them to be alone on this earth, as their god was to be solitary in heaven.

Meanwhile there had been no kings in Israel. With the nation royalty came. David followed Saul.
After him was Solomon. It is presumably at this period that traditions, orally transmitted
from a past relatively remote, were first put in writing. Previously it is conjectural if the
Jews could write. If they could, it is uncertain whether they made any use of the ability other
than in the possible compilation of toledoth, such as the Book of the Generations of Adam and
the Wars of Jahveh, works that, later, may have served as data for the Pentateuch. Even then,
the compositions must have been crude, and such rolls as existed may have been lost when Nebuchadnezzar
overturned Jerusalem.

Presumably, it was not until the post-exilic period that, under the editorship perhaps of Ezra,
the definitive edition of the Torah was produced. This supposition existing texts support.
In Genesis (xxxvii. 31) it is written: "These are the kings of Edom before there reigned any
king over the children of Israel." The passage shows, if it shows anything, that there were,
or had been, kings in Israel at the time when the passage itself was written. It is, therefore,
at least post-Davidic. In Genesis another passage (xlix. 10) says: "The sceptre shall not pass
from Judah until Shiloh come." Judah was the tribe that became pre-eminent in Israel after
the captivity. The passage is therefore post-exilic, consequently so is Genesis, and obviously
the rest of the Pentateuch as well. Or, if not obviously, perhaps demonstrably. In II Esdras
xiv. 22-48 it is stated that the writer, a candle of understanding in his heart, and aided
by five swift scribes, recomposed the Law, which, previously burned, was known to none.

The burning referred to is what may, perhaps, be termed religious fiction. Barring toledoth
and related data that may have been lost, the Law had almost certainly not existed before,
and this post-exilic romance concerning it was evolved in a laudable effort to show its Mosaic
source. What is true of the Law is, in a measure, true of the Prophets. None of them anterior
to Cyrus, all are later than Alexander. Spiritually very near to Christianity, chronologically
they are neighbourly too. If not divinely inspired, they at least disclosed the ideal.

Previously the ideal had not perhaps been very apparent. Apart from secessions, rebellions,
concussions, convulsions that deified Hatred until Jahveh, in the person of Nebuchadnezzar,
talked Assyrian, and then, in the person of Cyrus, talked Zend, the god of Israel, even in
Israel, was not unique. He had a home, his first, the Temple, built gorgeously by Solomon,
where invisibly, mysteriously, perhaps terribly, beneath the wings of cherubim that rose from
the depths of the Holy of Holies, he dwelled. But the shrine, however ornate, was not the only
one. There were other altars, other gods; the plentiful sanctuaries of Ashera, of Moloch and
of Baal. On the adjacent hilltops the phallus stood. In the neighbouring groves the kisses
of Ishtar consumed.

The Lady of Girdles was worshipped there not by men and women only, but by girls with girls;
by others too, not in couples, but singly, girls who in their solitary devotions had instruments
for aid.[36] Religion, as yet, had but the slightest connection with morality, a circumstance
explicable perhaps by the fact that it resumed the ethnical conscience of a race. Between the
altar of El Shaddai and the shrines of other gods there were many differences, of which geography
was the least. Jahveh, from a tutelary god, had indeed become the national divinity of a chosen
people. The title conferred no distinction. As a consequence, to differentiate Jahveh from
all other gods, and Israel from all other people, to make the one unique and the other pontiff
and shepherd of the nations of the world, became the dream of anonymous poets, one that prophets,
sometimes equally anonymous, proclaimed. It was the prophets that reviled the false gods, denounced
the abominations of Ishtar, and purified the Israelite heart. While nothing discernible, or
even imaginable, menaced, however slightly, the great empires of that day, the prophets were
the first to realize that the Orient was dead. When the Christ announced that the end of the
world was at hand, he but reiterated anterior predictions that presently were fulfilled. A
world did end. That of antiquity ceased to be.

[Footnote 36: Cf. Deut. xxiii. 17, where 'alâmôth (puellæ) is rendered in the Sapphist sense.
Ezekiel xvi. 17. Fecisti tibi imagines masculinas.]

It was the prophets that foretold it. Gloomy, fanatic, implacable and, it may be, mad, yet
inspired at least by genius which itself, while madness, is a madness wholly divine, they heralded
the future, they established the past. Abraham they drew from allegory, Moses from myth. They
made them live, and so immortally that one survives in Islam, the other in words that are a
law of grace for all.

If, in visions possibly ecstatic, they beheld heights that lost themselves in immensity, and
saw there an ineffable name seared by forked flames on a tablet of stone; if that spectacle
and the theophany of it were but poetry, the decalogue is a fact, one so solid that though
ages have gone, though empires have crumbled, though the customs of man have altered, though
the sky itself have changed, still is obeyed the commandment: Thou shalt have no other gods
before me.

From Chemos in Moab, from Rimmon among the Ammonites, no such edict had come. It felled them.
Amon-Râ it tore from the celestial Nile, and Bel-Marduk from the Silver Sky. The Refaïm hid
them in shadows as surely as they buried there the high and potent lords of Greece and Rome.
These interments, completed by others, the prophets began. For it was they who, in addition
to the command, revealed the commandant, creator of whatever is: the Being Absolute that abhorred
evil, loved righteousness, punished the transgressor and rewarded the just; El Shaddai, then
really Lord of Hosts.

It may be that already in Israel there had been some prescience of this. But it lacked the
authority of inspired text. The omission was one that only seers could remedy. It was presumably
in these circumstances that an agreement was imagined which, construed as a condition of a
covenant, assumed to have been made with Abraham, was further assumed to have been renewed
to Moses. The resulting poetry was enveloped in a romance of which Continental scholarship
has discovered two versions, woven together, perhaps by Ezra, into a single tale.

"In the beginning Elohim created the heaven and earth." That abrupt declaration, presented
originally in but one of the versions, had already been pronounced of Indra and also of Ormuzd.
The Hebraic announcement alone prevailed. It emptied the firmament of its monsters, dislodged
the gods from the skies, and enthroned there a deity at first multiple but subsequently unique.
Afterward seraphs and saints might replace the evaporated imaginings of other creeds; Satan
might create a world of his own and people it with the damned; theology might evolve from elder
faiths a newer trinity and set it like a diadem in space; angels and archangels might refill
the devastated heavens of the past; none the less, in the light of that austere pronouncement,
for a moment Israel dwelled in contemplation of the Ideal.

At the time it is probable that the story of the love of the sons of Jahveh for the daughters
of men, together with the pastel of Eden as it stands to-day, were not contained in existing
accounts of that ideal. These legends, which regarded as legends are obviously false, but which,
construed as allegories, may be profoundly true, were probably not diffused until after the
captivity, when Israel was not more subtle, that is not possible, but, by reason of her contact
with Persia, more wise.

The origin of evil these myths related but did not explain. Since then, from no church has
there come an adequate explanation of the malediction under which man is supposed to labour
because of the natural propensities of beings that never were. That explanation these myths,
which orthodoxy has gravely, though sometimes reluctantly, accepted, both provide and conceal.
They date possibly from the Ormuzdian revelation: "In the beginning was the living Word."

John, or more exactly his homonym, repeated the pronouncement, adding: "The word was made flesh."
But, save for a mention of the glory which he had before the world was, he omitted to further
follow the thought of Ormuzd, who, in describing paradise to Zarathrustra, likened it, in every
way, to heaven. There the first beings were, exempt from physical necessities, pure intelligences,
naked as the compilers of Genesis translated, naked and unashamed, but naked and unashamed
because incorporeal, unincarnate and clothed in light, a vestment which they exchanged for
a garment of flesh, coats of skin as it is in Genesis, when, descended on earth, their intelligence,
previously luminous, swooned in the senses of man. There perhaps is the origin of evil. There
too perhaps is its cure. But the view accepted there too is pre-existence and persistence,
a doctrine blasphemous to the Jew as it was to the Assyrian, to whom the gods alone were immortal,
and to whom, in consequence, immortal beings would be gods. In the creed of both, man was essentially
evanescent. To the Hebrew, he lived a few, brief days and then went down into silence, where
no remembrance is. There, gathered among the Refaïm to his fathers, he remained forever, unheeded
by God.

The conception, passably rationalistic and not impossibly correct, veiled the beautiful allegory
that was latent in the Eden myth. It had the further defect, or the additional advantage, of
eliminating any theory of future punishment and reward. In lieu of anything of the kind, there
was a doctrine that evil, in producing evil, automatically punished itself. The doctrine is
incontrovertible. But, for corollary, went the fallacy that virtue is its own reward. Against
that idea Job protested so energetically that mediæval monks were afraid to read what he wrote.
Yet it was perhaps in demonstration of the real significance of the allegory that a spiritualistic
doctrine--always an impiety to the orthodox--was insinuated by the Pharisees and instilled
by the Christ.

The basis of it rested perhaps partially in the idealism of the prophets. The clamour of their
voices awoke the dead. It transformed the skies. It transfigured Jahveh. It divested him of
attributes that were human. It outlined others that were divine. It awoke not merely the dead,
but the consciousness that a god that had a proper name could not be the true one. Thereafter
mention of it was avoided. The vowels were dropped. It became unpronounceable, therefore incommunicable.
For it was substituted the term vaguer, and therefore more exact, of Lord, one in whose service
were fulfilled the words of Isaiah: "I am the first and I am the last, and beside me there
is no God."

In the marvel of that miraculous realization were altitudes hitherto undreamed, peaks from
whose summits there was discernible but the valleys beneath, and another height on which stood
the Son of man. Yet marvellous though the realization was, instead of diminishing, it increased.
It did not pass. It was not forgot. Ceaselessly it augmented.

In the Scriptures there are many marvels. That perhaps is the greatest. Amon, originally an
obscure provincial god of Thebes, became the supreme divinity of Egypt. Bel, originally a local
god of Nippur, became in Babylon Lord of Hosts. But Jahveh, originally the tutelary god of
squalid nomads, became the Deity of Christendom. The fact is one that any scholarship must
admit. It is the indisputable miracle of the Bible.

VI

ZEUS

In Judea, when Jahveh was addressed, he answered, if at all, with a thunderclap. Since then
he has ceased to reply. Zeus was more complaisant. One might enter with him into the intimacy
of the infinite. The father of the Graces, the Muses, the Hours, it was natural that he should
be debonair. But he had other children. Among them were Litai, the Prayers. In the Vedas, where
Zeus was born, the Prayers upheld the skies. Lame and less lofty in Greece, they could but
listen and intercede.

The detail is taken from Homer. In his Ionian Pentateuch is the statement that beggars are
sent by Zeus, that whoever stretches a hand is respectable in his eyes, that the mendicant
who is repulsed may perhaps be a god[37]--suggestions which, afterward, were superiorly resumed
in the dictum: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it unto me."

[Footnote 37: Odyssey, xviii. 485, v. 447, xiv. 56.]

The Litai were not alone in their offices. There were the oracles of Delphi, of Trophonios
and of Mopsos, where one might converse with any divinity, even with Pan, who was a very great
god. But Olympos was neighbourly. It was charming too. There was unending spring there, eternal
youth, immortal beauty, the harmonies of divine honey-moons, the ideal in a golden dream; a
stretch of crystal parapets, from which, leaning and laughing, radiant goddesses and resplendent
gods looked down, and to whom a people, adolescent still, looked up.

In that morning of delight fear was absent, mystery was replaced by joy. The pageantry of the
hours may have been too near to nature to know of shame, it was yet too close to the divine
to know of hate. Man, then, for the first time, loved what he worshipped and worshipped what
he loved. His brilliant and musical Bible moved his heart without tormenting it. It conducted
but did not constrain. It taught him that in death all are equal and that in life the noble-minded
are serene.

In the Genesis of this Bible there is an account of a golden age and of a paradise into which
evil was introduced by woman. The account is Hesiod's, to whom the Orient had furnished the
details. It may be that both erred. If ever there were a golden age it must have been in those
days when heaven was on earth and, mingling familiarly with men, were processions of gods,
gods of love, of light, of liberty, thousands of them, not one of whom had ever heard an atheist's
voice. Related to humanity, of the same blood, sons of the same Aryan mother, they differed
from men only in that the latter died because they were real, while they were deathless because
ideal.

The ideal was too fair. Presently Pallas became the soul of Athens. But meanwhile from the
East there strayed swarms of enigmatic faces; the harlot handmaids of her Celestial Highness
Ishtar, Princess of Heaven; the mutilated priests of Tammuz her lover; dual conceptions that
resulted in Aphrodite Pandemos, the postures of Priapos, the leer of the Lampsacene, and, with
them, forms of worship comparable, in the circumadjacent beauty, to latrinæ in a garden, ignoble
shapes that violated the candour of maidens' eyes, but with which Greece became so accustomed
that on them moral aphorisms were engraved. "In the mind of Hellas, these things," Renan, with
his usual unctuousness, declared, "awoke but pious thoughts."

Pious at heart Hellas was. Even art, which now is wholly profane, with her was wholly sacred.
The sanctity was due to its perfection. The perfection was such that imbeciles who fancy that
it has been or could be surpassed show merely that they know nothing about it. At Athens, where
Pheidias created a palpable Olympos, Pallas stood colossally, a torch in her hand, a lance
at her shoulder, a shield at her side, a plastron of gold on her immaculate breast, a golden
robe about her ivory form, and on her immortal brow a crown of gold, beneath which, sapphire
eyes, that saw and foresaw, glittered. To-day the place where the marvellous creation stood
is vacant. With the gorgeous host Pallas has departed. But the torch she held still burns.
From the emptiness of her virginal arms, that never were filled, proceeds all civilization.

Adjacently at Eleusis was Demeter. Pallas was the soul of Greece. Eleusis was the Jerusalem,
Demeter the Madonna.

Demeter--the earth, the universal mother--had, in a mystic hymen with her brother Zeus, conceived
Persephone. The latter, when young and a maiden, beckoned perhaps by Eros, wandered from Olympos
and was gathering flowers when Pluto, borne by black horses, erupted, raped her, and tore her
away. The cries of the indignant Demeter sterilized the earth. To assuage her, Zeus undertook
to have Persephone recovered, provided that in Hades, of which Pluto was lord, she had eaten
nothing. But the girl had--a pomegranate grain. It was the irrevocable. Demeter yielded, as
the high gods had to yield, to what was higher than they, to Destiny. Meanwhile, in the shadows
below, Persephone was transfigured.

  Thou art more than the day or the morrow, the seasons that laugh and
      that weep;
  For these give joy and sorrow: but thou, Proserpina, sleep....
  O daughter of earth, of my mother, her crown and blossom of birth,
  I am also, I also, thy brother; I go as I came unto earth.
  In the night where thine eyes are as moons are in heaven, the night
      where thou art,
  Where the silence is more than all tunes, where sleep overflows from
      the heart, ...
  And the murmur of spirits that sleep in the shadow of gods from afar
  Grows dim in thine ears and deep as the deep dim soul of a star.
  In the sweet low light of thy face, under heavens untrod by the sun,
  Let my soul with their souls find place and forget what was done or
      undone.
  Thou art more than the gods that number the days of our temporal breath
  For these give labour and slumber; but thou, Proserpina, death.

Like Hesiod, Swinburne erred, though perhaps intentionally, as poets should, for the greater
glory of the Muses. Persephone brought not death but life. The aisles of despair she filled
with hope. Transfigured herself, Pluto she transformed. She changed what had been hell into
what was to be purgatory. It was not yet Elysium, but it was no longer Hades. Plato said that
those who were in her world had no wish at all for this.

