One man upon whom public attention was now turned, and whom the people of the City and State
began to regard as their champion and deliverer, was James King of William, and he was no common
man. He was born in Georgetown, D. C., in January, 1822, and was therefore thirty-four years
old at the time of his death. Having received a common school education, he was placed at an
early age in the banking house of Corcoran & Riggs at Washington City where he remained many
years. His health at length failing from steady application to business and conscientious devotion
to his employer's interests, he was induced to seek its restoration in the invigorating climate
of California. He arrived in the country just previous to the discovery of gold. The marvelous
growth of City and State soon required facilities for the transaction of business, and he became
a resident of San Francisco, and established the first banking house in that City. For several
years he was eminently successful in business; and his strict honesty and integrity secured
for him the abiding confidence and respect of the business community. But the sudden and extreme
depression in business in 1855 closed his doors as well as those of many other bankers and
merchants. By the surrender to his creditors of all he possessed, even his homestead, which,
to the value of five thousand dollars, the laws of California allowed him to retain, and which
might well be coveted by him as a home for his wife and six children; every claim against him
was promptly met and discharged. Retaining amidst all his reverses, the respect of all who
knew him, he engaged as a clerk in the banking house of Adams & Co. where most of his old customers
followed him, induced to do so by their confidence in him. After the failure of that firm,
he was for some time out of active employment. But compelled by the necessities of a large
family to seek it, he determined to establish a daily newspaper and take upon himself the editorial
charge of it. For such an undertaking, his large experience in business, his resolute spirit,
his sound judgment, his keen insight into character, his lofty scorn and detestation of meanness,
profligacy, peculation and fraud, eminently fitted him. The paper, the Evening Bulletin, was
first issued on the eighth day of October, 1855. From that day to the day of his death, he
devoted all his faculties most faithfully and conscientiously to the exposure of guilt, the
laying bare gigantic schemes for defrauding the public, the denouncing villains and villainy
in high or low station, and the reformation of the numerous and aggravated abuses under which
the community was and had long been groaning. Day after day did he assail with dauntless energy
the open or secret robbers, oppressors or corruptors of the people. Neither wealth nor power
could bribe or intimidate him. It would be difficult to conceive the enthusiasm with which
the People hailed the advent of so able a champion, and the intense satisfaction with which
they witnessed his steadfast perseverance in the cause of truth and the right.

At length, on the fourteenth day of May 1856, the anxious fears and gloomy forebodings of his
family and friends were realized.... His assassin, James P. Casey, was well-known and of evil
repute in the City. Bold, daring, and unscrupulous, his hand was ever ready to execute the
plans of villainy which his fertile brain had conceived. Sentenced in New York to imprisonment
for grand larceny in the State Prison at Sing Sing for the term of two years, and discharged
when that term had nearly expired; he soon after sailed for California. Shortly after his arrival,
he was chosen Inspector of Elections in the Sixth Ward of San Francisco. Here he presided over
the ballot box, and was generally believed to have accomplished more ballot box staffing, ticket
shifting and false returns than any other individual in the City or State. He made, as was
generally believed, his office a means of livelihood, and held the City and County offices
in his hands to be disposed of in such manner as might best promote his interest or fill his
pockets. Year after year by this means he was accumulating money, until he was reputed to have
made a fortune, although never known by the people to have been engaged in any honest industrial
occupation in California. For the purpose perhaps of adding the levy of blackmail to his other
modes of accumulation, he established a newspaper, called the Sunday Times, and without principle,
character or education, assumed to be the enlightener of public opinion and the conservator
of public morals. During the few months of its existence, the paper was conducted without ability;
advocated no good cause; favored no measures for promoting the public interest or welfare;
attained no measure of popularity; and its discontinuance inspired no regret, but was felt
rather to be a relief.

The thought seems now to have suggested itself that having been so long the distributor of
offices to others he might well assume it himself; and thus while obtaining position in society,
enlarge his sphere of operations in plundering the public. Accordingly a ballot box at the
Presidio Precinct in the suburbs of the City was so arranged or presided over by friends or
pliant tools, that four or five days alter the election, the law being conveniently silent
as to the time which might be consumed in counting votes and making the return, it was made
to turn out James P. Casey a member of the Board of Supervisors of the County, although not
known to have been a candidate for the office at the Polls on the day of election. In this
responsible position, he could find his way on important Committees, be able to squander the
resources of the County, and by his vote and influence assist in passing the most exorbitant
claims, of which, it is to be presumed, he received a satisfactory percentage.

So high-handed an offender against the law and the rights of the people could not escape the
notice or the withering rebuke of Mr. King. He fearlessly proclaimed him a convicted felon,
and dealt with him as one of the principal of those offenders against all law, human or divine,
with whom San Francisco had been so long and so terribly cursed.

The Bulletin of May 14th, in which the charges founded upon the most incontrovertible evidence,
of Casey's conviction, sentence and discharge from Sing Sing, was made in the plainest terms
accompanied with comments upon his ballot-box stuffings and other criminal acts in San Francisco,
was published at an early hour in the after noon. At four o'clock Casey called at the Editor's
room and demanded of Mr. King what he meant by the article in the Bulletin just issued, and
was asked to what article he alluded? "To that" was the reply, "in which I am said to have
been formerly an inmate of Sing Sing State Prison." "Is it not true?" said King. Casey replied,
"That is not the question. I don't wish my past acts raked up; on that point I am sensitive."
King then pointed to the door which was open, and told him to leave the room and never enter
there again. About mid-afternoon the Prince and Sergius sallied from the Castle to observe the
water, and finding it quiet, they determined to embark.
The formalities of reception in the Castle were not less rigidly
observed at the departure. King, rising from his seat, said, "Go, and
never show your face here again." Casey immediately retired.

