 Out he came from the water, which held him with a gentle
suction as if unwilling to let him go, and then he whirled through the air like a meteor flecked
with rosy fire, and landed on the fresh green grass a dozen feet behind me. Down on my knees
I dropped before him as he tossed and rolled, his beautiful spots and colors glistening in
the sun. He was truly a splendid trout, fully a foot long, round and heavy. Carefully seizing
him, I easily removed the hook from the bony roof of his capacious mouth thickly set with sparkling
teeth, and then I tenderly killed him, with all his pluck, as old Peter would have said, still
in him.

I covered the rest of the fish in my basket with wet plantain leaves, and laid my trout king
on this cool green bed. Then I hurried off to the old man, whom I saw coming out of the woods.
When I opened my basket and showed him what I had caught, Peter looked surprised, and, taking
up the trout, examined it.

"Why, this is a big fellow," he said. "At first I thought it was Barney Sloat's boss trout,
but it isn't long enough for him. Barney showed me his trout, that gen'rally keeps in a deep
pool, where a tree has fallen over the stream down there. Barney tells me he often sees him,
and he's been tryin' fur two years to ketch him, but he never has, and I say he never will,
fur them big trout's got too much sense to fool round any kind of victuals that's got a string
to it. They let a little fish eat all he wants, and then they eat him. How did you ketch this one?"

I gave an account of the manner of the capture, to which Peter listened with interest and approval.

"If you'd a stood off and made a cast at that feller, you'd either have caught him at the first
flip, which isn't likely, as he didn't seem to want no feather flies, or else you'd a skeered
him away. That's all well enough in the tumblin' water, where you gen'rally go fur trout, but
the man that's got the true feelin' fur fish will try to suit his idees to theirs, and if he
keeps on doin' that, he's like to learn a thing or two that may do him good. That's a fine
fish, and you ketched him well. I've got a lot of 'em, but nothin' of that heft."

After luncheon we fished for an hour or two with no result worth recording, and then we started
for home. A couple of partridges ran across the road some distance ahead of us, and these gave
Peter an idea.

"Do you know," said he, "if things go on as they're goin' on now, that there'll come a time
when it won't be considered high-toned sport to shoot a bird slam-bang dead. The game gunners
will pop 'em with little harpoons, with long threads tied to 'em, and the feller that can tire
out his bird, and haul him in with the longest and thinnest piece of spool thread, will be
the crackest sportsman."

At this point I remarked to my companion that perhaps he was a little hard on the game fishermen.

"Well," said old Peter, with a smile on his corrugated visage, "I reckon I'd have to do a lot
of talkin' before I'd git even with 'em, fur the way they give me the butt for my style of
fishin'. What I say behind their backs I say to their faces. I seed one of these fellers once
with a fish on his hook, that he was runnin' up an' down the stream like a chased chicken.
'Why don't you pull him in?' says I. 'And break my rod an' line?' says he. 'Why don't you have
a stronger line and pole?' says I. 'There wouldn't be no science in that,' says he. 'If it's
your science you want to show off,' says I, 'you ought to fish for mud eels. There's more game
in 'em than there is in any other fish round here, and as they're mighty lively out of water
you might play one of 'em fur half an hour after you got him on shore, and it would take all
your science to keep him from reelin' up his end of the line faster than you could yourn.'"

When we reached the farm the old man went into the barn, and I took the fish into the house.
I found the two pretty daughters in the large room, where the eating and some of the cooking
was done. I opened my basket, and with great pride showed them the big trout I had caught.
They evidently thought it was a large fish, but they looked at each other, and smiled in a
way that I did not understand. I had expected from them, at least, as much admiration for my
prize and my skill as their father had shown.

"You don't seem to think much of this fine trout that I took such trouble to catch," I remarked.

"You mean," said the elder girl, with a laugh, "that you bought of Barney Sloat."

I looked at her in astonishment.

"Barney was along here to-day," she said, "and he told about your buying your fish of him."

"Bought of him!" I exclaimed, indignantly. "A little string of fish at the bottom of the basket
I bought of him, but all the others, and this big one, I caught myself."

"Oh, of course," said the pretty daughter, "bought the little ones and caught all the big ones!"

"Barney Sloat ought to have kept his mouth shut," said the younger pretty daughter, looking
at me with an expression of pity. "He'd got his money, and he hadn't no business to go telling
on people. Nobody likes that sort of thing. But this big fish is a real nice one, and you shall
have it for your supper."

"Thank you," I said, with dignity, and left the room.

I did not intend to have any further words with these young women on this subject, but I cannot
deny that I was annoyed and mortified. This was the result of a charitable action. I think
I was never more proud of anything than of catching that trout; and it was a good deal of a
downfall to suddenly find myself regarded as a mere city man fishing with a silver hook. But,
after all, what did it matter?

The boy who did not seem to be accounted a member of the family came into the house, and as
he passed me he smiled good-humoredly, and said: "Buyed 'em!"

I felt like throwing a chair at him, but refrained out of respect to my host. Before supper
the old man came out on to the porch where I was sitting. "It seems," said he, "that my gals
has got it inter their heads that you bought that big fish of Barney Sloat, and as I can't
say I seed you ketch it, they're not willin' to give in, 'specially as I didn't git no such
big one. 'Tain't wise to buy fish when you're goin' fishin' yourself. It's pretty certain to
tell agen you."

"You ought to have given me that advice before," I said, somewhat shortly. "You saw me buy
the fish."

"You don't s'pose," said old Peter, "that I'm goin' to say anythin' to keep money out of my
neighbor's pockets. We don't do that way in these parts. But I've told the gals they're not
to speak another word about it, so you needn't give your mind no worry on that score. And now
let's go in to supper. If you're as hungry as I am, there won't be many of them fish left fur
breakfast."

That evening, as we were sitting smoking on the porch, old Peter's mind reverted to the subject
of the unfounded charge against me. "It goes pretty hard," he remarked, "to have to stand up
and take a thing you don' like when there's no call fur it. It's bad enough when there is a
call fur it. That matter about your fish buyin' reminds me of what happened two summers ago
to my sister, or ruther to her two little boys--or, more correct yit, to one of 'em. Them was
two cur'ous little boys. They was allus tradin' with each other. Their father deals mostly
in horses, and they must have got it from him. At the time I'm tellin' of they'd traded everythin'
they had, and when they hadn't nothin' else left to swap they traded names. Joe he took Johnny's
name, and Johnny he took Joe's. Jist about when they'd done this, they both got sick with sumthin'
or other, the oldest one pretty bad, the other not much. Now there ain't no doctor inside of
twenty miles of where my sister lives. But there's one who sometimes has a call to go through
that part of the country, and the people about there is allus very glad when they chance to
be sick when he comes along. Now this good luck happened to my sister, fur the doctor come
by jist at this time. He looks into the state of the boys, and while their mother has gone
downstairs he mixes some medicine he has along with him. 'What's your name?' he says to the
oldest boy when he'd done it. Now as he'd traded names with his brother, fair and square, he
wasn't goin' back on the trade, and he said, 'Joe.' 'And my name's Johnny,' up and says the
other one. Then the doctor he goes and gives the bottle of medicine to their mother, and says
he: 'This medicine is fur Joe. You must give him a tablespoonful every two hours. Keep up the
treatment, and he'll be all right. As fur Johnny, there's nothin' much the matter with him.
He don't need no medicine.' And then he went away. Every two hours after that Joe, who wasn't
sick worth mentionin', had to swallow a dose of horrid stuff, and pretty soon he took to his
bed, and Johnny he jist played round and got well in the nat'ral way. Joe's mother kept up
the treatment, gittin' up in the night to feed that stuff to him; but the poor little boy got
wuss and wuss, and one mornin' he says to his mother, says he: 'Mother, I guess I'm goin' to
die, and I'd ruther do that than take any more of that medicine, and I wish you'd call Johnny
and we'll trade names back agen, and if he don't want to come and do it, you kin tell him he
kin keep the old minkskin I gave him to boot, on account of his name havin' a Wesley in it.'
'Trade names,' says his mother, 'what do you mean by that?' And then he told her what he and
Johnny had done. 'And did you ever tell anybody about this?' says she. 'Nobody but Dr. Barnes,'
says he. 'After that I got sick and forgot it.' When my sister heard that, an idee struck into
her like you put a fork into an apple dumplin'. Traded names, and told the doctor! She'd all
along thought it strange that the boy that seemed wuss should be turned out, and the other
one put under treatment; but it wasn't fur her to set up her opinion agen that of a man like
Dr. Barnes. Down she went, in about seventeen jumps, to where Eli Timmins, the hired man, was
ploughin' in the corn. 'Take that horse out of that,' she hollers, 'and you may kill him if
you have to, but git Dr. Barnes here before my little boy dies.' When the doctor come he heard
the story, and looked at the sick youngster, and then says he: 'If he'd kept his minkskin,
and not hankered after a Wesley to his name, he'd a had a better time of it. Stop the treatment,
and he'll be all right.' Which she did; and he was. Now it seems to me that this is a good
deal like your case. You've had to take a lot of medicine that didn't belong to you, and I
guess it's made you feel pretty bad; but I've told my gals to stop the treatment, and you'll
be all right in the mornin'. Good-night. Your candlestick is on the kitchen table."

For two days longer I remained in this neighborhood, wandering alone over the hills, and up
the mountain-sides, and by the brooks, which tumbled and gurgled through the lonely forest.
Each evening I brought home a goodly supply of trout, but never a great one like the noble
fellow for which I angled in the meadow stream.

On the morning of my departure I stood on the porch with old Peter waiting for the arrival
of the mail driver, who was to take me to the nearest railroad town.

