THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM

by Tobias Smollett

COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS

PART I.

With the Author's Preface, and an Introduction by G. H. Maynadier, Ph.D. Department of English,
Harvard University.

CONTENTS

   INTRODUCTION

   PREFATORY ADDRESS

   CHAPTER
       I   Some sage Observations that naturally introduce our important
             History
      II   A superficial View of our Hero's Infancy
     III   He is initiated in a Military Life, and has the good Fortune
             to acquire a generous Patron
      IV   His Mother's Prowess and Death; together with some Instances
             of his own Sagacity
       V   A brief Detail of his Education
      VI   He meditates Schemes of Importance
     VII   Engages in Partnership with a female Associate, in order to
             put his Talents in Action
    VIII   Their first Attempt; with a Digression which some Readers
             may think impertinent
      IX   The Confederates change their Battery, and achieve a remarkable
             Adventure
       X   They proceed to levy Contributions with great Success, until
             our Hero sets out with the young Count for Vienna, where he
             enters into League with another Adventurer
      XI   Fathom makes various Efforts in the World of Gallantry
     XII   He effects a Lodgment in the House of a rich Jeweller
    XIII   He is exposed to a most perilous Incident in the Course of his
             Intrigue with the Daughter
     XIV   He is reduced to a dreadful Dilemma, in consequence of an
             Assignation with the Wife
      XV   But at length succeeds in his Attempt upon both
     XVI   His Success begets a blind Security, by which he is once again
             well-nigh entrapped in his Dulcinea's Apartment
    XVII   The Step-dame's Suspicions being awakened, she lays a Snare
             for our Adventurer, from which he is delivered by the
             Interposition of his Good Genius
   XVIII   Our Hero departs from Vienna, and quits the Domain of Venus
             for the rough Field of Mars
     XIX   He puts himself under the Guidance of his Associate, and
             stumbles upon the French Camp, where he finishes his
             Military Career
      XX   He prepares a Stratagem, but finds himself countermined--
             Proceeds on his Journey, and is overtaken by a terrible
             Tempest
     XXI   He falls upon Scylla, seeking to avoid Charybdis.
    XXII   He arrives at Paris, and is pleased with his Reception
   XXIII   Acquits himself with Address in a Nocturnal Riot
    XXIV   He overlooks the Advances of his Friends, and smarts severely
             for his Neglect
     XXV   He bears his Fate like a Philosopher; and contracts
             acquaintance with a very remarkable Personage
    XXVI   The History of the Noble Castilian
   XXVII   A flagrant Instance of Fathom's Virtue, in the Manner of his
             Retreat to England
  XXVIII   Some Account of his Fellow-Travellers
    XXIX   Another providential Deliverance from the Effects of the
             Smuggler's ingenious Conjecture
     XXX   The singular Manner of Fathom's Attack and Triumph over the
             Virtue of the fair Elenor
    XXXI   He by accident encounters his old Friend, with whom he holds
             a Conference, and renews a Treaty
   XXXII   He appears in the great World with universal Applause and
             Admiration
  XXXIII   He attracts the Envy and Ill Offices of the minor Knights of
             his own Order, over whom he obtains a complete Victory
   XXXIV   He performs another Exploit, that conveys a true Idea of his
             Gratitude and Honour
    XXXV   He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during
             the whole Season
   XXXVI   He is smitten with the Charms of a Female Adventurer, whose
             Allurements subject him to a new Vicissitude of Fortune
  XXXVII   Fresh Cause for exerting his Equanimity and Fortitude
 XXXVIII   The Biter is Bit

INTRODUCTION

The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom, Smollett's third novel, was given to the world in
1753. Curried eggs; Irish stew; rice meringue.

9. Potiron; beef steak stewed with vegetables; blancmange.

10. Baked haddock; calves' heart roasted; bread-and-jam pudding.

11. Shrimp toast; roast fillet of mutton; strawberry cream.

12. Turnip soup; breast of veal stewed; apple charlotte.

13. Fried mackerel; boiled rabbit and onion sauce; cheese toast.

14. Brunoise; stewed mutton cutlets; baked rice pudding.

15. Fried herrings, mustard sauce; rump-steak aux fines herbes; jam roll.

16. Dressed crab; boiled knuckle of mutton with caper sauce; bread-and-butter fritters.

17. Tomato soup; mutton cutlets with onion purée; cocoanut pudding.

18. Fried smelts; a currie; boiled batter pudding.
19. Vegetable soup; rump steak; macaroni cheese.

20. Stewed fish;
leg of mutton cutlet; raspberry sponge.

21. Vegetable marrow soup;
one rib of beef (boned and rolled) roasted; tapioca pudding.

22.
Fried soles; pounded meat cutlets in Italian paste with sauce; macaroni
with tomato sauce.

23. Fried whiting; boiled knuckle of veal with
parsley and butter, and grilled bacon; baked currant pudding.

24.
Semolina soup; part of loin of pork roasted; Spanish soufflé.

Vegetables,
though, of course, they are an important part of dinner, are not given,
as they must vary according to the month of the year. The recipes
which follow are as little complicated as possible.

Mulligatawny
Soup (without meat).--Cut two onions and a small carrot into thin
slices, put them into a stewpan with one ounce of butter, turn them
about until they are a nice brown colour, but not burnt, then add
a sprig of parsley and half an apple, stir in three teaspoonfuls of
curry powder, add a pint and a half of hot stock from bones, or of
hot water and a little piece of lean bacon, or a small bacon bone
if you have one; let the soup simmer for an hour, skim the fat off,
strain the soup, put it back in the saucepan, add to it the juice
of half a lemon and a dessertspoonful of flour that has been baked
a very light brown and mixed with a piece of butter the size of a
pigeon's egg; salt to taste.
Though this is notably less readable than the author's earlier works, still the wonder is that
when the man is so far "off his beat," he should yet know so well how to meet the strange conditions
which confront him.  To one whose idea of Smollett's genius is formed entirely by Random and
Pickle and Humphry Clinker, Ferdinand Count Fathom will offer many surprises.

The first of these is the comparative lifelessness of the book.  True, here again are action
and incident galore, but generally unaccompanied by that rough Georgian hurly-burly, common
in Smollett, which is so interesting to contemplate from a comfortable distance, and which
goes so far towards making his fiction seem real.  Nor are the characters, for the most part,
life-like enough to be interesting.  There is an apparent exception, to be sure, in the hero's
mother, already mentioned, the hardened camp-follower, whom we confidently expect to become
vitalised after the savage fashion of Smollett's characters.  But, alas! we have no chance
to learn the lady's style of conversation, for the few words that come from her lips are but
partially characteristic; we have only too little chance to learn her manners and customs.
In the fourth chapter, while she is making sure with her dagger that all those on the field
of battle whom she wishes to rifle are really dead, an officer of the hussars, who has been
watching her lucrative progress, unfeelingly puts a brace of bullets into the lady's brain,
just as she raises her hand to smite him to the heart.  Perhaps it is as well that she is thus
removed before our disappointment at the non-fulfilment of her promise becomes poignant.  So
far as we may judge from the other personages of Count Fathom, even this interesting Amazon
would sooner or later have turned into a wooden figure, with a label giving the necessary information
as to her character.

Such certainly is her son, Fathom, the hero of the book.  Because he is placarded, "Shrewd
villain of monstrous inhumanity," we are fain to accept him for what his creator intended;
but seldom in word or deed is he a convincingly real villain.  His friend and foil, the noble
young Count de Melvil, is no more alive than he; and equally wooden are Joshua, the high-minded,
saint-like Jew, and that tedious, foolish Don Diego. Neither is the heroine alive, the peerless
Monimia, but then, in her case, want of vitality is not surprising; the presence of it would
amaze us.  If she were a woman throbbing with life, she would be different from Smollett's
other heroines.  The "second lady" of the melodrama, Mademoiselle de Melvil, though by no means
vivified, is yet more real than her sister-in-law.

The fact that they are mostly inanimate figures is not the only surprise given us by the personages
of Count Fathom.  It is a surprise to find few of them strikingly whimsical; it is a surprise
to find them in some cases far more distinctly conceived than any of the people in Roderick
Random or Peregrine Pickle.  In the second of these, we saw Smollett beginning to understand
the use of incident to indicate consistent development of character.  In Count Fathom, he seems
fully to understand this principle of art, though he has not learned to apply it successfully.
And so, in spite of an excellent conception, Fathom, as I have said, is unreal. After all his
villainies, which he perpetrates without any apparent qualms of conscience, it is incredible
that he should honestly repent of his crimes.  We are much inclined to doubt when we read that
"his vice and ambition was now quite mortified within him," the subsequent testimony of Matthew
Bramble, Esq., in Humphry Clinker, to the contrary, notwithstanding.  Yet Fathom up to this
point is consistently drawn, and drawn for a purpose:--to show that cold-blooded roguery, though
successful for a while, will come to grief in the end.  To heighten the effect of his scoundrel,
Smollett develops parallel with him the virtuous Count de Melvil.  The author's scheme of thus
using one character as the foil of another, though not conspicuous for its originality, shows
a decided advance in the theory of constructive technique.  Only, as I have said, Smollett's
execution is now defective.

"But," one will naturally ask, "if Fathom lacks the amusing, and not infrequently stimulating,
hurly-burly of Smollett's former novels; if its characters, though well-conceived, are seldom
divertingly fantastic and never thoroughly animate; what makes the book interesting?"  The
surprise will be greater than ever when the answer is given that, to a large extent, the plot
makes Fathom interesting.  Yes, Smollett, hitherto indifferent to structure, has here written
a story in which the plot itself, often clumsy though it may be, engages a reader's attention.
One actually wants to know whether the young Count is ever going to receive consolation for
his sorrows and inflict justice on his basely ungrateful pensioner.  And when, finally, all
turns out as it should, one is amazed to find how many of the people in the book have helped
towards the designed conclusion.  Not all of them, indeed, nor all of the adventures, are indispensable,
but it is manifest at the end that much, which, for the time, most readers think irrelevant--such
as Don Diego's history--is, after all, essential.

