"And from out the blood which flows--and that is shed plenteously, very plenteously--(this
is the sacred faith which I brought back from the battlefields) out of this blood the proud
harvest will grow, whose blessings we shall all feel--the world dominion of the German idea!"[173]

[Footnote 173: Ibid., p. 50 et seq.]

In spite of Köhrer's assurances that the relationship between officers and men in the German
army is an ideal one, there is evidence that such is not always the case. The Social Democratic
paper Karlsruhe Volksfreund (July 23rd, 1915) contained a long article by "comrade" Wilhelm
Kolb, attacking the anti-annexation fraction of his party. Kolb accused the opposition with
"speculating on the question of food-prices and the ill-treatment of soldiers at and behind
the front. The power of the censor makes it exceedingly difficult, or even impossible, to ventilate
this matter."

German writers are careful to impress their readers that the losses of the French were appalling,
but here and there a stray word or sentence lifts the veil and discovers their own.

"Just before me are the graves of some German officers adorned with wooden crosses and helmets,
and a little farther on a Massengrab (large common grave) containing several hundred German
soldiers. At this point (Sedan) the battle raged with awful fury, and the Germans had to make
heavy sacrifices. It seems almost incredible that the Germans could have forced the position.

"The country is hilly; not a tree or bush offered cover from the French bullets. French trenches
at distances of from thirty to fifty yards, stretched across the land, and between them were
wire entanglements and other obstacles. Besides which they had an open firing-range of over
a mile in extent, with their artillery to cover them from a steep hill on the other side of
the Meuse.

"At 5 a.m. the attack commenced, and by the afternoon the French had been hurled across the
river. Then came the most difficult part of the operations. From the Meuse the ground rises
gradually to a steep hill, on which the French artillery and machine guns were placed. The
only bridge over the river, at Donchery, had been blown up at the last moment by the enemy,
and although our pioneers had hastily constructed a bridge of tree-trunks--what was this for
so many regiments!

"Many tried to ford or swim the stream. The French fire was murderous in its effect. Several
times the ranks wavered, but again and again they pressed forward, till the heights were stormed
and the enemy in flight. The battle raged on into the night and then the remains of the regiments
gathered at the foot of the hill. They had won a costly but glorious victory. Those who have
seen the successes which our troops have gained, even under the most difficult conditions,
need have no fear as to the ultimate result of this war.

"I stood long at this spot on the blood-drenched soil of France, just where the regiments from
Trier[174] had fought so bravely and suffered so heavily. Serious thoughts arose in me as I
gazed at the battlefield. What a dispensation! Two gigantic battles on the same spot in such
a short space of time; two great victories over the French. And most remarkable of all, the
nation which for forty-four years had desired revanche for Sedan, was again completely defeated
at the same place--almost on the anniversary of the first battle.

[Footnote 174: The writer, Dr. W. Kriege, is a Roman Catholic priest from Trier (Trèves). His
book "Bilder vom Kriegsschauplatz" (Pictures from the Seat of War"), published in 1915, is
both interesting and illuminating.]

