During the first rehearsal he read every one's part except mine, which he skipped, and the
power that he put into each part was extraordinary. In one
of these men recognized the storks those Kraemer back to them the magic powder had sold. Be
sitting next to asked him to tell them his latest actions. He told, among others, the history
of the caliph and his vizier.

"What a word to them because you have abandoned?" he asked another
magician.

"A very heavy Latin, it means mutabor. "

When the storks at the Mauerluecke heard this, they were almost beside himself with joy. They
ran to their long feet so fast the gates of the ruin that the owl
hardly follow could. There, said the Caliph moved to the owl, "savior
of my life and life my friend, take the eternal gratitude for what
you did to us, for a husband to me! " I was still a
stranger in the theater, and in awe of Henry Irving personally; but I plucked up courage, and said:

"I am very nervous about my first appearance with you. Couldn't we rehearse our scenes?"

"We shall be all right!" he answered, "but we are not going to run the risk of being bottled
up by a gas-man or a fiddler."

When I spoke, I think he was conducting a band rehearsal. Although he did not understand a
note of music, he felt, through intuition, what the music ought to be, and would pull it about
and have alterations made. No one was cleverer than Hamilton Clarke, Henry's first musical
director, and a most gifted composer, at carrying out his instructions. Hamilton Clarke often
grew angry and flung out of the theater, saying that it was quite impossible to do what Mr.
Irving required.

"Patch it together, indeed!" he used to say to me indignantly, when I was told off to smooth
him down. "Mr. Irving knows nothing about music, or he couldn't ask me to do such a thing."

But the next day he would return with the score altered on the lines suggested by Henry, and
would confess that the music was improved. "Upon my soul, it's better! Labakan could not be so candid regarding his public relationships, but he
was willing to admit that he was of noble origins and traveled to
entertain himself.

The two young fellows took a liking to each other and got along great
with each other.

The only person who did not profit by Henry's ceaseless labors was poor Ophelia. When the first
night came, I did not play the part well, although the critics and the public were pleased.
To myself I failed. I had not rehearsed enough. I can remember one occasion when I played Ophelia
really well. It was in Chicago some ten years later. Why couldn't my prayers grant me gold. He took my good sequins, but I moved
from Florence to triumph and he had to put up with me. He was a madman.
 This was a
tremendous thing for me, who am not capable of sustained effort, but can perhaps manage a cumulative
effort better than most actresses. I have been told that Ophelia has "nothing to do" at first.
I found so much to do! Little bits of business which, slight in themselves, contributed to
a definite result, and kept me always in the picture.

Like all Ophelias before (and after) me, I went to the madhouse to study wits astray. I was
disheartened at first. There was no beauty, no nature, no pity in most of the lunatics. Strange
as it may sound, they were too theatrical to teach me anything. Then, just as I was going away,
I noticed a young girl gazing at the wall. But he had heard that the women often fight in it, and for the life
of him wanted to know what she had hidden there. And while he was traveling, he thought money might
be one of the treasures the women had hidden. She was very thin,
very pathetic, very young, and the movement was as poignant as it was beautiful.

