We are sad that some of our kinsmen in Christ, children of one mother, have forsaken her ways.
God can over-rule even this sorrow, so that it shall fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel.
They must take with them precious memories of the love and the faith of the mother whom they
have forsaken, and of the liberty wherewith the truth in Christ has made her children free--under
God these may be a link in the chain of His providence to the restoration of unity.  It is
a singular providence that at this period of the world's history, when marvellous discoveries
have united the people of divers tongues in common interests, He has placed the Anglo-Saxon
race in the forefront of the nations.  They are carrying civilization to the ends of the earth.
They are bringing liberty to the oppressed, elevating the down-trodden, and are giving to all
these divers tongues and kindreds their customs, traditions, and laws.  I reverently believe
that the Anglo-Saxon Church has been preserved by God's Providence (if her children will accept
this Mission) to heal the divisions of Christendom, and lead on in His work to be done in the
eventide of the world.  She holds the truths which underlie the possibility of reunion, the
validity of all Christian baptism in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 
She ministers the two sacraments of Christ as of perpetual obligation, and makes faith in Jesus
Christ, as contained in the Catholic Creeds, a condition of Christian fellowship.  She believes
that the sacred Scriptures were written by inspiration of God, but she has no theory about
inspiration.  She holds up the Atonement of Christ as the only hope of a lost world; but she
has no philosophy about the Atonement. She teaches that it is through the Holy Ghost that men
are united to Christ.  She ministers the sacraments appointed by Christ as His channels of
grace; but she has no theory to explain the manner of Christ's presence to penitent believing
souls.  She does not explain what God has explained, but celebrates these Divine mysteries,
as they were held and celebrated for one thousand years after our Lord ascended into heaven,
before there was any East or West arrayed against each other in the Church of God.  Surely
we may and ought to be first to hold up the olive branch of peace over strife, and say, "Sirs,
ye are brethren."

In so grave a matter as the restoration of organic unity, we may not surrender anything which
is of Divine authority, or accept terms of communion which are contrary to God's Word.

The Church of the Reconciliation will be an historical and Catholic Church in its ministry,
its faith, and its sacraments.  It will inherit the promises of its Divine Lord.  It will preserve
all which is catholic and Divine.  It will adopt and use all instrumentalities of any existing
organization which will aid it in doing the Lord's work.  It will put away all which is individual,
narrow, and sectarian.  It will concede to all who hold the faith all the liberty wherewith
Christ hath made His children free.

/Missions/.--In the presence of brethren who bear in their bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus,
I hardly know how to clothe in words my thoughts as I speak of Missions.  The providence of
God has broken down impenetrable barriers--the doors of hermit nations have been opened; commerce
has bound men in common interests, and so prepared "a highway for our God"--Japan, India, China,
Africa, Polynesia, amid the solitudes of icy north, and in the lands of tropic suns, world-wide
there are signs of the coming of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.  The veil which has so long blinded
the eyes of the ancient people, our Lord's kinsmen according to the flesh, is being taken away.
We bless God for the good example of martyrs like Patteson, Mackenzie, Parker, Hannington,
and others, who have laid down their lives for the Lord Jesus.  "A great and effectual door
is opened."  There is no country on the earth where we may not carry the Gospel.  The wealth
of the world is largely in Christian hands.  The Church only needs faith to grasp the opportunity
to do the work.

In the presence of fields so white for the harvest, we must ask, "Lord, what wilt Thou have
me to do?"

1. There must be unceasing, prevailing intercessory prayer for those whom we send out to heathen
lands.  The hearts of all Christian nations were turned with anxious solicitude to that brave
servant of God and His country in Khartoum.  Shall we feel less for the servants of Christ
who have given up home and country to suffer and it may be to die for Him? Some of us remember
that when Missions were destroyed, when clouds were all around us, and the very ground drifting
from under our feet, that we were made brave to work and wait for the salvation of God by the
prayers which went up to God for us.  When "prayers were made without ceasing of the Church
unto God," the fast-closed doors of the prison were opened for the Apostles.  It will be so again.

2. There must be the entire consecration of all unto Christ.  The wisdom of Paul and the eloquence
of Apollos may plant, but "God alone giveth the increase."  If success comes, if "the rod of
the priesthood bud and blossom and bear fruit," it must be "laid up in the ark of God."  He
will not give His glory to another.  The work is Christ's.  "We are ambassadors for Him." 
"I have chosen you and ordained you that ye should go and bring forth fruit."

3. They who would win souls must have a ripe knowledge of the sacred Scriptures.  "They were
written by inspiration of God. . . . that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works." Our orders may be unquestioned, our doctrine perfect in every line and
feature, but we shall not reach the hearts of men unless we preach Christ out of an experimental
knowledge of the truths of Divine Revelation. A wife should accept her husband, and a friend
his friend, upon a general estimate. Particulars in character and conduct should be overlooked.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote
2: I speak, of course, only of the discreet poet. Great poets are never discreet. Their genius
overrides their discretion.]

BULLS AND BEARS.

CHAPTER I
THE ARTISTS' EXHIBITION, AND WHAT CAME OF IT.

There was an exhibition
of pictures in an upper room on Washington Street. The artists had
collected their unsold productions, and proposed to offer them at
auction. There were sketches of White Mountain scenery, views of Nahant
and other beaches, woodland prospects, farm-houses with well-sweeps,
reedy marshes and ponds, together with the usual variety of ideal
heads and figures,--a very pretty collection.  With St. Paul we must say, "Whereinsoever Christ
is preached I do rejoice, and will rejoice."

5. Above all gifts we need the baptism of the Holy Ghost.  When this consecration comes there
will be no cry of an empty treasury.  We shall no longer be weary with the bleating of lost
sheep, to whom we have to say, I have no means and no shepherd to send you.

/Christian Work/--We rejoice at every sign that Christians realize that wealth is a sacred
trust, for which they shall give an account.  We rejoice more that they are giving that personal
service which is a law of His kingdom.  Men and women of culture and gentle birth are going
into the abodes of sickness and sorrow to comfort stricken homes and lead sinful folk to the
Saviour.  Brotherhoods, Sisterhoods, and deaconesses are multiplying.  Never was there greater
need for their holy work.  Many of our own baptized children have drifted away from all faith.
To thousands God is a name, the Bible a tradition, faith an opinion, and heaven and hell fables.
But that which gives us the deepest sadness and makes all Christian work more difficult is
that so many of those to whom the people look for example have given up the Bible, the Lord's
Day, the house of God, and Christian faith.  Alas! they are telling these weary toilers whose
lives are clouded by anxiety and sorrow that there is no hereafter.  "They know not what they
do." They are sowing to the wind and will reap the whirlwind.  May God show them the danger
before if is too late!  The loss of faith is the loss of everything; without it morality becomes
prudence or imprudence.  When the tie which binds man to God is broken all other ties snap
asunder. No nation has survived the loss of its religion.  We are appalled at the mad cry of
anarchy which tramples all which we hold dear for time and eternity under its feet.  We cannot
look into its face without seeing the lineaments of that man of sin who "opposeth and exalteth
himself above all that is called God and worshipped."  Antichrist is he who usurps the place
of Christ.  "He is antichrist who denieth the Father and the Son."  Our hearts go out in pity
for those whose mechanical ideas of the universe may be a revolt from a mechanical theology
which has lost sight of the Fatherhood of God.  We stand where two ways meet. We shall take
care of the people or the people will take care of us. The people are the rulers; the power
of the future is in their hands. He became secretary of a club called the "Friends of the Constitution,"
and composed an Address to the National Assembly.

At the same time occurred an episode which reveals the duplicity of his nature--for Napoleon could
be unscrupulous when he had his own ends to serve.  We wonder why men pass by the Church to found clubs and brotherhoods
and orders.  They will have them, and they ought to have them, until the Church is in its Divine
love what its Founder designed it to be--the brotherhood in Christ of the children of our God
and Father.  What the world needs to-day is not alms, not hospitals, not homes of mercy alone.
It needs the spirit and the power of the love of Christ.  It needs the voice, the ear, the
hand, and the heart of Christ seen in and working in His children.  No powers of government,
no /prestige/ of social position, no prerogatives of Churchly authority can meet the issues
of this hour; we have waited already too long. Brotherhood men will have, and it will be the
brotherhood of the commune, or brotherhood in Christ as the children of our God and Father.
Infidelity answers no questions, heals no wounds, fulfils no hopes.  The Gospel will do, is
doing, to-day what it has done through all the ages: leading men out of sin and darkness and
despair to the liberty of sons of God.

