To turn back to the point from which this excursion branched off. It has been presumed all
the while that the technological equipment, or the state of the industrial arts, must continue
to advance under the conditions offered by this régime of peace at large. But the last few
paragraphs will doubtless suggest that such a single-minded addiction to competitive gain and
competitive spending as the stabilised and amplified price-system would enjoin, must lead to
an effectual retardation, perhaps to a decline, of those material sciences on which modern
technology draws; and that the state of the industrial arts should therefore cease to advance,
if only the scheme of investment and businesslike sabotage can be made sufficiently secure.
That such may be the outcome is a contingency which the argument will have to meet and to allow
for; but it is after all a contingency that need not be expected to derange the sequence of
events, except in the way of retardation. Even without further advance in technological expedients
or in the relevant material sciences, there will still necessarily ensue an effectual advance
in the industrial arts, in the sense that further organisation and enlargement of the material
equipment and industrial processes on lines already securely known and not to be forgotten
must bring an effectually enhanced efficiency of the industrial process as a whole.

In illustration, it is scarcely to be assumed even as a tentative hypothesis that the system
of transport and communication will not undergo extension and improvement on the lines already
familiar, even in the absence of new technological contrivances. At the same time a continued
increase of population is to be counted on; which has, for the purpose in hand, much the same
effect as an advance in the industrial arts. Human contact and mutual understanding will necessarily
grow wider and closer, and will have its effect on the habits of thought prevalent in the communities
that are to live under the promised régime of peace. The system of transport and communication
having to handle a more voluminous and exacting traffic, in the service of a larger and more
compact population, will have to be organised and administered on mechanically drawn schedules
of time, place, volume, velocity, and price, of a still more exacting accuracy than hitherto.
The like will necessarily apply throughout the industrial occupations that employ extensive
plant or processes, or that articulate with industrial processes of that nature; which will
necessarily comprise a larger proportion of the industrial process at large than hitherto.

As has already been remarked more than once in the course of the argument, a population that
lives and does its work, and such play as is allowed it, in and by an exactingly articulate
mechanical system of this kind will necessarily be an "intelligent" people, in the colloquial
sense of the word; that is to say it will necessarily be a people that uses printed matter
freely and that has some familiarity with the elements of those material sciences that underlie
this mechanically organised system of appliances and processes. Such a population lives by
and within the framework of the mechanistic logic, and is in a fair way to lose faith in any
proposition that can not be stated convincingly in terms of this mechanistic logic. Superstitions
are liable to lapse by neglect or disuse in such a community; that is to say propositions of
a non-mechanistic complexion are liable to insensible disestablishment in such a case; "superstition"
in these premises coming to signify whatever is not of this mechanistic, or "materialistic"
character.