Mr. Q., a Swedish missionary, and his native preacher called Rock, have arrived from Unalaklik,
with the two visiting preachers at the Home, and they held an evening service in the schoolhouse,
which was fairly well attended. There were seven white men, the three women in this house and
myself, besides many natives of both sexes. Grandmother was there with Alice, Ageetuk and others,
and the missionary spoke well and feelingly in English, interpreted by Rock into Eskimo. One
of the preachers sang a solo, and presided at the organ. Some of the native women present had
with them their babies, and these, away from home in the evening, contrary to their usual habit,
cried and nestled around a good deal, and had to be comforted in various ways, both substantial
and otherwise, during the evening; but the speakers were accustomed to all that, and were thankful
to have as listeners the poor mothers, who probably could not have come without the youngsters.

Considerable will power and auto-suggestion is needed to enable me to endure the fumes of seal
oil along with other smells which are constantly arising from the furs and bodies of the Eskimos,
made damp, perhaps, by the snow which has lodged upon them before entering the room. Fire we
must have. Those who are continually with the natives in these gatherings do get "acclimated,"
but I am having a hard struggle along these lines.

The three Swedish and one Eskimo preacher left today for the Home, after I had taken a kodak
view of them, and their dog-team. As the wind blew cold and stiffly from the northwest, they
hoisted a sail made of an old blanket upon their sled.

There are many who are ingenious, and who are glad to help the sick child, Jennie, pass her
time pleasantly, and among them is the musician. Being a clever artist as well as musician,
he goes often to sit beside Jennie, and then slate and pencils are brought out, and the drawing
begins. Indian heads, Eskimo children in fur parkies, summer landscapes, anything and everything
takes its turn upon the slate, which appears a real kaleidoscope under the artist's hands.
Jennie often laughs till the tears run down her face at some comical drawing or story, or the
musician's efforts to speak Eskimo as she does, and both enjoy themselves immensely.

Yesterday Mollie went out to hunt for ptarmigan. She is exceedingly fond of gunning, has great
success, and she and the child relish these tasty birds better than anything else at this season.
Ageetuk also is a good hunter and trapper, and brought in two red foxes from her traps yesterday,
when she came home from her outing with Mollie. Little Charlie ran up to Mollie on her return
from her hunt, and cried in a mixture of Eskimo and English:

"Foxes peeluk, Mamma?" meaning to ask if she did not secure any animals, appearing disappointed
when told by his mamma (for such she calls herself to the child) that she did not find anything
today but ptarmigan.

It was twenty degrees below zero this morning, and the sun was beautifully bright. The days
are growing longer, and it is quite light at eight o'clock in the morning. The short days have
never been tiresome to me because we have not lacked for fuel and lights, and have kept occupied.

One of the Commissioners and two or three other men have been trying for a long time to get
their meals here, but the girls have pleaded too little room, and other excuses, until now
the Commissioner has returned, and renewed his requests. Today he came over and left word that
he and two others would be here to six o'clock supper, at which the girls were wrathy.

"I guess he will wait a long time before I cook his meals for him," sputtered Alma, who disliked
the coming of the official to the house, and under no consideration would she consent to board him.

