That these continual stirs were once busy in St. Germain de Calberte, the imagination with
difficulty receives; all is now so quiet, the pulse of human life now beats so low and still
in this hamlet of the mountains. Boys followed me a great way off, like a timid sort of lion-hunters;
and people turned round to have a second look, or came out of their houses, as I went by. 
My passage was the first event, you would have fancied, since the Camisards.  There was nothing
rude or forward in this observation; it was but a pleased and wondering scrutiny, like that
of oxen or the human infant; yet it wearied my spirits, and soon drove me from the street.

I took refuge on the terraces, which are here greenly carpeted with sward, and tried to imitate
with a pencil the inimitable attitudes of the chestnuts as they bear up their canopy of leaves.
Ever and again a little wind went by, and the nuts dropped all around me, with a light and
dull sound, upon the sward.  The noise was as of a thin fall of great hailstones; but there
went with it a cheerful human sentiment of an approaching harvest and farmers rejoicing in
their gains.  Looking up, I could see the brown nut peering through the husk, which was already
gaping; and between the stems the eye embraced an amphitheatre of hill, sunlit and green with
leaves.

I have not often enjoyed a place more deeply.  I moved in an atmosphere of pleasure, and felt
light and quiet and content.  But perhaps it was not the place alone that so disposed my spirit.
Perhaps some one was thinking of me in another country; or perhaps some thought of my own had
come and gone unnoticed, and yet done me good.  For some thoughts, which sure would be the
most beautiful, vanish before we can rightly scan their features; as though a god, travelling
by our green highways, should but ope the door, give one smiling look into the house, and go
again for ever.  Was it Apollo, or Mercury, or Love with folded wings?  Who shall say?  But
we go the lighter about our business, and feel peace and pleasure in our hearts.

I dined with a pair of Catholics.  They agreed in the condemnation of a young man, a Catholic,
who had married a Protestant girl and gone over to the religion of his wife.  A Protestant
born they could understand and respect; indeed, they seemed to be of the mind of an old Catholic
woman, who told me that same day there was no difference between the two sects, save that 'wrong
was more wrong for the Catholic,' who had more light and guidance; but this of a man's desertion
filled them with contempt.

'It is a bad idea for a man to change,' said one.

It may have been accidental, but you see how this phrase pursued me; and for myself, I believe
it is the current philosophy in these parts.  I have some difficulty in imagining a better.

The phylloxera was in the neighbourhood; and instead of wine we drank at dinner a more economical
juice of the grape--La Parisienne, they call it. It is made by putting the fruit whole into
a cask with water; one by one the berries ferment and burst; what is drunk during the day is
supplied at night in water: so, with ever another pitcher from the well, and ever another grape
exploding and giving out its strength, one cask of Parisienne may last a family till spring.
It is, as the reader will anticipate, a feeble beverage, but very pleasant to the taste.

What with dinner and coffee, it was long past three before I left St. Germain de Calberte.
I went down beside the Gardon of Mialet, a great glaring watercourse devoid of water, and through
St. Etienne de Vallee Francaise, or Val Francesque, as they used to call it; and towards evening
began to ascend the hill of St. Pierre.  It was a long and steep ascent.  Behind me an empty
carriage returning to St. Jean du Gard kept hard upon my tracks, and near the summit overtook
me.  The driver, like the rest of the world, was sure I was a pedlar; but, unlike others, he
was sure of what I had to sell.  He had noticed the blue wool which hung out of my pack at
either end; and from this he had decided, beyond my power to alter his decision, that I dealt
in blue-wool collars, such as decorate the neck of the French draught-horse.

I had hurried to the topmost powers of Modestine, for I dearly desired to see the view upon
the other side before the day had faded.  But it was night when I reached the summit; the moon
was riding high and clear; and only a few grey streaks of twilight lingered in the west.  A
yawning valley, gulfed in blackness, lay like a hole in created nature at my feet; but the
outline of the hills was sharp against the sky.  There was Mount Aigoal, the stronghold of
Castanet.  And Castanet, not only as an active undertaking leader, deserves some mention among
Camisards; for there is a spray of rose among his laurel; and he showed how, even in a public
tragedy, love will have its way.  In the high tide of war he married, in his mountain citadel,
a young and pretty lass called Mariette.  There were great rejoicings; and the bridegroom released
five- and-twenty prisoners in honour of the glad event.  Seven months afterwards, Mariette,
the Princess of the Cevennes, as they called her in derision, fell into the hands of the authorities,
where it was like to have gone hard with her.  But Castanet was a man of execution, and loved
his wife.  He fell on Valleraugue, and got a lady there for a hostage; and for the first and
last time in that war there was an exchange of prisoners.  Their daughter, pledge of some starry
night upon Mount Aigoal, has left descendants to this day.

Modestine and I--it was our last meal together--had a snack upon the top of St. Pierre, I on
a heap of stones, she standing by me in the moonlight and decorously eating bread out of my
hand.  The poor brute would eat more heartily in this manner; for she had a sort of affection
for me, which I was soon to betray.

It was a long descent upon St. Jean du Gard, and we met no one but a carter, visible afar off
by the glint of the moon on his extinguished lantern.

Before ten o'clock we had got in and were at supper; fifteen miles and a stiff hill in little
beyond six hours!

FAREWELL, MODESTINE!

On examination, on the morning of October 3rd, Modestine was pronounced unfit for travel. 
She would need at least two days' repose, according to the ostler; but I was now eager to reach
Alais for my letters; and, being in a civilised country of stage-coaches, I determined to sell
my lady friend and be off by the diligence that afternoon.  Our yesterday's march, with the
testimony of the driver who had pursued us up the long hill of St. Pierre, spread a favourable
notion of my donkey's capabilities.  Intending purchasers were aware of an unrivalled opportunity.
Before ten I had an offer of twenty-five francs; and before noon, after a desperate engagement,
I sold her, saddle and all, for five- and-thirty.  The pecuniary gain is not obvious, but I
had bought freedom into the bargain.

St Jean du Gard is a large place, and largely Protestant.  The maire, a Protestant, asked me
to help him in a small matter which is itself characteristic of the country.  The young women
of the Cevennes profit by the common religion and the difference of the language to go largely
as governesses into England; and here was one, a native of Mialet, struggling with English
circulars from two different agencies in London. I gave what help I could; and volunteered
some advice, which struck me as being excellent.

