But at last it came along, in the course of events, that they had a son named Featherhead,
who was destined to bring them a great deal of anxiety.  Nobody knows what the reason is, but
the fact was, that Master Featherhead was as different from all the former children of this
worthy couple as if he had been dropped out of the moon into their nest, instead of coming
into it in the general way.  Young Featherhead was a squirrel of good parts and a lively disposition,
but he was sulky and contrary and unreasonable, and always finding matter of complaint in everything
his respectable papa and mamma did. Instead of assisting in the cares of a family,--picking
up nuts and learning other lessons proper to a young squirrel,--he seemed to settle himself
from his earliest years into a sort of lofty contempt for the Nutcrackers, for Nutcracker Lodge,
and for all the good old ways and institutions of the domestic hole, which he declared to be
stupid and unreasonable, and entirely behind the times.  To be sure, he was always on hand
at meal-times, and played a very lively tooth on the nuts which his mother had collected, always
selecting the very best for himself; but he seasoned his nibbling with so much grumbling and
discontent, and so many severe remarks, as to give the impression that he considered himself
a peculiarly ill-used squirrel in having to "eat their old grub," as he very unceremoniously
called it.

Papa Nutcracker, on these occasions, was often fiercely indignant, and poor little Mamma Nutcracker
would shed tears, and beg her darling to be a little more reasonable; but the young gentleman
seemed always to consider himself as the injured party.

Now nobody could tell why or wherefore Master Featherhead looked upon himself as injured or
aggrieved, since he was living in a good hole, with plenty to eat, and without the least care
or labour of his own; but he seemed rather to value himself upon being gloomy and dissatisfied.
While his parents and brothers and sisters were cheerfully racing up and down the branches,
busy in their domestic toils, and laying up stores for the winter, Featherhead sat gloomily
apart, declaring himself weary of existence, and feeling himself at liberty to quarrel with
everybody and everything about him.  Nobody understood him, he said;--he was a squirrel of
a peculiar nature, and needed peculiar treatment, and nobody treated him in a way that did
not grate on the finer nerves of his feelings.  He had higher notions of existence than could
be bounded by that old rotten hole in a hollow tree; he had thoughts that soared far above
the miserable, petty details of every-day life, and he could not and would not bring down these
soaring aspirations to the contemptible toil of laying up a few chestnuts or hickory-nuts for
winter.

"Depend upon it, my dear," said Mrs. Nutcracker solemnly, "that fellow must be a genius."

"Fiddlestick on his genius!" said old Mr. Nutcracker; "what does he DO?"

"Oh, nothing, of course; that's one of the first marks of genius. Geniuses, you know, never
can come down to common life."

"He eats enough for any two," remarked old Nutcracker, "and he never helps to gather nuts."

"My dear, ask Parson Too-whit.  He has conversed with him, and quite agrees with me that he
says very uncommon things for a squirrel of his age; he has such fine feelings,--so much above
those of the common crowd."

"Fine feelings be hanged!" said old Nutcracker.  "When a fellow eats all the nuts that his
mother gives him, and then grumbles at her, I don't believe much in his fine feelings.  Why
don't he set himself about something?  I'm going to tell my fine young gentleman that, if he
doesn't behave himself, I'll tumble him out of the nest, neck and crop, and see if hunger won't
do something towards bringing down his fine airs."

But then Mrs. Nutcracker fell on her husband's neck with both paws, and wept, and besought
him so piteously to have patience with her darling, that old Nutcracker, who was himself a
soft-hearted old squirrel, was prevailed upon to put up with the airs and graces of his young
scapegrace a little longer; and secretly in his silly old heart he revolved the question whether
possibly it might not be that a great genius was actually to come of his household.

The Nutcrackers belonged to the old-established race of the Grays, but they were sociable,
friendly people, and kept on the best of terms with all branches of the Nutcracker family.
The Chipmunks of Chipmunk Hollow were a very lively, cheerful, sociable race, and on the very
best of terms with the Nutcracker Grays.  Young Tip Chipmunk, the oldest son, was in all respects
a perfect contrast to Master Featherhead.  He was always lively and cheerful, and so very alert
in providing for the family, that old Mr. and Mrs. Chipmunk had very little care, but could
sit sociably at the door of their hole and chat with neighbours, quite sure that Tip would
bring everything out right for them, and have plenty laid up for winter.

Now Featherhead took it upon him, for some reason or other, to look down upon Tip Chipmunk,
and on every occasion to disparage him in the social circle, as a very common kind of squirrel,
with whom it would be best not to associate too freely.

"My dear," said Mrs. Nutcracker one day, when he was expressing these ideas, "it seems to me
that you are too hard on poor Tip; he is a most excellent son and brother, and I wish you would
be civil to him."

"Oh, I don't doubt that Tip is GOOD enough," said Featherhead carelessly; "but then he is so
very common! he hasn't an idea in his skull above his nuts and his hole.  He is good-natured
enough, to be sure,--these very ordinary people often are good-natured,--but he wants manner;
he has really no manner at all; and as to the deeper feelings, Tip hasn't the remotest idea
of them.  I mean always to be civil to Tip when he comes in my way, but I think the less we
see of that sort of people the better; and I hope, mother, you won't invite the Chipmunks at
Christmas,--these family dinners are such a bore!"

"But, my dear, your father thinks a great deal of the Chipmunks; and it is an old family custom
to have all the relatives here at Christmas."

"And an awful bore it is!  Why must people of refinement and elevation be forever tied down
because of some distant relationship? Now there are our cousins the High-Flyers,--if we could
get them, there would be some sense in it.  Young Whisk rather promised me for Christmas; but
it's seldom now you can get a flying squirrel to show himself in our parts, and if we are intimate
with the Chipmunks it isn't to be expected."

"Confound him for a puppy!" said old Nutcracker, when his wife repeated these sayings to him.
"Featherhead is a fool.  Common, forsooth!  I wish good, industrious, painstaking sons like
Tip Chipmunk WERE common.  For my part, I find these uncommon people the most tiresome.  They
are not content with letting us carry the whole load, but they sit on it, and scold at us while
we carry them."

But old Mr. Nutcracker, like many other good old gentlemen squirrels, found that Christmas
dinners and other things were apt to go as his wife said, and his wife was apt to go as young
Featherhead said; and so, when Christmas came, the Chipmunks were not invited, for the first
time in many years.  The Chipmunks, however, took all pleasantly, and accepted poor old Mrs.
Nutcracker's awkward apologies with the best possible grace; and young Tip looked in on Christmas
morning with the compliments of the season and a few beech-nuts, which he had secured as a
great dainty.  The fact was, that Tip's little striped fur coat was so filled up and overflowing
with cheerful good-will to all, that he never could be made to understand that any of his relations
could want to cut him; and therefore Featherhead looked down on him with contempt, and said
he had no tact, and couldn't see when he was not wanted.

It was wonderful to see how, by means of persisting in remarks like these, young Featherhead
at last got all his family to look up to him as something uncommon.  Though he added nothing
to the family, and required more to be done for him than all the others put together,-- though
he showed not the smallest real perseverance or ability in anything useful,--yet somehow all
his brothers and sisters, and his poor foolish old mother, got into a way of regarding him
as something wonderful, and delighting in his sharp sayings as if they had been the wisest
things in the world.

But at last old papa declared that it was time for Featherhead to settle himself to some business
in life, roundly declaring that he could not always have him as a hanger-on in the paternal hole.

"What are you going to do, my boy?" said Tip Chipmunk to him one day. "We are driving now a
thriving trade in hickory-nuts, and if you would like to join us--"

"Thank you," said Featherhead; "but I confess I have no fancy for anything so slow as the hickory
trade; I never was made to grub and delve in that way."

The fact was that Featherhead had lately been forming alliances such as no reputable squirrel
should even think of.  He had more than once been seen going out evenings with the Rats of
Rat Hollow,--a race whose reputation for honesty was more than doubtful.  The fact was, further,
that old Longtooth Rat, an old sharper and money-lender, had long had his eye on Featherhead
as just about silly enough for their purposes,--engaging him in what he called a speculation,
but which was neither more nor less than downright stealing.

Near by the chestnut-tree where Nutcracker Lodge was situated was a large barn filled with
corn and grain, besides many bushels of hazel- nuts, chestnuts, and walnuts.  Now old Longtooth
proposed to young Featherhead that he should nibble a passage into this loft, and there establish
himself in the commission business, passing the nuts and corn to him as he wanted them.  Old
Longtooth knew what he was about in the proposal, for he had heard talk of a brisk Scotch terrier
that was about to be bought to keep the rats from the grain; but you may be sure he kept his
knowledge to himself, so that Featherhead was none the wiser for it.

"The nonsense of fellows like Tip Chipmunk!" said Featherhead to his admiring brothers and
sisters--"the perfectly stupid nonsense!  There he goes, delving and poking, picking up a nut
here and a grain there, when I step into property at once." 

Forgotten nothing? No, because I remember I have to dine at Gray's Inn. Yes, to be sure--23rd
of January. Grand Day.

Hilary Term. Falls on a Thursday. Would not forget it to save my election! Looking forward
to the port. Excellent port at Gray's Inn, I am told. Well, well, I shall be there! I don't
believe much in artificial memory, but to assist my recollection,
I have tied knots in all my pocket-handkerchiefs.

Wouldn't forget the fixture for a kingdom. Falls on a Thursday.  He
had a splendid hole in the midst of a heap of chestnuts, and he literally seemed to be rolling
in wealth; he never came home without showering lavish gifts on his mother and sisters; he
wore his tail over his back with a buckish air, and patronized Tip Chipmunk with a gracious
nod whenever he met him, and thought that the world was going well with him.

But one luckless day, as Featherhead was lolling in his hole, up came two boys with the friskiest,
wiriest Scotch terrier you ever saw. His eyes blazed like torches, and poor Featherhead's heart
died within him as he heard the boys say, "Now we'll see if we can't catch the rascal that
eats our grain."

Featherhead tried to slink out at the hole he had gnawed to come in by, but found it stopped.

"Oh, you are there, are you, mister?" said the boy.  "Well, you don't get out; and now for
a chase!"

And, sure enough, poor Featherhead ran distracted with terror up and down, through the bundles
of hay, between barrels, and over casks, but with the barking terrier ever at his heels, and
the boys running, shouting, and cheering his pursuer on.  He was glad at last to escape through
a crack, though he left half of his fine brush behind him; for Master Wasp the terrier made
a snap at it just as he was going, and cleaned all the hair off of it, so that it was bare
as a rat's tail.

Poor Featherhead limped off, bruised and beaten and bedraggled, with the boys and dog still
after him; and they would have caught him, after all, if Tip Chipmunk's hole had not stood
hospitably open to receive him.  Tip took him in, like a good-natured fellow as he was, and
took the best of care of him; but the glory of Featherhead's tail had departed for ever.  He
had sprained his left paw, and got a chronic rheumatism, and the fright and fatigue which he
had gone through had broken up his constitution, so that he never again could be what he had
been; but, Tip gave him a situation as under-clerk in his establishment, and from that time
he was a sadder and a wiser squirrel than he ever had been before.

THE HISTORY OF TIP-TOP

Under the window of a certain pretty little cottage there grew a great old apple-tree, which
in the spring had thousands and thousands of lovely pink blossoms on it, and in the autumn
had about half as many bright red apples as it had blossoms in the spring.

The nursery of this cottage was a little bower of a room, papered with mossy-green paper, and
curtained with white muslin; and here five little children used to come, in their white nightgowns,
to be dressed and have their hair brushed and curled every morning.

First, there were Alice and Mary, bright-eyed, laughing little girls, of seven and eight years;
and then came stout little Jamie, and Charlie; and finally little Puss, whose real name was
Ellen, but who was called Puss, and Pussy, and Birdie, and Toddlie, and any other pet name
that came to mind.

Now it used to happen, every morning, that the five little heads would be peeping out of the
window, together, into the flowery boughs of the apple-tree; and the reason was this.  A pair
of robins had built a very pretty, smooth-lined nest in a fork of the limb that came directly
under the window, and the building of this nest had been superintended, day by day, by the
five pairs of bright eyes of these five children.  The robins at first had been rather shy
of this inspection; but as they got better acquainted, they seemed to think no more of the
little curly heads in the window than of the pink blossoms about them, or the daisies and buttercups
at the foot of the tree.

All the little hands were forward to help; some threw out flossy bits of cotton,--for which,
we grieve to say, Charlie had cut a hole in the crib quilt,--and some threw out bits of thread
and yarn, and Allie ravelled out a considerable piece from one of her garters, which she threw
out as a contribution; and they exulted in seeing the skill with which the little builders
wove everything in.  "Little birds, little birds," they would say, "you shall be kept warm,
for we have given you cotton out of our crib quilt, and yarn out of our stockings."  Nay, so
far did this generosity proceed, that Charlie cut a flossy, golden curl from Toddlie's head
and threw it out; and when the birds caught it up the whole flock laughed to see Toddlie's
golden hair figuring in a bird's-nest.

When the little thing was finished, it was so neat, and trim, and workman-like, that the children
all exulted over it, and called it "our nest," and the two robins they called "our birds."
But wonderful was the joy when the little eyes, opening one morning, saw in the nest a beautiful
pale-green egg; and the joy grew from day to day, for every day there came another egg, and
so on till there were five little eggs; and then the oldest girl, Alice, said, "There are five
eggs:  that makes one for each of us, and each of us will have a little bird by-and-by;"--at
which all the children laughed and jumped for glee.

When the five little eggs were all laid, the mother-bird began to sit on them; and at any time
of day or night, when a little head peeped out of the nursery window, might be seen a round,
bright, patient pair of bird's eyes contentedly waiting for the young birds to come. It seemed
a long time for the children to wait; but every day they put some bread and cake from their
luncheon on the window-sill, so that the birds might have something to eat; but still there
she was, patiently sitting!

"How long, long, long she waits!" said Jamie impatiently.  "I don't believe she's ever going
to hatch."

"Oh, yes she is!" said grave little Alice.  "Jamie, you don't understand about these things;
it takes a long, long time to hatch eggs.  Old Sam says his hens sit three weeks;--only think,
almost a month!"

Three weeks looked a long time to the five bright pairs of little watching eyes; but Jamie
said the eggs were so much smaller than hens' eggs that it wouldn't take so long to hatch them,
he knew. Jamie always thought he knew all about everything, and was so sure of it that he rather
took the lead among the children.  But one morning, when they pushed their five heads out of
the window, the round, patient little bird-eyes were gone, and there seemed to be nothing in
the nest but a bunch of something hairy.

Upon this they all cried out, "O mamma, DO come here! the bird is gone and left her nest?"
And when they cried out, they saw five wide little red mouths open in the nest, and saw that
the hairy bunch of stuff was indeed the first of five little birds.

"They are dreadful-looking things," said Mary; "I didn't know that little birds began by looking
so badly."

"They seem to be all mouth," said Jamie. 

The Secretary of the Banquet, an actor, is anxiously hurrying about with a list, on which he
ticks off names.

The Secretary (to BOLDERO). So glad all you fellows have been able
to come. I've put you pretty well together, as you wished.

"Take care, Charlie," said his mamma; "we do not know enough to feed young birds.  We must
leave that to their papa and mamma, who probably started out bright and early in the morning
to get breakfast for them."

Sure enough, while they were speaking, back came Mr. and Mrs. Robin, whirring through the green
shadows of the apple tree; and thereupon all the five little red mouths flew open, and the
birds put something into each.

It was great amusement, after this, to watch the daily feeding of the little birds, and to
observe how, when not feeding them, the mother sat brooding on the nest, warming them under
her soft wings, while the father-bird sat on the topmost bough of the apple-tree and sang to
them.  In time they grew and grew, and, instead of a nest full of little red mouths, there
was a nest full of little, fat, speckled robins, with round, bright, cunning eyes, just like
their parents; and the children began to talk together about their birds.

"I'm going to give my robin a name," said Mary.  "I call him Brown- Eyes."

"And I call mine Tip-Top," said Jamie, "because I know he'll be a tip-top bird."

"And I call mine Singer," said Alice.

"I 'all mine Toddy," said little Toddlie, who would not be behindhand in anything that was
going on.

"Hurrah for Toddlie!" said Charlie; "hers is the best of all.  For my part, I call mine Speckle."

