Columbus, left idle in the absence of Bartholomew, listening to the continuous drip and patter
of the rain on the leaves and the water, begins to dream again--to dream of gold and geography.
Remembers that David left three thousand quintals of gold from the Indies to Solomon for the
decoration of the Temple; remembers that Josephus said it came from the Golden Chersonesus;
decides that enough gold could never have been got from the mines of Hayna in Espanola; and
concludes that the Ophir of Solomon must be here in Veragua and not there in Espanola.  It
was always here and now with Columbus; and as he moved on his weary sea pilgrimages these mythical
lands with their glittering promise moved about with him, like a pillar of fire leading him
through the dark night of his quest.

The rain came to an end, however, the sun shone out again, and activity took the place of dreams
with Columbus and with his crew.  He decided to found a settlement in this place, and to make
preparations for seizing and working the gold mines.  It was decided to leave a garrison of
eighty men, and the business of unloading the necessary arms and provisions and building houses
ashore was immediately begun.  Hawks' bells and other trifles were widely distributed among
the natives, with special toys and delicacies for the Quibian, in order that friendly relations
might be established from the beginning; and special regulations were framed to prevent the
possibility of any recurrence of the disasters that overtook the settlers of Isabella.

Such are the orderly plans of Columbus; but the Quibian has his plans too, which are found
to be of quite a different nature.  The Quibian does not like intruders, though he likes their
hawks' bells well enough; he is not quite so innocent as poor Guacanagari and the rest of them
were; he knows that gold is a thing coveted by people to whom it does not belong, and that
trouble follows in its train.  Quibian therefore decides that Columbus and his followers shall
be exterminated--news of which intention fortunately came to the ears of Columbus in time,
Diego Mendez and Rodrigo de Escobar having boldly advanced into the Quibian's village and seen
the warlike preparations.  Bartholomew, returning from his visit to the gold mines, was informed
of this state of affairs.  Always quick to strike, Bartholomew immediately started with an
armed force, and advanced upon the village so rapidly that the savages were taken by surprise,
their headquarters surrounded, and the Quibian and fifty of his warriors captured.  Bartholomew
triumphantly marched the prisoners back, the Quibian being entrusted to the charge of Juan
Sanchez, who was rowing him in a little boat. A voltaic battery whose positive and negative electrodes
are formed or deposited by a current from a separate source of electricity by electrolysis. On disconnection
the battery is ready to yield a current, in the reverse direction of that of the charging current.
The usual type has lead plates on one of which lead binoxide and
on the other of which spongy lead is formed.

The lead binoxide seems to be the negative element, and it also acts as the depolarizer. The spongy
lead is the positive electrode. On April 6th Diego Tristan was sent in charge
of a boat with a message to Bartholomew, who was to be left in command of the settlement; but
when Tristan had rounded the point at the entrance to the river and come in sight of the shore
he had an unpleasant surprise; the settlement was being savagely attacked by the resurrected
Quibian and his followers. The fight had lasted for three hours, and had been going badly against
the Spaniards, when Bartholomew and Diego Mendes rallied a little force round them and, calling
to Columbus's Irish dog which had been left with them, made a rush upon the savages and so
terrified them that they scattered.  Bartholomew with eight of the other Spaniards was wounded,
and one was killed; and it was at this point that Tristan's boat arrived at the settlement.
Having seen the fight safely over, he went on up the river to get water, although he was warned
that it was not safe; and sure enough, at a point a little farther up the river, beyond some
low green arm of the shore, he met with a sudden and bloody death.  A cloud of yelling savages
surrounded his boat hurling javelins and arrows, and only one seaman, who managed to dive into
the water and crawl ashore, escaped to bring the evil tidings.

The Spaniards under Bartholomew's command broke into a panic, and taking advantage of his wounded
condition they tried to make sail on their caravel and join the ships of Columbus outside;
but since the time of the rains the river had so much gone down that she was stuck fast in
the sand.  They could not even get a boat over the bar, for there was a heavy cross sea breaking
on it; and in the meantime here they were, trapped inside this river, the air resounding with
dismal blasts of the natives' conch-shells, and the natives themselves dancing round and threatening
to rush their position; while the bodies of Tristan and his little crew were to be seen floating
down the stream, feasted upon by a screaming cloud of birds.  The position of the shore party
was desperate, and it was only by the greatest efforts that the wounded Adelantado managed
to rally his crew and get them to remove their little camp to an open place on the shore, where
a kind of stockade was made of chests, casks, spars, and the caravel's boat.  With this for
cover, the Spanish fire-arms, so long as there was ammunition for them, were enough to keep
the natives at bay.

Outside the bar, in his anchorage beyond the green wooded point, the Admiral meanwhile was
having an anxious time.  One supposes the entrance to the river to have been complicated by
shoals and patches of broken water extending some considerable distance, so that the Admiral's
anchorage would be ten or twelve miles away from the camp ashore, and of course entirely hidden
from it.  As day after day passed and Diego Tristan did not return, the Admiral's anxiety increased.
Among the three caravels that now formed his little squadron there was only one boat remaining,
the others, not counting one taken by Tristan and one left with Bartholomew, having all been
smashed in the late hurricanes.  In the heavy sea that was running on the bar the Admiral dared
not risk his last remaining boat; but in the mean time he was cut off from all news of the
shore party and deprived of any means of finding out what had happened to Tristan.  And presently
to these anxieties was added a further disaster. It will be remembered that when the Quibian
had been captured fifty natives had been taken with him; and these were confined in the forecastle
of the Capitana and covered by a large hatch, on which most of the crew slept at night.  But
one night the natives collected a heap of big stones from the ballast of the ship, and piled
them up to a kind of platform beneath the hatch; some of the strongest of them got upon the
platform and set their backs horizontally against the hatch, gave a great heave and, lifted
it off.  In the confusion that followed, a great many of the prisoners escaped into the sea,
and swam ashore; the rest were captured and thrust back under the hatch, which was chained
down; but when on the following morning the Spaniards went to attend to this remnant it was
found that they had all hanged themselves.

This was a great disaster, since it increased the danger of the garrison ashore, and destroyed
all hope of friendship with the natives.  There was something terrible and powerful, too, in
the spirit of people who could thus to a man make up their minds either to escape or die; and
the Admiral must have felt that he was in the presence of strange, powerful elements that were
far beyond his control.  At any moment, moreover, the wind might change and put him on a lee
shore, or force him to seek safety in sea-room; in which case the position of Bartholomew would
be a very critical one.  It was while things were at this apparent deadlock that a brave fellow,
Pedro Ledesma, offered to attempt to swim through the surf if the boat would take him to the
edge of it.  Brave Pedro, his offer accepted, makes the attempt; plunges into the boiling surf,
and with mighty efforts succeeds in reaching the shore; and after an interval is seen by his
comrades, who are waiting with their boat swinging on the edge of the surf, to be returning
to them; plunges into the sea, comes safely through the surf again, and is safely hauled on
board, having accomplished a very real and satisfactory bit of service.

The story he had to tell the Admiral was as we know not a pleasant one --Tristan and his men
dead, several of Bartholomew's force, including the Adelantado himself, wounded, and all in
a state of panic and fear at the hostile natives.  The Spaniards would do nothing to make the
little fortress safer, and were bent only on escaping from the place of horror. Some of them
were preparing canoes in which to come out to the ships when the sea should go down, as their
one small boat was insufficient; and they swore that if the Admiral would not take them they
would seize their own caravel and sail out themselves into the unknown sea as soon as they
could get her floated over the bar, rather than remain in such a dreadful situation.  Columbus
was in a very bad way.  He could not desert Bartholomew, as that would expose him to the treachery
of his own men and the hostility of the savages.  He could not reinforce him, except by remaining
himself with the whole of his company; and in that case there would be no means of sending
the news of his rich discovery to Spain. There was nothing for it, therefore, but to break
up the settlement and return some other time with a stronger force sufficient to occupy the
country.  And even this course had its difficulties; for the weather continued bad, the wind
was blowing on to the shore, the sea was--so rough as to make the passage of the bar impossible,
and any change for the worse in the weather would probably drive his own crazy ships ashore
and cut off all hope of escape.

The Admiral, whose health was now permanently broken, and who only had respite from his sufferings
in fine weather and when he was relieved from a burden of anxieties such as had been continually
pressing on him now for three months, fell into his old state of sleeplessness, feverishness,
and consequent depression; and it, these circumstances it is not wonderful that the firm ground
of fact began to give a little beneath him and that his feet began to sink again into the mire
or quag of stupor. Of these further flounderings in the quag he himself wrote an account to
the King and Queen, so we may as well have it in his own words.

