VERA CRUZ. "This line of investment, through the chaparral and over the sand hills, was located
by Lieut. G. W. Smith, of the engineers, assisted by Lieut. G. B. McClellan, and a roadway
along the line was made under the supervision of these two lieutenants with the engineer company
and a party of several hundred soldiers". (p. 246.)

CERRO GORDO. "On the arrival of the engineer company and train at Plan del Rio [April 17th,
1847], Lieut. G. B. McClellan with a party of ten men reported to General Pillow, and Lieut.
G. W. Smith with [the rest of] his men and a portion of the train to General Twiggs".

"That night [17th] one 24-pounder and two 24-pound howitzers were placed in position on the
Atalaya, the battery being constructed under the supervision of Lieut. G. W. Smith, assisted
by Lieut. John G. Foster of the engineers, the location of the battery having been determined
by Capt. R. E. Lee". (p. 286.)

FROM PUEBLA TO THE VALLEY OF MEXICO. "Riley's brigade was guided by Capt. Lee, assisted by
Lieut. John G. Foster with ten men of the engineer company". (p. 287-8.)

"It was the rule with General Scott that one of the only two regular divisions should always
be in front. The engineer company headed the column. There was but one company of engineer
soldiers in the United States army". (p. 339.)

IN THE VALLEY OF MEXICO. "Beyond San Gregorio, the border of Xochimilco was skirted, and here
obstructions in the road were first encountered, a ditch having been dug across it, and large
stones rolled down from the hillside; but these obstacles were soon overcome by the engineer
company with a detail from the leading brigade, while the Mexicans, who were firing from the
heights above, were driven off by Colonel C. F. Smith's light battalion". (p. 355.)

CONTRERAS. "The engineer company was recalled from Worth, and with a working party of 500 men,
was ordered to make the road to Padierna practicable for artillery". (p. 362.)

"When Smith's brigade advanced as described, the engineer company, under Lieut. G. W. Smith,
went into action with the Third Infantry of that brigade". (p. 363.)

"General Smith moved to his right and front across the pedrigal, the Rifles, with the engineer
company at their head, leading".

"At 2:30 A. M. of the 20th [August, 1847], the troops under General Smith began to form and
take their places preparatory to the march which would bring them on Valencia's rear. Leading
the Rifles in front of the brigade was the engineer company". (p. 369.)

"The engineer company and the Rifles, being already in position in rear of the Mexican detachment,
then rose and firing a volley upon it, and Riley continuing on upon them, they faced about,
broke, and fled in the utmost precipitation to the main line in rear, pursued by Riley, the
Rifles and engineer company". (p. 70.)

CHURUBUSCO. "At Coyoacan General Scott joined, having previously ordered his columns to halt
there. Lieut. I. I. Stevens, ordered about the same time to advance on the direct road and
reconnoitre, was supported by the engineer company under Lieut. G. W. Smith. This reconnaissance
covered the Convent of San Pablo in the village of Churubusco". (p. 378-9.)

CHAPULTEPEC. "Battery No. 1 was constructed under Lieut. G. W. Smith's supervision, and Battery
No. 2 under Lieut. G. B. McClellan's. Details were made from Quitman's division to assist the
engineer company in the construction of these works, but although directed to report immediately
after dark they did not arrive until near 4 A. M., of the 12th; hence these works, which were
to have been finished before daylight, were hardly commenced by that time. The engineers were
however, indefatigable, and the batteries were completed rapidly". (p. 452.)

CITY OF MEXICO. "Lieut. G. W. Smith, with the company and train under his command, reported
to General Worth on the [San Cosme] causeway, [in the afternoon, September 13th], was informed
that the wounding of Lieut. Stevens made him [Smith] the senior engineer of the attack then
going on, and was instructed to go to the front, closely and carefully examine the state of
affairs, return as soon as practicable, and report the best method of conducting the attack".
He reported "that infantry alone on the left of the road could capture the gate, without artillery
and with little loss, by making its way through the houses. He was ordered to take the engineer
company and tools, return to the front, and carry out the plan proposed". (p. 476.)

"The Mexicans did not remain long in front of Worth; after dark the signal for retreat of one
command was given, and being heard by all, they left the buildings and scattered in all directions,
their officers being unable to restrain them. In a little while, however, they repaired to
the citadel. In one of the pavilions a council was held. Santa Anna presided, explained the
untoward incidents of the day, and asked the opinions of those present as to whether or not
the defence of the capital should be prolonged. There was discussion and opposition, but, Santa
Anna announced his decision in these emphatic words: 'I resolve that this night this city must
be evacuated'". (p. 480-1.)

"At 1 o'clock A. M. of the 14th commissioners from the municipal government of the city approached
the advanced post of Worth's command, were passed to his headquarters, and by him sent to General
Scott's headquarters in Tacubaya". Eternal issues may hang upon any one of them, but it has come and
gone before we can even think about it.

Nothing seems less within the possibility of our own keeping, yet nothing is more inclusive
of all other keeping. Therefore let us ask Him to keep them for us.
 The senior
engineer being directed to make known promptly any indication that the rumored evacuation was
incorrect, reported that everything indicated that the Mexican army had abandoned the city".
(p. 481.)

APPENDIX B.

PROMOTIONS OF ENLISTED MEN OF THE COMPANY.

      TEPE AGUALCO, MEXICO,
      May 4, 1847.

      Colonel JOSEPH G. TOTTEN,
      Chief Engineer,
      Washington City.

      SIR:

      "I have the honor to inform you that, on the 25th of April,
      First Sergeant Hastings of 'K' Company, Third Artillery,
      was, by order of General Worth, transferred to the Engineer
      Corps, subject to the approval of the Commander-in-Chief.

      "Sergeant Hastings has the reputation of being one of the
      best first sergeants in the army. He was for 7 or 8 years
      orderly sergeant in the Second Infantry. He is an intimate
      friend of Sergeant Everett;[6] is a well educated man, very
      intelligent; a remarkably fine looking soldier, a good drill
      sergeant.

      "By birth he is an Irishman--he came to this country quite
      young, and was brought up in Po'keepsie, N. Y.

      "We were very much in want of an orderly sergeant. I think
      there can be no doubt but we have secured a prize.

      "I would be glad if you would send a Sergeant's warrant for
      David H. Hastings. I hope they will be favorably
      acted upon.

      "My monthly return for April shows a total of sixty-two. My
      recommendations make, in the company, six sergeants, six
      corporals, one musician, twenty-three artificers and
      twenty-six second class privates".

      Very respectfully,
      Your obdt. servt.,
      GUS. W. SMITH,
      Lieut., Comdg. Engr. Co.

The foregoing recommendations were approved and the appointments were received whilst the company
was in the city of Puebla.

Soon after the war ended, Sergeants Hastings, Starr and Everett were promoted to be commissioned
officers in the "Old Regular Army" of the United States. Later, Sergeant Warren L. Lothrop
was given a commission in that army.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] Thornton S. Everett was property sergeant of the engineer company; had charge of its train
from the time of his enlistment in the company until its return to West Point; and, in addition,
had charge, in Mexico, of the general engineer train of the army.