More About Peggy, by Mrs G. de Horne Vaizey

This is another excellent book by Mrs de Horne Vaizey, dating from the end of the nineteenth
century.  While of course it is dated in its references to the world around its actors, yet
nevertheless their emotions are well-described, and no doubt are timeless.

In some ways the world around the people in the book is recognisable today, in a way which
a book written thirty or forty years before would not have been.  They have electricity, telephones,
trains, buses, and many other things that we still use regularly today.  Of course one major
difference is that few people today have servants, while middle-class and upper-class families
of the eighteen nineties would certainly have had them.

Today we travel by aeroplane, while in those days, and indeed for much of my own life, we travelled
by ship and train.  It was normal when travelling back to England from India to disembark at
Marseilles, and come on to the Channel Ports by train, perhaps even spending a week or two
in Italy, en route.  I have done it myself.

So it is not so very dated after all.  But I do think there is a real value in reading the
book.  Oddly enough, I think that a boy would benefit from reading any of the author's books,
more than a girl would, because it would give him an insight into the girlish mind which he
could not so easily otherwise obtain.  And as the young ladies of this book are trying to sort
out whom they should marry, matters do get quite girlish.  N.H.

MORE ABOUT PEGGY

BY MRS. GEORGE DE HORNE VAIZEY

CHAPTER ONE.

It was mid-January, and at home in England the ground was white with snow, but the sun shone
down with brazen glare on the blue waters of the Bay of Bengal, along which a P and O steamer
was gliding on its homeward way.  An awning was hoisted over the deck, but not a breath of
wind fluttered its borders, and the passengers lay back in their deck-chairs too limp and idle
to do more than flick over the pages of the books which they were pretending to read.  It was
only twenty-four hours since they had left Calcutta, and they were still in that early stage
of journeying when they looked askance at their fellows, decided that never, no, never had
Fate placed them in the midst of such uninteresting companions, and determined to keep severely
to themselves during the rest of the voyage.

The stout lady in the white pique stared stonily at the thin lady in drill, and decided that
she was an "Impossible Person," blissfully unconscious of the fact that before Aden was reached
she would pour all her inmost secrets into the "Impossible Person's" ear, and weep salt tears
at parting from her at Marseilles.  The mother of the sickly little girls in muslin swept them
away to the other end of the deck when she discovered them playing with the children who inhabited
the next state-room, and the men stared at one another stolidly across the smoking-room.  The
more experienced travellers knew that ere a week had passed the scene would be changed, that
a laughing babel of voices would succeed the silence, and deck sports and other entertainments
take the place of inaction; but the younger members of the party saw no such alleviation ahead,
and resigned themselves to a month of frosty solitude.

The ladies dozed amongst their cushions, but the men strolled up and down the deck smoking
their cigars with that air of resigned dejection which seems to be the monopoly of Englishmen
of the upper classes.  The quick movements, animated gestures, and sparkling eyes of the Southerner
were all lacking in these strongly built, well-dressed, well-set-up men, who managed to conceal
all signs of animation so successfully that no one looking at them could have believed that
one was the wit of his regiment, another celebrated throughout an Indian province for his courage
and daring, and a third an expectant bridegroom!

About eleven o'clock a diversion was made on the upper deck by the appearance of two more travellers--an
elegant-looking woman accompanied by her husband, who came forward in search of the deck-chairs
which had been placed in readiness for their use.  They were not a young couple by any means,
yet the eyes of the passengers followed their movements with interest, for they were not only
exceedingly good to look upon, but had an air of enjoyment in their surroundings and in each
other's society which is unfortunately not universal among middle-aged couples.  The man was
tall and slight, with the weather-beaten, dried-up skin which tells of a long residence under
burning suns, and he had a long nose, and eyes which appeared almost startlingly blue against
the brown of his skin. They were curious eyes, with a kind of latent fierceness in their good
humour, but just now they shone in holiday mood, and softened into tenderness as he waited
on his wife.

No sooner had this interesting couple seated themselves in their chairs than a chirrup of welcome
sounded in their ears, and a beaming little figure in grey alpaca darted forward to greet them.
Though the majority of passengers in an ocean-going boat may be unsociably inclined at the
start, there are always one or two exceptions to the rule to be found, in the shape of ultra-friendly
souls, who, willy-nilly, insist upon playing the part of devoted friends to some unresponsive
stranger, and the old lady in question was one of these exceptions.  She had begun operations
the night before by quarrelling violently over the possession of a cabin, had then proceeded
to borrow half-a-dozen necessities of the toilet which she had forgotten, and had advanced
to the length of terms of endearment before the bell sounded for dinner.  It was only natural
then that she should exhibit a breathless anxiety to know how her new friend had fared during
the night, and the invalid braced herself to bear the attack with composure.

"So glad to see you up this morning, dear!" she cried.  "I was afraid you might be ill, but
I asked your daughter about you, and was so relieved to hear good news.  We met on deck before
breakfast, and had a nice, long talk.  Such a sweet creature!  So different from the fast,
loud-voiced specimens one meets nowadays.  Quite an old-world girl, I declare; sweet, and mild,
and gentle...  `A violet by a mossy dell, half-hidden from the eye'--as dear old What's-his-name
has it!  It does me good to be with her, and feel her restful influence.  You are to be congratulated
on owning such a daughter!"

"Thank you!" said the mild girl's mother softly.  She dropped her eyelids, and twisted the
rings round and round on her slender fingers, as if for some reason she did not wish to meet
the speaker's eye, while her husband rose suddenly and walked to the end of the deck.  When
he came back, five minutes later, he remarked to his wife that there was no depending on weather
signals nowadays; at which innocent remark she laughed so heartily that the friendly old lady
instantly put down hysterics as the probable explanation of her delicate appearance, and felt
a chilling of sympathy.  In a few minutes she took herself off to some other friends, and the
husband and wife whispered smilingly together, and, after the invariable custom on shipboard,
fell to criticising their companions.

Perhaps the most striking figure which met their eyes was that of a young man some thirty years
of age, whose walk and carriage plainly marked him out as an officer in the army.  A certain
pallor showing through his tanned skin made it seem possible that he was returning home on
sick-leave, but he was a handsome fellow all the same with aquiline features and a heavy moustache,
and he scanned the scene around him with an air of languid patronage, as one who felt that
the P and O Company might feel themselves honoured to have the privilege of accommodating his
noble self, and expected that even the ocean should show its best aspect for his benefit. 
Of the passengers by whom he was surrounded the lordly stranger appeared entirely oblivious,
not deigning to throw even a glance in their direction; and so strange a thing is human nature
that the feminine portion, at least, felt their interest heightened by this indifference, and
were increasingly anxious to make his acquaintance. It did not seem likely that their desire
would be granted on this occasion, at least, for as the morning wore on and the heat of the
sun grew ever stronger and stronger, the object of their admiration took counsel with himself,
and decided that it would be wisdom to retire within the shelter of the reading-room, and pass
the hour before lunch in the company of a novel which he had brought on board with his effects.
He had carried the book upstairs earlier in the morning, and placed it in a corner of the room
where he believed it would be safe from alien hands; but, alas! the best-laid plans "gang aft
a-gley," and when he went in search, he met with a shock of disappointment.  The book had been
appropriated, and the thief was seated in the very corner which he had destined for himself,
bending over the pages with every appearance of absorption.  Her face was hidden from view,
and all that could be seen was a trim little figure in a trim white gown, a pair of trim little
feet, a sleek brown head, and a well-rounded cheek.  No one could deny that it was a pleasing
figure, but the lordly stranger was too much ruffled in his feelings to be influenced by appearances.
His manner was perhaps a trifle less haughty than it would have been, had the thief taken the
shape of an elderly gentleman, but he never wavered in his intention, and only stopped for
an imperceptible moment in his progress up the room to demand a return of the volume.

"Excuse me.  Ah!  My book, I think!  Sorry to interrupt you, but--"

The young lady laid down the book and lifted her face to his.  A flicker as of mingled surprise
and pleasure passed over her features as she saw who it was that stood before her, but she
showed not the slightest sign of discomfiture.

"I beg a thousand pardons!" she said, and inclined her head in such a bow as an empress might
bestow on a blundering and ignorant supplicant. It was such a very grand air for such a small
person that the big officer drew a breath of surprise, and gazed down with a startled interest.
The girl's features were delicately modelled; the brows might have been drawn with a pencil,
so clear and perfect was the arch which they described, and the brilliant hazel eyes met his
with a mocking glance.  For almost the first time in his life a spasm of discomfiture seized
him, a struggling suspicion that his conduct had not been altogether above reproach.  He stood
with the book in his hand, hesitating, uncertain.

"If you would care to read it, pray keep it!  I shall be most happy to lend it to you."

The girl waved her hand with a gracious patronage.

"Not for the world, until you have finished!  When you have no more use for it yourself, perhaps
you will be good enough to renew the offer. Meantime, there are plenty of other books.  The
library seems very large."

"I make a point of never reading the ship's books.  You never--aw--know who has had them last!"
drawled the stranger, sweeping a scathing glance over the well-filled shelves; "and, as a rule,
they are in such shocking condition.  People seem to take a malign satisfaction in tearing
out the most important pages, so that, after wading through a whole volume, you are left in
uncertainty as to what really happened."

"But sometimes that is a blessing in disguise, for by exercising a little imagination you can
make the story end as you like, and spare yourself the pain of disappointment.  I rarely read
a book without reflecting how much better I could have finished it myself," remarked the young
lady, with an assurance which evoked a smile on the officer's impassive countenance.

"You don't look much like an authoress," he said, surveying the dainty little figure approvingly,
and calling up a mental picture of the spectacled and cadaverous female invariably associated
with a literary career in the masculine mind.  "I am afraid my imagination will hardly stand
such a strain; but books are the only refuge for the destitute on a voyage, especially during
the first few days, when you find yourself shut up with a herd of strangers whom you have never
met before in the course of your life.  There is only one thing to do under the circumstances,
and that is to lie low, and speak to no one until you have found your bearings and discovered
who is who.  If you go about talking to strangers, you can never tell in what sort of a set
you may land yourself."

"You can't, indeed!  It's appalling to think of!" agreed the young lady, with a dramatic gesture
of dismay which brought her little ringed hands together in decided emphasis.  "For my own
part I get on well enough," she proceeded, contradicting herself with unruffled composure,
"for I can find something interesting in all of my fellow-creatures; but I feel it for my maid!
The couriers and valets are so very exclusive that she has been snubbed more than once because
of our inferior station. Naturally she feels it keenly.  I observe that those people are most
sensitive about their position who have the least claim to distinction; but as she does my
hair better than any one else, and is an admirable dressmaker, I am, of course, anxious to
keep her happy."

The big man looked down with a suspicious glance.  Through his not very keen sensibilities
there had penetrated the suspicion that the small person in the white frock was daring to smile
at him and amuse herself at his expense; but his suspicion died at once before the glance of
infantile sweetness which met his own.  Pretty little thing! there was something marvellously
taking in her appearance.  For one moment, as she had spoken of inferior station, he had had
an uneasy fear lest he had made the acquaintance of some vulgar upstart, with whom he could
not possibly associate.  But no!  If ever the signs of race and breeding were distinguishable
in personal appearance, they were so in the case of the girl before him.  A glance at the head
in its graceful setting, the delicate features, the dainty hands and feet, was sufficient to
settle the question in the mind of a man who prided himself on being an adept in such matters.
To his own surprise, he found himself floundering through a complimentary denial of her own
estimate of herself, and being rescued from a breakdown by a gracious acknowledgment.

"Praise," murmured the young lady sweetly--"praise from Major Darcy is praise indeed!  When
`Haughty Hector' deigns to approve--"

The big man jumped as if he had been shot, and turned a flushed, excited face upon her.

"Wh-at?" he gasped.  "What do you say?  You know me--you know my old home name!  Who are you,
then?  Who can you be?"

The girl rose to her feet and stood before him.  The top of her smooth little head barely reached
his shoulders, but she held herself with an air of dignity which gave an appearance of far
greater height.  For one long minute they stared at one another in silence; then she stretched
out her hand and laid it frankly in his own.

"Why, I'm Peggy!" she cried.  "Don't you remember me?  I'm Peggy Saville!"

CHAPTER TWO.

Hector Darcy knitted his brows, and started in bewilderment at the little figure before him.
"Peggy Saville!" he repeated blankly.  "No, you cannot mean it!  The little girl who had lessons
with Rob, and who saved Rosalind's life at the time of the fire?  The little girl I met at
The Larches with the pale face, and the pink sash, and the pigtail down her back?"

"The self-same Peggy--at your service!"--and Miss Saville swept a curtesy in which dignity
mingled with mischief.  Her eyes were sparkling with pleasure, and Major the Honourable Hector
Darcy--to give that gentleman his full title--looked hardly less radiant than herself.  Here
was a piece of luck--to make the acquaintance of an interesting and attractive girl at the
very beginning of a voyage, and then to discover in her an intimate friend of the family! 
True, he himself had seen little of her personally, but the name of Peggy Saville was a household
word with his people, and one memorable Christmas week, which they had spent together at The
Larches in years gone by, might be safely accepted as the foundation of a friendship.

"Of course I remember you!" he cried.  "We had fine romps together, you and I.  You danced
me off my feet one night, and gave me my death of cold putting up a snow man the next day.
I have never forgotten Peggy Saville, but you have changed so much that I did not recognise
you, and I did not see your name."

"I noticed yours in the list of passengers, and then I looked out for you, and recognised you
at once.  There was a Darcy look about the back of your head which could not be mistaken! 
I meant to ask father to introduce you to me after lunch, but the book has taken his place.
So you think I have changed!  I have `growed,' of course, and the pigtail has disappeared;
but in other respects there is not so much alteration as could be desired.  My father tells
me, on an average three times a day, that I shall remain the same `Peggy-Pickle' all my life."

"That sounds bad!  So far as my remembrance goes, you used to be a mischievous little person,
always getting into scrapes and frightening the wits out of your companions."

"Ah!" sighed Miss Saville dolorously.  "Ah-h!"  She shook her head with a broken-hearted air,
and looked so overwhelmed with compunction for her misdeeds, that if it had not been for a
treacherous dimple that defied her control, the major would have felt remorseful at awakening
a painful memory.  As it was he laughed heartily, and cried aloud:

"When you look like that, I can see you again with the pigtail and the white frock, just as
you looked that Christmas half-a-dozen years ago! Your father is right--you have not changed
a bit from the little Peggy I used to know!"

"I'm a full-fledged young lady now, Major Darcy, and have been `out' for three whole years.
I've grown into `Miss Saville,' or at the very least into `Mariquita.'"

"But not to me.  I'm part of the old times; Rosalind's brother--Rob's brother--you cannot treat
me like a stranger.  Peggy you have been, and Peggy you must be, so far as I am concerned,
for I could not recognise you by another name.  Sit down and tell me all about yourself.  How
long have you been in India, and where are you bound for now?"

"I came out three years ago, when I was eighteen, and now we are going home for good.  I'm
so glad, for though I've enjoyed India immensely, there is no place like the old country. 
Mother is not strong, so we are going to stay on the Continent until it is warm enough to return
safely. We shall land at Marseilles, stay a month in the Riviera, and gradually work our way
homewards.  When I say home, of course you understand that we have no home as yet, but we are
going to look round for a house as soon as possible.  We know exactly what we want, so it ought
to be easy to get it.  A dear old place in the country--the real country, not a suburb, but
within half an hour's rail of town.  A house covered with roses and creepers, and surrounded
by a garden.  Oh! think of seeing English grass again--the green, green grass, and walking
along between hedges of wild roses and honeysuckle; and the smell of the earth after it has
rained, and all the little leaves are glistening with water--do you remember--oh! do you remember?"
cried Peggy, clasping her eager hands, and gazing at her companion with a sudden glimmer of
tears which rose from very excess of happiness.  "I don't say so to mother, because it would
seem as if I had not been happy abroad; but I ache for England!  Sometimes in the midst of
the Indian glare I used to have a curious wild longing, not for the Country... that was always
there--but for the dull, old Tottenham Court Road!  Don't laugh!  It was no laughing matter.
You know how dull that road looks, how ugly and grimy, and how grey, grey, grey in rainy weather?
Well, amidst the glare of Eastern surroundings that scene used to come back to me as something
so thoroughly, typically English, that its very dreariness made the attraction.  I have stood
in the midst of palm and aloes, and just longed my very heart out for Tottenham Court Road!"

Major Darcy laughed and shrugged his shoulders.

"I know the feeling--had it myself; but you will lose it soon enough. In the East you gasp
and long for England; in England you shudder and long for the East.  It's the way of the world.
What you haven't got seems always the thing you want; but no sooner have you got it than you
realise its defects.  England will strike you as intolerably dreary when you are really there."

Peggy shook her head obstinately.

"Never!  I was ablaze with patriotism before I left, and I have been growing worse and worse
all the time I have been abroad.  And it will not be dreary!  What is the use of imagining
disagreeable things?  You might just as well imagine nice ones while you are about it.  Now
I imagine that it is going to be a perfect summer--clear, and fine, and warm, with the delicious
warmth which is so utterly different from that dreadful India scald.  And father and I are
going to turn gardeners, and trot about all day long tending our plants.  Did I tell you that
we were going to have a garden?  Oh yes--a beauty!--with soft turf paths, bordered with roses,
and every flower that blooms growing in the borders.  We will have an orchard, too, where the
spring bulbs come up among the grass; and I've set my heart on a moat.  It has been the dream
of my life to have a moat.  `Mariquita of the Moated Grange!'...  Sounds well, doesn't it?
It would be good for me to have an address like that, for I possess a strong instinct of fitness,
and make a point of living up to my surroundings."  Peggy lay back in her seat and coughed
in the languid, Anglo-Indian fashion which was her latest accomplishment.  "I suppose you don't
happen to know the sort of house that would suit us?"

"Within half an hour of London?  No!  That is too much to ask.  It's a Chateau en Espagne,
Peggy, and not to be had in Middlesex.  You will have to do like the rest of the world, and
settle down in a red brick villa, with a plot of uncultivated land out of which to manufacture
your garden.  There will be neither green sward nor festoons of roses; but, on the other hand,
the house will contain every modern convenience, and there will be hot and cold water, electric
light--"

"Don't!" cried Peggy hastily.  She lifted her hand with a gesture of entreaty, and Hector was
startled to see how seriously she had taken his jesting words.  "Don't laugh at me!  I've been
dreaming of it so long, and it's such a dear, dear dream.  Do you realise that in all my life
I have never had a permanent home?  It has been a few years here, a few years there, with always
the certainty of another change ahead; but now we mean to find a real home, where we can take
refuge, with all our possessions around us.  Mother and I have talked about it until we can
see every nook and corner, and it is waiting for us somewhere--I know it is!  So don't be sceptical,
and pretend that it is not!  We won't talk about houses any more, but you shall tell me your
own news.  It is four years since I saw Rob and Rosalind, as they were abroad for the year
before I left England.  But you have been home since then, I know."

"Yes; only eighteen months ago.  I should not be back so soon, but I've had an attack of fever,
and am taking a few months off, to pull myself together.  I'm glad our home-goings have taken
place at the same time. What do you want to know?  My people were much as usual when I saw
them last; but the mater has not been at all well for some months back.  She has had to leave
the house in charge of her sister, Mrs Everett, and go off to some baths in Germany for a course
of treatment, and I believe she will not return to England until the autumn.  Rosalind--"

"Yes--Rosalind?"

The major's handsome face softened into a smile, which showed that the subject of his young
sister was pleasant to his mind.

"Rosalind," he said slowly, "is a circumstance--decidedly a circumstance to be taken into account!
We look to her to redeem the fortunes of the family, and the mater considers nobody under a
royal duke worthy of her acceptance.  She is certainly a lovely girl, and a more agreeable
one into the bargain than I expected her to turn out.  She was a spoiled, affected child, but
she took a turn for the better after her accident. My parents, I believe,"--Major Darcy looked
at his companion with a brightening glance,--"my parents ascribe a great part of the change
to your beneficial influence."

Peggy's cheeks flushed with pleasure, for she had by no means outgrown her childish love of
a compliment; but she shrugged her shoulders, and replied in a tone of would-be indifference:

"Plus the wholesome discipline of having her hair cut short.  Poor Rosalind!  Never shall I
forget her confiding to me that she was `wesigned to becoming a hideous fwight,' while all
the time she was admiring her profile in the mirror and arranging her curls to hide the scar.
We had been on very distant terms before that accident; but when we were both convalescent
we took courage, and spoke faithfully to one another on the subject of our several failings.
I told Rosalind, in effect, that she was a conceited doll, and she replied that I was a consequential
minx.  It cleared the air so much that we exchanged vows of undying friendship, which have
been kept to the extent of some half- a-dozen letters a year.  I know much more about Rosalind
than I do about Rob.  Please tell me all you can about Rob!"

"Oh, Rob, you know, was always a boor," said Rob's brother lightly, "and, upon my word, he
is a boor still!  He did remarkably well at Oxford, as no doubt you heard, and then went travelling
about for a couple of years through a number of uncomfortable and insanitary lands. He has
always been a great gardener and naturalist, and he brought home some new varieties of shrubs
and flowers, out of which he makes a fair amount of money.  His principal craze, however, as
I understand it, was to add to his knowledge on the engrossing subject of Beetles.  He has
written some papers on them since his return, and they tell me he has made his mark, and will
soon be considered a leading authority.  I must say, however, that the whole thing seems to
me of supreme unimportance. What on earth can it matter whether there are ten varieties of
beetles or ten thousand?  Rob is just the sort of hard-headed, determined fellow who could
have made himself felt in whatever role he had taken up, and it seems hard luck that he should
have chosen one so extremely dull and unremunerative."  Hector leant his head against the wall
with an air of patronising disgust, for his own profession being one of avowed readiness to
kill as many as possible of his fellow-creatures, he felt a natural impatience with a man who
trifled away his time in the study of animal nature.  He sighed, and turned to his companion
in an appeal for sympathy.  "Hard lines, isn't it, when a fellow has society practically at
his feet, that he should run off the lines like that?"

"De-plorable!" said Peggy firmly, and her expression matched the word. She shook her head and
gazed solemnly into space, as if overpowered by the littleness of the reflection.  "Poor Rob--he
is incorrigible!  I suppose, then, he doesn't care a bit for dinners, or dances, or standing
against a wall at a reception, or riding in a string in the Park, but prefers to pore over
his microscope, and roam over the country, poking about for specimens in the ditches and hedgerows?"

"Exactly.  The mater can hardly induce him to go out, and he is never so happy as when he can
get on a flannel shirt and transform himself into a tramp.  You remember Rob's appearance in
his school-days?  He is almost as disreputable to-day, with his hair hanging in that straight
heavy lock over his forehead, and his shoulders bowed by poring over that everlasting microscope."

A light passed swiftly across Peggy's face, and her eyes sparkled.  One of the most trying
features of a long absence from home is that the face which one most longs to remember has
a way of growing dim, and elusively refusing to be recalled.  In those hot Indian days, Peggy
had often seated herself in her mental picture gallery, and summoned one friend after another
before her: the vicar, with his kindly smiles; Mrs Asplin, with the loving eyes, and the tired
flush on the dear, thin cheeks; Esther, with her long, solemn visage; Mellicent, plump and
rosy; Rex, with his handsome features and budding moustache; Oswald, immaculately blond--they
could all be called up at will, and would remain contentedly in their frames until such times
as she chose to dismiss them; but Rob's face refused to be recalled in the same easy fashion.
Now and again, from out the gloom, a pair of stormy eyes would flash upon her, or she would
catch her breath as a stooping figure seemed to rise suddenly beside the palm-trees; but Rob,
as a whole, had refused to be recalled, until at his brother's words his image had appeared
before her in so vivid and characteristic a guise that it seemed almost as if Rob himself stood
by her side.  She drew a long breath, and chimed in with an eager--

"Yes, yes!  And his great long arms waving about--I never knew any one with such long arms
as Rob.  And a pair of thick, nailed boots, with all four tabs sticking out, and a tie slipping
round to the back of his neck.  It's exactly like him.  I can see him now!"

Hector Darcy shrugged his shoulders.

"Don't, please!  It's not a pleasant prospect.  I try to let distance lend enchantment to the
view, for it's bad enough having to go about with him when I am at home.  The fellow would
not be bad-looking, if he took a little care of himself; but he is absolutely regardless of
appearances."

"He must have an idea that there are other things of more importance. He was always a ridiculous
boy!" murmured Miss Saville sweetly.  The major glanced at her with a suspicious eye, once
more disturbed by the suspicion that she was being sarcastic at his expense, but Peggy was
gazing dreamily through the opposite windows, her delicately cut profile thrown into relief
against the dark wood of the background.  She looked so young, so fragile and innocent, that
it seemed quite criminal to have harboured such a suspicion.  He was convinced that she was
far too sweet and unassuming a girl to laugh at such a superior person as Major Hector Darcy.

CHAPTER THREE.

A fortnight later the passengers on board the steamer were congratulating themselves on having
accomplished half their journey, and being within ten days' sail of England.  The waters of
the Mediterranean surrounded them, clear and blue as the sky overhead, a healthful breeze supplanted
the calm, and the spirits of the travellers rose ever higher and higher.  Homeward bound is
a very different thing from outward bound, and every soul on board had some dear one waiting
for them in Old England, some one who had loved them faithfully through the years of absence,
and who was even now counting the days until their return.  The mothers boasted to each other
concerning the doings of the children whom they had left at school, and in the midst of laughter
turned aside suddenly to conceal their tears; the men thought lovingly of the wives from whom
they had parted years before; and one or two radiant bridegrooms exhibited photographs of the
brides whom they were going to carry back to cheer their exile.

After a fortnight at sea the company on board this particular steamer might be said to be divided
into four distinct cliques--namely, members of military and diplomatic services, Civil Service
employees, second- class passengers, and--Miss Mariquita Saville.  The young lady must be taken
as representing a class by herself, because while each of the other divisions kept, or was
kept, severely to itself, Peggy mixed impartially with all, and was received with equal cordiality
wherever she turned.  The little person had made such a unique position for herself that there
is no doubt that if a vote had been taken to discover the most popular person on board, she
would have headed the list by a large majority; but whether her unfailing affability was due
more to pride or humility, Hector Darcy, among others, found it difficult to determine.

Major Darcy had attached himself to the Saville party with a determination hardly to be expected
in so languid a man, had even lowered his dignity to the extent of asking the fellow-passenger
who occupied the coveted seat at table to exchange places with himself, so that breakfast,
lunch, and dinner found him seated at Peggy's side, finding ever-fresh surprises in her society.
Sometimes the surprise was the reverse of pleasant, for Miss Saville was a prickly little person,
and upon occasion would snap him up in the middle of an argument with a lack of respect which
took away his breath.  When any difference arose between them, she never seemed to have a shadow
of a doubt that she was in the right, and as Hector was equally positive about his own position,
relationships frequently grew so strained that Peggy would rise from the table half-way through
the meal, and stalk majestically out of the saloon.  She invariably repented her hastiness
by the time she reached the deck, for dessert was the part of the meal which she most enjoyed,
so that when the major followed ten minutes later on, bearing a plate of carefully selected
fruit as a peace-offering, he was sure of a gracious welcome.

"But you must never contradict me on Tuesdays, I can't support it!" she said on one of these
occasions, as he seated himself beside her, and watched her raising the grapes to her lips
with her little finger cocked well in the air.  "Especially when I am in the right, as you
must admit--"

"I admit nothing; but I pray and beseech you not to begin the discussion over again.  I am
nine years older than you, and must surely be supposed to know a little more."

"If you only realised it, that is just the reason why you don't.  The world advances so rapidly
with every decade, that you of the last generation have necessarily enjoyed fewer opportunities
than myself and my contemporaries, and are therefore behind the times.  It's not your fault,
of course, and I don't advance it in any way as a reproach, but still--"

Major Darcy stared at her, struck dumb by an insinuation of age which was even more hurtful
than that of inferior knowledge; but before he had recovered himself sufficiently to reply,
his companion had finished her dessert, presented him calmly with the empty plate, and risen
to take her departure.

"Where are you going?" he queried in an injured tone; for it was one of his pet grievances
that the girl refused to be appropriated by himself whenever he wished to enjoy her society.
"Can't you sit still for an hour at least?  You have been rushing about all the morning.  Surely
now you can take a rest!"

But Peggy shook her head.

"Impossible!  I'm engaged straight away from now until tea-time.  The nurse of those peevish
little Mortons is worn out, for the mother is ill, and can't help her at all, so I promised
to amuse the children for an hour after lunch while she takes a nap.  Then I have to play a
game of halma with old Mr Schute, and help Miss Ranger to dress and come on deck.  She thinks
she can manage it to-day, and it will do her a world of good to get some fresh air."

"But why need you fag yourself for all these people?  Surely there is some one else who can
do it.  Can you not send your maid to look after the children, at least, and take that hour
to yourself?"

Peggy smiled with complacent satisfaction.

"They would scream themselves hoarse.  Of all the spoilt, bad-tempered little ruffians you
ever encountered, they are the worst, and there is not a soul on board who can manage them
except myself.  Yesterday they got so cross that I was almost in despair, and it was only by
pretending to be a wild buffalo, and letting them chase me and dig pencils into me for spears,
that I could keep them in any sort of order.  When they grew tired of the buffalo, I changed
into a musical-box, and they ground tunes out of me until my throat was as dry as leather.
It kept us going for a long time, however, for they all wanted to hear their own favourite
tunes, and were so charmed with the variations.  I wish you could have heard the variations!
I was so proud of them.  The scales ran up and down just like a real musical-box, the tremolo
and arpeggio chords were fine, and as for the trills, they were simply entr-r- rancing!"  Peggy
rolled the `r' with a self-satisfied enjoyment which made Hector laugh in spite of his displeasure,
and finished up with an explanatory, "I could never expect Parker to pose as a wild buffalo.
She has far too much sense of dignity!"

"Oh, of course, I acknowledge that you have a wonderful knack with children!  Every one sees
that," allowed Hector unwillingly.  "It is very kind and delightful of you to bother about
other people as you do; but what I complain of is the extent of your services, and--aw--the
nature of the recipients!  Miss Ranger, for instance, is an impossible person.  What she calls
herself I don't know, but she doesn't even begin to be a lady.  I heard her talking the other
day, and she has a vile accent, and not an `h' in her composition."

"She has enough responsibilities without them at present, poor soul, so perhaps it's just as
well.  She has been ill ever since we started, and has no friend nor servant to look after
her.  She fell on the floor in a faint one day while she was trying to dress, and lay there
helpless until the stewardess happened to go in and find her.  That sort of thing sha'n't happen
twice on board this ship, if I can help it!" cried Peggy with a straightening of the slim little
back which seemed to add a couple of inches to her height, and a toss of the head which convinced
Major Darcy that it was no use arguing further on this point.  It was astonishing how often
he was forced to retire from post to post in arguments with Miss Saville, and the consciousness
that this was the case gave him courage to enter yet a third protest.

