At this moment an old Indian woman, the mother of the boy whom Nanking had desired to amuse,
threw herself between the upraised spears and the laughing widow's son. She shouted something
very earnestly, and then stretched herself at Nanking's feet. All the other Indians also flung
themselves down in fear or revulsion of feeling, and some crawled in another minute to where
the burning coals were strewn over the sward, and with their fingers or with tree-boughs returned
these coals to the fire, while others quenched the fire itself with water from the torrent.
Nanking had never lost his temper. He put the young Indian down and kissed him, and shook hands
with one after another, who only rose as he approached them with a kind countenance. They unbound
his hands and overwhelmed him with attentions and professions, and placed their fingers on
their foreheads significantly, still looking at him.

"Well," exclaimed Nanking, "I hope they also don't take me for a big idiot! No, they do not.
It is only a part of the queer game."

It was now growing late in the day, and Nanking wanted some food. The Susquehannocks produced
nuts, venison, fish, hominy, and succotash. Their formerly savage countenances beamed confidence
and consideration. Nanking expressed his wishes by signs. He wanted a great, long-legged, long-winged
bird, a stork, to carry back alive to New Amstel. The Indian chiefs conferred, and finally
replied, by signs and assurances, that they had such a bird, but that it would take two whole
days to procure one.

"Very well," thought Nanking, "I may as well stay here until I get it, and not return home
like a fool. My mother will trust in God, if not in Saint Nicholas, and I trust in both. Elsje
will not forget me at any time!"

All the next day Nanking played ball and bandy with the Susquehannock boys, and taught them
jack-stones and how to make a shuttlecock. They put eagle's feathers in his hair, and the old
men adopted him into their tribe. On the third day the absent Indians returned with a stork.
It was a white stork with a red bill and plenty of stork's neck, but short legs. Nanking doubted
if it could stand on one leg on the top of a chimney and feed worms around to the young stork
family, but he felt very proud and happy. The whole tribe seemed to have assembled to see Nanking
go away. He had become the friend of all the boys and women and the protégé of the tall warriors.
They placed his stork in a canoe, and in a second canoe following it were a couple of large
deers freshly killed, which he was to take to his mother as the gift of the fierce Susquehannocks.
Amid the cheers and adieus of the nation the two canoes pushed off and, entering the broad
bay, paddled up a river under the side of a bar of blue mountains, until the river dwindled
to a mere creek, and finally its navigation ceased altogether. By signs upon the head of the
dead stag, indicating a larger deer, Nanking knew they were at the "Head-of-Elk" River. His
fierce friends left him here with many professions of apology and esteem, and soon after they
departed Swedes and Minquas appeared, who had observed the hostile canoes from their lookout
stations on the neighboring hills. These also welcomed Nanking, being already well acquainted
with him, and taking up his venison proceeded through the woods toward New Amstel. He carried
the live stork himself--a rough bird, which would not yield to blandishments or good treatment.
After a very fatiguing journey and four days' absence from home, Nanking entered New Amstel
in the dead of night.

"To-morrow," he thought, "I shall be repaid for all this. They will say, 'Nanking Cloos is
the smartest man in the colony of New Amstel.' Perhaps I shall be a burgomaster, and eat terrapin
stewed in Canary wine!"

Nanking was up betimes, looking at the chimneys on his mother's dwelling, of which there were
two, and both were the largest chimneys in New Amstel. The Widow Cloos lived in a huge log
building with brick ends, long and rather low, which had been built by the commissary of the
colony at the expense of the city of Amsterdam as a magazine of food and supply for her colonists;
but after several years of unprofitable experiment with the colony, it was resolved to give
no more provisions away, and the director, great Captain Hinoyossa, when Van Swearingen became
the schout, allowed the latter's sister to inhabit one end of the warehouse, and that the farthest
end from the water. The rest was uninhabited, and Nanking, looking at the chimney which surmounted
the river gable, said to himself:

"That will never do for my stork, as there is no fire lighted there. I never saw smoke from
that chimney in my life. The stork requires a nest where there is heat, and plenty of it."

He therefore prepared to climb to the chimney on the land-side and establish a nest. There
was a broken cart-wheel in the warehouse, which Nanking procured and drew to the roof, and
when daylight broke upon the town the earliest loungers and fishermen saw the happy simpleton
working like a chimney-sweep, as they thought, except that instead of brushing he was piling
brush around the chimney on the cart-wheel. His mother came out and looked joy to see him back;
the soldiers strolled down from the fort and the boys and women from the town. Uncle Van Swearingen
was there, smiting the ground with his shodden staff, and ejaculating, "Foei! weg! fychaam
u! Fie! leave off! fie on you! What absurdity is this on the property of our hoofstad, our
metropolis?"

"Never mind, uncle!" answered the beaming Nanking. "I have been a great man in the last few
days. I have lived among the fierce Susquehannocks. Presently you shall see something that
you shall see!"

Peter Alrichs also came down to the quay with his pretty daughter, who could no longer keep
her secret. "Good Nanking," she whispered, "is building a nest for a real stork. He has found
one, just like the dear creatures in Holland!"

The news was presently dispersed, and all felt an interest, until finally Nanking produced
his stork.

"It is like a stork, indeed!" uttered Peter Alrichs; "'tis big as one, too, but its wings are
all white!"

"'Tis a stork, yah, op myne eer! Upon my honor, it is!" muttered uncle Van Swearingen.

"Nanking is not an idiot, papa!" said Elsje, overjoyed.

The widow was delighted at the enterprise of her son.

When Nanking had carried the great bird to the nest he made a little speech:

"Worshipful masters and good people all, I have been at great pains to get this stork, not
for my own gratification entirely, though there are some here I expect to please particularly.
(He looked at Elsje and his mother.) This stork will pick up the offal and eat it, and we shall
have no more bad fevers here for want of a good scavenger. By and by he will bring more storks,
and they will multiply; and every house, however humble, shall have its own stork family to
ornament the chimney-top and remind us of our dear native land. I have done all this good with
the hope of being useful, and now I hope nobody will call me wicked names any more."

Nanking cut the fastenings on the bird and set it on the new-made nest. In a minute the stork
stood up on its short legs, poked its beautiful head and neck into the air, and with its wings
struck Nanking so heavy a blow that it knocked him off the roof of the house, but happily the
fall did not hurt him. As he arose the huge bird was spreading its wings for flight. Before
Nanking could climb the ladder again, it was sailing through the air, magnificent as a ship,
toward its winter pastures on the bay of Chisopecke.

"He! Zoo!" exclaimed the soldiers.

"Foei! weg!" cried the fishermen.

Only three persons said "Ach! helas!"--the Widow Cloos, pretty Elsje, and Nanking.

"Thy stork is a savage bird!" cried Peter Alrichs. "The English on the Chisopecke name it a swan!"

Nanking burst into tears. His uncle struck the ground with his schout's staff, swore dreadfully,
and shouted to the Widow Cloos:

"Sister, thy boy is nothing but a big idiot. Thou hadst better drown him, as I told thee!"

Nothing could equal the mortification of Nanking. He thought he would die of grief. He was
now known to be more of an idiot than ever, and the fickle Miss Elsje would not let him hold
her doll for a whole week.

"My poor son," entreated the widow, "do not pine and lose courage! The venison will feed us
half the winter. You can help me smoke it and dry it. Do not give up your sweet simple faith,
my boy! As long as you keep that we are rich!"

The next day Schout Van Swearingen, the great dignitary, came in and said to Nanking: "As you
are a big idiot and good for nothing else, I will give you an office. Even there you will be
a failure, for you are too simple to steal any thing."

Nanking's mother was happy to hear this, and to see her son in a linsey-woolsey coat with large
brass buttons, and six pairs of breeches--the gift of the city of Amsterdam--stride up the
streets of New Amstel, with copper buckles in his shoes and his hair tied in an eel-skin queue.
The schout, his uncle, who was sheriff and chief of police in one, marched him up to the jail
and presented him with a beautiful plaything--a handle of wood with nine leather whip-lashes
upon the end of it. "Your duties will be light," said the schout. "Every man you flog will
give your mother a fee. Come here with me and begin your labors!"

In the open space before the jail and stadt huys were a pair of stocks and a whipping-post.
Nanking's uncle released a rough but light-built man, who had been sitting in the stocks, and
taking off the man's jacket and shirt, fastened him to the post by his wrists.

"Give this culprit fifty lashes, well laid on!" ordered the schout.

Nanking turned pale. "Must I whip him? What has he been doing that he is wicked?"

"Smuggling!" exclaimed Schout Van Swearingen. "He has taken advantage of the free port of New
Amstel to smuggle to the Swedes of Altona and New Gottenburg, and the English of Maryland.
Mark his back well!"

The sailor, as he seemed to be, looked at Nanking without fear. "Come, earn your money," he said.

"Uncle," cried Nanking, throwing down the whip, "how can I whip this man who never injured
me? Do not all the people smuggle in New Amstel? Was it not to stop that which brought the
mighty Director Stuyvesant hither with the great schout of New Amsterdam, worshipful Peter
Tonneman? Yes, uncle, I have heard the people say so, and that you have smuggled yourself ever
since your superior, the glorious Captain Hinoyossa, sailed to Europe."

"Ha!" exclaimed the bold smuggler. "Van Swearingen, dat is voor u! That is for you!"

"Vore God!" exclaimed the schout; "am I exposed and mocked by this idiot?"

He took up the whip and beat Nanking so hard that the strong young man had to disarm his uncle
of the instrument. Then, stripped of his fine clothes and restored to his rags, Nanking was
returned with contempt to his mother's house.

"Mother!" he cried, throwing himself upon the floor, "am I an idiot because I cannot hurt others?
No, I will be a fool, but not whip-master!"

The shrewd Peter Alrichs came to the widow's abode and asked to see Nanking. He brought with
him the worshipful Beeckman, lord of all South River, except New Amstel's little territory,
which reached from Christine Hill to Bombay Hook. They both put long questions to Nanking,
and he showed them his burnt heel, still scarred by the fagots of the Susquehannocks.

"Ik houd dat voor waar! I believe it is true," they said to each other. "They were burning
him at the stake and he did not know it. Yes, his feeble mind saved him!"

"Not at all," protested Nanking. "It was because I thought no evil of anybody."

"Hearken, Nanking!" said Peter Alrichs, very soberly. "And you, Mother Cloos, come hither too.
This boy can make our fortunes if we can make him fully comprehend us."

"Yah, mynheers!"

"He can return in safety to the land of the Susquehannocks, where no other Dutchman can go
and live. Thence, down the great river of rocks and rapids, come all the valuable furs. Of
these we Dutch on South River receive altogether only ten thousand a year. Nanking must take
some rum and bright cloth to his friends, the chiefs, and make them promise to send no more
furs to the English of Chisopecke, but bring them to Head-of-Elk. There we will make a treaty,
and Nanking and thee, widow, shall have part of our profits."

"Zeer wel!" cried Nanking. "That is very well. But Elsje, may I marry her, too?"

"Well," said Peter Alrichs, smiling, "you can come to see her sometimes and carry her doll."

"Good enough!" cried Nanking, overjoyed.

Before Nanking started on his trip, the sailor-man he had refused to whip walked into his mother's
house.

"Widow Cloos, no doubt," he said, bowing. "Madame, I owe your son a service. Here are three
petticoats and a pair of blue stockings with red clocks; for I see that your ankles still have
a fine turn to them."

The widow courtesied low; for she had not received a compliment in seven years.

Nanking now began to show his leg also, as modestly as possible.

"Ah! Nanking," cried the sailor, "I have a piece of good Holland stuff for you to make you
shirts and underclothes. 'Tis a pity so good a boy has not a rich father; ha! widow?"

The widow stooped very low again, but had the art to show her ankle to the best advantage,
though she blushed. She said it was very lonely for her in the New World.

"Now, Widow Cloos," continued the sailor, "I am Ffob Oothout, at your service! I am a mariner.
Some years ago, when Jacob Alrichs was our director, I helped to build this great warehouse
with my own hands. They were good men, then, in charge of New Amstel's government. Thieves
and jealous rogues have succeeded them. Would you think it, they suspect even me, and ordered
Nanking to whip me with the cat! But for Nanking I should have a bloody back at this minute,
and you would be wiping the brine out of it for me, I do not doubt!"

Nanking had gone out meantime, seeing that he was to get no clock-stockings.

"Widow, come hither," said the sailor. "Do you know I like this big barn of a warehouse. It
is my handicraft, you know, and that attaches me to it. Well, you say nothing to anybody, and
let me sleep in the river end. In a little while the noble veteran, Alexander D'Hinoyosso,
will be due from Holland on the ship Blue Cock. Then we will all have good protection. In that
ship are lots of supplies of mine. Of evenings we can court and drink liquor of my own mulling.
And when the Blue Cock comes to port you shall have more petticoats and high-heeled shoes than
any beauty in New Amstel."

Ffob Oothout stole a couple of kisses from the widow, like a bold sailor-man, and she promised
that he should lodge in the river end of the Amsterdam warehouse.

For the rest of that afternoon Nanking carried Elsje's beautiful doll, and his feelings were
very much comforted.

"Big sweetheart," she said, "what a smart man you would be if you could only make me a bigger
doll than this, which would open and shut its eyes and cry 'fus; hush!'"

Nanking left New Amstel at moonlight, at the head of a little procession, carrying gay cloths
and plenty of rum for the Susquehannocks. The last words Peter Alrichs said to him were: "You
must talk wisely, Nanking. It is a mighty responsibility you have on this errand. Remember Elsje!"

Next morning Nanking pushed off in a boat, all alone, from the Head-of-Elk, and rowed under
the blue bar of mountain into the Chisopecke, and turned up the creek below the rocky mouth
of the great river toward the council-fire retreat of the fierce Susquehannocks. As he was
about to step ashore a band of Englishmen confronted him, with swords and muskets.

"Whom art thou?" cried their leader, a stalwart man, with long mustaches.

"Only Nanking Cloos, mynheers, who used to be the big idiot of New Amstel. But," he added,
with confidence, "I am now a great man on a very responsible mission to the Indians. I am to
talk much and wisely. They are to send to New Amstel thousands of furs and peltries, and I
am to give them this rum and finery!"

"He talks beautifully," exclaimed the English; and the chief man added:

"Nanking, I know thee well. Thy mother is the pretty widow in the house by the river. I am
Colonel Utye, who swore so dreadfully when I summoned New Amstel to surrender. Come ashore,
Nanking."

Nanking felt very proud to be recognized thus and receive such compliments for his mother.
The English poured out a big flagon of French brandy and gravely drank his health, touching
their foreheads with their thumbs. The brandy elated and exalted Nanking very much.

"Nanking," said Colonel Utye, "we desire to spare thee a long journey and much danger. Leave
here thy rum and presents, and return to thy patrons, Alrichs and Beeckman, bearing our English
gratitude, and thou shalt wear a beautiful hat, such as the King of England allows only his
jester to put upon his head."

Nanking felt very much obliged to these kind gentlemen. They made the hat of the red cloth
he had brought. It was like a tall steeple on a house, and was at least three feet long. As
proud as possible he re-entered New Amstel on the evening of the day after he left it. It was
now within a few days of Christmas, and the Dutch burghers and boors, and Swedes, English and
Finns, were anticipating that holiday by assembling at the two breweries which the town afforded,
and quaffing nightly of beer. Beeckman and Alrichs were interested in the largest brewery,
and their beer was sent by Appoquinimy in great hogsheads to the English of Maryland in exchange
for butts of tobacco.

As Nanking walked into the big room where fifty men were drinking, his prodigious red hat rose
almost to the ceiling, and was greeted by roars of laughter.

"Goeden avond! Hoe yaart gij! How do you do, my bully?"

Nanking bowed politely, and singling out Beeckman and Alrichs, stood before them with child-like
joy.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I gave all your presents to the noble Colonel Utye, who sends his deepest
gratitude, and presented me with this exalted cap in acknowledgment of my capacity."

"Thou idiot!" exclaimed Beeckman; "'tis a dunce's cap!"

"Dunder and blitzen!" swore Peter Alrichs, "hast thou lost all our provision and made fools
of us, too?"

They struck the dunce's cap off Nanking's head with their staves, and threw their beer in his face.

"Two hundred guilders are we out of pocket," cried both these great men. "Was ever such a brainless
dolt in our possessions?"

The room rang with the cry, "Incurable idiot!" and Gerrit Van Swearingen cried louder than
any, "Go drown thyself, and spare thy mother shame!"

"Then I shall not marry Elsje?" exclaimed Nanking, bursting into tears.

"No!" stormed Peter Alrichs; "thou shalt marry a calf. Away!"

When Nanking arrived home he found his mother sitting very close to Ffob Oothout. He told his
tale with a broken heart.

"My man," exclaimed the rough sailor, in his kindest tone, but still very rough, "take this
advice from me: Whatever thou believest, tell it not. Where thy head is weak, hold thy teeth
tight. Then thou canst still have faith in many things, and make no grief."

The next day the Blue Cock sailed into the roadstead and the fort thundered a salute. Fort
and vessel dipped the tricolor flag of the States-General and the municipal banner of Amsterdam.
Beeckman surrendered all the country on South River to Hinoyossa, who came ashore very drunk
and very haughty, and threatened to set up an empire for himself and fit out privateers against
the world.

"Let him lose no time," muttered Ffob Oothout; "the English have doomed these Western Netherlands!"

Amidst the festivity Nanking was in a condition of despair. He had seen Elsje on the street
and she turned up her nose at him. Christmas was only one day off, and Santa Claus, the Swede
boys insisted, never came to the sorrowing shores of New Amstel.

"My uncle Gerrit was right," thought Nanking. "I had better drown myself. Yes; I will watch
on Christmas eve for Santa Claus. I will give him plenty of time to come. He is the patron
saint of children, and if he neglects poor, simple boys in this needful place, there is no
truth in any thing. On Christmas morning I will fall into the river without any noise. My mother
will cry, perhaps, but nobody else, and they will all say, 'It was better that the big idiot
should be drowned; he had not sense enough to keep out of the water.'"

Nanking spent half the day watching the chimneys of his mother's house. Both chimneys were
precisely alike in form and capacity, and the largest in the place. But the chimney next the
river did not retain the dark, smoky, red color of the chimney on the land side.

"No wonder," thought Nanking, "for no fire nor smoke has been made in that river chimney for
years. It almost seems that the bricks therein are oozing out their color and growing pale
and streaked."

Night fell while he was watching. Nanking hid himself upon the roof of the house, determined
to see if Saint Nicholas ever came to bless children any more by descending into chimneys,
or was only a myth.

It was a little cold, and under the moonlight the frost was forming on the marshes and fields.
The broad, remorseless river flowed past with nothing on its tide except the two or three vessels
tied to the river bank, of which the Blue Cock was directly under the widow's great dwelling.
From the town came sounds of revelry and wassail, of singing and quarrel, and from the church
on Sand Hook softer chanting, where the women were twining holly and laurel and mistletoe.
Nanking lay flat on the roof, with his face turned toward the sky. The moon went down and it
grew very dark.

"Lord of all things," he murmured, "forgive my rash intention and comfort my poor mother!"

The noise of the town died on the night air, and every light went out. Nanking said to himself,
"Is it Christmas at all, out in this lonely wilderness of the world? Is it the same sky which
covers Holland, and are these stars as gentle as yonder, where all are rich and happy?"

He heard a noise. A voice whispered, just above the edge of the chimney on the river gable:
"Fus-s-s! Pas op!"

"What is that?" thought Nanking; "somebody saying, 'Hist! be careful?' Surely I see something
moving on the chimney, like a living head."

The voice whispered again: "Maak hast! Kom hier!" Or, "Hasten! Come here!"

Nanking raised up and made a noise.

"Wie komt, daar?" demanded the voice, and in a minute repeated: "Wie sprecht, daar?"

They ask, "Who comes and who speaks?" said Nanking. "Blessed be the promises of heaven! It
is Santa Claus!"

Then he heard movements at the chimney, and people seemed to be ascending and descending a
ladder. There seemed, also, to be noises on the deck of the Blue Cock, and sounds of falling
burdens and spoken words: "Maak plaats!" or make room for more.

"I never heard of Santa Claus stopping so long at one humble house," thought Nanking.

After awhile all sounds ceased. Nanking crept to the chimney and touched it with his hand.
It had no opening whatever in the top.

He felt around this mysterious chimney. "He! Zoo!" he said aloud, "there is more wood here
than brick. 'Tis a false chimney altogether!"

Then he saw that his close observation had not been at fault. The chimney over the river gable
was a painted chimney, a mere invention. Yet, surely Santa Claus had been there.

After a time Nanking opened the top and side of this chimney as if they were two doors. He
found it packed with goods of all kinds--a ton at least.

"I will run and awaken my mother," he thought. "But no. Did not Ffob Oothout tell me to blab
no secrets and shut my teeth tight? I will tell nobody. These costly things are all mine; for
there are no other boys in this whole dwelling but Nanking Cloos, the fatherless idiot!"

He slipped down and hastened to his boat, which lay in a cove not far below. Towing it along
the bank to a sheltered place convenient, Nanking began to load up the goods from the chimney.
Before daylight broke he had secured every thing, and hoisting sail was speedily carried to
the island of the Pea Patch, far down the bay--that island which shone in the offing and seemed
to close the river's mouth. Here, in the wreck of an old galiot, he hid every article dry and
secure; kegs of liquors and wine, shawls and blankets, pieces of silk, gunpowder, beautiful
pipes, bars of silver and copper, and a whole bag of gold. Nanking covered them with dry driftwood
and boughs of trees, and sailed again to New Amstel, where he arrived before breakfast.

At breakfast Nanking found upon his bench a beautiful new gun.

"It is thine, good child," said Ffob Oothout, "for sparing me those lashes. Thy churlish uncle
felt so reproved by thy innocent words that he set me free. Widow, here is a spiegel for thee,
a looking-glass to see, unseen, whoever passes up or down the street. That is a woman's high
privilege everywhere. Thou shalt be, erelong, the best-dressed wife in all New Amstel. Nanking,
wouldst thou like to have a father?"

"I would like you, Ffob Oothout, for a father."

"Widow," said Ffob, "he has popped the question for me; wilt thou take an old pirate for thy man?"

"They are all pirates here," replied the blushing widow, "and thou art the best pirate or man
I have seen."

"Well, then, when the English conquer this region I have that will make thee rich. Till then
let us wait on the good event, but not delay the marriage."

That Christmas Day they were married in form. As the three sat before the fresh venison and
drank wine from the store of the Blue Cock, Nanking said:

"Father Ffob, you are wise. Give me yet another word of advice, that I may not continue to
be a big idiot."

"Trust whom thou wilt, Nanking, yet ever hold thy tongue. If thou hast now a secret, hold it
close. Begin this instant!"

"Even the secrets of Santa Claus?"

"Yes, even them."

Nanking said no more. He found compensation for Elsje's contumely in his gun, and roved the
forests through, and peeped from time to time at his mystic treasures.

One day the news came overland that the English had taken New Amsterdam. Then the great Hinoyossa
and uncle Van Swearingen and Alrichs and Beeckman swore dreadfully, and said they would fight
to the last man. Ffob Oothout went around amongst the Swedes and the citizen Dutch, and prepared
them to take the matter reasonably.

One day in October of that same wonderful year, 1664, two mighty vessels of war, flying the
English flag, came to anchor off New Amstel and the fort. They parleyed with the citizens for
a surrender, and Ffob Oothout conducted the negotiations. The citizens were to receive protection
and property. The fort replied by a cannon. Then the English soldiery landed and formed their
veteran lines. They charged the ramparts and broke down the palisades, and killed three Dutchmen
and wounded ten more. Proclamation was made that New Amstel should for all the future be named
New-castle, and that Gerrit Van Swearingen, the refractory schout, should yield up his noble
property to Captain John Carr, of the invaders, and Peter Alrichs lose every thing for the
benefit of the fortunate William Tom.

The English soldiery proceeded to make barracks of the Amsterdam warehouse. The first night
they inhabited it they strove to light a fire under the wooden chimney in the river gable.
The chimney caught fire and burnt out like an old hollow barrel.

"Wife," exclaimed Ffob Oothout, looking grimly on, "in that chimney was all my property and
thine. Poor boy," he said to Nanking, "we must all be poor together now."

"No," cried Nanking, "I have yet the gifts of Santa Claus which I took from that chimney on
the night before Christmas. Yours, father, may be burnt. Mine are all safe!"

He sailed his father and mother to the island since called the Pea Patch, and Ffob Oothout
recognized his property.

"Wonderful Nanking!" he cried, "thy faith was all the wisdom we had. God protects the simple!
Thou art our treasure."

The great Hinoyossa condignly fled to Maryland. Uncle Van Swearingen was exported to Holland,
and in the dwelling of Peter Alrichs the family of Ffob Oothout made their abode.

"Nanking," asked the houseless Alrichs, "is not Elsje pretty yet?"

"Not as pretty," answered Nanking, "as my little baby sister. I will carry nobody's doll but hers."

"Humph!" said Peter Alrichs, "you are not the big idiot I took you for!"

A BAYSIDE IDYL.

    Basking on the Choptank pleasant Cambridge lies
    In the humid atmosphere under fluttered skies,
    And the oaks and willows their protection fling
    Round the court-house cluster and the public spring.

    There the streets are cleanly and they meet oblique,
    Forced upon each other by the village creek
    Winding round the ancient lawns, till the site appears
    Like a moated fortress crumbling down with years.

    Round the town the oysters grow within the coves,
    And the fertile cornfields bearing yellow loaves;
    And the wild duck flying o'er the parish spire
    Fall into the graveyard when the fowlers fire?

    There the old armorial stones dwellers seldom read;
    There the ivy clambers like the rankest weed;
    There the Cambridge lawyers sometimes scale the wall
    To the grave of Helen, loveliest of all.

    Even here the fairest of the little band
    Strangers call the fairest girls in Maryland,
    Like the peach her color ere its dyes are fast,
    And her form as slender as the virgin mast.

    Like a vessel gliding with a net in tow,
    Up the street of evenings Helen seemed to flow,
    Leaving light behind her and a nameless spell
    Murmured in the young men, like an ocean shell.

    Made too early conscious of her power to charm,
    Still unconscious ever love of men could harm,
    Voices whispered to her: "Beauty rare as thine
    Princes in the city never drank in wine!

    "Hide it not in Cambridge! Cross the bay and see
    How a world delighted hastes to honor thee.
    Seek the fortune-teller and thy future hear;
    There is empire yonder; there is thy career!"

    Oh, the sad ambition and the speedy dart!
    He, the fortune-reader, read poor Helen's heart;
    And a face created for the hearthstone's light--
    Fishers tell its ruin as they scud by night.

    Whisper, whisper, whisper! leaf and wave and grass;
    Look not sidewise, maiden, as the place you pass.
    If you hear a restless spirit when you pray,
    'Tis the voice that tempted Helen o'er the bay.

SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON'S NIGHT.

An extraordinary story, some say the recital of a dream, or scenes in somnambulism, is that
of Andrew Waples, of Horntown, Va. He visited Saratoga twenty years ago, well-to-do, the owner
of slaves, sloops, lands, and fisheries, and visits it now upon an income of $2000 a year,
derived from boiling down fish into phosphates for the midland markets. He preserves, however,
the habit and appearance of old days: that is to say, his chin is folded away under his lip
like a reef in a mainsail; his cheek-bones hide his ears, so tusky and prominent are the former,
and tipped with a varnish of red, like corns on old folks' feet; he has a nose which is so
long and bony that it seems to have been constructed in sections, like a tubular bridge, and
to communicate with itself by relays of sensation. A straight, mournful, twinkling, yet aristocratic
man was Andrew Waples, "befo' de waw, sah! befo' de waw!"

He had no sooner arrived at Saratoga than he met some ancient boon companions, who took him
off to the lake, exploded champagne, filled his lungs with cigar-smoke, and sent him to bed,
the first night, with a decided thirst and no occasion to say his prayers. For it was Andrew's
intention, being a mournful man of the Eastern Shore, to pray on every unusual occurrence.
Piety is relative as well as real, but Andrew Waples on this occasion jumped into bed, said
hic and amen, and "times befo' de waw," and went to sleep in the somnorific air of the Springs.

He awoke with a dry throat, a disposition to faint and surrender his stomach, and an irresistible
propensity to walk abroad and drink of the waters. He looked at his watch: it was two o'clock,
and Saturday night. "Alas!" said Andrew Waples aloud, "the bars are closed. Even Morrissey
has gone to bed, and the club-house is in darkness, but perhaps I can climb over the gate of
some spring company, or find a fountain uninclosed. Yes, there is the High Rock Spring!"

He drew on his clothes partly, slipped his feet in slippers, and wrote on a piece of paper,
which he conspicuously posted on the gas bracket:

"Andrew Waples, Gentleman (befo' de waw), departed from the United States Hotel, at two o'clock
A. M., precisely. If any accident happens to him, seek at the High Rock Spring, or thereabouts."

It was a sad, green, ghostly moonlight streaming through the elms as Andrew Waples walked up
Broadway. The moon appeared to be dredging for oysters amongst the clouds, circling around
there by bars, islets, and shoals. Bits of spotted and mackerel-back sky swam like hosts of
menhaden through the pearly sheen of the more open aërial main. The leaves of the tall domes
and kissing branches of the elms, that peeped on either side into open windows of people asleep
and told across the street to each other the secrets there, were now themselves heavy as if
with surfeit of gossip and they drooped and hardly rustled. Not a tipsy waiter lurked in the
shadows, not a skylarking couple of darkey lovers whispered on doorsteps. No birds, nor even
crickets, serenaded the torpid night. The shuffling feet of Andrew Waples barely made watch-dogs
growl in their dreams, and started his own heart with the concussions they produced on the
arborescent and deeply-shadowed aisles of the after midnight. He saw the town-hall clock pallidly
illuminated above its tower. The low frame villa of Chancellor Walworth, cowering amongst the
pine-trees, expressed the burden of parricidal blood that had of late oppressed its memories.
There were no murmurs from the court-room where Judge Barnard had been tried, but its deep
silence seemed from the clock to tick: "Removed! disqualified!" and "Disqualified! removed!"

Turning from Broadway to lesser streets of cheap hotels and plain boarding cottages, where
weary women and girls had drudged all day long, and washerwomen moaned and fluting and ruffling
were the amusements of the poor, Andrew Waples became haunted with the idea that Saratoga was
poisoned, that every soul in the village was dead, and that he was to be the last man of the
century to drink of the Springs. Nature and night were in the swoon of love or death. Parting
their drowsy curtains went Waples through the muffled echoes, impelled by nothing greater than
a human thirst.

