Her flightiness or inconstancy was of the most dangerous kind.  With the exception of some
of her old friends, to whom she had good reasons for remaining faithful, she favoured people
one moment only to cast them off the next.  You were admitted to an audience with her for instance,
you pleased her in some manner, and forthwith she unbosomed herself to you as though you had
known her from childhood.  At the second audience you found her dry, laconic, cold.  You racked
your brains to discover the cause of this change.  Mere loss of time!--Flightiness was the
sole reason of it.

Devoutness was her strong point; by that she governed and held her place. She found a King
who believed himself an apostle, because he had all his life persecuted Jansenism, or what
was presented to him as such.  This indicated to her with what grain she could sow the field
most profitably.

The profound ignorance in which the King had been educated and kept all his life, rendered
him from the first an easy prey to the Jesuits.  He became even more so with years, when he
grew devout, for he was devout with the grossest ignorance.  Religion became his weak point.
In this state it was easy to persuade him that a decisive and tremendous blow struck against
the Protestants would give his name more grandeur than any of his ancestors had acquired, besides
strengthening his power and increasing his authority.  Madame de Maintenon was one of those
who did most to make him believe this.

The revocation of the edict of Nantes, without the slightest pretext or necessity, and the
various proscriptions that followed it, were the fruits of a frightful plot, in which the new
spouse was one of the chief conspirators, and which depopulated a quarter of the realm, ruined
its commerce, weakened it in every direction, gave it up for a long time to the public and
avowed pillage of the dragoons, authorised torments and punishments by which so many innocent
people of both sexes were killed by thousands; ruined a numerous class; tore in pieces a world
of families; armed relatives against relatives, so as to seize their property and leave them
to die of hunger; banished our manufactures to foreign lands, made those lands flourish and
overflow at the expense of France, and enabled them to build new cities; gave to the world
the spectacle of a prodigious population proscribed, stripped, fugitive, wandering, without
crime, and seeking shelter far from its country; sent to the galleys, nobles, rich old men,
people much esteemed for their piety, learning, and virtue, people well off, weak, delicate,
and solely on account of religion; in fact, to heap up the measure of horror, filled all the
realm with perjury and sacrilege, in the midst of the echoed cries of these unfortunate victims
of error, while so many others sacrificed their conscience to their wealth and their repose,
and purchased both by simulated abjuration, from which without pause they were dragged to adore
what they did not believe in, and to receive the divine body of the Saint of Saints whilst
remaining persuaded that they were only eating bread which they ought to abhor!  Such was the
general abomination born of flattery and cruelty.  From torture to abjuration, and from that
to the communion, there was often only twenty-four hours' distance; and executioners were the
conductors of the converts and their witnesses. Those who in the end appeared to have been
reconciled, more at leisure did not fail by their flight, or their behaviour, to contradict
their pretended conversion.

