I found only a bed covered with a quilt, an old table with small drawers, a wash-stand, two
chairs, and a desk on three legs. The walls were bare except for a fly-stained map yellow with
age. As I passed through the sitting-room, Rachel preceding me with my traps, I caught a glimpse
of traces of better times. There was a plain wooden mantelpiece, a wide fireplace with big
brass andirons, a sideboard with and without brass handles and a limited number of claw feet,--which
if brought under the spell of the scraper and varnish-pot might once more regain its lost estate,--a
corner-cupboard built into the wall, half full of fragments of old china, and, to do justice
to the major's former statement, there was also a pair of dull old mahogany doors with glass
knobs separating the room from some undiscovered unknown territory of bareness and emptiness
beyond. These, no doubt, were the doors Anthony threw open for the bevies of beauties so picturesquely
described by the major, but where were the Chippendale furniture, the George III. silver, the
Italian marble mantels with carved lions' heads, the marquetry floors and cabinets?

I determined to end my mental suspense. I would ask Rachel and get at the facts. The old woman
was opening the windows, letting in the fresh breath of a honeysuckle, and framing a view of
the sea beyond.

"How long have you lived here, aunty?"

"'Most fo'ty years, sah. Long 'fo' Massa John Talbot died."

"Where's old Anthony?" I said.

"What Anthony? De fust major's body-servant?"

"Yes."

"Go 'long, honey. He's daid dese twenty years. Daid two years 'fo' Massa Slocomb married Mis'
Talbot."

"And Anthony never waited at all on Major Slocomb?"

"How could he wait on him, honey, when he daid 'fo' he see him?"

I pondered for a moment over the picturesque quality of the major's mendacity.

Was it, then, only another of the major's tributes to his wife,--this whole story of Anthony
and the madeira of '39? How he must have loved this dear relict of his military predecessor!

An hour later the major strolled into the sitting-room, his arm through Jack's.

"Grand old place, is it not?" he said, turning to me. "Full of historic interest. Of co'se
the damnable oligarchy has stripped us, but"--

Here Aunt Rachel flopped in--her slippers, I mean; the sound was distinctly audible.

"Bre'kfus', major."

"All right, Rachel. Come, gentlemen!"

When we were all seated, the major leaned back in his chair, toyed with his knife a moment,
and said with an air of great deliberation:--

"Gentlemen, when I was in New York I discovered that the fashionable dish of the day was a
po'ter-house steak. So when I knew you were coming, I wired my agent in Baltimo' to go to Lexington
market and to send me down on ice the best steak he could buy fo' money. It is now befo' you.

"Jack, shall I cut you a piece of the tenderloin?"

A KNIGHT OF THE LEGION OF HONOR

It was in the smoking-room of a Cunarder two days out. The evening had been spent in telling
stories, the fresh-air passengers crowding the doorways to listen, the habitual loungers and
card-players abandoning their books and games.

When my turn came,--mine was a story of Venice, a story of the old palace of the Barbarozzi,--I
noticed in one corner of the room a man seated alone wrapped in a light shawl, who had listened
intently as he smoked, but who took no part in the general talk. He attracted my attention
from his likeness to my friend Vereschagin the painter; his broad, white forehead, finely wrought
features, clear, honest, penetrating eye, flowing mustache and beard streaked with gray,--all
strongly suggestive of that distinguished Russian. I love Vereschagin, and so, unconsciously,
and by mental association, perhaps, I was drawn to this stranger. Seeing my eye fixed constantly
upon him, he threw off his shawl, and crossed the room.

"Pardon me, but your story about the Barbarozzi brought to my mind so many delightful recollections
that I cannot help thanking you. I know that old palace,--knew it thirty years ago,--and I
know that cortile, and although I have not had the good fortune to run across either your gondolier,
Espero, or his sweetheart, Mariana, I have known a dozen others as romantic and delightful.
The air is stifling here. Shall we have our coffee outside on the deck?"

When we were seated, he continued, "And so you are going to Venice to paint?"

"Yes; and you?"

"Me? Oh, to the Engadine to rest. American life is so exhausting that I must have these three
months of quiet to make the other nine possible."

The talk drifted into the many curious adventures befalling a man in his journeyings up and
down the world, most of them suggested by the queer stories of the night. When coffee had been
served, he lighted another cigar, held the match until it burned itself out,--the yellow flame
lighting up his handsome face,--looked out over the broad expanse of tranquil sea, with its
great highway of silver leading up to the full moon dominating the night, and said as if in
deep thought:--

"And so you are going to Venice?" Then, after a long pause: "Will you mind if I tell you of
an adventure of my own,--one still most vivid in my memory? It happened near there many years
ago." He picked up his shawl, pushed our chairs close to the overhanging life-boat, and continued:
"I had begun my professional career, and had gone abroad to study the hospital system in Europe.
The revolution in Poland--the revolt of '62--had made traveling in northern Europe uncomfortable,
if not dangerous, for foreigners, even with the most authentic of passports, and so I had spent
the summer in Italy. One morning, early in the autumn, I bade good-by to my gondolier at the
water-steps of the railroad station, and bought a ticket for Vienna. An important letter required
my immediate presence in Berlin.

"On entering the train I found the carriage occupied by two persons: a lady, richly dressed,
but in deep mourning and heavily veiled; and a man, dark and smooth-faced, wearing a high silk
hat. Raising my cap, I placed my umbrella and smaller traps under the seat, and hung my bundle
of traveling shawls in the rack overhead. The lady returned my salutation gravely, lifting
her veil and making room for my bundles. The dark man's only response was a formal touching
of his hat-brim with his forefinger.

"The lady interested me instantly. She was perhaps twenty-five years of age, graceful, and
of distinguished bearing. Her hair was jet-black, brushed straight back from her temples, her
complexion a rich olive, her teeth pure white. Her lashes were long, and opened and shut with
a slow, fan-like movement, shading a pair of deep blue eyes, which shone with that peculiar
light only seen when quick tears lie hidden under half-closed lids. Her figure was rounded
and full, and her hands exquisitely modeled. Her dress, while of the richest material, was
perfectly plain, with a broad white collar and cuffs like those of a nun. She wore no jewels
of any kind. I judged her to be a woman of some distinction,--an Italian or Hungarian, perhaps.

"When the train started, the dark man, who had remained standing, touched his hat to me, raised
it to the lady, and disappeared. Her only acknowledgment was a slight inclination of the head.
A polite stranger, no doubt, I thought, who prefers the smoker. When the train stopped for
luncheon, I noticed that the lady did not leave the carriage, and on my return I found her
still seated, looking listlessly out of the window, her head upon her hand.

"'Pardon me, madame,' I said in French, 'but unless you travel some distance this is the last
station where you can get anything to eat.'

"She started, and looked about helplessly. 'I am not hungry. I cannot eat--but I suppose I should.'

"'Permit me;' and I sprang from the carriage, and caught a waiter with a tray before the guard
reclosed the doors. She drank the coffee, tasted the fruit, thanking me in a low, sweet voice,
and said:--

"'You are very considerate. It will help me to bear my journey. I am very tired, and weaker
than I thought; for I have not slept for many nights.'

"I expressed my sympathy, and ended by telling her I hoped we could keep the carriage to ourselves;
she might then sleep undisturbed. She looked at me fixedly, a curious startled expression crossing
her face, but made no reply.

"Almost every man is drawn, I think, to a sad or tired woman. There is a look about the eyes
that makes an instantaneous draft on the sympathies. So, when these slight confidences of my
companion confirmed my misgivings as to her own weariness, I at once began diverting her as
best I could with some account of my summer's experience in Venice, and with such of my plans
for the future as at the moment filled my mind. I was younger then,--perhaps only a year or
two her senior,--and you know one is not given to much secrecy at twenty-six: certainly not
with a gentle lady whose good-will you are trying to gain, and whose sorrowful face, as I have
said, enlists your sympathy at sight. Then, to establish some sort of footing for myself, I
drifted into an account of my own home life; telling her of my mother and sisters, of the social
customs of our country, of the freedom given the women,--so different from what I had seen
abroad,--of their perfect safety everywhere.

"We had been talking in this vein some time, she listening quietly until something I said reacted
in a slight curl of her lips,--more incredulous than contemptuous, perhaps, but significant
all the same; for, lifting her eyes, she answered slowly and meaningly:--

"'It must be a paradise for women. I am glad to believe that there is one corner of the earth
where they are treated with respect. My own experiences have been so different that I have
begun to believe that none of us are safe after we leave our cradles.' Then, as if suddenly
realizing the inference, the color mounting to her cheeks, she added: 'But please do not misunderstand
me. I am quite willing to accept your statement; for I never met an American before.'

"As we neared the foothills the air grew colder. She instinctively drew her cloak the closer,
settling herself in one corner and closing her eyes wearily. I offered my rug, insisting that
she was not properly clad for a journey over the mountains at night. She refused gently but
firmly, and closed her eyes again, resting her head against the dividing cushion. For a moment
I watched her; then arose from my seat, and, pulling down my bundle of shawls, begged that
I might spread my heaviest rug over her lap. An angry color mounted to her cheeks. She turned
upon me, and was about to refuse indignantly, when I interrupted:--

"'Please allow me; don't you know you cannot sleep if you are cold? Let me put this wrap about
you. I have two.'

"With the unrolling, the leather tablet of the shawl-strap, bearing my name, fell in her lap.

"'Your name is Bosk,' she said, with a quick start, 'and you an American?'

"'Yes; why not?'

"'My maiden name is Boski,' she replied, looking at me in astonishment, 'and I am a Pole.'

"Here were two mysteries solved. She was married, and neither Italian nor Slav.

"'And your ancestry?' she continued with increased animation. 'Are you of Polish blood? You
know our name is a great name in Poland. Your grandfather, of course, was a Pole.' Then, with
deep interest, 'What are your armorial bearings?'

"I answered that I had never heard that my grandfather was a Pole. It was quite possible, though,
that we might be of Polish descent, for my father had once told me of an ancestor, an old colonel,
who fell at Austerlitz. As to the armorial bearings, we Americans never cared for such things.
The only thing I could remember was a certain seal which my father used to wear, and with which
he sealed his letters. The tradition in the family was that it belonged to this old colonel.
My sister used it sometimes. I had a letter from her in my pocket.

"She examined the indented wax on the envelope, opened her cloak quickly, and took from the
bag at her side a seal mounted in jewels, bearing a crest and coat of arms.

"'See how slight the difference. The quarterings are almost the same, and the crest and motto
identical. This side is mine, the other is my husband's. How very, very strange! And yet you
are an American?'

"'And your husband's crest?' I asked. 'Is he also a Pole?'

"'Yes; I married a Pole,' with a slight trace of haughtiness, even resentment, at the inquiry.

"'And his name, madame? Chance has given you mine--a fair exchange is never a robbery.'

"She drew herself up, and said quickly, and with a certain bearing I had not noticed before:--

"'Not now; it makes no difference.'

"Then, as if uncertain of the effect of her refusal, and with a willingness to be gracious,
she added:--

"In a few minutes--at ten o'clock--we reach Trieste. The train stops twenty minutes. You were
so kind about my luncheon; I am stronger now. Will you dine with me?'

"I thanked her, and on arriving at Trieste followed her to the door. As we alighted from the
carriage I noticed the same dark man standing by the steps, his fingers on his hat. During
the meal my companion seemed brighter and less weary, more gracious and friendly, until I called
the waiter and counted out the florins on his tray. Then she laid her hand quietly but firmly
upon my arm.

"'Please do not--you distress me; my servant Polaff has paid for everything.'

"I looked up. The dark man was standing behind her chair, his hat in his hand.

"I can hardly express to you my feelings as these several discoveries revealed to me little
by little the conditions and character of my traveling companion. Brought up myself under a
narrow home influence, with only a limited knowledge of the world, I had never yet been thrown
in with a woman of her class. And yet I cannot say that it was altogether the charm of her
person that moved me. It was more a certain hopeless sort of sorrow that seemed to envelop
her, coupled with an indefinable distrust which I could not solve. Her reserve, however, was
impenetrable, and her guarded silence on every subject bearing upon herself so pronounced that
I dared not break through it. Yet, as she sat there in the carriage after dinner, during the
earlier hours of the night, she and I the only occupants, her eyes heavy and red for want of
sleep, her beautiful hair bound in a veil, the pallor of her skin intensified by the sombre
hues of her dress, I would have given anything in the world to have known her well enough to
have comforted her, even by a word.

"As the night wore on the situation became intolerable. Every now and then she would start
from her seat, jostled awake by the roughness of the road,--this section had just been completed,--turn
her face the other way, only to be awakened again.

"'You cannot sleep. May I make a pillow for your head of my other shawl? I do not need it.
My coat is warm enough.'

"'No; I am very comfortable.'

"'Forgive me, you are not. You are very uncomfortable, and it pains me to see you so weary.
These dividing-irons make it impossible for you to lie down. Perhaps I can make a cushion for
your head so that you will rest easier.'

"She looked at me coldly, her eyes riveted on mine.

"'You are very kind, but why do you care? You have never seen me before, and may never again.'

"'I care because you are a woman, alone and unprotected. I care most because you are suffering.
Will you let me help you?'

"She bent her head, and seemed wrapped in thought. Then straightening up, as if her mind had
suddenly resolved,--

"'No; leave me alone. I will sleep soon. Men never really care for a woman when she suffers.'
She turned her face to the window.

"'I pity you, then, from the bottom of my heart,' I replied, nettled at her remark. 'There
is not a man the length and breadth of my land who would not feel for you now as I do, and
there is not a woman who would misunderstand him.'

"She raised her head, and in a softened voice, like a sorrowing child's, it was so pathetic,
said: 'Please forgive me. I had no right to speak so. I shall be very grateful to you if you
can help me; I am so tired.'

"I folded the shawl, arranged the rug over her knees, and took the seat beside her. She thanked
me, laid her cheek upon the impromptu pillow, and closed her eyes. The train sped on, the carriage
swaying as we rounded the curves, the jolting increasing as we neared the great tunnel. Settling
myself in my seat, I drew my traveling-cap well down so that its shadow from the overhead light
would conceal my eyes, and watched her unobserved. For half an hour I followed every line in
her face, with its delicate nostrils, finely cut nose, white temples with their blue veins,
and the beautiful hair glistening in the half-shaded light, the long lashes resting, tired
out, upon her cheek. Soon I noticed at irregular intervals a nervous twitching pass over her
face; the brow would knit and relax wearily, the mouth droop. These indications of extreme
exhaustion occurred constantly, and alarmed me. Unchecked, they would result in an alarming
form of nervous prostration. A sudden lurch dislodged the pillow.

"'Have you slept?' I asked.

"'I do not know. A little, I think. The car shakes so.'

"'My dear lady,' I said, laying my hand on hers,--she started, but did not move her own,--'it
is absolutely necessary that you sleep, and at once. What your nervous strain has been, I know
not; but my training tells me that it has been excessive, and still is. Its continuance is
dangerous. This road gets rougher as the night passes. If you will rest your head upon my shoulder,
I can hold you so that you will go to sleep.'

"Her face flushed, and she recovered her hand quickly.

"'You forget, sir, that'--

"'No, no; I forget nothing. I remember everything; that I am a stranger, that you are ill,
that you are rapidly growing worse, that, knowing as I do your condition, I cannot sit here
and not help you. It would be brutal.'

"Her lips quivered, and her eyes filled. 'I believe you,' she said. Then, turning quickly with
an anxious look, 'But it will tire you.'

"'No; I have held my mother that way for hours at a time.'

"She put out her hand, laid it gently on my wrist, looked into my face long and steadily, scanning
every feature, as if reassuring herself, then laid her cheek upon my shoulder, and fell asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When the rising sun burst behind a mountain-crag, and, at a turn in the road, fell full upon
her face, she awoke with a start, and looked about bewildered. Then her mind cleared.

"'How good you have been. You have not moved all night so I might rest. I awoke once frightened,
but your hands were folded in your lap.'

"With this her whole manner changed. All the haughty reserve was gone; all the cynicism, the
distrust, and suspicion. She became as gentle and tender as an anxious mother, begging me to
go to sleep at once. She would see that no one disturbed me. It was cruel that I was so exhausted.

