When I saw the Emperor, a few moments after his return, he appeared more annoyed than pleased;
for everything having an appearance of disorder was excessively distasteful to him, and a popular
tumult, whatever its cause, had always in it something unpleasant to him.

Meanwhile this scene, which his Majesty might well have repeated, produced a deep impression
on the people; and this enthusiasm had positive and immediate results, since on that day more
than two thousand men were voluntarily enrolled, and formed a new regiment of the guard.

On the anniversary fete of the coronation and of the battle of Austerlitz, there were as usual
free representations in all the theaters of Paris; but at these the Emperor did not appear,
as he had so often done.  There were also amusements, a free distribution of eatables, and
also illuminations; and twelve young girls, whose marriage dowries were given by the city of
Paris, were married to old soldiers.  I remember that among everything which marked the ceremonials
of the Empire, the custom of performing these marriages was the one most pleasing to the Emperor,
and he often spoke of it in terms of approbation; for, if I may be allowed to make the observation,
his Majesty had what might be called a kind of mania on the subject of marriage.  We were now
settled at the Tuileries, which the Emperor had not left since the 20th of November when he
had returned from Saint-Cloud, and which he did not leave again until his departure for the
army.  His Majesty often presided over the deliberations of the council of state, which were
of grave interest.  I learned at that time, in relation to a certain decree, a circumstance
which appeared to me very singular.  The Commune of Montmorency had long since lost its ancient
name; but it was not until the end of November, 1813, that the Emperor legally took away the
name of Emile which it had received under the republic in honor of J. J. Rousseau.  It may
well be believed that it had retained it so long simply because the Emperor's attention had
not been directed to it sooner.

I do not know but I should ask pardon for relating so trivial an event, when so many great
measures were being adopted by his Majesty.  In fact, each day necessitated new dispositions,
since the enemy was making progress at every point. Three of the five were sons of the old chief
and the rock was named for them. All of these captives made good their escape within a few days,
except the youngest son of Tenaya, who was shot by his guard while trying to escape. That same
day the old chief was captured on the cliff on the east side of Indian Canyon by some of Boling's
scouts. As Tenaya walked toward the camp his eye fell upon the dead body of his favorite son. Captain
Boling through an interpreter, expressed his regret at the occurrence, but not a word did Tenaya
utter in reply. There remained to the Emperor not a single ally, as the
King of Denmark, the only one who had until now remained faithful, had succumbed to the northern
torrent, and concluded an armistice with Russia; and in the south all the strategy of Marshal
Soult barely sufficed to delay the progress of the Duke of Wellington, who was advancing on
our frontiers at the head of an army far more numerous than that with which we could oppose
him, and which, moreover, was not suffering from the same privations as our own.  I remember
well to have heard several generals blame the Emperor at that time, because he had not abandoned
Spain, and recalled all his troops to France.  I make a note of this, but, as may well be believed,
am not willing to risk my judgment on such matters. At all events, it is evident that war surrounded
us on every side; and in this state of affairs, and with our ancient frontiers threatened,
it would have been strange if there had not been a general cry for peace.