It is sometimes found on Easter morning that the eggs have been kept too long. The boy's intentions
were good enough, but the enterprise had been too protracted, and the casting out of the dozen
was sudden and precipitate. Indeed, that is the trouble with some older boys I wot of. They
keep their money, or their brain, or their influence hidden till it rots. They are not willing
to come forth day by day on a humble mission, doing what little good they may, but are keeping
themselves hidden till some great Easter-day of triumph, and then they will astonish the Church
and the world; but they find that faculties too long hidden are faculties ruined. Better for
an egg to have succeeded in making one plain cake for a poor man's table than to have failed
in making a banquet for the House of Lords.

That was a glad time when on Easter morning the eggs went into the saucepan, and came out striped,
and spotted, and blue, and yellow, and the entire digestive capacity of the children was tested.
You have never had anything so good to eat since. You found the eggs. You hid them. They were
your contribution to the table. Since then you have seen eggs scrambled, eggs poached, eggs
in omelet, eggs boiled, eggs done on one side and eggs in a nog, but you shall never find anything
like the flavor of that Easter morning in boyhood.

Alas for the boys in town! Easter comes to them on stilts, and they buy their eggs out of the
store. There is no room for a boy to swing round. There is no good place in town to fly a kite,
or trundle a hoop, or even shout without people's throwing up the window to see who is killed.
The holidays are robbed of half their life because some wiseacre will persist in telling him
who Santa Claus is, while yet he is hanging up his first pair of stockings. Here the boy pays
half a dollar for a bottle of perfume as big as his finger, when out of town, for nothing but
the trouble of breathing it, he may smell a country full of new-mown hay and wild honeysuckle.
In a painted bath-tub he takes his Saturday bath careful lest he hit his head against the spigot,
while in the meadow-brook the boys plunge in wild glee, and pluck up health and long life from
the pebbly bottom. Oh, the joy in the spring day, when, after long teasing of mother to let
you take off your shoes, you dash out on the cool grass barefoot, or down the road, the dust
curling about the instep in warm enjoyment, and, henceforth, for months, there shall be no
shoes to tie or blacken.

Let us send the boys out into the country every year for an airing. If their grandfather and
grandmother be yet alive, they will give them a good time. They will learn in a little while
the mysteries of the hay-mow, how to drive oxen and how to keep Easter. They will take the
old people back to the time when you yourself were a boy. There will be for the grandson an
extra cake in each oven. And grandfather and grandmother will sit and watch the prodigy, and
wonder if any other family ever had such grandchildren. It will be a good thing when the evenings
are short, and the old folks' eyesight is somewhat dim, if you can set up in their house for
a little while one or two of these lights of childhood. For the time the aches and pains of
old age will be gone, and they will feel as lithe and merry as when sixty years ago they themselves
rummaged hayrick, and mow and wagon-house, hiding eggs for Easter.

CHAPTER XLII.

SINK OR SWIM.

We entered the ministry with a mortal horror of extemporaneous speaking. Each week we wrote
two sermons and a lecture all out, from the text to the amen. We did not dare to give out the
notice of a prayer-meeting unless it was on paper. Then the doctor got up and got a thread and needle,
and sewed the ghost's head on, and pushed him gently out of the door, and told him never to show
himself again. Nobody ever saw that ghost again, for the doctor had sewed his head on wrong
side first, and he couldn't walk without running into the furniture, and of course he felt too
much ashamed to show himself. This doctor was Mr. Travers's own grandfather, and Mr. Travers
knows the story is true.

But I meant to tell you about the last
time Mr. Martin came to our house.

It so happened that the coming Sabbath night Was to be eventful in the village. The trustees
of the church had been building a gasometer back of the church, and the night I speak of the
building was for the first time to be lighted in the modern way. The church was, of course,
crowded--not so much to hear the preacher as to see how the gas would burn. Many were unbelieving,
and said that there would be an explosion, or a big fire, or that in the midst of the service
the lights would go out. Several brethren disposed to hang on to old customs declared that
candles and oil were the only fit material for lighting a church, and they denounced the innovation
as indicative of vanity on the part of the new-comers. They used oil in the ancient temple,
and it was that which ran down on Aaron's beard, and anything that was good enough for the
whiskers of an old-time priest was good enough for a country meeting-house. These sticklers
for the oil were present that night, hoping--and I think some of them secretly praying--that
the gas might go out.

With our ten-minute manuscript we went into the pulpit, all in a tremor. Although the gas did
not burn as brightly as its friends had hoped, still it was bright enough to show the people
the perspiration that stood in beads on our forehead. We began our discourse, and every sentence
gave us the feeling that we were one step nearer the gallows. We spoke very slowly, so as to
make the ten-minute notes last fifteen minutes. During the preachment of the brief manuscript
we concluded that we had never been called to the ministry. We were in a hot bath of excitement.
People noticed our trepidation, and supposed it was because we were afraid the gas would go
out. Alas! our fear was that it would not go out. As we came toward the close of our brief
we joined the anti-gas party, and prayed that before we came to the last written line something
would burst, and leave us in the darkness. Indeed, we discovered an encouraging flicker amid
the burners, which gave us the hope that the brief which lay before us would be long enough
for all practical purposes, and that the hour of execution might be postponed to some other
night. As we came to the sentence next to the last the lights fell down to half their size,
and we could just manage to see the audience as they were floating away from our vision. We
said to ourselves, "Why can't these lights be obliging, and go out entirely?" The wish was
gratified. As we finished the last line of our brief, and stood on the verge of rhetorical
destruction, the last glimmer of light was extinguished. "It is impossible to proceed," we
cried out; "receive the benediction!"

We crawled down the pulpit in a state of exhilaration; we never before saw such handsome darkness.
The odor of the escaping gas was to us like "gales from Araby." Did a frightened young man
ever have such fortunate deliverance? The providence was probably intended to humble the trustees,
yet the scared preacher took advantage of it.

