In an aperture of the western wall of Jerusalem hang the "oaken valves" called the Bethlehem
or Joppa Gate. The area outside of them is one of the notable places of the city. Long before
David coveted Zion there was a citadel there. When at last the son of Jesse ousted the Jebusite,
and began to build, the site of the citadel became the northwest corner of the new wall, defended
by a tower much more imposing than the old one. The location of the gate, however, was not
disturbed, for the reasons, most likely, that the roads which met and merged in front of it
could not well be transferred to any other point, while the area outside had become a recognized
market-place. In Solomon's day there was great traffic at the locality, shared in by traders
from Egypt and the rich dealers from Tyre and Sidon. Nearly three thousand years have passed,
and yet a kind of commerce clings to the spot. A pilgrim wanting a pin or a pistol, a cucumber
or a camel, a house or a horse, a loan or a lentil, a date or a dragoman, a melon or a man,
a dove or a donkey, has only to inquire for the article at the Joppa Gate. Sometimes the scene
is quite animated, and then it suggests, What a place the old market must have been in the
days of Herod the Builder! And to that period and that market the reader is now to be transferred.

Following the Hebrew system, the meeting of the wise men described in the preceding chapters
took place in the afternoon of the twenty-fifth day of the third month of the year; that is
say, on the twenty-fifth day of December. The year was the second of the 193d Olympiad, or
the 747th of Rome; the sixty-seventh of Herod the Great, and the thirty-fifth of his reign;
the fourth before the beginning of the Christian era. The hours of the day, by Judean custom,
begin with the sun, the first hour being the first after sunrise; so, to be precise; the market
at the Joppa Gate during the first hour of the day stated was in full session, and very lively.
The massive valves had been wide open since dawn. Business, always aggressive, had pushed through
the arched entrance into a narrow lane and court, which, passing by the walls of the great
tower, conducted on into the city. As Jerusalem is in the hill country, the morning air on
this occasion was not a little crisp. The rays of the sun, with their promise of warmth, lingered
provokingly far up on the battlements and turrets of the great piles about, down from which
fell the crooning of pigeons and the whir of the flocks coming and going.

As a passing acquaintance with the people of the Holy City, strangers as well as residents,
will be necessary to an understanding of some of the pages which follow, it will be well to
stop at the gate and pass the scene in review. Better opportunity will not offer to get sight
of the populace who will afterwhile go forward in a mood very different from that which now
possesses them.

The scene is at first one of utter confusion--confusion of action, sounds, colors, and things.
It is especially so in the lane and court. The ground there is paved with broad unshaped flags,
from which each cry and jar and hoof-stamp arises to swell the medley that rings and roars
up between the solid impending walls. A little mixing with the throng, however, a little familiarity
with the business going on, will make analysis possible.

Here stands a donkey, dozing under panniers full of lentils, beans, onions, and cucumbers,
brought fresh from the gardens and terraces of Galilee. When not engaged in serving customers,
the master, in a voice which only the initiated can understand, cries his stock. Nothing can
be simpler than his costume--sandals, and an unbleached, undyed blanket, crossed over one shoulder
and girt round the waist. Near-by, and far more imposing and grotesque, though scarcely as
patient as the donkey, kneels a camel, raw-boned, rough, and gray, with long shaggy tufts of
fox-colored hair under its throat, neck, and body, and a load of boxes and baskets curiously
arranged upon an enormous saddle. The owner is an Egyptian, small, lithe, and of a complexion
which has borrowed a good deal from the dust of the roads and the sands of the desert. He wears
a faded tarbooshe, a loose gown, sleeveless, unbelted, and dropping from the neck to the knee.
His feet are bare. The camel, restless under the load, groans and occasionally shows his teeth;
but the man paces indifferently to and fro, holding the driving-strap, and all the time advertising
his fruits fresh from the orchards of the Kedron--grapes, dates, figs, apples, and pomegranates.

At the corner where the lane opens out into the court, some women sit with their backs against
the gray stones of the wall. Their dress is that common to the humbler classes of the country--a
linen frock extending the full length of the person, loosely gathered at the waist, and a veil
or wimple broad enough, after covering the head, to wrap the shoulders. Their merchandise is
contained in a number of earthen jars, such as are still used in the East for bringing water
from the wells, and some leathern bottles. Among the jars and bottles, rolling upon the stony
floor, regardless of the crowd and cold, often in danger but never hurt, play half a dozen
half-naked children, their brown bodies, jetty eyes, and thick black hair attesting the blood
of Israel. Sometimes, from under the wimples, the mothers look up, and in the vernacular modestly
bespeak their trade: in the bottles "honey of grapes," in the jars "strong drink." Their entreaties
are usually lost in the general uproar, and they fare illy against the many competitors: brawny
fellows with bare legs, dirty tunics, and long beards, going about with bottles lashed to their
backs, and shouting "Honey of wine! Grapes of En-Gedi!" When a customer halts one of them,
round comes the bottle, and, upon lifting the thumb from the nozzle, out into the ready cup
gushes the deep-red blood of the luscious berry.

Scarcely less blatant are the dealers in birds--doves, ducks, and frequently the singing bulbul,
or nightingale, most frequently pigeons; and buyers, receiving them from the nets, seldom fail
to think of the perilous life of the catchers, bold climbers of the cliffs; now hanging with
hand and foot to the face of the crag, now swinging in a basket far down the mountain fissure.

Blent with peddlers of jewelry--sharp men cloaked in scarlet and blue, top-heavy under prodigious
white turbans, and fully conscious of the power there is in the lustre of a ribbon and the
incisive gleam of gold, whether in bracelet or necklace, or in rings for the finger or the
nose--and with peddlers of household utensils, and with dealers in wearing-apparel, and with
retailers of unguents for anointing the person, and with hucksters of all articles, fanciful
as well as of need, hither and thither, tugging at halters and ropes, now screaming, now coaxing,
toil the venders of animals--donkeys, horses, calves, sheep, bleating kids, and awkward camels;
animals of every kind except the outlawed swine. All these are there; not singly, as described,
but many times repeated; not in one place, but everywhere in the market.

Turning from this scene in the lane and court, this glance at the sellers and their commodities,
the reader has need to give attention, in the next place, to visitors and buyers, for which
the best studies will be found outside the gates, where the spectacle is quite as varied and
animated; indeed, it may be more so, for there are superadded the effects of tent, booth, and
sook, greater space, larger crowd, more unqualified freedom, and the glory of the Eastern sunshine.

CHAPTER VII

Let us take our stand by the gate, just out of the edge of the currents--one flowing in, the
other out--and use our eyes and ears awhile.

In good time! Here come two men of a most noteworthy class.

"Gods! How cold it is!" says one of them, a powerful figure in armor; on his head a brazen
helmet, on his body a shining breastplate and skirts of mail. "How cold it is! Dost thou remember,
my Caius, that vault in the Comitium at home which the flamens say is the entrance to the lower
world? By Pluto! I could stand there this morning, long enough at least to get warm again!"

The party addressed drops the hood of his military cloak, leaving bare his head and face, and
replies, with an ironic smile, "The helmets of the legions which conquered Mark Antony were
full of Gallic snow; but thou--ah, my poor friend!--thou hast just come from Egypt, bringing
its summer in thy blood."

And with the last word they disappear through the entrance. Though they had been silent, the
armor and the sturdy step would have published them Roman soldiers.

From the throng a Jew comes next, meager of frame, round-shouldered, and wearing a coarse brown
robe; over his eyes and face, and down his back, hangs a mat of long, uncombed hair. He is
alone. Those who meet him laugh, if they do not worse; for he is a Nazarite, one of a despised
sect which rejects the books of Moses, devotes itself to abhorred vows, and goes unshorn while
the vows endure.

As we watch his retiring figure, suddenly there is a commotion in the crowd, a parting quickly
to the right and left, with exclamations sharp and decisive. Then the cause comes--a man, Hebrew
in feature and dress. The mantle of snow-white linen, held to his head by cords of yellow silk,
flows free over his shoulders; his robe is richly embroidered, a red sash with fringes of gold
wraps his waist several times. His demeanor is calm; he even smiles upon those who, with such
rude haste, make room for him. A leper? No, he is only a Samaritan. The shrinking crowd, if
asked, would say he is a mongrel--an Assyrian--whose touch of the robe is pollution; from whom,
consequently, an Israelite, though dying, might not accept life. In fact, the feud is not of
blood. When David set his throne here on Mount Zion, with only Judah to support him, the ten
tribes betook themselves to Shechem, a city much older, and, at that date, infinitely richer
in holy memories. The final union of the tribes did not settle the dispute thus begun. The
Samaritans clung to their tabernacle on Gerizim, and, while maintaining its superior sanctity,
laughed at the irate doctors in Jerusalem. Time brought no assuagement of the hate. Under Herod,
conversion to the faith was open to all the world except the Samaritans; they alone were absolutely
and forever shut out from communion with Jews.

As the Samaritan goes in under the arch of the gate, out come three men so unlike all whom
we have yet seen that they fix our gaze, whether we will or not. They are of unusual stature
and immense brawn; their eyes are blue, and so fair is their complexion that the blood shines
through the skin like blue pencilling; their hair is light and short; their heads, small and
round, rest squarely upon necks columnar as the trunks of trees. Woollen tunics, open at the
breast, sleeveless and loosely girt, drape their bodies, leaving bare arms and legs of such
development that they at once suggest the arena; and when thereto we add their careless, confident,
insolent manner, we cease to wonder that the people give them way, and stop after they have
passed to look at them again. They are gladiators--wrestlers, runners, boxers, swordsmen; professionals
unknown in Judea before the coming of the Roman; fellows who, what time they are not in training,
may be seen strolling through the king's gardens or sitting with the guards at the palace gates;
or possibly they are visitors from Caesarea, Sebaste, or Jericho; in which Herod, more Greek
than Jew, and with all a Roman's love of games and bloody spectacles, has built vast theaters,
and now keeps schools of fighting-men, drawn, as is the custom, from the Gallic provinces or
the Slavic tribes on the Danube.

"By Bacchus!" says one of them, drawing his clenched hand to his shoulder, "their skulls are
not thicker than eggshells."

The brutal look which goes with the gesture disgusts us, and we turn happily to something more
pleasant.

Opposite us is a fruit-stand. The proprietor has a bald head, a long face, and a nose like
the beak of a hawk. He sits upon a carpet spread upon the dust; the wall is at his back; overhead
hangs a scant curtain, around him, within hand's reach and arranged upon little stools, lie
osier boxes full of almonds, grapes, figs, and pomegranates. To him now comes one at whom we
cannot help looking, though for another reason than that which fixed our eyes upon the gladiators;
he is really beautiful--a beautiful Greek. Around his temples, holding the waving hair, is
a crown of myrtle, to which still cling the pale flowers and half ripe berries. His tunic,
scarlet in color, is of the softest woollen fabric; below the girdle of buff leather, which
is clasped in front by a fantastic device of shining gold, the skirt drops to the knee in folds
heavy with embroidery of the same royal metal; a scarf, also woollen, and of mixed white and
yellow, crosses his throat and falls trailing at his back; his arms and legs, where exposed,
are white as ivory, and of the polish impossible except by perfect treatment with bath, oil,
brushes, and pincers.

The dealer, keeping his seat, bends forward, and throws his hands up until they meet in front
of him, palm downwards and fingers extended.

"What hast thou, this morning, O son of Paphos?" says the young Greek, looking at the boxes
rather than at the Cypriote. "I am hungry. What hast thou for breakfast?"

"Fruits from the Pedius--genuine--such as the singers of Antioch take of mornings to restore
the waste of their voices," the dealer answers, in a querulous nasal tone.

"A fig, but not one of thy best, for the singers of Antioch!" says the Greek. "Thou art a worshiper
of Aphrodite, and so am I, as the myrtle I wear proves; therefore I tell thee their voices
have the chill of a Caspian wind. Seest thou this girdle?--a gift of the mighty Salome--"

"The king's sister!" exclaims the Cypriote, with another salaam.

"And of royal taste and divine judgment. And why not? She is more Greek than the king. But--my
breakfast! Here is thy money--red coppers of Cyprus. Give me grapes, and--"

"Wilt thou not take the dates also?"

"No, I am not an Arab."

"Nor figs?"

"That would be to make me a Jew. No, nothing but the grapes. Never waters mixed so sweetly
as the blood of the Greek and the blood of the grape."

The singer in the grimed and seething market, with all his airs of the court, is a vision not
easily shut out of mind by such as see him; as if for the purpose, however, a person follows
him challenging all our wonder. He comes up the road slowly, his face towards the ground; at
intervals he stops, crosses his hands upon his breast, lengthens his countenance, and turns
his eyes towards heaven, as if about to break into prayer. Nowhere, except in Jerusalem, can
such a character be found. On his forehead, attached to the band which keeps the mantle in
place, projects a leathern case, square in form; another similar case is tied by a thong to
the left arm; the borders of his robe are decorated with deep fringe; and by such signs--the
phylacteries, the enlarged borders of the garment, and the savor of intense holiness pervading
the whole man--we know him to be a Pharisee, one of an organization (in religion a sect, in
politics a party) whose bigotry and power will shortly bring the world to grief.

The densest of the throng outside the gate covers the road leading off to Joppa. Turning from
the Pharisee, we are attracted by some parties who, as subjects of study, opportunely separate
themselves from the motley crowd. First among them a man of very noble appearance--clear, healthful
complexion; bright black eyes; beard long and flowing, and rich with unguents; apparel well-fitting,
costly, and suitable for the season. He carries a staff, and wears, suspended by a cord from
his neck, a large golden seal. Several servants attend him, some of them with short swords
stuck through their sashes; when they address him, it is with the utmost deference. The rest
of the party consists of two Arabs of the pure desert stock; thin, wiry men, deeply bronzed,
and with hollow cheeks, and eyes of almost evil brightness; on their heads red tarbooshes;
over their abas, and wrapping the left shoulder and the body so as to leave the right arm free,
brown woollen haicks, or blankets. There is loud chaffering, for the Arabs are leading horses
and trying to sell them; and, in their eagerness, they speak in high, shrill voices. The courtly
person leaves the talking mostly to his servants; occasionally he answers with much dignity;
directly, seeing the Cypriote, he stops and buys some figs. And when the whole party has passed
the portal, close after the Pharisee, if we betake ourselves to the dealer in fruits, he will
tell, with a wonderful salaam, that the stranger is a Jew, one of the princes of the city,
who has travelled, and learned the difference between the common grapes of Syria and those
of Cyprus, so surpassingly rich with the dews of the sea.

And so, till towards noon, sometimes later, the steady currents of business habitually flow
in and out of the Joppa Gate, carrying with them every variety of character; including representatives
of all the tribes of Israel, all the sects among whom the ancient faith has been parcelled
and refined away, all the religious and social divisions, all the adventurous rabble who, as
children of art and ministers of pleasure, riot in the prodigalities of Herod, and all the
peoples of note at any time compassed by the Caesars and their predecessors, especially those
dwelling within the circuit of the Mediterranean.

In other words, Jerusalem, rich in sacred history, richer in connection with sacred prophecies--the
Jerusalem of Solomon, in which silver was as stones, and cedars as the sycamores of the vale--had
come to be but a copy of Rome, a center of unholy practises, a seat of pagan power. A Jewish
king one day put on priestly garments, and went into the Holy of Holies of the first temple
to offer incense, and he came out a leper; but in the time of which we are reading, Pompey
entered Herod's temple and the same Holy of Holies, and came out without harm, finding but
an empty chamber, and of God not a sign.

CHAPTER VIII

The reader is now besought to return to the court described as part of the market at the Joppa
Gate. It was the third hour of the day, and many of the people had gone away; yet the press
continued without apparent abatement. Of the new-comers, there was a group over by the south
wall, consisting of a man, a woman, and a donkey, which requires extended notice.

The man stood by the animal's head, holding a leading-strap, and leaning upon a stick which
seemed to have been chosen for the double purpose of goad and staff. His dress was like that
of the ordinary Jews around him, except that it had an appearance of newness. The mantle dropping
from his head, and the robe or frock which clothed his person from neck to heel, were probably
the garments he was accustomed to wear to the synagogue on Sabbath days. His features were
exposed, and they told of fifty years of life, a surmise confirmed by the gray that streaked
his otherwise black beard. He looked around him with the half-curious, half-vacant stare of
a stranger and provincial.

The donkey ate leisurely from an armful of green grass, of which there was an abundance in
the market. In its sleepy content, the brute did not admit of disturbance from the bustle and
clamor about; no more was it mindful of the woman sitting upon its back in a cushioned pillion.
An outer robe of dull woollen stuff completely covered her person, while a white wimple veiled
her head and neck. Once in a while, impelled by curiosity to see or hear something passing,
she drew the wimple aside, but so slightly that the face remained invisible.

At length the man was accosted.

"Are you not Joseph of Nazareth?"

The speaker was standing close by.

"I am so called," answered Joseph, turning gravely around; "And you--ah, peace be unto you!
my friend, Rabbi Samuel!"

"The same give I back to you." The Rabbi paused, looking at the woman, then added, "To you,
and unto your house and all your helpers, be peace."

With the last word, he placed one hand upon his breast, and inclined his head to the woman,
who, to see him, had by this time withdrawn the wimple enough to show the face of one but a
short time out of girlhood. Thereupon the acquaintances grasped right hands, as if to carry
them to their lips; at the last moment, however, the clasp was let go, and each kissed his
own hand, then put its palm upon his forehead.

"There is so little dust upon your garments," the Rabbi said, familiarly, "that I infer you
passed the night in this city of our fathers."

"No," Joseph replied, "as we could only make Bethany before the night came, we stayed in the
khan there, and took the road again at daybreak."

"The journey before you is long, then--not to Joppa, I hope."

"Only to Bethlehem."

The countenance of the Rabbi, theretofore open and friendly, became lowering and sinister,
and he cleared his throat with a growl instead of a cough.

"Yes, yes--I see," he said. "You were born in Bethlehem, and wend thither now, with your daughter,
to be counted for taxation, as ordered by Caesar. The children of Jacob are as the tribes in
Egypt were--only they have neither a Moses nor a Joshua. How are the mighty fallen!"

Joseph answered, without change of posture or countenance,

"The woman is not my daughter."

But the Rabbi clung to the political idea; and he went on, without noticing the explanation,
"What are the Zealots doing down in Galilee?"

"I am a carpenter, and Nazareth is a village," said Joseph, cautiously. "The street on which
my bench stands is not a road leading to any city. Hewing wood and sawing plank leave me no
time to take part in the disputes of parties."

"But you are a Jew," said the Rabbi, earnestly. "You are a Jew, and of the line of David. It
is not possible you can find pleasure in the payment of any tax except the shekel given by
ancient custom to Jehovah."

Joseph held his peace.

"I do not complain," his friend continued, "of the amount of the tax--a denarius is a trifle.
Oh no! The imposition of the tax is the offense. And, besides, what is paying it but submission
to tyranny? Tell me, is it true that Judas claims to be the Messiah? You live in the midst
of his followers."

"I have heard his followers say he was the Messiah," Joseph replied.

At this point the wimple was drawn aside, and for an instant the whole face of the woman was
exposed. The eyes of the Rabbi wandered that way, and he had time to see a countenance of rare
beauty, kindled by a look of intense interest; then a blush overspread her cheeks and brow,
and the veil was returned to its place.

The politician forgot his subject.

"Your daughter is comely," he said, speaking lower.

"She is not my daughter," Joseph repeated.

The curiosity of the Rabbi was aroused; seeing which, the Nazarene hastened to say further,
"She is the child of Joachim and Anna of Bethlehem, of whom you have at least heard, for they
were of great repute--"

"Yes," remarked the Rabbi, deferentially, "I know them. They were lineally descended from David.
I knew them well."

"Well, they are dead now," the Nazarene proceeded. "They died in Nazareth. Joachim was not
rich, yet he left a house and garden to be divided between his daughters Marian and Mary. This
is one of them; and to save her portion of the property, the law required her to marry her
next of kin. She is now my wife."

"And you were--"

"Her uncle."

"Yes, yes! And as you were both born in Bethlehem, the Roman compels you to take her there
with you to be also counted."

The Rabbi clasped his hands, and looked indignantly to heaven, exclaiming, "The God of Israel
still lives! The vengeance is his!"

With that he turned and abruptly departed. A stranger near by, observing Joseph's amazement,
said, quietly, "Rabbi Samuel is a zealot. Judas himself is not more fierce."

Joseph, not wishing to talk with the man, appeared not to hear, and busied himself gathering
in a little heap the grass which the donkey had tossed abroad; after which he leaned upon his
staff again, and waited.

In another hour the party passed out the gate, and, turning to the left, took the road into
Bethlehem. The descent into the valley of Hinnom was quite broken, garnished here and there
with straggling wild olive-trees. Carefully, tenderly, the Nazarene walked by the woman's side,
leading-strap in hand. On their left, reaching to the south and east round Mount Zion, rose
the city wall, and on their right the steep prominences which form the western boundary of
the valley.

Slowly they passed the Lower Pool of Gihon, out of which the sun was fast driving the lessening
shadow of the royal hill; slowly they proceeded, keeping parallel with the aqueduct from the
Pools of Solomon, until near the site of the country-house on what is now called the Hill of
Evil Counsel; there they began to ascend to the plain of Rephaim. The sun streamed garishly
over the stony face of the famous locality, and under its influence Mary, the daughter of Joachim,
dropped the wimple entirely, and bared her head. Joseph told the story of the Philistines surprised
in their camp there by David. He was tedious in the narrative, speaking with the solemn countenance
and lifeless manner of a dull man. She did not always hear him.

Wherever on the land men go, and on the sea ships, the face and figure of the Jew are familiar.
The physical type of the race has always been the same; yet there have been some individual
variations. "Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to."
Such was the son of Jesse when brought before Samuel. The fancies of men have been ever since
ruled by the description. Poetic license has extended the peculiarities of the ancestor to
his notable descendants. So all our ideal Solomons have fair faces, and hair and beard chestnut
in the shade, and of the tint of gold in the sun. Such, we are also made believe, were the
locks of Absalom the beloved. And, in the absence of authentic history, tradition has dealt
no less lovingly by her whom we are now following down to the native city of the ruddy king.

So they skirted the great plain, and at length reached the elevation Mar Elias; from which,
across a valley, they beheld Bethlehem, the old, old House of Bread, its white walls crowning
a ridge, and shining above the brown scumbling of leafless orchards. They paused there, and
rested, while Joseph pointed out the places of sacred renown; then they went down into the
valley to the well which was the scene of one of the marvellous exploits of David's strong
men. The narrow space was crowded with people and animals. A fear came upon Joseph--a fear
lest, if the town were so thronged, there might not be house-room for the gentle Mary. Without
delay, he hurried on, past the pillar of stone marking the tomb of Rachel, up the gardened
slope, saluting none of the many persons he met on the way, until he stopped before the portal
of the khan that then stood outside the village gates, near a junction of roads.

CHAPTER IX

To understand thoroughly what happened to the Nazarene at the khan, the reader must be reminded
that Eastern inns were different from the inns of the Western world. They were called khans,
from the Persian, and, in simplest form, were fenced enclosures, without house or shed, often
without a gate or entrance. Their sites were chosen with reference to shade, defence, or water.
Such were the inns that sheltered Jacob when he went to seek a wife in Padan-Aram. Their like
may been seen at this day in the stopping-places of the desert. On the other hand, some of
them, especially those on the roads between great cities, like Jerusalem and Alexandria, were
princely establishments, monuments to the piety of the kings who built them. In ordinary, however,
they were no more than the house or possession of a sheik, in which, as in headquarters, he
swayed his tribe. Lodging the traveller was the least of their uses; they were markets, factories,
forts; places of assemblage and residence for merchants and artisans quite as much as places
of shelter for belated and wandering wayfarers. Within their walls, all the year round, occurred
the multiplied daily transactions of a town.

The singular management of these hostelries was the feature likely to strike a Western mind
with most force. There was no host or hostess; no clerk, cook, or kitchen; a steward at the
gate was all the assertion of government or proprietorship anywhere visible. Strangers arriving
stayed at will without rendering account. A consequence of the system was that whoever came
had to bring his food and culinary outfit with him, or buy them of dealers in the khan. The
same rule held good as to his bed and bedding, and forage for his beasts. Water, rest, shelter,
and protection were all he looked for from the proprietor, and they were gratuities. The peace
of synagogues was sometimes broken by brawling disputants, but that of the khans never. The
houses and all their appurtenances were sacred: a well was not more so.

The khan at Bethlehem, before which Joseph and his wife stopped, was a good specimen of its
class, being neither very primitive nor very princely. The building was purely Oriental; that
is to say, a quadrangular block of rough stones, one story high, flat-roofed, externally unbroken
by a window, and with but one principal entrance--a doorway, which was also a gateway, on the
eastern side, or front. The road ran by the door so near that the chalk dust half covered the
lintel. A fence of flat rocks, beginning at the northeastern corner of the pile, extended many
yards down the slope to a point from whence it swept westwardly to a limestone bluff; making
what was in the highest degree essential to a respectable khan--a safe enclosure for animals.

In a village like Bethlehem, as there was but one sheik, there could not well be more than
one khan; and, though born in the place, the Nazarene, from long residence elsewhere, had no
claim to hospitality in the town. Moreover, the enumeration for which he was coming might be
the work of weeks or months; Roman deputies in the provinces were proverbially slow; and to
impose himself and wife for a period so uncertain upon acquaintances or relations was out of
the question. So, before he drew nigh the great house, while he was yet climbing the slope,
in the steep places toiling to hasten the donkey, the fear that he might not find accommodations
in the khan became a painful anxiety; for he found the road thronged with men and boys who,
with great ado, were taking their cattle, horses, and camels to and from the valley, some to
water, some to the neighboring caves. And when he was come close by, his alarm was not allayed
by the discovery of a crowd investing the door of the establishment, while the enclosure adjoining,
broad as it was, seemed already full.

"We cannot reach the door," Joseph said, in his slow way. "Let us stop here, and learn, if
we can, what has happened."

The wife, without answering, quietly drew the wimple aside. The look of fatigue at first upon
her face changed to one of interest. She found herself at the edge of an assemblage that could
not be other than a matter of curiosity to her, although it was common enough at the khans
on any of the highways which the great caravans were accustomed to traverse. There were men
on foot, running hither and thither, talking shrilly and in all the tongues of Syria; men on
horseback screaming to men on camels; men struggling doubtfully with fractious cows and frightened
sheep; men peddling bread and wine; and among the mass a herd of boys apparently in chase of
a herd of dogs. Everybody and everything seemed to be in motion at the same time. Possibly
the fair spectator was too weary to be long attracted by the scene; in a little while she sighed,
and settled down on the pillion, and, as if in search of peace and rest, or in expectation
of some one, looked off to the south, and up to the tall cliffs of the Mount of Paradise, then
faintly reddening under the setting sun.

While she was thus looking, a man pushed his way out of the press, and, stopping close by the
donkey, faced about with an angry brow. The Nazarene spoke to him.

"As I am what I take you to be, good friend--a son of Judah--may I ask the cause of this multitude?"

The stranger turned fiercely; but, seeing the solemn countenance of Joseph, so in keeping with
his deep, slow voice and speech, he raised his hand in half-salutation, and replied,

"Peace be to you, Rabbi! I am a son of Judah, and will answer you. I dwell in Beth-Dagon, which,
you know, is in what used to be the land of the tribe of Dan."

"On the road to Joppa from Modin," said Joseph.

"Ah, you have been in Beth-Dagon," the man said, his face softening yet more. "What wanderers
we of Judah are! I have been away from the ridge--old Ephrath, as our father Jacob called it--for
many years. When the proclamation went abroad requiring all Hebrews to be numbered at the cities
of their birth-- That is my business here, Rabbi."

Joseph's face remained stolid as a mask, while he remarked, "I have come for that also--I and
my wife."

The stranger glanced at Mary and kept silence. She was looking up at the bald top of Gedor.
The sun touched her upturned face, and filled the violet depths of her eyes, and upon her parted
lips trembled an aspiration which could not have been to a mortal. For the moment, all the
humanity of her beauty seemed refined away: she was as we fancy they are who sit close by the
gate in the transfiguring light of Heaven. The Beth-Dagonite saw the original of what, centuries
after, came as a vision of genius to Sanzio the divine, and left him immortal.

"Of what was I speaking? Ah! I remember. I was about to say that when I heard of the order
to come here, I was angry. Then I thought of the old hill, and the town, and the valley falling
away into the depths of Cedron; of the vines and orchards, and fields of grain, unfailing since
the days of Boaz and Ruth, of the familiar mountains--Gedor here, Gibeah yonder, Mar Elias
there--which, when I was a boy, were the walls of the world to me; and I forgave the tyrants
and came--I, and Rachel, my wife, and Deborah and Michal, our roses of Sharon."

The man paused again, looking abruptly at Mary, who was now looking at him and listening. Then
he said, "Rabbi, will not your wife go to mine? You may see her yonder with the children, under
the leaning olive-tree at the bend of the road. I tell you"--he turned to Joseph and spoke
positively--"I tell you the khan is full. It is useless to ask at the gate."

Joseph's will was slow, like his mind; he hesitated, but at length replied, "The offer is kind.
Whether there be room for us or not in the house, we will go see your people. Let me speak
to the gate-keeper myself. I will return quickly."

And, putting the leading-strap in the stranger's hand, he pushed into the stirring crowd.

The keeper sat on a great cedar block outside the gate. Against the wall behind him leaned
a javelin. A dog squatted on the block by his side.

"The peace of Jehovah be with you," said Joseph, at last confronting the keeper.

"What you give, may you find again; and, when found, be it many times multiplied to you and
yours," returned the watchman, gravely, though without moving.

"I am a Bethlehemite," said Joseph, in his most deliberate way. "Is there not room for--"

"There is not."

"You may have heard of me--Joseph of Nazareth. This is the house of my fathers. I am of the
line of David."

These words held the Nazarene's hope. If they failed him, further appeal was idle, even that
of the offer of many shekels. To be a son of Judah was one thing--in the tribal opinion a great
thing; to be of the house of David was yet another; on the tongue of a Hebrew there could be
no higher boast. A thousand years and more had passed since the boyish shepherd became the
successor of Saul and founded a royal family. Wars, calamities, other kings, and the countless
obscuring processes of time had, as respects fortune, lowered his descendants to the common
Jewish level; the bread they ate came to them of toil never more humble; yet they had the benefit
of history sacredly kept, of which genealogy was the first chapter and the last; they could
not become unknown, while, wherever they went In Israel, acquaintance drew after it a respect
amounting to reverence.

If this were so in Jerusalem and elsewhere, certainly one of the sacred line might reasonably
rely upon it at the door of the khan of Bethlehem. To say, as Joseph said, "This is the house
of my fathers," was to say the truth most simply and literally; for it was the very house Ruth
ruled as the wife of Boaz, the very house in which Jesse and his ten sons, David the youngest,
were born, the very house in which Samuel came seeking a king, and found him; the very house
which David gave to the son of Barzillai, the friendly Gileadite; the very house in which Jeremiah,
by prayer, rescued the remnant of his race flying before the Babylonians.

The appeal was not without effect. The keeper of the gate slid down from the cedar block, and,
laying his hand upon his beard, said, respectfully, "Rabbi, I cannot tell you when this door
first opened in welcome to the traveller, but it was more than a thousand years ago; and in
all that time there is no known instance of a good man turned away, save when there was no
room to rest him in. If it has been so with the stranger, just cause must the steward have
who says no to one of the line of David. Wherefore, I salute you again; and, if you care to
go with me, I will show you that there is not a lodging-place left in the house; neither in
the chambers, nor in the lewens, nor in the court--not even on the roof. May I ask when you came?"

"But now."

The keeper smiled.

"'The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be as one born among you, and thou shalt love him
as thyself.' Is not that the law, Rabbi?"

Joseph was silent.

"If it be the law, can I say to one a long time come, 'Go thy way; another is here to take
thy place?'"

Yet Joseph held his peace.

"And, if I said so, to whom would the place belong? See the many that have been waiting, some
of them since noon."

"Who are all these people?" asked Joseph, turning to the crowd. "And why are they here at this
time?"

"That which doubtless brought you, Rabbi--the decree of the Caesar"--the keeper threw an interrogative
glance at the Nazarene, then continued--"brought most of those who have lodging in the house.
And yesterday the caravan passing from Damascus to Arabia and Lower Egypt arrived. These you
see here belong to it--men and camels."

Still Joseph persisted.

"The court is large," he said.

"Yes, but it is heaped with cargoes--with bales of silk, and pockets of spices, and goods of
every kind." 

We took a hearty leave of our hosts, and raced, singing and shouting, down the steep hills, and
so home. The fine weather was at an end. The sky was cloudy, the barometer fell and a thin rain
pierced everything. Two days later the steamer arrived, and I meant to go aboard, but a heavy
swell from the west set in, such as I had never seen before, although
not a breath of wind was stirring.

These rollers were caused by a cyclone, and gave us some idea of its violence. I despaired
of ever reaching the steamer, but Mr. B. was an expert sailor, and
making the most of a slight lull, he brought me safely through the
surf and on board.

His goods, however, could not be loaded on to the steamer, which immediately sailed. We passed
New Year's Eve and New Year's Day at anchor in South-West Bay, Malekula,
while a terrific gale whipped the water horizontally toward the ship
and across the deck.

We spent gloomy holidays, shut up in the damp, dark steamer, unable
to stay on deck, restless and uncomfortable below.

How one learns to appreciate the British impassiveness which helps one, in such conditions,
to spend a perfectly happy day with a pipe and a talk about the weather!

On

the morning of the third day we lay off the east coast of Malekula,
on a blue, shining sea, with all the landscape as peaceful and bright
as if there were no such thing as a cyclone in the world.

I landed, packed my collections, which I had left in Vao, and, with
the help of a missionary, I reached Bushman Bay, whence Mr. H. kindly
took me to Vila.

There H.B.M. Resident Commissioner, Mr. Morton King, did me the honour of offering me his hospitality,
so that I was suddenly transplanted to all the luxuries of civilized
life once more.

I spent the days packing the collections awaiting me at Vila, and which I found in fairly good
condition; the evenings were passed in the interesting society of
Mr. King, who had travelled extensively and was an authority on matters
relating to the Orient.

He inspired me with admiration for the British system of colonial
politics with its truly idealistic tendencies.

The weeks I spent at Port Vila will always be a pleasant memory of a time of rest and comfort
and stimulating intercourse.

In February I left for Nouméa, where I hoped to meet two friends and
colleagues, Dr. Fritz Sarasin and Dr. Jean Roux, who were coming to
New Caledonia in order to pursue studies similar to mine.

The time I spent with them was rich in interest and encouragement,
and in March I returned to the New Hebrides with renewed energy.

CHAPTER XI

AMBRYM

It was a miserable little boat in which I sailed from Nouméa. We were to have started on a Monday,
but it was Friday before we got off. The boat was overloaded. On deck there was a quantity of
timber, also cattle, pigs, sheep and calves, all very seasick and uncomfortable. The deck was
almost on a level with the water, and even while still inside the reef occasional waves broke
over the gunwale and flooded the ship. At nightfall we entered the open ocean. Now the waves began
to pour on to the deck from all sides, and the bow of the vessel dived into the sea as if it
were never going to rise again. The night was dark, shreds of cloud raced across a steel-grey
sky, while a greenish patch showed the position of the moon

.
 From the field below us, and from the well down in the valley, he used to drive his
flocks to it for safety; and afterwards, when he was king, he came back to the old house here
for rest and health, bringing great trains of animals. The mangers yet remain as they were
in his day. Better a bed on the floor where he has slept than one in the court-yard or out
by the roadside. Ah, here is the house before the cave!"

This speech must not be taken as an apology for the lodging offered. There was no need of apology.
The place was the best then at disposal. The guests were simple folks, by habits of life easily
satisfied. To the Jew of that period, moreover, abode in caverns was a familiar idea, made
so by every-day occurrences, and by what he heard of Sabbaths in the synagogues. How much of
Jewish history, how many of the many exciting incidents in that history, had transpired in
caves! Yet further, these people were Jews of Bethlehem, with whom the idea was especially
commonplace; for their locality abounded with caves great and small, some of which had been
dwelling-places from the time of the Emim and Horites. No more was there offence to them in
the fact that the cavern to which they were being taken had been, or was, a stable. They were
the descendants of a race of herdsmen, whose flocks habitually shared both their habitations
and wanderings. In keeping with a custom derived from Abraham, the tent of the Bedawin yet
shelters his horses and children alike. So they obeyed the keeper cheerfully, and gazed at
the house, feeling only a natural curiosity. Everything associated with the history of David
was interesting to them.

The building was low and narrow, projecting but a little from the rock to which it was joined
at the rear, and wholly without a window. In its blank front there was a door, swung on enormous
hinges, and thickly daubed with ochreous clay. While the wooden bolt of the lock was being
pushed back, the women were assisted from their pillions.  Upon the opening of the door, the
keeper called out,

"Come in!"

The guests entered, and stared about them. It became apparent immediately that the house was
but a mask or covering for the mouth of a natural cave or grotto, probably forty feet long,
nine or ten high, and twelve or fifteen in width. The light streamed through the doorway, over
an uneven floor, falling upon piles of grain and fodder, and earthenware and household property,
occupying the centre of the chamber. Along the sides were mangers, low enough for sheep, and
built of stones laid in cement. There were no stalls or partitions of any kind. Dust and chaff
yellowed the floor, filled all the crevices and hollows, and thickened the spider-webs, which
dropped from the ceiling like bits of dirty linen; otherwise the place was cleanly, and, to
appearance, as comfortable as any of the arched lewens of the khan proper. In fact, a cave
was the model and first suggestion of the lewen.

"Come in!" said the guide. "These piles upon the floor are for travellers like yourselves.
Take what of them you need."

Then he spoke to Mary.

"Can you rest here?"

"The place is sanctified," she answered.

"I leave you then. Peace be with you all!"

When he was gone, they busied themselves making the cave habitable.

CHAPTER X.

At a certain hour in the evening the shouting and stir of the people in and about the khan
ceased; at the same time, every Israelite, if not already upon his feet, arose, solemnized
his face, looked towards Jerusalem, crossed his hands upon his breast, and prayed; for it was
the sacred ninth hour, when sacrifices were offered in the temple on Moriah, and God was supposed
to be there. When the hands of the worshippers fell down, the commotion broke forth again;
everybody hastened to bread, or to make his pallet. A little later, the lights were put out,
and there was silence, and then sleep.

* * * * * *

About midnight some one on the roof cried out, "What light is that in the sky? Awake, brethren,
awake and see!"

The people, half asleep, sat up and looked; then they became wide-awake, though wonder-struck.
And the stir spread to the court below, and into the lewens; soon the entire tenantry of the
house and court and enclosure were out gazing at the sky.

And this was what they saw. A ray of light, beginning at a height immeasurably beyond the nearest
stars, and dropping obliquely to the earth; at its top, a diminishing point; at its base, many
furlongs in width; its sides blending softly with the darkness of the night, its core a roseate
electrical splendor. The apparition seemed to rest on the nearest mountain southeast of the
town, making a pale corona along the line of the summit. The khan was touched luminously, so
that those upon the roof saw each other's faces, all filled with wonder.

Steadily, through minutes, the ray lingered, and then the wonder changed to awe and fear; the
timid trembled; the boldest spoke in whispers.

"Saw you ever the like?" asked one.

"It seems just over the mountain there. I cannot tell what it is, nor did I ever see anything
like it," was the answer.

"Can it be that a star has burst and fallen?" asked another, his tongue faltering.

"When a star falls, its light goes out."

"I have it!" cried one, confidently. "The shepherds have seen a lion, and made fires to keep
him from the flocks."

The men next the speaker drew a breath of relief, and said, "Yes, that is it! The flocks were
grazing in the valley over there to-day."

A bystander dispelled the comfort.

"No, no! Though all the wood in all the valleys of Judah was brought together in one pile and
fired, the blaze would not throw a light so strong and high."

After that there was silence on the house-top, broken but once again while the mystery continued.

"Brethren!" exclaimed a Jew of venerable mien, "what we see is the ladder our father Jacob
saw in his dream. Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers!"

CHAPTER XI

A mile and a half, it may be two miles, southeast of Bethlehem, there is a plain separated
from the town by an intervening swell of the mountain. Besides being well sheltered from the
north winds, the vale was covered with a growth of sycamore, dwarf-oak, and pine trees, while
in the glens and ravines adjoining there were thickets of olive and mulberry; all at this season
of the year invaluable for the support of sheep, goats, and cattle, of which the wandering
flocks consisted.

At the side farthest from the town, close under a bluff, there was an extensive marah, or sheepcot,
ages old. In some long-forgotten foray, the building had been unroofed and almost demolished.
The enclosure attached to it remained intact, however, and that was of more importance to the
shepherds who drove their charges thither than the house itself. The stone wall around the
lot was high as a man's head, yet not so high but that sometimes a panther or a lion, hungering
from the wilderness, leaped boldly in. On the inner side of the wall, and as an additional
security against the constant danger, a hedge of the rhamnus had been planted, an invention
so successful that now a sparrow could hardly penetrate the overtopping branches, armed as
they were with great clusters of thorns hard as spikes.

The day of the occurrences which occupy the preceding chapters, a number of shepherds, seeking
fresh walks for their flocks, led them up to this plain; and from early morning the groves
had been made ring with calls, and the blows of axes, the bleating of sheep and goats, the
tinkling of bells, the lowing of cattle, and the barking of dogs. When the sun went down, they
led the way to the marah, and by nightfall had everything safe in the field; then they kindled
a fire down by the gate, partook of their humble supper, and sat down to rest and talk, leaving
one on watch.

There were six of these men, omitting the watchman; and afterwhile they assembled in a group
near the fire, some sitting, some lying prone. As they went bareheaded habitually, their hair
stood out in thick, coarse, sunburnt shocks; their beard covered their throats, and fell in
mats down the breast; mantles of the skin of kids and lambs, with the fleece on, wrapped them
from neck to knee, leaving the arms exposed; broad belts girthed the rude garments to their
waists; their sandals were of the coarsest quality; from their right shoulders hung scrips
containing food and selected stones for slings, with which they were armed; on the ground near
each one lay his crook, a symbol of his calling and a weapon of offence.

Such were the shepherds of Judea! In appearance, rough and savage as the gaunt dogs sitting
with them around the blaze; in fact, simple-minded, tender-hearted; effects due, in part, to
the primitive life they led, but chiefly to their constant care of things lovable and helpless.

They rested and talked, and their talk was all about their flocks, a dull theme to the world,
yet a theme which was all the world to them. If in narrative they dwelt long upon affairs of
trifling moment; if one of them omitted nothing of detail in recounting the loss of a lamb,
the relation between him and the unfortunate should be remembered: at birth it became his charge,
his to keep all its days, to help over the floods, to carry down the hollows, to name and train;
it was to be his companion, his object of thought and interest, the subject of his will; it
was to enliven and share his wanderings; in its defense he might be called on to face the lion
or robber--to die.

The great events, such as blotted out nations and changed the mastery of the world, were trifles
to them, if perchance they came to their knowledge. Of what Herod was doing in this city or
that, building palaces and gymnasia, and indulging forbidden practises, they occasionally heard.
As was her habit in those days, Rome did not wait for people slow to inquire about her; she
came to them. Over the hills along which he was leading his lagging herd, or in the fastnesses
in which he was hiding them, not unfrequently the shepherd was startled by the blare of trumpets,
and, peering out, beheld a cohort, sometimes a legion, in march; and when the glittering crests
were gone, and the excitement incident to the intrusion over, he bent himself to evolve the
meaning of the eagles and gilded globes of the soldiery, and the charm of a life so the opposite
of his own.

Yet these men, rude and simple as they were, had a knowledge and a wisdom of their own. On
Sabbaths they were accustomed to purify themselves, and go up into the synagogues, and sit
on the benches farthest from the ark. When the chazzan bore the Torah round, none kissed it
with greater zest; when the sheliach read the text, none listened to the interpreter with more
absolute faith; and none took away with them more of the elder's sermon, or gave it more thought
afterwards. In a verse of the Shema they found all the learning and all the law of their simple
lives--that their Lord was One God, and that they must love him with all their souls. And they
loved him, and such was their wisdom, surpassing that of kings.

While they talked, and before the first watch was over, one by one the shepherds went to sleep,
each lying where he had sat.

The night, like most nights of the winter season in the hill country, was clear, crisp, and
sparkling with stars. There was no wind. The atmosphere seemed never so pure, and the stillness
was more than silence; it was a holy hush, a warning that heaven was stooping low to whisper
some good thing to the listening earth.

By the gate, hugging his mantle close, the watchman walked; at times he stopped, attracted
by a stir among the sleeping herds, or by a jackal's cry off on the mountain-side. The midnight
was slow coming to him; but at last it came. His task was done; now for the dreamless sleep
with which labor blesses its wearied children! He moved towards the fire, but paused; a light
was breaking around him, soft and white, like the moon's. He waited breathlessly. The light
deepened; things before invisible came to view; he saw the whole field, and all it sheltered.
A chill sharper than that of the frosty air--a chill of fear--smote him. He looked up; the
stars were gone; the light was dropping as from a window in the sky; as he looked, it became
a splendor; then, in terror, he cried,

"Awake, awake!"

Up sprang the dogs, and, howling, ran away.

The herds rushed together bewildered.

The men clambered to their feet, weapons in hand.

"What is it?" they asked, in one voice.

"See!" cried the watchman, "the sky is on fire!"

Suddenly the light became intolerably bright, and they covered their eyes, and dropped upon
their knees; then, as their souls shrank with fear, they fell upon their faces blind and fainting,
and would have died had not a voice said to them,

"Fear not!"

And they listened.

"Fear not: for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people."

The voice, in sweetness and soothing more than human, and low and clear, penetrated all their
being, and filled them with assurance. They rose upon their knees, and, looking worshipfully,
beheld in the centre of a great glory the appearance of a man, clad in a robe intensely white;
above its shoulders towered the tops of wings shining and folded; a star over its forehead
glowed with steady lustre, brilliant as Hesperus; its hands were stretched towards them in
blessing; its face was serene and divinely beautiful.

They had often heard, and, in their simple way, talked, of angels; and they doubted not now,
but said, in their hearts, The glory of God is about us, and this is he who of old came to
the prophet by the river of Ulai.

Again there was a rest, while the words sank into their minds.

"And this shall be a sign unto you," the annunciator said next.

The herald spoke not again; his good tidings were told; yet he stayed awhile.

Not once the praise, but many times.

Then the herald raised his eyes as seeking approval of one far off; his wings stirred, and
spread slowly and majestically, on their upper side white as snow, in the shadow vari-tinted,
like mother-of-pearl; when they were expanded many cubits beyond his stature, he arose lightly,
and, without effort, floated out of view, taking the light up with him.

When the shepherds came fully to their senses, they stared at each other stupidly, until one
of them said, "It was Gabriel, the Lord's messenger unto men."

None answered.

"Christ the Lord is born; said he not so?"

Then another recovered his voice, and replied, "That is what he said."

"And did he not also say, in the city of David, which is our Bethlehem yonder. And that we
should find him a babe in swaddling-clothes?"

"And lying in a manger."

The first speaker gazed into the fire thoughtfully, but at length said, like one possessed
of a sudden resolve, "There is but one place in Bethlehem where there are mangers; but one,
and that is in the cave near the old khan. Brethren, let us go see this thing which has come
to pass. The priests and doctors have been a long time looking for the Christ. Now he is born,
and the Lord has given us a sign by which to know him. Let us go up and worship him."

"But the flocks!"

"The Lord will take care of them. Let us make haste."

Then they all arose and left the marah.

* * * * * *

Around the mountain and through the town they passed, and came to the gate of the khan, where
there was a man on watch.

"What would you have?" he asked.

"We have seen and heard great things to-night," they replied.

"Well, we, too, have seen great things, but heard nothing. What did you hear?"

"Let us go down to the cave in the enclosure, that we may be sure; then we will tell you all.
Come with us, and see for yourself."

"It is a fool's errand."

"No, the Christ is born."

"The Christ! How do you know?"

"Let us go and see first."

The man laughed scornfully.

"The Christ indeed! How are you to know him?"

"He was born this night, and is now lying in a manger, so we were told; and there is but one
place in Bethlehem with mangers."

"The cave?"

"Yes. Come with us."

They went through the court-yard without notice, although there were some up even then talking
about the wonderful light. The door of the cavern was open. A lantern was burning within, and
they entered unceremoniously.

"I give you peace," the watchman said to Joseph and the Beth Dagonite. "Here are people looking
for a child born this night, whom they are to know by finding him in swaddling-clothes and
lying in a manger."

For a moment the face of the stolid Nazarene was moved; turning away, he said, "The child is here."

They were led to one of the mangers, and there the child was. The lantern was brought, and
the shepherds stood by mute. The little one made no sign; it was as others just born.

"Where is the mother?" asked the watchman.

One of the women took the baby, and went to Mary, lying near, and put it in her arms. Then
the bystanders collected about the two.

"It is the Christ!" said a shepherd, at last.

"The Christ!" they all repeated, falling upon their knees in worship. One of them repeated
several times over,

"It is the Lord, and his glory is above the earth and heaven."

And the simple men, never doubting, kissed the hem of the mother's robe, and with joyful faces
departed.

The story went abroad, confirmed by the light so generally seen; and the next day, and for
days thereafter, the cave was visited by curious crowds, of whom some believed, though the
greater part laughed and mocked.

CHAPTER XII

The eleventh day after the birth of the child in the cave, about mid-afternoon, the three wise
men approached Jerusalem by the road from Shechem. After crossing Brook Cedron, they met many
people, of whom none failed to stop and look after them curiously.

Judea was of necessity an international thoroughfare; a narrow ridge, raised, apparently, by
the pressure of the desert on the east, and the sea on the west, was all she could claim to
be; over the ridge, however, nature had stretched the line of trade between the east and the
south; and that was her wealth. In other words, the riches of Jerusalem were the tolls she
levied on passing commerce. Nowhere else, consequently, unless in Rome, was there such constant
assemblage of so many people of so many different nations; in no other city was a stranger
less strange to the residents than within her walls and purlieus. And yet these three men excited
the wonder of all whom they met on the way to the gates.

A child belonging to some women sitting by the roadside opposite the Tombs of the Kings saw
the party coming; immediately it clapped its hands, and cried, "Look, look! What pretty bells!
What big camels!"

The bells were silver; the camels, as we have seen, were of unusual size and whiteness, and
moved with singular stateliness; the trappings told of the desert and of long journeys thereon,
and also of ample means in possession of the owners, who sat under the little canopies exactly
as they appeared at the rendezvous beyond the Jebel. Yet it was not the bells or the camels,
or their furniture, or the demeanor of the riders, that were so wonderful; it was the question
put by the man who rode foremost of the three.

The approach to Jerusalem from the north is across a plain which dips southward, leaving the
Damascus Gate in a vale or hollow. The road is narrow, but deeply cut by long use, and in places
difficult on account of the cobbles left loose and dry by the washing of the rains. On either
side, however, there stretched, in the old time, rich fields and handsome olive-groves, which
must, in luxurious growth, have been beautiful, especially to travellers fresh from the wastes
of the desert. In this road, the three stopped before the party in front of the Tombs.

"Good people," said Balthasar, stroking his plaited beard, and bending from his cot, "is not
Jerusalem close by?"

"Yes," answered the woman into whose arms the child had shrunk. "If the trees on yon swell
were a little lower you could see the towers on the market-place."

Balthasar gave the Greek and the Hindoo a look, then asked,

"Where is he that is born King of the Jews?"

The women gazed at each other without reply.

"You have not heard of him?"

"No."

"Well, tell everybody that we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him."

Thereupon the friends rode on. Of others they asked the same question, with like result. A
large company whom they met going to the Grotto of Jeremiah were so astonished by the inquiry
and the appearance of the travellers that they turned about and followed them into the city.

So much were the three occupied with the idea of their mission that they did not care for the
view which presently rose before them in the utmost magnificence: for the village first to
receive them on Bezetha; for Mizpah and Olivet, over on their left; for the wall behind the
village, with its forty tall and solid towers, superadded partly for strength, partly to gratify
the critical taste of the kingly builder; for the same towered wall bending off to the right,
with many an angle, and here and there an embattled gate, up to the three great white piles
Phasaelus, Mariamne, and Hippicus; for Zion, tallest of the hills, crowned with marble palaces,
and never so beautiful; for the glittering terraces of the temple on Moriah, admittedly one
of the wonders of the earth; for the regal mountains rimming the sacred city round about until
it seemed in the hollow of a mighty bowl.

They came, at length, to a tower of great height and strength, overlooking the gate which,
at that time, answered to the present Damascus Gate, and marked the meeting-place of the three
roads from Shechem, Jericho, and Gibeon. A Roman guard kept the passage-way. By this time the
people following the camels formed a train sufficient to draw the idlers hanging about the
portal; so that when Balthasar stopped to speak to the sentinel, the three became instantly
the centre of a close circle eager to hear all that passed.

"I give you peace," the Egyptian said, in a clear voice.

The sentinel made no reply.

"We have come great distances in search of one who is born King of the Jews. Can you tell us
where he is?"

The soldier raised the visor of his helmet, and called loudly. From an apartment at the right
of the passage an officer appeared.

"Give way," he cried, to the crowd which now pressed closer in; and as they seemed slow to
obey, he advanced twirling his javelin vigorously, now right, now left; and so he gained room.

"What would you?" he asked of Balthasar, speaking in the idiom of the city.

And Balthasar answered in the same,

"Where is he that is born King of the Jews?"

"Herod?" asked the officer, confounded.

"Herod's kingship is from Caesar; not Herod."

"There is no other King of the Jews."

"But we have seen the star of him we seek, and come to worship him."

The Roman was perplexed.

"Go farther," he said, at last. "Go farther. I am not a Jew. Carry the question to the doctors
in the Temple, or to Hannas the priest, or, better still, to Herod himself. If there be another
King of the Jews, he will find him."

Thereupon he made way for the strangers, and they passed the gate. But, before entering the
narrow street, Balthasar lingered to say to his friends, "We are sufficiently proclaimed. By
midnight the whole city will have heard of us and of our mission. Let us to the khan now."

CHAPTER XIII

That evening, before sunset, some women were washing clothes on the upper step of the flight
that led down into the basin of the Pool of Siloam. They knelt each before a broad bowl of
earthenware. A girl at the foot of the steps kept them supplied with water, and sang while
she filled the jar. The song was cheerful, and no doubt lightened their labor. Occasionally
they would sit upon their heels, and look up the slope of Ophel, and round to the summit of
what is now the Mount of Offence, then faintly glorified by the dying sun.

While they plied their hands, rubbing and wringing the clothes in the bowls, two other women
came to them, each with an empty jar upon her shoulder.

"Peace to you," one of the new-comers said.

The laborers paused, sat up, wrung the water from their hands, and returned the salutation.

"It is nearly night--time to quit."

"There is no end to work," was the reply.

"But there is a time to rest, and--"

"To hear what may be passing," interposed another.

"What news have you?"

"Then you have not heard?"

"No."

"They say the Christ is born," said the newsmonger, plunging into her story.

It was curious to see the faces of the laborers brighten with interest; on the other side down
came the jars, which, in a moment, were turned into seats for their owners.

"The Christ!" the listeners cried.

"So they say."

"Who?"

"Everybody; it is common talk."

"Does anybody believe it?"

"This afternoon three men came across Brook Cedron on the road from Shechem," the speaker replied,
circumstantially, intending to smother doubt. "Each one of them rode a camel spotless white,
and larger than any ever before seen in Jerusalem."

The eyes and mouths of the auditors opened wide.

"To prove how great and rich the men were," the narrator continued, "they sat under awnings
of silk; the buckles of their saddles were of gold, as was the fringe of their bridles; the
bells were of silver, and made real music. Nobody knew them; they looked as if they had come
from the ends of the world. Only one of them spoke, and of everybody on the road, even the
women and children, he asked this question--'Where is he that is born King of the Jews?' No
one gave them answer--no one understood what they meant; so they passed on, leaving behind
them this saying: 'For we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him.' They
put the question to the Roman at the gate; and he, no wiser than the simple people on the road,
sent them up to Herod."

"Where are they now?"

"At the khan. Hundreds have been to look at them already, and hundreds more are going."

"Who are they?"

"Nobody knows. They are said to be Persians--wise men who talk with the stars--prophets, it
may be, like Elijah and Jeremiah."

"What do they mean by King of the Jews?"

"The Christ, and that he is just born."

One of the women laughed, and resumed her work, saying, "Well, when I see him I will believe."

Another followed her example: "And I--well, when I see him raise the dead, I will believe."

A third said, quietly, "He has been a long time promised. It will be enough for me to see him
heal one leper."

And the party sat talking until the night came, and, with the help of the frosty air, drove
them home.

* * * * * *

Later in the evening, about the beginning of the first watch, there was an assemblage in the
palace on Mount Zion, of probably fifty persons, who never came together except by order of
Herod, and then only when he had demanded to know some one or more of the deeper mysteries
of the Jewish law and history. It was, in short, a meeting of the teachers of the colleges,
of the chief priests, and of the doctors most noted in the city for learning--the leaders of
opinion, expounders of the different creeds; princes of the Sadducees; Pharisaic debaters;
calm, soft-spoken, stoical philosophers of the Essene socialists.

The chamber in which the session was held belonged to one of the interior court-yards of the
palace, and was quite large and Romanesque. The floor was tessellated with marble blocks; the
walls, unbroken by a window, were frescoed in panels of saffron yellow; a divan occupied the
centre of the apartment, covered with cushions of bright-yellow cloth, and fashioned in form
of the letter U, the opening towards the doorway; in the arch of the divan, or, as it were,
in the bend of the letter, there was an immense bronze tripod, curiously inlaid with gold and
silver, over which a chandelier dropped from the ceiling, having seven arms, each holding a
lighted lamp. The divan and the lamp were purely Jewish.

The company sat upon the divan after the style of Orientals, in costume singularly uniform,
except as to color. They were mostly men advanced in years; immense beards covered their faces;
to their large noses were added the effects of large black eyes, deeply shaded by bold brows;
their demeanor was grave, dignified, even patriarchal. In brief, their session was that of
the Sanhedrim.

He who sat before the tripod, however, in the place which may be called the head of the divan,
having all the rest of his associates on his right and left, and, at the same time, before
him, evidently president of the meeting, would have instantly absorbed the attention of a spectator.
He had been cast in large mould, but was now shrunken and stooped to ghastliness; his white
robe dropped from his shoulders in folds that gave no hint of muscle or anything but an angular
skeleton. His hands, half concealed by sleeves of silk, white and crimson striped, were clasped
upon his knees. When he spoke, sometimes the first finger of the right hand extended tremulously;
he seemed incapable of other gesture. But his head was a splendid dome. A few hairs, whiter
than fine-drawn silver, fringed the base; over a broad, full-sphered skull the skin was drawn
close, and shone in the light with positive brilliance; the temples were deep hollows, from
which the forehead beetled like a wrinkled crag; the eyes were wan and dim; the nose was pinched;
and all the lower face was muffed in a beard flowing and venerable as Aaron's. Such was Hillel
the Babylonian! The line of prophets, long extinct in Israel, was now succeeded by a line of
scholars, of whom he was first in learning--a prophet in all but the divine inspiration! At
the age of one hundred and six, he was still Rector of the Great College.

On the table before him lay outspread a roll or volume of parchment inscribed with Hebrew characters;
behind him, in waiting, stood a page richly habited.

There had been discussion, but at this moment of introduction the company had reached a conclusion;
each one was in an attitude of rest, and the venerable Hillel, without moving, called the page.

"Hist!"

The youth advanced respectfully.

"Go tell the king we are ready to give him answer."

The boy hurried away.

After a time two officers entered and stopped, one on each side the door; after them slowly
followed a most striking personage--an old man clad in a purple robe bordered with scarlet,
and girt to his waist by a band of gold linked so fine that it was pliable as leather; the
latchets of his shoes sparkled with precious stones; a narrow crown wrought in filigree shone
outside a tarbooshe of softest crimson plush, which, encasing his head, fell down the neck
and shoulders, leaving the throat and neck exposed. Instead of a seal, a dagger dangled from
his belt. He walked with a halting step, leaning heavily upon a staff. Not until he reached
the opening of the divan, did he pause or look up from the floor; then, as for the first time
conscious of the company, and roused by their presence, he raised himself, and looked haughtily
round, like one startled and searching for an enemy--so dark, suspicious, and threatening was
the glance. Such was Herod the Great--a body broken by diseases, a conscience seared with crimes,
a mind magnificently capable, a soul fit for brotherhood with the Caesars; now seven-and-sixty
years old, but guarding his throne with a jealousy never so vigilant, a power never so despotic,
and a cruelty never so inexorable.

There was a general movement on the part of the assemblage--a bending forward in salaam by
the more aged, a rising-up by the more courtierly, followed by low genuflections, hands upon
the beard or breast.

His observations taken, Herod moved on until at the tripod opposite the venerable Hillel, who
met his cold glance with an inclination of the head, and a slight lifting of the hands.

"The answer!" said the king, with imperious simplicity, addressing Hillel, and planting his
staff before him with both hands. "The answer!"

The eyes of the patriarch glowed mildly, and, raising his head, and looking the inquisitor
full in the face, he answered, his associates giving him closest attention,

"With thee, O king, be the peace of God, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob!"

His manner was that of invocation; changing it, he resumed:

"Thou hast demanded of us where the Christ should be born."

The king bowed, though the evil eyes remained fixed upon the sage's face.

"That is the question."

"Then, O king, speaking for myself, and all my brethren here, not one dissenting, I say, in
Bethlehem of Judea."

Herod's face was troubled, and his eyes fell upon the parchment while he thought. Those beholding
him scarcely breathed; they spoke not, nor did he. At length he turned about and left the chamber.

"Brethren," said Hillel, "we are dismissed."

The company then arose, and in groups departed.

"Simeon," said Hillel again.

A man, quite fifty years old, but in the hearty prime of life, answered and came to him.

"Take up the sacred parchment, my son; roll it tenderly."

The order was obeyed.

"Now lend me thy arm; I will to the litter."

The strong man stooped; with his withered hands the old one took the offered support, and,
rising, moved feebly to the door.

So departed the famous Rector, and Simeon, his son, who was to be his successor in wisdom,
learning, and office.

* * * * * *

Yet later in the evening the wise men were lying in a lewen of the khan awake. The stones which
served them as pillows raised their heads so they could look out of the open arch into the
depths of the sky; and as they watched the twinkling of the stars, they thought of the next
manifestation. How would it come? What would it be? They were in Jerusalem at last; they had
asked at the gate for Him they sought; they had borne witness of his birth; it remained only
to find him; and as to that, they placed all trust in the Spirit. Men listening for the voice
of God, or waiting a sign from Heaven, cannot sleep.

While they were in this condition, a man stepped in under the arch, darkening the lewen.

"Awake!" he said to them; "I bring you a message which will not be put off."

They all sat up.

"From whom?" asked the Egyptian.

"Herod the king."

Each one felt his spirit thrill.

"Are you not the steward of the khan?" Balthasar asked next.

"I am."

"What would the king with us?"

"His messenger is without; let him answer."

"Tell him, then, to abide our coming."

"You were right, O my brother!" said the Greek, when the steward was gone. "The question put
to the people on the road, and to the guard at the gate, has given us quick notoriety. I am
impatient; let us up quickly."

They arose, put on their sandals, girt their mantles about them, and went out.

"I salute you, and give you peace, and pray your pardon; but my master, the king, has sent
me to invite you to the palace, where he would have speech with you privately."

Thus the messenger discharged his duty.

A lamp hung in the entrance, and by its light they looked at each other, and knew the Spirit
was upon them. Then the Egyptian stepped to the steward, and said, so as not to be heard by
the others, "You know where our goods are stored in the court, and where our camels are resting.
While we are gone, make all things ready for our departure, if it should be needful."

"Go your way assured; trust me," the steward replied.

"The king's will is our will," said Balthasar to the messenger. "We will follow you."

The streets of the Holy City were narrow then as now, but not so rough and foul; for the great
builder, not content with beauty, enforced cleanliness and convenience also. Following their
guide, the brethren proceeded without a word. Through the dim starlight, made dimmer by the
walls on both sides, sometimes almost lost under bridges connecting the house-tops, out of
a low ground they ascended a hill. At last they came to a portal reared across the way. In
the light of fires blazing before it in two great braziers, they caught a glimpse of the structure,
and also of some guards leaning motionlessly upon their arms. They passed into a building unchallenged.
Then by passages and arched halls; through courts, and under colonnades not always lighted;
up long flights of stairs, past innumerable cloisters and chambers, they were conducted into
a tower of great height. Suddenly the guide halted, and, pointing through an open door, said
to them,

"Enter. The king is there."

The air of the chamber was heavy with the perfume of sandal-wood, and all the appointments
within were effeminately rich. Upon the floor, covering the central space, a tufted rug was
spread, and upon that a throne was set. The visitors had but time, however, to catch a confused
idea of the place--of carved and gilt ottomans and couches; of fans and jars and musical instruments;
of golden candlesticks glittering in their own lights; of walls painted in the style of the
voluptuous Grecian school, one look at which had made a Pharisee hide his head with holy horror.
Herod, sitting upon the throne to receive them, clad as when at the conference with the doctors
and lawyers, claimed all their minds.

At the edge of the rug, to which they advanced uninvited, they prostrated themselves. The king
touched a bell. An attendant came in, and placed three stools before the throne.

"Seat yourselves," said the monarch, graciously.

"From the North Gate," he continued, when they were at rest, "I had this afternoon report of
the arrival of three strangers, curiously mounted, and appearing as if from far countries.
Are you the men?"

The Egyptian took the sign from the Greek and the Hindoo, and answered, with the profoundest
salaam, "Were we other than we are, the mighty Herod, whose fame is as incense to the whole
world, would not have sent for us. We may not doubt that we are the strangers."

Herod acknowledged the speech with a wave of the hand.

"Who are you? Whence do you come?" he asked, adding significantly, "Let each speak for himself."

In turn they gave him account, referring simply to the cities and lands of their birth, and
the routes by which they came to Jerusalem. Somewhat disappointed, Herod plied them more directly.

"What was the question you put to the officer at the gate?"

"We asked him, Where is he that is born King of the Jews."

"I see now why the people were so curious. You excite me no less. Is there another King of
the Jews?"

The Egyptian did not blanch.

"There is one newly born."

An expression of pain knit the dark face of the monarch, as if his mind were swept by a harrowing
recollection.

"Not to me, not to me!" he exclaimed.

Possibly the accusing images of his murdered children flitted before him; recovering from the
emotion, whatever it was, he asked, steadily, "Where is the new king?"

"That, O king, is what we would ask."

"You bring me a wonder--a riddle surpassing any of Solomon's," the inquisitor said next. "As
you see, I am in the time of life when curiosity is as ungovernable as it was in childhood,
when to trifle with it is cruelty. Tell me further, and I will honor you as kings honor each
other. Give me all you know about the newly born, and I will join you in the search for him;
and when we have found him, I will do what you wish; I will bring him to Jerusalem, and train
him in kingcraft; I will use my grace with Caesar for his promotion and glory. Jealousy shall
not come between us, so I swear. But tell me first how, so widely separated by seas and deserts,
you all came to hear of him."

"I will tell you truly, O king."

"Speak on," said Herod.

Balthasar raised himself erect, and said, solemnly,

"There is an Almighty God."

Herod was visibly startled.

"He bade us come hither, promising that we should find the Redeemer of the World; that we should
see and worship him, and bear witness that he was come; and, as a sign, we were each given
to see a star. His Spirit stayed with us. O king, his Spirit is with us now!"

An overpowering feeling seized the three. The Greek with difficulty restrained an outcry. Herod's
gaze darted quickly from one to the other; he was more suspicious and dissatisfied than before.

"You are mocking me," he said. "If not, tell me more. What is to follow the coming of the new
king?"

"The salvation of men."

"From what?"

"Their wickedness."

"How?"

"By the divine agencies--Faith, Love, and Good Works."

"Then"--Herod paused, and from his look no man could have said with what feeling he continued--"you
are the heralds of the Christ. Is that all?"

Balthasar bowed low.

"We are your servants, O king."

The monarch touched a bell, and the attendant appeared.

"Bring the gifts," the master said.

The attendant went out, but in a little while returned, and, kneeling before the guests, gave
to each one an outer robe or mantle of scarlet and blue, and a girdle of gold. They acknowledged
the honors with Eastern prostrations.

"A word further," said Herod, when the ceremony was ended. "To the officer of the gate, and
but now to me, you spoke of seeing a star in the east."

"Yes," said Balthasar, "his star, the star of the newly born."

"What time did it appear?"

"When we were bidden come hither."

Herod arose, signifying the audience was over. Stepping from the throne towards them, he said,
with all graciousness,

"If, as I believe, O illustrious men, you are indeed the heralds of the Christ just born, know
that I have this night consulted those wisest in things Jewish, and they say with one voice
he should be born in Bethlehem of Judea. To your going there shall be no let or hindrance.
Peace be with you!"

And, folding his robe about him, he left the chamber.

Directly the guide came, and led them back to the street, and thence to the khan, at the portal
of which the Greek said, impulsively, "Let us to Bethlehem, O brethren, as the king has advised."

"Yes," cried the Hindoo. "The Spirit burns within me."

"Be it so," said Balthasar, with equal warmth. "The camels are ready."

They gave gifts to the steward, mounted into their saddles, received directions to the Joppa
Gate, and departed. At their approach the great valves were unbarred, and they passed out into
the open country, taking the road so lately travelled by Joseph and Mary. As they came up out
of Hinnom, on the plain of Rephaim, a light appeared, at first wide-spread and faint. Their
pulses fluttered fast. The light intensified rapidly; they closed their eyes against its burning
brilliance: when they dared look again, lo! the star, perfect as any in the heavens, but low
down and moving slowly before them. And they folded their hands, and shouted, and rejoiced
with exceeding great joy.

"God is with us! God is with us!" they repeated, in frequent cheer, all the way, until the
star, rising out of the valley beyond Mar Elias, stood still over a house up on the slope of
the hill near the town.

CHAPTER XIV

It was now the beginning of the third watch, and at Bethlehem the morning was breaking over
the mountains in the east, but so feebly that it was yet night in the valley. The watchman
on the roof of the old khan, shivering in the chilly air, was listening for the first distinguishable
sounds with which life, awakening, greets the dawn, when a light came moving up the hill towards
the house. He thought it a torch in some one's hand; next moment he thought it a meteor; the
brilliance grew, however, until it became a star. Sore afraid, he cried out, and brought everybody
within the walls to the roof. The phenomenon, in eccentric motion, continued to approach; the
rocks, trees, and roadway under it shone as in a glare of lightning; directly its brightness
became blinding. The more timid of the beholders fell upon their knees, and prayed, with their
faces hidden; the boldest, covering their eyes, crouched, and now and then snatched glances
fearfully. Afterwhile the khan and everything thereabout lay under the intolerable radiance.
Such as dared look beheld the star standing still directly over the house in front of the cave
where the Child had been born.

In the height of this scene, the wise men came up, and at the gate dismounted from their camels,
and shouted for admission. When the steward so far mastered his terror as to give them heed,
he drew the bars and opened to them. The camels looked spectral in the unnatural light, and,
besides their outlandishness, there were in the faces and manner of the three visitors an eagerness
and exaltation which still further excited the keeper's fears and fancy; he fell back, and
for a time could not answer the question they put to him.

"Is not this Bethlehem of Judea?"

But others came, and by their presence gave him assurance.

"No, this is but the khan; the town lies farther on."

"Is there not here a child newly born?"

The bystanders turned to each other marvelling, though some of them answered, "Yes, yes."

"Show us to him!" said the Greek, impatiently.

"Show us to him!" cried Balthasar, breaking through his gravity; "for we have seen his star,
even that which ye behold over the house, and are come to worship him."

The Hindoo clasped his hands, exclaiming, "God indeed lives! Make haste, make haste! The Savior
is found. Blessed, blessed are we above men!"

The people from the roof came down and followed the strangers as they were taken through the
court and out into the enclosure; at sight of the star yet above the cave, though less candescent
than before, some turned back afraid; the greater part went on. As the strangers neared the
house, the orb arose; when they were at the door, it was high up overhead vanishing; when they
entered, it went out lost to sight. And to the witnesses of what then took place came a conviction
that there was a divine relation between the star and the strangers, which extended also to
at least some of the occupants of the cave. When the door was opened, they crowded in.

The apartment was lighted by a lantern enough to enable the strangers to find the mother, and
the child awake in her lap.

"Is the child thine?" asked Balthasar of Mary.

And she who had kept all the things in the least affecting the little one, and pondered them
in her heart, held it up in the light, saying,

"He is my son!"

And they fell down and worshipped him.

They saw the child was as other children: about its head was neither nimbus nor material crown;
its lips opened not in speech; if it heard their expressions of joy, their invocations, their
prayers, it made no sign whatever, but, baby-like, looked longer at the flame in the lantern
than at them.

In a little while they arose, and, returning to the camels, brought gifts of gold, frankincense,
and myrrh, and laid them before the child, abating nothing of their worshipful speeches; of
which no part is given, for the thoughtful know that the pure worship of the pure heart was
then what it is now, and has always been, an inspired song.

And this was the Savior they had come so far to find!

Yet they worshipped without a doubt.

Why?

Their faith rested upon the signs sent them by him whom we have since come to know as the Father;
and they were of the kind to whom his promises were so all-sufficient that they asked nothing
about his ways. Few there were who had seen the signs and heard the promises--the Mother and
Joseph, the shepherds, and the Three--yet they all believed alike; that is to say, in this
period of the plan of salvation, God was all and the Child nothing. But look forward, O reader!
A time will come when the signs will all proceed from the Son. Happy they who then believe in him!

Let us wait that period.

BOOK SECOND

    "There is a fire
  And motion of the soul which will not dwell
  In its own narrow being, but aspire
  Beyond the fitting medium of desire;
  And, but once kindled, quenchless evermore,
  Preys upon high adventure, nor can tire
  Of aught but rest."

  Childe Harold.

CHAPTER I

It is necessary now to carry the reader forward twenty-one years, to the beginning of the administration
of Valerius Gratus, the fourth imperial governor of Judea--a period which will be remembered
as rent by political agitations in Jerusalem, if, indeed, it be not the precise time of the
opening of the final quarrel between the Jew and the Roman.

In the interval Judea had been subjected to changes affecting her in many ways, but in nothing
so much as her political status. Herod the Great died within one year after the birth of the
Child--died so miserably that the Christian world had reason to believe him overtaken by the
Divine wrath. Like all great rulers who spend their lives in perfecting the power they create,
he dreamed of transmitting his throne and crown--of being the founder of a dynasty. With that
intent, he left a will dividing his territories between his three sons, Antipas, Philip, and
Archelaus, of whom the last was appointed to succeed to the title. The testament was necessarily
referred to Augustus, the emperor, who ratified all its provisions with one exception: he withheld
from Archelaus the title of king until he proved his capacity and loyalty; in lieu thereof,
he created him ethnarch, and as such permitted him to govern nine years, when, for misconduct
and inability to stay the turbulent elements that grew and strengthened around him, he was
sent into Gaul as an exile.

Caesar was not content with deposing Archelaus; he struck the people of Jerusalem in a manner
that touched their pride, and keenly wounded the sensibilities of the haughty habitues of the
Temple. He reduced Judea to a Roman province, and annexed it to the prefecture of Syria. So,
instead of a king ruling royally from the palace left by Herod on Mount Zion, the city fell
into the hands of an officer of the second grade, an appointee called procurator, who communicated
with the court in Rome through the Legate of Syria, residing in Antioch. To make the hurt more
painful, the procurator was not permitted to establish himself in Jerusalem; Caesarea was his
seat of government. Most humiliating, however, most exasperating, most studied, Samaria, of
all the world the most despised--Samaria was joined to Judea as a part of the same province!
What ineffable misery the bigoted Separatists or Pharisees endured at finding themselves elbowed
and laughed at in the procurator's presence in Caesarea by the devotees of Gerizim!

In this rain of sorrows, one consolation, and one only, remained to the fallen people: the
high-priest occupied the Herodian palace in the market-place, and kept the semblance of a court
there. What his authority really was is a matter of easy estimate. Judgment of life and death
was retained by the procurator. Justice was administered in the name and according to the decretals
of Rome. Yet more significant, the royal house was jointly occupied by the imperial exciseman,
and all his corps of assistants, registrars, collectors, publicans, informers, and spies. Still,
to the dreamers of liberty to come, there was a certain satisfaction in the fact that the chief
ruler in the palace was a Jew. His mere presence there day after day kept them reminded of
the covenants and promises of the prophets, and the ages when Jehovah governed the tribes through
the sons of Aaron; it was to them a certain sign that he had not abandoned them: so their hopes
lived, and served their patience, and helped them wait grimly the son of Judah who was to rule
Israel.

Judea had been a Roman province eighty years and more--ample time for the Caesars to study
the idiosyncrasies of the people--time enough, at least, to learn that the Jew, with all his
pride, could be quietly governed if his religion were respected. Proceeding upon that policy,
the predecessors of Gratus had carefully abstained from interfering with any of the sacred
observances of their subjects. But he chose a different course: almost his first official act
was to expel Hannas from the high-priesthood, and give the place to Ishmael, son of Fabus.

Whether the act was directed by Augustus, or proceeded from Gratus himself, its impolicy became
speedily apparent. The reader shall be spared a chapter on Jewish politics; a few words upon
the subject, however, are essential to such as may follow the succeeding narration critically.
At this time, leaving origin out of view, there were in Judea the party of the nobles and the
Separatist or popular party. Upon Herod's death, the two united against Archelaus; from temple
to palace, from Jerusalem to Rome, they fought him; sometimes with intrigue, sometimes with
the actual weapons of war. More than once the holy cloisters on Moriah resounded with the cries
of fighting-men. Finally, they drove him into exile. Meantime throughout this struggle the
allies had their diverse objects in view. The nobles hated Joazar, the high-priest; the Separatists,
on the other hand, were his zealous adherents. When Herod's settlement went down with Archelaus,
Joazar shared the fall. Hannas, the son of Seth, was selected by the nobles to fill the great
office; thereupon the allies divided. The induction of the Sethian brought them face to face
in fierce hostility.

In the course of the struggle with the unfortunate ethnarch, the nobles had found it expedient
to attach themselves to Rome. Discerning that when the existing settlement was broken up some
form of government must needs follow, they suggested the conversion of Judea into a province.
The fact furnished the Separatists an additional cause for attack; and, when Samaria was made
part of the province, the nobles sank into a minority, with nothing to support them but the
imperial court and the prestige of their rank and wealth; yet for fifteen years--down, indeed,
to the coming of Valerius Gratus--they managed to maintain themselves in both palace and Temple.

Hannas, the idol of his party, had used his power faithfully in the interest of his imperial
patron. A Roman garrison held the Tower of Antonia; a Roman guard kept the gates of the palace;
a Roman judge dispensed justice civil and criminal; a Roman system of taxation, mercilessly
executed, crushed both city and country; daily, hourly, and in a thousand ways, the people
were bruised and galled, and taught the difference between a life of independence and a life
of subjection; yet Hannas kept them in comparative quiet. Rome had no truer friend; and he
made his loss instantly felt. Delivering his vestments to Ishmael, the new appointee, he walked
from the courts of the Temple into the councils of the Separatists, and became the head of
a new combination, Bethusian and Sethian.

Gratus, the procurator, left thus without a party, saw the fires which, in the fifteen years,
had sunk into sodden smoke begin to glow with returning life. A month after Ishmael took the
office, the Roman found it necessary to visit him in Jerusalem. When from the walls, hooting
and hissing him, the Jews beheld his guard enter the north gate of the city and march to the
Tower of Antonia, they understood the real purpose of the visit--a full cohort of legionaries
was added to the former garrison, and the keys of their yoke could now be tightened with impunity.
If the procurator deemed it important to make an example, alas for the first offender!

CHAPTER II

With the foregoing explanation in mind, the reader is invited to look into one of the gardens
of the palace on Mount Zion. The time was noonday in the middle of July, when the heat of summer
was at its highest.

The garden was bounded on every side by buildings, which in places arose two stories, with
verandas shading the doors and windows of the lower story, while retreating galleries, guarded
by strong balustrades, adorned and protected the upper. Here and there, moreover, the structures
fell into what appeared low colonnades, permitting the passage of such winds as chanced to
blow, and allowing other parts of the house to be seen, the better to realize its magnitude
and beauty. The arrangement of the ground was equally pleasant to the eye. There were walks,
and patches of grass and shrubbery, and a few large trees, rare specimens of the palm, grouped
with the carob, apricot, and walnut. In all directions the grade sloped gently from the centre,
where there was a reservoir, or deep marble basin, broken at intervals by little gates which,
when raised, emptied the water into sluices bordering the walks--a cunning device for the rescue
of the place from the aridity too prevalent elsewhere in the region.

Not far from the fountain, there was a small pool of clear water nourishing a clump of cane
and oleander, such as grow on the Jordan and down by the Dead Sea. Between the clump and the
pool, unmindful of the sun shining full upon them in the breathless air, two boys, one about
nineteen, the other seventeen, sat engaged in earnest conversation.

They were both handsome, and, at first glance, would have been pronounced brothers. Both had
hair and eyes black; their faces were deeply browned; and, sitting, they seemed of a size proper
for the difference in their ages.

The elder was bareheaded. A loose tunic, dropping to the knees, was his attire complete, except
sandals and a light-blue mantle spread under him on the seat. The costume left his arms and
legs exposed, and they were brown as the face; nevertheless, a certain grace of manner, refinement
of features, and culture of voice decided his rank. The tunic, of softest woollen, gray-tinted,
at the neck, sleeves, and edge of the skirt bordered with red, and bound to the waist by a
tasselled silken cord, certified him the Roman he was. And if in speech he now and then gazed
haughtily at his companion and addressed him as an inferior, he might almost be excused, for
he was of a family noble even in Rome--a circumstance which in that age justified any assumption.
In the terrible wars between the first Caesar and his great enemies, a Messala had been the
friend of Brutus. After Philippi, without sacrifice of his honor, he and the conqueror became
reconciled. Yet later, when Octavius disputed for the empire, Messala supported him. Octavius,
as the Emperor Augustus, remembered the service, and showered the family with honors. Among
other things, Judea being reduced to a province, he sent the son of his old client or retainer
to Jerusalem, charged with the receipt and management of the taxes levied in that region; and
in that service the son had since remained, sharing the palace with the high-priest. The youth
just described was his son, whose habit it was to carry about with him all too faithfully a
remembrance of the relation between his grandfather and the great Romans of his day.

The associate of the Messala was slighter in form, and his garments were of fine white linen
and of the prevalent style in Jerusalem; a cloth covered his head, held by a yellow cord, and
arranged so as to fall away from the forehead down low over the back of the neck. An observer
skilled in the distinctions of race, and studying his features more than his costume, would
have soon discovered him to be of Jewish descent. The forehead of the Roman was high and narrow,
his nose sharp and aquiline, while his lips were thin and straight, and his eyes cold and close
under the brows. The front of the Israelite, on the other hand, was low and broad; his nose
long, with expanded nostrils; his upper lip, slightly shading the lower one, short and curving
to the dimpled corners, like a Cupid's bow; points which, in connection with the round chin,
full eyes, and oval cheeks reddened with a wine-like glow, gave his face the softness, strength,
and beauty peculiar to his race. The comeliness of the Roman was severe and chaste, that of
the Jew rich and voluptuous.

"Did you not say the new procurator is to arrive to-morrow?"

The question proceeded from the younger of the friends, and was couched in Greek, at the time,
singularly enough, the language everywhere prevalent in the politer circles of Judea; having
passed from the palace into the camp and college; thence, nobody knew exactly when or how,
into the Temple itself, and, for that matter, into precincts of the Temple far beyond the gates
and cloisters--precincts of a sanctity intolerable for a Gentile.

"Yes, to-morrow," Messala answered.

"Who told you?"

"I heard Ishmael, the new governor in the palace--you call him high priest--tell my father
so last night. The news had been more credible, I grant you, coming from an Egyptian, who is
of a race that has forgotten what truth is, or even from an Idumaean, whose people never knew
what truth was; but, to make quite certain, I saw a centurion from the Tower this morning,
and he told me preparations were going on for the reception; that the armorers were furbishing
the helmets and shields, and regilding the eagles and globes; and that apartments long unused
were being cleansed and aired as if for an addition to the garrison--the body-guard, probably,
of the great man."

A perfect idea of the manner in which the answer was given cannot be conveyed, as its fine
points continually escape the power behind the pen. The reader's fancy must come to his aid;
and for that he must be reminded that reverence as a quality of the Roman mind was fast breaking
down, or, rather, it was becoming unfashionable. The old religion had nearly ceased to be a
faith; at most it was a mere habit of thought and expression, cherished principally by the
priests who found service in the Temple profitable, and the poets who, in the turn of their
verses, could not dispense with the familiar deities: there are singers of this age who are
similarly given. As philosophy was taking the place of religion, satire was fast substituting
reverence; insomuch that in Latin opinion it was to every speech, even to the little diatribes
of conversation, as salt to viands, and aroma to wine. The young Messala, educated in Rome,
but lately returned, had caught the habit and manner; the scarce perceptible movement of the
outer corner of the lower eyelid, the decided curl of the corresponding nostril, and a languid
utterance affected as the best vehicle to convey the idea of general indifference, but more
particularly because of the opportunities it afforded for certain rhetorical pauses thought
to be of prime importance to enable the listener to take the happy conceit or receive the virus
of the stinging epigram. Such a stop occurred in the answer just given, at the end of the allusion
to the Egyptian and Idumaean. The color in the Jewish lad's cheeks deepened, and he may not
have heard the rest of the speech, for he remained silent, looking absently into the depths
of the pool.

"Our farewell took place in this garden. 'The peace of the Lord go with you!'--your last words.
'The gods keep you!' I said. Do you remember? How many years have passed since then?"

"Five," answered the Jew, gazing into the water.

"Well, you have reason to be thankful to--whom shall I say? The gods? No matter. You have grown
handsome; the Greeks would call you beautiful--happy achievement of the years! If Jupiter would
stay content with one Ganymede, what a cup-bearer you would make for the emperor! Tell me,
my Judah, how the coming of the procurator is of such interest to you."

Judah bent his large eyes upon the questioner; the gaze was grave and thoughtful, and caught
the Roman's, and held it while he replied, "Yes, five years. I remember the parting; you went
to Rome; I saw you start, and cried, for I love you. The years are gone, and you have come
back to me accomplished and princely--I do not jest; and yet--yet--I do wish you were the Messala
you went away."

The fine nostril of the satirist stirred, and he put on a longer drawl as he said, "No, no;
not a Ganymede--an oracle, my Judah. A few lessons from my teacher of rhetoric hard by the
Forum--I will give you a letter to him when you become wise enough to accept a suggestion which
I am reminded to make you--a little practise of the art of mystery, and Delphi will receive
you as Apollo himself. At the sound of your solemn voice, the Pythia will come down to you
with her crown. Seriously, O my friend, in what am I not the Messala I went away? I once heard
the greatest logician in the world. His subject was Disputation. One saying I remember--'Understand
your antagonist before you answer him.' Let me understand you."

The lad reddened under the cynical look to which he was subjected; yet he replied, firmly,
"You have availed yourself, I see, of your opportunities; from your teachers you have brought
away much knowledge and many graces. You talk with the ease of a master, yet your speech carries
a sting. My Messala, when he went away, had no poison in his nature; not for the world would
he have hurt the feelings of a friend."

The Roman smiled as if complimented, and raised his patrician head a toss higher.

"O my solemn Judah, we are not at Dodona or Pytho. Drop the oracular, and be plain. Wherein
have I hurt you?"

The other drew a long breath, and said, pulling at the cord about his waist, "In the five years,
I, too, have learned somewhat. Hillel may not be the equal of the logician you heard, and Simeon
and Shammai are, no doubt, inferior to your master hard by the Forum. Their learning goes not
out into forbidden paths; those who sit at their feet arise enriched simply with knowledge
of God, the law, and Israel; and the effect is love and reverence for everything that pertains
to them. Attendance at the Great College, and study of what I heard there, have taught me that
Judea is not as she used to be. I know the space that lies between an independent kingdom and
the petty province Judea is. I were meaner, viler, than a Samaritan not to resent the degradation
of my country. Ishmael is not lawfully high-priest, and he cannot be while the noble Hannas
lives; yet he is a Levite; one of the devoted who for thousands of years have acceptably served
the Lord God of our faith and worship. His--"

Messala broke in upon him with a biting laugh.

"Oh, I understand you now. Ishmael, you say, is a usurper, yet to believe an Idumaean sooner
than Ishmael is to sting like an adder. By the drunken son of Semele, what it is to be a Jew!
All men and things, even heaven and earth, change; but a Jew never. To him there is no backward,
no forward; he is what his ancestor was in the beginning. In this sand I draw you a circle--there!
Now tell me what more a Jew's life is? Round and round, Abraham here, Isaac and Jacob yonder,
God in the middle. And the circle--by the master of all thunders! the circle is too large.
I draw it again--" He stopped, put his thumb upon the ground, and swept the fingers about it.
"See, the thumb spot is the Temple, the finger-lines Judea. Outside the little space is there
nothing of value? The arts! Herod was a builder; therefore he is accursed. Painting, sculpture!
to look upon them is sin. Poetry you make fast to your altars. Except in the synagogue, who
of you attempts eloquence? In war all you conquer in the six days you lose on the seventh.
Such your life and limit; who shall say no if I laugh at you? Satisfied with the worship of
such a people, what is your God to our Roman Jove, who lends us his eagles that we may compass
the universe with our arms? Hillel, Simeon, Shammai, Abtalion--what are they to the masters
who teach that everything is worth knowing that can be known?"

The Jew arose, his face much flushed.

"No, no; keep your place, my Judah, keep your place," Messala cried, extending his hand.

"You mock me."

"Listen a little further. Directly"--the Roman smiled derisively--"directly Jupiter and his
whole family, Greek and Latin, will come to me, as is their habit, and make an end of serious
speech. I am mindful of your goodness in walking from the old house of your fathers to welcome
me back and renew the love of our childhood--if we can. 'Go,' said my teacher, in his last
lecture--'Go, and, to make your lives great, remember Mars reigns and Eros has found his eyes.'
He meant love is nothing, war everything. It is so in Rome. Marriage is the first step to divorce.
Virtue is a tradesman's jewel. Cleopatra, dying, bequeathed her arts, and is avenged; she has
a successor in every Roman's house. The world is going the same way; so, as to our future,
down Eros, up Mars! I am to be a soldier; and you, O my Judah, I pity you; what can you be?"

The Jew moved nearer the pool; Messala's drawl deepened.

"Yes, I pity you, my fine Judah. From the college to the synagogue; then to the Temple; then--oh,
a crowning glory!--the seat in the Sanhedrim. A life without opportunities; the gods help you!
But I--"

Judah looked at him in time to see the flush of pride that kindled in his haughty face as he
went on.

"But I--ah, the world is not all conquered. The sea has islands unseen. In the north there
are nations yet unvisited. The glory of completing Alexander's march to the Far East remains
to some one. See what possibilities lie before a Roman."

Next instant he resumed his drawl.

"A campaign into Africa; another after the Scythian; then--a legion! Most careers end there;
but not mine. I--by Jupiter! what a conception!--I will give up my legion for a prefecture.
Think of life in Rome with money--money, wine, women, games--poets at the banquet, intrigues
in the court, dice all the year round. Such a rounding of life may be--a fat prefecture, and
it is mine. O my Judah, here is Syria! Judea is rich; Antioch a capital for the gods. I will
succeed Cyrenius, and you--shall share my fortune."

The sophists and rhetoricians who thronged the public resorts of Rome, almost monopolizing
the business of teaching her patrician youth, might have approved these sayings of Messala,
for they were all in the popular vein; to the young Jew, however, they were new, and unlike
the solemn style of discourse and conversation to which he was accustomed. He belonged, moreover,
to a race whose laws, modes, and habits of thought forbade satire and humor; very naturally,
therefore, he listened to his friend with varying feelings; one moment indignant, then uncertain
how to take him. The superior airs assumed had been offensive to him in the beginning; soon
they became irritating, and at last an acute smart. Anger lies close by this point in all of
us; and that the satirist evoked in another way. To the Jew of the Herodian period patriotism
was a savage passion scarcely hidden under his common humor, and so related to his history,
religion, and God that it responded instantly to derision of them. Wherefore it is not speaking
too strongly to say that Messala's progress down to the last pause was exquisite torture to
his hearer; at that point the latter said, with a forced smile,

"There are a few, I have heard, who can afford to make a jest of their future; you convince
me, O my Messala, that I am not one of them."

The Roman studied him; then replied, "Why not the truth in a jest as well as a parable? The
great Fulvia went fishing the other day; she caught more than all the company besides. They
said it was because the barb of her hook was covered with gold."

"Then you were not merely jesting?"

"My Judah, I see I did not offer you enough," the Roman answered, quickly, his eyes sparkling.
"When I am prefect, with Judea to enrich me, I--will make you high-priest."

The Jew turned off angrily.

"Do not leave me," said Messala.

The other stopped irresolute.

"Gods, Judah, how hot the sun shines!" cried the patrician, observing his perplexity. "Let
us seek a shade."

Judah answered, coldly,

"We had better part. I wish I had not come. I sought a friend and find a--"

"Roman," said Messala, quickly.

The hands of the Jew clenched, but controlling himself again, he started off. Messala arose,
and, taking the mantle from the bench, flung it over his shoulder, and followed after; when
he gained his side, he put his hand upon his shoulder and walked with him.

"This is the way--my hand thus--we used to walk when we were children. Let us keep it as far
as the gate."

Apparently Messala was trying to be serious and kind, though he could not rid his countenance
of the habitual satirical expression. Judah permitted the familiarity.

"You are a boy; I am a man; let me talk like one."

The complacency of the Roman was superb. Mentor lecturing the young Telemachus could not have
been more at ease.

"Do you believe in the Parcae? Ah, I forgot, you are a Sadducee: the Essenes are your sensible
people; they believe in the sisters. So do I. How everlastingly the three are in the way of
our doing what we please! I sit down scheming. I run paths here and there. Perpol! Just when
I am reaching to take the world in hand, I hear behind me the grinding of scissors. I look,
and there she is, the accursed Atropos! But, my Judah, why did you get mad when I spoke of
succeeding old Cyrenius? You thought I meant to enrich myself plundering your Judea. Suppose
so; it is what some Roman will do. Why not I?"

Judah shortened his step.

"There have been strangers in mastery of Judea before the Roman," he said, with lifted hand.
"Where are they, Messala? She has outlived them all. What has been will be again."

Messala put on his drawl.

"The Parcae have believers outside the Essenes. Welcome, Judah, welcome to the faith!"

"No, Messala, count me not with them. My faith rests on the rock which was the foundation of
the faith of my fathers back further than Abraham; on the covenants of the Lord God of Israel."

"Too much passion, my Judah. How my master would have been shocked had I been guilty of so
much heat in his presence! There were other things I had to tell you, but I fear to now."

When they had gone a few yards, the Roman spoke again.

"I think you can hear me now, especially as what I have to say concerns yourself. I would serve
you, O handsome as Ganymede; I would serve you with real good-will. I love you--all I can.
I told you I meant to be a soldier. Why not you also? Why not you step out of the narrow circle
which, as I have shown, is all of noble life your laws and customs allow?"

Judah made no reply.

"Who are the wise men of our day?" Messala continued. "Not they who exhaust their years quarrelling
about dead things; about Baals, Joves, and Jehovahs; about philosophies and religions. Give
me one great name, O Judah; I care not where you go to find it--to Rome, Egypt, the East, or
here in Jerusalem--Pluto take me if it belong not to a man who wrought his fame out of the
material furnished him by the present; holding nothing sacred that did not contribute to the
end, scorning nothing that did! How was it with Herod? How with the Maccabees? How with the
first and second Caesars? Imitate them. Begin now. At hand see--Rome, as ready to help you
as she was the Idumaean Antipater."

The Jewish lad trembled with rage; and, as the garden gate was close by, he quickened his steps,
eager to escape.

"O Rome, Rome!" he muttered.

"Be wise," continued Messala. "Give up the follies of Moses and the traditions; see the situation
as it is. Dare look the Parcae in the face, and they will tell you, Rome is the world. Ask
them of Judea, and they will answer, She is what Rome wills."

They were now at the gate. Judah stopped, and took the hand gently from his shoulder, and confronted
Messala, tears trembling in his eyes.

"I understand you, because you are a Roman; you cannot understand me--I am an Israelite. You
have given me suffering to-day by convincing me that we can never be the friends we have been--never!
Here we part. The peace of the God of my fathers abide with you!"

Messala offered him his hand; the Jew walked on through the gateway. When he was gone, the
Roman was silent awhile; then he, too, passed through, saying to himself, with a toss of the head,

"Be it so. Eros is dead, Mars reigns!"

CHAPTER III

From the entrance to the Holy City, equivalent to what is now called St. Stephen's Gate, a
street extended westwardly, on a line parallel with the northern front of the Tower of Antonia,
though a square from that famous castle. Keeping the course as far as the Tyropoeon Valley,
which it followed a little way south, it turned and again ran west until a short distance beyond
what tradition tells us was the Judgment Gate, from whence it broke abruptly south. The traveller
or the student familiar with the sacred locality will recognize the thoroughfare described
as part of the Via Dolorosa--with Christians of more interest, though of a melancholy kind,
than any street in the world. As the purpose in view does not at present require dealing with
the whole street, it will be sufficient to point out a house standing in the angle last mentioned
as marking the change of direction south, and which, as an important centre of interest, needs
somewhat particular description.

The building fronted north and west, probably four hundred feet each way, and, like most pretentious
Eastern structures, was two stories in height, and perfectly quadrangular. The street on the
west side was about twelve feet wide, that on the north not more than ten; so that one walking
close to the walls, and looking up at them, would have been struck by the rude, unfinished,
uninviting, but strong and imposing, appearance they presented; for they were of stone laid
in large blocks, undressed--on the outer side, in fact, just as they were taken from the quarry.
A critic of this age would have pronounced the house fortelesque in style, except for the windows,
with which it was unusually garnished, and the ornate finish of the doorways or gates. The
western windows were four in number, the northern only two, all set on the line of the second
story in such manner as to overhang the thoroughfares below. The gates were the only breaks
of wall externally visible in the first story; and, besides being so thickly riven with iron
bolts as to suggest resistance to battering-rams, they were protected by cornices of marble,
handsomely executed, and of such bold projection as to assure visitors well informed of the
people that the rich man who resided there was a Sadducee in politics and creed.

Not long after the young Jew parted from the Roman at the palace up on the Market-place, he
stopped before the western gate of the house described, and knocked. The wicket (a door hung
in one of the valves of the gate) was opened to admit him. He stepped in hastily, and failed
to acknowledge the low salaam of the porter.

To get an idea of the interior arrangement of the structure, as well as to see what more befell
the youth, we will follow him.

The passage into which he was admitted appeared not unlike a narrow tunnel with panelled walls
and pitted ceiling. There were benches of stone on both sides, stained and polished by long
use. Twelve or fifteen steps carried him into a court-yard, oblong north and south, and in
every quarter, except the east, bounded by what seemed the fronts of two-story houses; of which
the lower floor was divided into lewens, while the upper was terraced and defended by strong
balustrading. The servants coming and going along the terraces; the noise of millstones grinding;
the garments fluttering from ropes stretched from point to point; the chickens and pigeons
in full enjoyment of the place; the goats, cows, donkeys, and horses stabled in the lewens;
a massive trough of water, apparently for the common use, declared this court appurtenant to
the domestic management of the owner. Eastwardly there was a division wall broken by another
passage-way in all respects like the first one.

Clearing the second passage, the young man entered a second court, spacious, square, and set
with shrubbery and vines, kept fresh and beautiful by water from a basin erected near a porch
on the north side. The lewens here were high, airy, and shaded by curtains striped alternate
white and red. The arches of the lewens rested on clustered columns. A flight of steps on the
south ascended to the terraces of the upper story, over which great awnings were stretched
as a defence against the sun. Another stairway reached from the terraces to the roof, the edge
of which, all around the square, was defined by a sculptured cornice, and a parapet of burned-clay
tiling, sexangular and bright red. In this quarter, moreover, there was everywhere observable
a scrupulous neatness, which, allowing no dust in the angles, not even a yellow leaf upon a
shrub, contributed quite as much as anything else to the delightful general effect; insomuch
that a visitor, breathing the sweet air, knew, in advance of introduction, the refinement of
the family he was about calling upon.

A few steps within the second court, the lad turned to the right, and, choosing a walk through
the shrubbery, part of which was in flower, passed to the stairway, and ascended to the terrace--a
broad pavement of white and brown flags closely laid, and much worn. Making way under the awning
to a doorway on the north side, he entered an apartment which the dropping of the screen behind
him returned to darkness. Nevertheless, he proceeded, moving over a tiled floor to a divan,
upon which he flung himself, face downwards, and lay at rest, his forehead upon his crossed arms.

About nightfall a woman came to the door and called; he answered, and she went in.

"Supper is over, and it is night. Is not my son hungry?" she asked.

"No," he replied.

"Are you sick?"

"I am sleepy."

"Your mother has asked for you."

"Where is she?"

"In the summer-house on the roof."

He stirred himself, and sat up.

"Very well. Bring me something to eat."

"What do you want?"

"What you please, Amrah. I am not sick, but indifferent. Life does not seem as pleasant as
it did this morning. A new ailment, O my Amrah; and you who know me so well, who never failed
me, may think of the things now that answer for food and medicine. Bring me what you choose."

Amrah's questions, and the voice in which she put them--low, sympathetic, and solicitous--were
significant of an endeared relation between the two. She laid her hand upon his forehead; then,
as satisfied, went out, saying, "I will see."

After a while she returned, bearing on a wooden platter a bowl of milk, some thin cakes of
white bread broken, a delicate paste of brayed wheat, a bird broiled, and honey and salt. On
one end of the platter there was a silver goblet full of wine, on the other a brazen hand-lamp
lighted.

The room was then revealed: its walls smoothly plastered; the ceiling broken by great oaken
rafters, brown with rain stains and time; the floor of small diamond-shaped white and blue
tiles, very firm and enduring; a few stools with legs carved in imitation of the legs of lions;
a divan raised a little above the floor, trimmed with blue cloth, and partially covered by
an immense striped woollen blanket or shawl--in brief, a Hebrew bedroom.

The same light also gave the woman to view. Drawing a stool to the divan, she placed the platter
upon it, then knelt close by ready to serve him. Her face was that of a woman of fifty, dark-skinned,
dark-eyed, and at the moment softened by a look of tenderness almost maternal. A white turban
covered her head, leaving the lobes of the ear exposed, and in them the sign that settled her
condition--an orifice bored by a thick awl. She was a slave, of Egyptian origin, to whom not
even the sacred fiftieth year could have brought freedom; nor would she have accepted it, for
the boy she was attending was her life. She had nursed him through babyhood, tended him as
a child, and could not break the service. To her love he could never be a man.

He spoke but once during the meal.

"You remember, O my Amrah," he said, "the Messala who used to visit me here days at a time."

"I remember him."

"He went to Rome some years ago, and is now back. I called upon him to-day."

A shudder of disgust seized the lad.

"I knew something had happened," she said, deeply interested. "I never liked the Messala. Tell
me all."

But he fell into musing, and to her repeated inquiries only said, "He is much changed, and
I shall have nothing more to do with him."

When Amrah took the platter away, he also went out, and up from the terrace to the roof.

The reader is presumed to know somewhat of the uses of the house-top in the East. In the matter
of customs, climate is a lawgiver everywhere. The Syrian summer day drives the seeker of comfort
into the darkened lewen; night, however, calls him forth early, and the shadows deepening over
the mountain-sides seem veils dimly covering Circean singers; but they are far off, while the
roof is close by, and raised above the level of the shimmering plain enough for the visitation
of cool airs, and sufficiently above the trees to allure the stars down closer, down at least
into brighter shining. So the roof became a resort--became playground, sleeping-chamber, boudoir,
rendezvous for the family, place of music, dance, conversation, reverie, and prayer.

The motive that prompts the decoration, at whatever cost, of interiors in colder climes suggested
to the Oriental the embellishment of his house-top. The parapet ordered by Moses became a potter's
triumph; above that, later, arose towers, plain and fantastic; still later, kings and princes
crowned their roofs with summer-houses of marble and gold. When the Babylonian hung gardens
in the air, extravagance could push the idea no further.

The lad whom we are following walked slowly across the house-top to a tower built over the
northwest corner of the palace. Had he been a stranger, he might have bestowed a glance upon
the structure as he drew nigh it, and seen all the dimness permitted--a darkened mass, low,
latticed, pillared, and domed. He entered, passing under a half-raised curtain. The interior
was all darkness, except that on four sides there were arched openings like doorways, through
which the sky, lighted with stars, was visible. In one of the openings, reclining against a
cushion from a divan, he saw the figure of a woman, indistinct even in white floating drapery.
At the sound of his steps upon the floor, the fan in her hand stopped, glistening where the
starlight struck the jewels with which it was sprinkled, and she sat up, and called his name.

"Judah, my son!"

"It is I, mother," he answered, quickening his approach.

Going to her, he knelt, and she put her arms around him, and with kisses pressed him to her bosom.

CHAPTER IV

The mother resumed her easy position against the cushion, while the son took place on the divan,
his head in her lap. Both of them, looking out of the opening, could see a stretch of lower
house-tops in the vicinity, a bank of blue-blackness over in the west which they knew to be
mountains, and the sky, its shadowy depths brilliant with stars. The city was still. Only the
winds stirred.

"Amrah tells me something has happened to you," she said, caressing his cheek. "When my Judah
was a child, I allowed small things to trouble him, but he is now a man. He must not forget"--her
voice became very soft--"that one day he is to be my hero."

She spoke in the language almost lost in the land, but which a few--and they were always as
rich in blood as in possessions--cherished in its purity, that they might be more certainly
distinguished from Gentile peoples--the language in which the loved Rebekah and Rachel sang
to Benjamin.

The words appeared to set him thinking anew; after a while, however, he caught the hand with
which she fanned him, and said, "Today, O my mother, I have been made to think of many things
that never had place in my mind before. Tell me, first, what am I to be?"

"Have I not told you? You are to be my hero."

He could not see her face, yet he knew she was in play. He became more serious.

"You are very good, very kind, O my mother. No one will ever love me as you do."

He kissed the hand over and over again.

"I think I understand why you would have me put off the question," he continued. "Thus far
my life has belonged to you. How gentle, how sweet your control has been! I wish it could last
forever. But that may not be. It is the Lord's will that I shall one day become owner of myself--a
day of separation, and therefore a dreadful day to you. Let us be brave and serious. I will
be your hero, but you must put me in the way. You know the law--every son of Israel must have
some occupation. I am not exempt, and ask now, shall I tend the herds? or till the soil? or
drive the saw? or be a clerk or lawyer? What shall I be? Dear, good mother, help me to an answer."

"Gamaliel has been lecturing today," she said, thoughtfully.

"If so, I did not hear him."

"Then you have been walking with Simeon, who, they tell me, inherits the genius of his family."

"No, I have not seen him. I have been up on the Market-place, not to the Temple. I visited
the young Messala."

A certain change in his voice attracted the mother's attention. A presentiment quickened the
beating of her heart; the fan became motionless again.

"The Messala!" she said. "What could he say to so trouble you?"

"He is very much changed."

"You mean he has come back a Roman."

"Yes."

"Roman!" she continued, half to herself. "To all the world the word means master. How long
has he been away?"

"Five years."

She raised her head, and looked off into the night.

"The airs of the Via Sacra are well enough in the streets of the Egyptian and in Babylon; but
in Jerusalem--our Jerusalem--the covenant abides."

And, full of the thought, she settled back into her easy place. He was first to speak.

"What Messala said, my mother, was sharp enough in itself; but, taken with the manner, some
of the sayings were intolerable."

"I think I understand you. Rome, her poets, orators, senators, courtiers, are mad with affectation
of what they call satire."

"I suppose all great peoples are proud," he went on, scarcely noticing the interruption; "but
the pride of that people is unlike all others; in these latter days it is so grown the gods
barely escape it."

"The gods escape!" said the mother, quickly. "More than one Roman has accepted worship as his
divine right."

"Well, Messala always had his share of the disagreeable quality. When he was a child, I have
seen him mock strangers whom even Herod condescended to receive with honors; yet he always
spared Judea. For the first time, in conversation with me to-day, he trifled with our customs
and God. As you would have had me do, I parted with him finally. And now, O my dear mother,
I would know with more certainty if there be just ground for the Roman's contempt. In what
am I his inferior? Is ours a lower order of people? Why should I, even in Caesar's presence;
feel the shrinking of a slave? Tell me especially why, if I have the soul, and so choose, I
may not hunt the honors of the world in all its fields? Why may not I take sword and indulge
the passion of war? As a poet, why may not I sing of all themes? I can be a worker in metals,
a keeper of flocks, a merchant, why not an artist like the Greek? Tell me, O my mother--and
this is the sum of my trouble--why may not a son of Israel do all a Roman may?"

The reader will refer these questions back to the conversation in the Market-place; the mother,
listening with all her faculties awake, from something which would have been lost upon one
less interested in him--from the connections of the subject, the pointing of the questions,
possibly his accent and tone--was not less swift in making the same reference. She sat up,
and in a voice quick and sharp as his own, replied, "I see, I see! From association Messala,
in boyhood, was almost a Jew; had he remained here, he might have become a proselyte, so much
do we all borrow from the influences that ripen our lives; but the years in Rome have been
too much for him. I do not wonder at the change; yet"--her voice fell--"he might have dealt
tenderly at least with you. It is a hard, cruel nature which in youth can forget its first loves."

Her hand dropped lightly upon his forehead, and the fingers caught in his hair and lingered
there lovingly, while her eyes sought the highest stars in view. Her pride responded to his,
not merely in echo, but in the unison of perfect sympathy. She would answer him; at the same
time, not for the world would she have had the answer unsatisfactory: an admission of inferiority
might weaken his spirit for life. She faltered with misgivings of her own powers.

"What you propose, O my Judah, is not a subject for treatment by a woman. Let me put its consideration
off till to-morrow, and I will have the wise Simeon--"

"Do not send me to the Rector," he said, abruptly.

"I will have him come to us."

"No, I seek more than information; while he might give me that better than you, O my mother,
you can do better by giving me what he cannot--the resolution which is the soul of a man's soul."

She swept the heavens with a rapid glance, trying to compass all the meaning of his questions.

"While craving justice for ourselves, it is never wise to be unjust to others. To deny valor
in the enemy we have conquered is to underrate our victory; and if the enemy be strong enough
to hold us at bay, much more to conquer us"--she hesitated--"self-respect bids us seek some
other explanation of our misfortunes than accusing him of qualities inferior to our own."

Thus, speaking to herself rather than to him, she began:

"Take heart, O my son. The Messala is nobly descended; his family has been illustrious through
many generations. In the days of Republican Rome--how far back I cannot tell--they were famous,
some as soldiers, some as civilians. I can recall but one consul of the name; their rank was
senatorial, and their patronage always sought because they were always rich. Yet if to-day
your friend boasted of his ancestry, you might have shamed him by recounting yours. If he referred
to the ages through which the line is traceable, or to deeds, rank, or wealth--such allusions,
except when great occasion demands them, are tokens of small minds--if he mentioned them in
proof of his superiority, then without dread, and standing on each particular, you might have
challenged him to a comparison of records."

Taking a moment's thought, the mother proceeded:

"One of the ideas of fast hold now is that time has much to do with the nobility of races and
families. A Roman boasting his superiority on that account over a son of Israel will always
fail when put to the proof. The founding of Rome was his beginning; the very best of them cannot
trace their descent beyond that period; few of them pretend to do so; and of such as do, I
say not one could make good his claim except by resort to tradition. Messala certainly could
not. Let us look now to ourselves. Could we better?"

A little more light would have enabled him to see the pride that diffused itself over her face.

"Let us imagine the Roman putting us to the challenge. I would answer him, neither doubting
nor boastful."

Her voice faltered; a tender thought changed the form of the argument.

"Your father, O my Judah, is at rest with his fathers; yet I remember, as though it were this
evening, the day he and I, with many rejoicing friends, went up into the Temple to present
you to the Lord. We sacrificed the doves, and to the priest I gave your name, which he wrote
in my presence--'Judah, son of Ithamar, of the House of Hur.' The name was then carried away,
and written in a book of the division of records devoted to the saintly family.

"I cannot tell you when the custom of registration in this mode began. We know it prevailed
before the flight from Egypt. I have heard Hillel say Abraham caused the record to be first
opened with his own name, and the names of his sons, moved by the promises of the Lord which
separated him and them from all other races, and made them the highest and noblest, the very
chosen of the earth. The covenant with Jacob was of like effect. 'In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed'--so said the angel to Abraham in the place Jehovah-jireh.
Afterwards the wise men looked forward to a just division of the land of promise; and, that
it might be known in the day of partition who were entitled to portions, the Book of Generations
was begun. But not for that alone. The promise of a blessing to all the earth through the patriarch
reached far into the future. One name was mentioned in connection with the blessing--the benefactor
might be the humblest of the chosen family, for the Lord our God knows no distinctions of rank
or riches. So, to make the performance clear to men of the generation who were to witness it,
and that they might give the glory to whom it belonged, the record was required to be kept
with absolute certainty. Has it been so kept?"

The fan played to and fro, until, becoming impatient, he repeated the question, "Is the record
absolutely true?" 

This time we arrived safely at Port Vila, where the British and French native police forces came
aboard, bound for Santo, to quell a disturbance at Hog Harbour; and so the hapless boat was
overloaded again, this time with passengers.

Next day we arrived at Epi, and I landed at Ringdove Bay. The station of the Messrs. F. and
H. is one of the oldest in the islands. Besides running a plantation, they trade with the natives,
and their small cutters go to all the neighbouring islands for coprah and other produce. There
is always plenty of life and movement at the station, as there are
usually a few of the vessels lying at anchor, and natives coming in
from all sides in their whale-boats to buy or sell something.

From Malekula one can often see them tacking about all day, or, if
there is a calm, drifting slowly along, as they are too lazy to row.

When they have found the passage through the reef, they pull down the sails with much noise and
laughter, and come to anchor; then the whole crowd wades through the surf to the shore, with
the loads of coprah, and waits patiently for business to begin.

On these stations, where almost everyone is squeezed into decent European clothes, it is a
charming sight to see the naked bodies of the genuine savages, all the more so as only young
and able-bodied men take part in these cruises, under the leadership of one older and more experienced
companion. Their beauty is doubly striking beside the poor station hands, wrapped in filthy
calico.

When the coprah has been bought and paid for, they all go to the store, where they buy whatever
they need or think they need. The native of the coast districts to-day goes beyond needs to
luxuries; he buys costly silks, such as he may once have seen in Queensland, and he samples
sewing-machines or whatever else tempts him. In consequence of competition, the prices for coprah
and the wages of labour are unreasonably high, and the natives might
profit greatly by this state of things if they knew the value of money
or how to use it to advantage.

But, as a rule, they spend it for any nonsense they may fancy, to
the joy of the trader, who makes an average profit of 50 per cent.
on all commodities; or else the natives economize to buy a pig (tusked
pigs have brought as much as forty pounds), or they bury their money.

It is astonishing how easily a native might make a small fortune here,
and how little use he makes of his opportunities, not only from laziness,
but also because he has no wants.

Nature supplies food in abundance without any effort on his part, so that matches, tobacco,
a pipe and a knife satisfy all his needs, and he can spend all the
rest of his money for pleasure.

Thus the native, in spite of everything, is economically master of the situation in his own
country, and many traders have been made to realize this fact to their cost, when the natives,
to avenge some ill-treatment, have simply boycotted a station.

 Youth is but the painted
shell within which, continually growing, lives that wondrous thing the spirit of man, biding
its moment of apparition, earlier in some than in others. She trembled under a perception that
this might be the supreme moment come to him; that as children at birth reach out their untried
hands grasping for shadows, and crying the while, so his spirit might, in temporary blindness,
be struggling to take hold of its impalpable future. They to whom a boy comes asking, Who am
I, and what am I to be? have need of ever so much care. Each word in answer may prove to the
after-life what each finger-touch of the artist is to the clay he is modelling.

"I have a feeling, O my Judah," she said, patting his cheek with the hand he had been caressing--"I
have the feeling that all I have said has been in strife with an antagonist more real than
imaginary. If Messala is the enemy, do not leave me to fight him in the dark. Tell me all he said."

CHAPTER V

The young Israelite proceeded then, and rehearsed his conversation with Messala, dwelling with
particularity upon the latter's speeches in contempt of the Jews, their customs, and much pent
round of life.

Afraid to speak the while, the mother listened, discerning the matter plainly. Judah had gone
to the palace on the Market-place, allured by love of a playmate whom he thought to find exactly
as he had been at the parting years before; a man met him, and, in place of laughter and references
to the sports of the past, the man had been full of the future, and talked of glory to be won,
and of riches and power. Unconscious of the effect, the visitor had come away hurt in pride,
yet touched with a natural ambition; but she, the jealous mother, saw it, and, not knowing
the turn the aspiration might take, became at once Jewish in her fear. What if it lured him
away from the patriarchal faith? In her view, that consequence was more dreadful than any or
all others. She could discover but one way to avert it, and she set about the task, her native
power reinforced by love to such degree that her speech took a masculine strength and at times
a poet's fervor.

"There never has been a people," she began, "who did not think themselves at least equal to
any other; never a great nation, my son, that did not believe itself the very superior. When
the Roman looks down upon Israel and laughs, he merely repeats the folly of the Egyptian, the
Assyrian, and the Macedonian; and as the laugh is against God, the result will be the same."

Her voice became firmer.

"There is no law by which to determine the superiority of nations; hence the vanity of the
claim, and the idleness of disputes about it. A people risen, run their race, and die either
of themselves or at the hands of another, who, succeeding to their power, take possession of
their place, and upon their monuments write new names; such is history. If I were called upon
to symbolize God and man in the simplest form, I would draw a straight line and a circle, and
of the line I would say, 'This is God, for he alone moves forever straightforward,' and of
the circle, 'This is man--such is his progress.' I do not mean that there is no difference
between the careers of nations; no two are alike. The difference, however, is not, as some
say, in the extent of the circle they describe or the space of earth they cover, but in the
sphere of their movement, the highest being nearest God.

"To stop here, my son, would be to leave the subject where we began. Let us go on. There are
signs by which to measure the height of the circle each nation runs while in its course. By
them let us compare the Hebrew and the Roman.

"The simplest of all the signs is the daily life of the people. Of this I will only say, Israel
has at times forgotten God, while the Roman never knew him; consequently comparison is not
possible.

"Your friend--or your former friend--charged, if I understood you rightly, that we have had
no poets, artists, or warriors; by which he meant, I suppose, to deny that we have had great
men, the next most certain of the signs. A just consideration of this charge requires a definition
at the commencement. A great man, O my boy, is one whose life proves him to have been recognized,
if not called, by God. A Persian was used to punish our recreant fathers, and he carried them
into captivity; another Persian was selected to restore their children to the Holy Land; greater
than either of them, however, was the Macedonian through whom the desolation of Judea and the
Temple was avenged. The special distinction of the men was that they were chosen by the Lord,
each for a divine purpose; and that they were Gentiles does not lessen their glory. Do not
lose sight of this definition while I proceed.

"There is an idea that war is the most noble occupation of men, and that the most exalted greatness
is the growth of battle-fields. Because the world has adopted the idea, be not you deceived.
That we must worship something is a law which will continue as long as there is anything we
cannot understand. The prayer of the barbarian is a wail of fear addressed to Strength, the
only divine quality he can clearly conceive; hence his faith in heroes. What is Jove but a
Roman hero? The Greeks have their great glory because they were the first to set Mind above
Strength. In Athens the orator and philosopher were more revered than the warrior. The charioteer
and the swiftest runner are still idols of the arena; yet the immortelles are reserved for
the sweetest singer. The birthplace of one poet was contested by seven cities. But was the
Hellene the first to deny the old barbaric faith? No. My son, that glory is ours; against brutalism
our fathers erected God; in our worship, the wail of fear gave place to the Hosanna and the
Psalm. So the Hebrew and the Greek would have carried all humanity forward and upward. But,
alas! the government of the world presumes war as an eternal condition; wherefore, over Mind
and above God, the Roman has enthroned his Caesar, the absorbent of all attainable power, the
prohibition of any other greatness.

"The sway of the Greek was a flowering time for genius. In return for the liberty it then enjoyed,
what a company of thinkers the Mind led forth? There was a glory for every excellence, and
a perfection so absolute that in everything but war even the Roman has stooped to imitation.
A Greek is now the model of the orators in the Forum; listen, and in every Roman song you will
hear the rhythm of the Greek; if a Roman opens his mouth speaking wisely of moralities, or
abstractions, or of the mysteries of nature, he is either a plagiarist or the disciple of some
school which had a Greek for its founder. In nothing but war, I say again, has Rome a claim
to originality. Her games and spectacles are Greek inventions, dashed with blood to gratify
the ferocity of her rabble; her religion, if such it may be called, is made up of contributions
from the faiths of all other peoples; her most venerated gods are from Olympus--even her Mars,
and, for that matter, the Jove she much magnifies. So it happens, O my son, that of the whole
world our Israel alone can dispute the superiority of the Greek, and with him contest the palm
of original genius.

"To the excellences of other peoples the egotism of a Roman is a blindfold, impenetrable as
his breastplate. Oh, the ruthless robbers! Under their trampling the earth trembles like a
floor beaten with flails. Along with the rest we are fallen--alas that I should say it to you,
my son! They have our highest places, and the holiest, and the end no man can tell; but this
I know--they may reduce Judea as an almond broken with hammers, and devour Jerusalem, which
is the oil and sweetness thereof; yet the glory of the men of Israel will remain a light in
the heavens overhead out of reach: for their history is the history of God, who wrote with
their hands, spake with their tongues, and was himself in all the good they did, even the least;
who dwelt with them, a Lawgiver on Sinai, a Guide in the wilderness, in war a Captain, in government
a King; who once and again pushed back the curtains of the pavilion which is his resting-place,
intolerably bright, and, as a man speaking to men, showed them the right, and the way to happiness,
and how they should live, and made them promises binding the strength of his Almightiness with
covenants sworn to everlastingly. O my son, could it be that they with whom Jehovah thus dwelt,
an awful familiar, derived nothing from him?--that in their lives and deeds the common human
qualities should not in some degree have been mixed and colored with the divine? that their
genius should not have in it, even after the lapse of ages, some little of heaven?"

For a time the rustling of the fan was all the sound heard in the chamber.

"In the sense which limits art to sculpture and painting, it is true," she next said, "Israel
has had no artists."

The admission was made regretfully, for it must be remembered she was a Sadducee, whose faith,
unlike that of the Pharisees, permitted a love of the beautiful in every form, and without
reference to its origin.

"Still he who would do justice," she proceeded, "will not forget that the cunning of our hands
was bound by the prohibition, 'Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of anything;' which the Sopherim wickedly extended beyond its purpose and time. Nor should
it be forgotten that long before Daedalus appeared in Attica and with his wooden statues so
transformed sculpture as to make possible the schools of Corinth and AEgina, and their ultimate
triumphs the Poecile and Capitolium--long before the age of Daedalus, I say, two Israelites,
Bezaleel and Aholiab, the master-builders of the first tabernacle, said to have been skilled
'in all manner of workmanship,' wrought the cherubim of the mercy-seat above the ark. Of gold
beaten, not chiseled, were they; and they were statues in form both human and divine. 'And
they shall stretch forth their wings on high, .... and their faces shall look one to another.'
Who will say they were not beautiful? or that they were not the first statues?"

"Oh, I see now why the Greek outstripped us," said Judah, intensely interested. "And the ark;
accursed be the Babylonians who destroyed it!"

"Nay, Judah, be of faith. It was not destroyed, only lost, hidden away too safely in some cavern
of the mountains. One day--Hillel and Shammai both say so--one day, in the Lord's good time,
it will be found and brought forth, and Israel dance before it, singing as of old. And they
who look upon the faces of the cherubim then, though they have seen the face of the ivory Minerva,
will be ready to kiss the hand of the Jew from love of his genius, asleep through all the thousands
of years."

The mother, in her eagerness, had risen into something like the rapidity and vehemence of a
speech-maker; but now, to recover herself, or to pick up the thread of her thought, she rested
awhile.

"You are so good, my mother," he said, in a grateful way. "And I will never be done saying
so. Shammai could not have talked better, nor Hillel. I am a true son of Israel again."

"Flatterer!" she said. "You do not know that I am but repeating what I heard Hillel say in
an argument he had one day in my presence with a sophist from Rome."

"Well, the hearty words are yours."

Directly all her earnestness returned.

"Where was I? Oh yes, I was claiming for our Hebrew fathers the first statues. The trick of
the sculptor, Judah, is not all there is of art, any more than art is all there is of greatness.
I always think of great men marching down the centuries in groups and goodly companies, separable
according to nationalities; here the Indian, there the Egyptian, yonder the Assyrian; above
them the music of trumpets and the beauty of banners; and on their right hand and left, as
reverent spectators, the generations from the beginning, numberless. As they go, I think of
the Greek, saying, 'Lo! The Hellene leads the way.' Then the Roman replies, 'Silence! what
was your place is ours now; we have left you behind as dust trodden on.' And all the time,
from the far front back over the line of march, as well as forward into the farthest future,
streams a light of which the wranglers know nothing, except that it is forever leading them
on--the Light of Revelation! Who are they that carry it? Ah, the old Judean blood! How it leaps
at the thought! By the light we know them. Thrice blessed, O our fathers, servants of God,
keepers of the covenants! Ye are the leaders of men, the living and the dead. The front is
thine; and though every Roman were a Caesar, ye shall not lose it!"

Judah was deeply stirred.

"Do not stop, I pray you," he cried. "You give me to hear the sound of timbrels. I wait for
Miriam and the women who went after her dancing and singing."

She caught his feeling, and, with ready wit, wove it into her speech.

"Very well, my son. If you can hear the timbrel of the prophetess, you can do what I was about
to ask; you can use your fancy, and stand with me, as if by the wayside, while the chosen of
Israel pass us at the head of the procession. Now they come--the patriarchs first; next the
fathers of the tribes. I almost hear the bells of their camels and the lowing of their herds.
Who is he that walks alone between the companies? An old man, yet his eye is not dim, nor his
natural force abated. He knew the Lord face to face! Warrior, poet, orator, lawgiver, prophet,
his greatness is as the sun at morning, its flood of splendor quenching all other lights, even
that of the first and noblest of the Caesars. After him the judges. And then the kings--the
son of Jesse, a hero in war, and a singer of songs eternal as that of the sea; and his son,
who, passing all other kings in riches and wisdom, and while making the Desert habitable, and
in its waste places planting cities, forgot not Jerusalem which the Lord had chosen for his
seat on earth. Bend lower, my son! These that come next are the first of their kind, and the
last. Their faces are raised, as if they heard a voice in the sky and were listening. Their
lives were full of sorrows. Their garments smell of tombs and caverns. Hearken to a woman among
them--'Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously!' Nay, put your forehead in the
dust before them! They were tongues of God, his servants, who looked through heaven, and, seeing
all the future, wrote what they saw, and left the writing to be proven by time. Kings turned
pale as they approached them, and nations trembled at the sound of their voices. The elements
waited upon them. In their hands they carried every bounty and every plague. See the Tishbite
and his servant Elisha! See the sad son of Hilkiah, and him, the seer of visions, by the river
of Chebar! And of the three children of Judah who refused the image of the Babylonian, lo!
that one who, in the feast to the thousand lords, so confounded the astrologers. And yonder--O
my son, kiss the dust again!--yonder the gentle son of Amoz, from whom the world has its promise
of the Messiah to come!"

In this passage the fan had been kept in rapid play; it stopped now, and her voice sank low.

"You are tired," she said.

"No," he replied, "I was listening to a new song of Israel."

The mother was still intent upon her purpose, and passed the pleasant speech.

"In such light as I could, my Judah, I have set our great men before you--patriarchs, legislators,
warriors, singers, prophets. Turn we to the best of Rome. Against Moses place Caesar, and Tarquin
against David; Sylla against either of the Maccabees; the best of the consuls against the judges;
Augustus against Solomon, and you are done: comparison ends there. But think then of the prophets--greatest
of the great."

She laughed scornfully.

"Pardon me. I was thinking of the soothsayer who warned Caius Julius against the Ides of March,
and fancied him looking for the omens of evil which his master despised in the entrails of
a chicken. From that picture turn to Elijah sitting on the hill-top on the way to Samaria,
amid the smoking bodies of the captains and their fifties, warning the son of Ahab of the wrath
of our God. Finally, O my Judah--if such speech be reverent--how shall we judge Jehovah and
Jupiter unless it be by what their servants have done in their names? And as for what you shall
do--"

She spoke the latter words slowly, and with a tremulous utterance.

"As for what you shall do, my boy--serve the Lord, the Lord God of Israel, not Rome. For a
child of Abraham there is no glory except in the Lord's ways, and in them there is much glory."

"I may be a soldier then?" Judah asked.

"Why not? Did not Moses call God a man of war?"

There was then a long silence in the summer chamber.

"You have my permission," she said, finally; "if only you serve the Lord instead of Caesar."

He was content with the condition, and by-and-by fell asleep. She arose then, and put the cushion
under his head, and, throwing a shawl over him and kissing him tenderly, went away.

CHAPTER VI

The good man, like the bad, must die; but, remembering the lesson of our faith, we say of him
and the event, "No matter, he will open his eyes in heaven." Nearest this in life is the waking
from healthful sleep to a quick consciousness of happy sights and sounds.

When Judah awoke, the sun was up over the mountains; the pigeons were abroad in flocks, filling
the air with the gleams of their white wings; and off southeast he beheld the Temple, an apparition
of gold in the blue of the sky. These, however, were familiar objects, and they received but
a glance; upon the edge of the divan, close by him, a girl scarcely fifteen sat singing to
the accompaniment of a nebel, which she rested upon her knee, and touched gracefully. To her
he turned listening; and this was what she sang:

  THE SONG.

  "Wake not, but hear me, love!
    Adrift, adrift on slumber's sea,
    Thy spirit call to list to me.
  Wake not, but hear me, love!
    A gift from Sleep, the restful king,
    All happy, happy dreams I bring.

  "Wake not, but hear me, love!
    Of all the world of dreams 'tis thine
    This once to choose the most divine.
  So choose, and sleep, my love!
    But ne'er again in choice be free,
    Unless, unless--thou dream'st of me."

She put the instrument down, and, resting her hands in her lap, waited for him to speak. And
as it has become necessary to tell somewhat of her, we will avail ourselves of the chance,
and add such particulars of the family into whose privacy we are brought as the reader may
wish to know.

The favors of Herod had left surviving him many persons of vast estate. Where this fortune
was joined to undoubted lineal descent from some famous son of one of the tribes, especially
Judah, the happy individual was accounted a Prince of Jerusalem--a distinction which sufficed
to bring him the homage of his less favored countrymen, and the respect, if nothing more, of
the Gentiles with whom business and social circumstance brought him into dealing. Of this class
none had won in private or public life a higher regard than the father of the lad whom we have
been following. With a remembrance of his nationality which never failed him, he had yet been
true to the king, and served him faithfully at home and abroad. Some offices had taken him
to Rome, where his conduct attracted the notice of Augustus, who strove without reserve to
engage his friendship. In his house, accordingly, were many presents, such as had gratified
the vanity of kings--purple togas, ivory chairs, golden pateroe--chiefly valuable on account
of the imperial hand which had honorably conferred them. Such a man could not fail to be rich;
yet his wealth was not altogether the largess of royal patrons. He had welcomed the law that
bound him to some pursuit; and, instead of one, he entered into many. Of the herdsmen watching
flocks on the plains and hill-sides, far as old Lebanon, numbers reported to him as their employer;
in the cities by the sea, and in those inland, he founded houses of traffic; his ships brought
him silver from Spain, whose mines were then the richest known; while his caravans came twice
a year from the East, laden with silks and spices. In faith he was a Hebrew, observant of the
law and every essential rite; his place in the synagogue and Temple knew him well; he was thoroughly
learned in the Scriptures; he delighted in the society of the college-masters, and carried
his reverence for Hillel almost to the point of worship. Yet he was in no sense a Separatist;
his hospitality took in strangers from every land; the carping Pharisees even accused him of
having more than once entertained Samaritans at his table. Had he been a Gentile, and lived,
the world might have heard of him as the rival of Herodes Atticus: as it was, he perished at
sea some ten years before this second period of our story, in the prime of life, and lamented
everywhere in Judea. We are already acquainted with two members of his family--his widow and
son; the only other was a daughter--she whom we have seen singing to her brother.

Tirzah was her name, and as the two looked at each other, their resemblance was plain. Her
features had the regularity of his, and were of the same Jewish type; they had also the charm
of childish innocency of expression. Home-life and its trustful love permitted the negligent
attire in which she appeared. A chemise buttoned upon the right shoulder, and passing loosely
over the breast and back and under the left arm, but half concealed her person above the waist,
while it left the arms entirely nude. A girdle caught the folds of the garment, marking the
commencement of the skirt. The coiffure was very simple and becoming--a silken cap, Tyrian-dyed;
and over that a striped scarf of the same material, beautifully embroidered, and wound about
in thin folds so as to show the shape of the head without enlarging it; the whole finished
by a tassel dropping from the crown point of the cap. She had rings, ear and finger; anklets
and bracelets, all of gold; and around her neck there was a collar of gold, curiously garnished
with a network of delicate chains, to which were pendants of pearl. The edges of her eyelids
were painted, and the tips of her fingers stained. Her hair fell in two long plaits down her
back. A curled lock rested upon each cheek in front of the ear. Altogether it would have been
impossible to deny her grace, refinement, and beauty.

"Very pretty, my Tirzah, very pretty!" he said, with animation.

"The song?" she asked.

"Yes--and the singer, too. It has the conceit of a Greek. Where did you get it?"

"You remember the Greek who sang in the theatre last month? They said he used to be a singer
at the court for Herod and his sister Salome. He came out just after an exhibition of wrestlers,
when the house was full of noise. At his first note everything became so quiet that I heard
every word. I got the song from him."

"But he sang in Greek."

"And I in Hebrew."

"Ah, yes. I am proud of my little sister. Have you another as good?"

"Very many. But let them go now. Amrah sent me to tell you she will bring you your breakfast,
and that you need not come down. She should be here by this time. She thinks you sick--that
a dreadful accident happened you yesterday. What was it? Tell me, and I will help Amrah doctor
you. She knows the cures of the Egyptians, who were always a stupid set; but I have a great
many recipes of the Arabs who--"

"Are even more stupid than the Egyptians," he said, shaking his head.

"Do you think so? Very well, then," she replied, almost without pause, and putting her hands
to her left ear. "We will have nothing to do with any of them. I have here what is much surer
and better--the amulet which was given to some of our people--I cannot tell when, it was so
far back--by a Persian magician. See, the inscription is almost worn out."

She offered him the earring, which he took, looked at, and handed back, laughing.

"If I were dying, Tirzah, I could not use the charm. It is a relic of idolatry, forbidden every
believing son and daughter of Abraham. Take it, but do not wear it any more."

"Forbidden! Not so," she said. "Our father's mother wore it I do not know how many Sabbaths
in her life. It has cured I do not know how many people--more than three anyhow. It is approved--look,
here is the mark of the rabbis."

"I have no faith in amulets."

She raised her eyes to his in astonishment.

"What would Amrah say?"

"Amrah's father and mother tended sakiyeh for a garden on the Nile."

"But Gamaliel!"

"He says they are godless inventions of unbelievers and Shechemites."

Tirzah looked at the ring doubtfully.

"What shall I do with it?"

"Wear it, my little sister. It becomes you--it helps make you beautiful, though I think you
that without help."

Satisfied, she returned the amulet to her ear just as Amrah entered the summer chamber, bearing
a platter, with wash-bowl, water, and napkins.

Not being a Pharisee, the ablution was short and simple with Judah. The servant then went out,
leaving Tirzah to dress his hair. When a lock was disposed to her satisfaction, she would unloose
the small metallic mirror which, as was the fashion among her fair countrywomen, she wore at
her girdle, and gave it to him, that he might see the triumph, and how handsome it made him.
Meanwhile they kept up their conversation.

"What do you think, Tirzah?--I am going away."

She dropped her hands with amazement.

"Going away! When? Where? For what?"

He laughed.

"Three questions, all in a breath! What a body you are!" Next instant he became serious. "You
know the law requires me to follow some occupation. Our good father set me an example. Even
you would despise me if I spent in idleness the results of his industry and knowledge. I am
going to Rome."

"Oh, I will go with you."

"You must stay with mother. If both of us leave her she will die."

The brightness faded from her face.

"Ah, yes, yes! But--must you go? Here in Jerusalem you can learn all that is needed to be a
merchant--if that is what you are thinking of."

"But that is not what I am thinking of. The law does not require the son to be what the father
was."

"What else can you be?"

"A soldier," he replied, with a certain pride of voice.

Tears came into her eyes.

"You will be killed."

"If God's will, be it so. But, Tirzah, the soldiers are not all killed."

She threw her arms around his neck, as if to hold him back.

"We are so happy! Stay at home, my brother."

"Home cannot always be what it is. You yourself will be going away before long."

"Never!"

He smiled at her earnestness.

"A prince of Judah, or some other of one of the tribes, will come soon and claim my Tirzah,
and ride away with her, to be the light of another house. What will then become of me?"

She answered with sobs.

"War is a trade," he continued, more soberly. "To learn it thoroughly, one must go to school,
and there is no school like a Roman camp."

"You would not fight for Rome?" she asked, holding her breath.

"And you--even you hate her. The whole world hates her. In that, O Tirzah, find the reason
of the answer I give you-- Yes, I will fight for her, if, in return, she will teach me how
one day to fight against her."

"When will you go?"

Amrah's steps were then heard returning.

"Hist!" he said. "Do not let her know of what I am thinking."

The faithful slave came in with breakfast, and placed the waiter holding it upon a stool before
them; then, with white napkins upon her arm, she remained to serve them. They dipped their
fingers in a bowl of water, and were rinsing them, when a noise arrested their attention. They
listened, and distinguished martial music in the street on the north side of the house.

"Soldiers from the Praetorium! I must see them," he cried, springing from the divan, and running
out.

In a moment more he was leaning over the parapet of tiles which guarded the roof at the extreme
northeast corner, so absorbed that he did not notice Tirzah by his side, resting one hand upon
his shoulder.

Their position--the roof being the highest one in the locality--commanded the house-tops eastward
as far as the huge irregular Tower of Antonia, which has been already mentioned as a citadel
for the garrison and military headquarters for the governor. The street, not more than ten
feet wide, was spanned here and there by bridges, open and covered, which, like the roofs along
the way, were beginning to be occupied by men, women, and children, called out by the music.
The word is used, though it is hardly fitting; what the people heard when they came forth was
rather an uproar of trumpets and the shriller litui so delightful to the soldiers.

The array after a while came into view of the two upon the house of the Hurs. First, a vanguard
of the light-armed--mostly slingers and bowmen--marching with wide intervals between their
ranks and files; next a body of heavy-armed infantry, bearing large shields, and hastoe longoe,
or spears identical with those used in the duels before Ilium; then the musicians; and then
an officer riding alone, but followed closely by a guard of cavalry; after them again, a column
of infantry also heavy-armed, which, moving in close order, crowded the streets from wall to
wall, and appeared to be without end.

The brawny limbs of the men; the cadenced motion from right to left of the shields; the sparkle
of scales, buckles, and breastplates and helms, all perfectly burnished; the plumes nodding
above the tall crests; the sway of ensigns and iron-shod spears; the bold, confident step,
exactly timed and measured; the demeanor, so grave, yet so watchful; the machine-like unity
of the whole moving mass--made an impression upon Judah, but as something felt rather than
seen. Two objects fixed his attention--the eagle of the legion first--a gilded effigy perched
on a tall shaft, with wings outspread until they met above its head. He knew that, when brought
from its chamber in the Tower, it had been received with divine honors.

The officer riding alone in the midst of the column was the other attraction. His head was
bare; otherwise he was in full armor. At his left hip he wore a short sword; in his hand, however,
he carried a truncheon, which looked like a roll of white paper. He sat upon a purple cloth
instead of a saddle, and that, and a bridle with a forestall of gold and reins of yellow silk
broadly fringed at the lower edge, completed the housings of the horse.

While the man was yet in the distance, Judah observed that his presence was sufficient to throw
the people looking at him into angry excitement. They would lean over the parapets or stand
boldly out, and shake their fists at him; they followed him with loud cries, and spit at him
as he passed under the bridges; the women even flung their sandals, sometimes with such good
effect as to hit him. When he was nearer, the yells became distinguishable--"Robber, tyrant,
dog of a Roman! Away with Ishmael! Give us back our Hannas!"

When quite near, Judah could see that, as was but natural, the man did not share the indifference
so superbly shown by the soldiers; his face was dark and sullen, and the glances he occasionally
cast at his persecutors were full of menace; the very timid shrank from them.

Now the lad had heard of the custom, borrowed from a habit of the first Caesar, by which chief
commanders, to indicate their rank, appeared in public with only a laurel vine upon their heads.
By that sign he knew this officer--VALERIUS GRATUS, THE NEW PROCURATOR OF JUDEA!

To say truth now, the Roman under the unprovoked storm had the young Jew's sympathy; so that
when he reached the corner of the house, the latter leaned yet farther over the parapet to
see him go by, and in the act rested a hand upon a tile which had been a long time cracked
and allowed to go unnoticed. The pressure was strong enough to displace the outer piece, which
started to fall. A thrill of horror shot through the youth. He reached out to catch the missile.
In appearance the motion was exactly that of one pitching something from him. The effort failed--nay,
it served to push the descending fragment farther out over the wall. He shouted with all his
might. The soldiers of the guard looked up; so did the great man, and that moment the missile
struck him, and he fell from his seat as dead.

The cohort halted; the guards leaped from their horses, and hastened to cover the chief with
their shields. On the other hand, the people who witnessed the affair, never doubting that
the blow had been purposely dealt, cheered the lad as he yet stooped in full view over the
parapet, transfixed by what he beheld, and by anticipation of the consequences flashed all
too plainly upon him.

A mischievous spirit flew with incredible speed from roof to roof along the line of march,
seizing the people, and urging them all alike. They laid hands upon the parapets and tore up
the tiling and the sunburnt mud of which the house-tops were for the most part made, and with
blind fury began to fling them upon the legionaries halted below. A battle then ensued. Discipline,
of course, prevailed. The struggle, the slaughter, the skill of one side, the desperation of
the other, are alike unnecessary to our story. Let us look rather to the wretched author of it all.

He arose from the parapet, his face very pale.

"O Tirzah, Tirzah! What will become of us?"

She had not seen the occurrence below, but was listening to the shouting and watching the mad
activity of the people in view on the houses. Something terrible was going on, she knew; but
what it was, or the cause, or that she or any of those dear to her were in danger, she did
not know.

"What has happened? What does it all mean?" she asked, in sudden alarm.

"I have killed the Roman governor. The tile fell upon him."

An unseen hand appeared to sprinkle her face with the dust of ashes--it grew white so instantly.
She put her arm around him, and looked wistfully, but without a word, into his eyes. His fears
had passed to her, and the sight of them gave him strength.

"I did not do it purposely, Tirzah--it was an accident," he said, more calmly.

"What will they do?" she asked.

He looked off over the tumult momentarily deepening in the street and on the roofs, and thought
of the sullen countenance of Gratus. If he were not dead, where would his vengeance stop? And
if he were dead, to what height of fury would not the violence of the people lash the legionaries?
To evade an answer, he peered over the parapet again, just as the guard were assisting the
Roman to remount his horse.

"He lives, he lives, Tirzah! Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers!"

With that outcry, and a brightened countenance, he drew back and replied to her question.

"Be not afraid, Tirzah. I will explain how it happened, and they will remember our father and
his services, and not hurt us."

He was leading her to the summer-house, when the roof jarred under their feet, and a crash
of strong timbers being burst away, followed by a cry of surprise and agony, arose apparently
from the court-yard below. He stopped and listened. The cry was repeated; then came a rush
of many feet, and voices lifted in rage blent with voices in prayer; and then the screams of
women in mortal terror. The soldiers had beaten in the north gate, and were in possession of
the house. The terrible sense of being hunted smote him. His first impulse was to fly; but
where? Nothing but wings would serve him. Tirzah, her eyes wild with fear, caught his arm.

"O Judah, what does it mean?"

The servants were being butchered--and his mother! Was not one of the voices he heard hers?
With all the will left him, he said, "Stay here, and wait for me, Tirzah. I will go down and
see what is the matter, and come back to you."

His voice was not steady as he wished. She clung closer to him.

Clearer, shriller, no longer a fancy, his mother's cry arose. He hesitated no longer.

"Come, then, let us go."

The terrace or gallery at the foot of the steps was crowded with soldiers. Other soldiers with
drawn swords ran in and out of the chambers. At one place a number of women on their knees
clung to each other or prayed for mercy. Apart from them, one with torn garments, and long
hair streaming over her face, struggled to tear loose from a man all whose strength was tasked
to keep his hold. At the horizon glistened an uncertain light, but the sea was a black abyss, out
of which the phosphorescent waves appeared suddenly, rolled swiftly nearer and broke over the ship
as if poured down from above.

I looked on without another thought save that of pity for the poor
sick calves, when the captain whispered in my ear that things looked
bad, as the ship was much too heavily loaded.

In the darkness I could see nothing but that the boat was very deep
in the water, and that her bow, instead of rising on the waves, dug
into them.

On deck a quantity of water ran backward and forward in a wave as high as the bulwarks, and
it seemed as if the ship could scarcely right herself when once she
lay over on one side.

The growing excitement of the captain, his nervous consultations with the engineer and the
supercargo, were most uncomfortable; presently the passengers began to take part in the deliberations,
and to observe the behaviour of the ship.

As our course gave us a sidewise current, the captain ordered the
sails to be hoisted, in order to lessen the rolling; but the sea was
too heavy, and we shipped still more water and rolled alarmingly.

The captain sighed, ran hither and thither, then lowered the sails
and took a more westerly course, in the direction of one of the Loyalty
Islands; thus we had the current from behind, which made things still
worse, as the sea, rolling along the ship, filled the deck from both
sides; and as the bulwarks were blocked up by the lumber, the water
could not run off, thus adding an enormous weight to the already overloaded
ship; the water ran forward, pressing down the bow, while the stern
reared upward.

When the captain saw the state of affairs, he lost his head completely,
and began to lament piteously: "We do not want to drown, no, we do
not want to drown; but we are going to.

Oh, my poor wife and children! Do you like to drown, doctor?" I denied this energetically, but
I could not help looking at the dark sea and trying to get used to
the idea of a closer acquaintance with it.

The feeling of insecurity was increased by the knowledge that the
boat was old and in poor repair, and might spring a leak at any moment.

Meanwhile

the skipper had turned her round and was making headway against the
waves, but still her bow would not lift, and the captain wept still
more.

His womanish behaviour disgusted me. At last a quiet passenger, an experienced sailor, gave
some advice, which the skipper followed, and which helped matters
a little, so that he regained his self-control to the extent of calling
a general council; he announced that he dared not continue the voyage,
and asked our consent to return to Nouméa.

We all agreed, and about midnight we approached the reef.

Now there are lights in the passage, but they are so poor as to be invisible until the traveller
is already in the passage, so that they are of little use. We were trying to find the entrance, when
the experienced seaman I mentioned before, who was keeping a look
out, called out that we were close to the breakers and surrounded
by the reef.

The only thing we could do was to turn seaward again and beat about till daylight. After some
hours the wind fell and the worst was over; still, the night was unpleasant enough, and frequent
squalls kept us awake. We were all glad when the day broke and we were able to enter the passage.
We landed at Nouméa in the finest of weather, and our unexpected
return created quite a sensation.



The mother, daughter, and entire household were led out of the north gate, the ruins of which
choked the passageway. The cries of the domestics, some of whom had been born in the house,
were most pitiable. When, finally, the horses and all the dumb tenantry of the place were driven
past him, Judah began to comprehend the scope of the procurator's vengeance. The very structure
was devoted. Far as the order was possible of execution, nothing living was to be left within
its walls. If in Judea there were others desperate enough to think of assassinating a Roman
governor, the story of what befell the princely family of Hur would be a warning to them, while
the ruin of the habitation would keep the story alive.

The officer waited outside while a detail of men temporarily restored the gate.

In the street the fighting had almost ceased. Upon the houses here and there clouds of dust
told where the struggle was yet prolonged. The cohort was, for the most part, standing at rest,
its splendor, like its ranks, in nowise diminished. Borne past the point of care for himself,
Judah had heart for nothing in view but the prisoners, among whom he looked in vain for his
mother and Tirzah.

Suddenly, from the earth where she had been lying, a woman arose and started swiftly back to
the gate. Some of the guards reached out to seize her, and a great shout followed their failure.
She ran to Judah, and, dropping down, clasped his knees, the coarse black hair powdered with
dust veiling her eyes.

"O Amrah, good Amrah," he said to her, "God help you; I cannot."

She could not speak.

He bent down, and whispered, "Live, Amrah, for Tirzah and my mother. They will come back, and--"

A soldier drew her away; whereupon she sprang up and rushed through the gateway and passage
into the vacant court-yard.

"Let her go," the officer shouted. "We will seal the house, and she will starve."

The men resumed their work, and, when it was finished there, passed round to the west side.
That gate was also secured, after which the palace of the Hurs was lost to use.

The cohort at length marched back to the Tower, where the procurator stayed to recover from
his hurts and dispose of his prisoners. On the tenth day following, he visited the Market-place.

CHAPTER VII

Next day a detachment of legionaries went to the desolated palace, and, closing the gates permanently,
plastered the corners with wax, and at the sides nailed a notice in Latin:

"THIS IS THE PROPERTY OF THE EMPEROR."

In the haughty Roman idea, the sententious announcement was thought sufficient for the purpose--and
it was.

The day after that again, about noon, a decurion with his command of ten horsemen approached
Nazareth from the south--that is, from the direction of Jerusalem. The place was then a straggling
village, perched on a hill-side, and so insignificant that its one street was little more than
a path well beaten by the coming and going of flocks and herds. The great plain of Esdraelon
crept close to it on the south, and from the height on the west a view could be had of the
shores of the Mediterranean, the region beyond the Jordan, and Hermon. The valley below, and
the country on every side, were given to gardens, vineyards, orchards, and pasturage. Groves
of palm-trees Orientalized the landscape. The houses, in irregular assemblage, were of the
humbler class--square, one-story, flat-roofed, and covered with bright-green vines. The drought
that had burned the hills of Judea to a crisp, brown and lifeless, stopped at the boundary-line
of Galilee.

A trumpet, sounded when the cavalcade drew near the village, had a magical effect upon the
inhabitants. The gates and front doors cast forth groups eager to be the first to catch the
meaning of a visitation so unusual.

Nazareth, it must be remembered, was not only aside from any great highway, but within the
sway of Judas of Gamala; wherefore it should not be hard to imagine the feelings with which
the legionaries were received. But when they were up and traversing the street, the duty that
occupied them became apparent, and then fear and hatred were lost in curiosity, under the impulse
of which the people, knowing there must be a halt at the well in the northeastern part of the
town, quit their gates and doors, and closed in after the procession.

A prisoner whom the horsemen were guarding was the object of curiosity. He was afoot, bareheaded,
half naked, his hands bound behind him. A thong fixed to his wrists was looped over the neck
of a horse. The dust went with the party when in movement, wrapping him in yellow fog, sometimes
in a dense cloud. He drooped forward, footsore and faint. The villagers could see he was young.

At the well the decurion halted, and, with most of the men, dismounted. The prisoner sank down
in the dust of the road, stupefied, and asking nothing: apparently he was in the last stage
of exhaustion. Seeing, when they came near, that he was but a boy, the villagers would have
helped him had they dared.

In the midst of their perplexity, and while the pitchers were passing among the soldiers, a
man was descried coming down the road from Sepphoris. At sight of him a woman cried out, "Look!
Yonder comes the carpenter. Now we will hear something."

The person spoken of was quite venerable in appearance. Thin white locks fell below the edge
of his full turban, and a mass of still whiter beard flowed down the front of his coarse gray
gown. He came slowly, for, in addition to his age, he carried some tools--an axe, a saw, and
a drawing-knife, all very rude and heavy--and had evidently travelled some distance without rest.

He stopped close by to survey the assemblage.

"O Rabbi, good Rabbi Joseph!" cried a woman, running to him. "Here is a prisoner; come ask
the soldiers about him, that we may know who he is, and what he has done, and what they are
going to do with him."

The rabbi's face remained stolid; he glanced at the prisoner, however, and presently went to
the officer.

"The peace of the Lord be with you!" he said, with unbending gravity.

"And that of the gods with you," the decurion replied.

"Are you from Jerusalem?"

"Yes."

"Your prisoner is young."

"In years, yes."

"May I ask what he has done?"

"He is an assassin."

The people repeated the word in astonishment, but Rabbi Joseph pursued his inquest.

"Is he a son of Israel?"

"He is a Jew," said the Roman, dryly.

The wavering pity of the bystanders came back.

"I know nothing of your tribes, but can speak of his family," the speaker continued. "You may
have heard of a prince of Jerusalem named Hur--Ben-Hur, they called him. He lived in Herod's day."

"I have seen him," Joseph said.

"Well, this is his son."

Exclamations became general, and the decurion hastened to stop them.

"In the streets of Jerusalem, day before yesterday, he nearly killed the noble Gratus by flinging
a tile upon his head from the roof of a palace--his father's, I believe."

There was a pause in the conversation during which the Nazarenes gazed at the young Ben-Hur
as at a wild beast.

"Did he kill him?" asked the rabbi.

"No."

"He is under sentence."

"Yes--the galleys for life."

"The Lord help him!" said Joseph, for once moved out of his stolidity.

Thereupon a youth who came up with Joseph, but had stood behind him unobserved, laid down an
axe he had been carrying, and, going to the great stone standing by the well, took from it
a pitcher of water. The action was so quiet that before the guard could interfere, had they
been disposed to do so, he was stooping over the prisoner, and offering him drink.

The hand laid kindly upon his shoulder awoke the unfortunate Judah, and, looking up, he saw
a face he never forgot--the face of a boy about his own age, shaded by locks of yellowish bright
chestnut hair; a face lighted by dark-blue eyes, at the time so soft, so appealing, so full
of love and holy purpose, that they had all the power of command and will. The spirit of the
Jew, hardened though it was by days and nights of suffering, and so embittered by wrong that
its dreams of revenge took in all the world, melted under the stranger's look, and became as
a child's. He put his lips to the pitcher, and drank long and deep. Not a word was said to
him, nor did he say a word.

When the draught was finished, the hand that had been resting upon the sufferer's shoulder
was placed upon his head, and stayed there in the dusty locks time enough to say a blessing;
the stranger then returned the pitcher to its place on the stone, and, taking his axe again,
went back to Rabbi Joseph. All eyes went with him, the decurion's as well as those of the villagers.

This was the end of the scene at the well. When the men had drunk, and the horses, the march
was resumed. But the temper of the decurion was not as it had been; he himself raised the prisoner
from the dust, and helped him on a horse behind a soldier. The Nazarenes went to their houses--among
them Rabbi Joseph and his apprentice.

And so, for the first time, Judah and the son of Mary met and parted.

BOOK THIRD

  "Cleopatra.... Our size of sorrow,
  Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
  As that which makes it.--
              Enter, below, DIOMEDES.
                            How now? is he dead?

  Diomedes. His death's upon him, but not dead."
            Antony and Cleopatra (act iv., sc. xiii.).

CHAPTER I

The city of Misenum gave name to the promontory which it crowned, a few miles southwest of
Naples. An account of ruins is all that remains of it now; yet in the year of our Lord 24--to
which it is desirable to advance the reader--the place was one of the most important on the
western coast of Italy.[1]

    [1] The Roman government, it will be remembered, had two harbors in
        which great fleets were constantly kept--Ravenna and Misenum.

In the year mentioned, a traveller coming to the promontory to regale himself with the view
there offered, would have mounted a wall, and, with the city at his back, looked over the bay
of Neapolis, as charming then as now; and then, as now, he would have seen the matchless shore,
the smoking cone, the sky and waves so softly, deeply blue, Ischia here and Capri yonder; from
one to the other and back again, through the purpled air, his gaze would have sported; at last--for
the eyes do weary of the beautiful as the palate with sweets--at last it would have dropped
upon a spectacle which the modern tourist cannot see--half the reserve navy of Rome astir or
at anchor below him. Thus regarded, Misenum was a very proper place for three masters to meet,
and at leisure parcel the world among them.

In the old time, moreover, there was a gateway in the wall at a certain point fronting the
sea--an empty gateway forming the outlet of a street which, after the exit, stretched itself,
in the form of a broad mole, out many stadia into the waves.

The watchman on the wall above the gateway was disturbed, one cool September morning, by a
party coming down the street in noisy conversation. He gave one look, then settled into his
drowse again.

There were twenty or thirty persons in the party, of whom the greater number were slaves with
torches, which flamed little and smoked much, leaving on the air the perfume of the Indian
nard. The masters walked in advance arm-in-arm. One of them, apparently fifty years old, slightly
bald, and wearing over his scant locks a crown of laurel, seemed, from the attentions paid
him, the central object of some affectionate ceremony. They all sported ample togas of white
wool broadly bordered with purple. A glance had sufficed the watchman. He knew, without question,
they were of high rank, and escorting a friend to ship after a night of festivity. Further
explanation will be found in the conversation they carried on.

"No, my Quintus," said one, speaking to him with the crown, "it is ill of Fortune to take thee
from us so soon. Only yesterday thou didst return from the seas beyond the Pillars. Why, thou
hast not even got back thy land legs."

"By Castor! if a man may swear a woman's oath," said another, somewhat worse of wine, "let
us not lament. Our Quintus is but going to find what he lost last night. Dice on a rolling
ship is not dice on shore--eh, Quintus?"

"Abuse not Fortune!" exclaimed a third. "She is not blind or fickle. At Antium, where our Arrius
questions her, she answers him with nods, and at sea she abides with him holding the rudder.
She takes him from us, but does she not always give him back with a new victory?"

"The Greeks are taking him away," another broke in. "Let us abuse them, not the gods. In learning
to trade they forgot how to fight."

With these words, the party passed the gateway, and came upon the mole, with the bay before
them beautiful in the morning light. To the veteran sailor the plash of the waves was like
a greeting. He drew a long breath, as if the perfume of the water were sweeter than that of
the nard, and held his hand aloft.

"My gifts were at Praeneste, not Antium--and see! Wind from the west. Thanks, O Fortune, my
mother!" he said, earnestly.

The friends all repeated the exclamation, and the slaves waved their torches.

"She comes--yonder!" he continued, pointing to a galley outside the mole. "What need has a
sailor for other mistress? Is your Lucrece more graceful, my Caius?"

He gazed at the coming ship, and justified his pride. A white sail was bent to the low mast,
and the oars dipped, arose, poised a moment, then dipped again, with wing-like action, and
in perfect time.

"Yes, spare the gods," he said, soberly, his eyes fixed upon the vessel. "They send us opportunities.
Ours the fault if we fail. And as for the Greeks, you forget, O my Lentulus, the pirates I
am going to punish are Greeks. One victory over them is of more account than a hundred over
the Africans."

"Then thy way is to the Aegean?"

The sailor's eyes were full of his ship.

"What grace, what freedom! A bird hath not less care for the fretting of the waves. See!" he
said, but almost immediately added, "Thy pardon, my Lentulus. I am going to the Aegean; and
as my departure is so near, I will tell the occasion--only keep it under the rose. I would
not that you abuse the duumvir when next you meet him. He is my friend. The trade between Greece
and Alexandria, as ye may have heard, is hardly inferior to that between Alexandria and Rome.
The people in that part of the world forgot to celebrate the Cerealia, and Triptolemus paid
them with a harvest not worth the gathering. At all events, the trade is so grown that it will
not brook interruption a day. Ye may also have heard of the Chersonesan pirates, nested up
in the Euxine; none bolder, by the Bacchae! Yesterday word came to Rome that, with a fleet,
they had rowed down the Bosphorus, sunk the galleys off Byzantium and Chalcedon, swept the
Propontis, and, still unsated, burst through into the Aegean. The corn-merchants who have ships
in the East Mediterranean are frightened. They had audience with the Emperor himself, and from
Ravenna there go to-day a hundred galleys, and from Misenum"--he paused as if to pique the
curiosity of his friends, and ended with an emphatic--"one."

"Happy Quintus! We congratulate thee!"

"The preferment forerunneth promotion. We salute thee duumvir; nothing less."

"Quintus Arrius, the duumvir, hath a better sound than Quintus Arrius, the tribune."

In such manner they showered him with congratulations.

"I am glad with the rest," said the bibulous friend, "very glad; but I must be practical, O
my duumvir; and not until I know if promotion will help thee to knowledge of the tesserae will
I have an opinion as to whether the gods mean thee ill or good in this--this business."

"Thanks, many thanks!" Arrius replied, speaking to them collectively. "Had ye but lanterns,
I would say ye were augurs. Perpol! I will go further, and show what master diviners ye are!
See--and read."

From the folds of his toga he drew a roll of paper, and passed it to them, saying, "Received
while at table last night from--Sejanus."

The name was already a great one in the Roman world; great, and not so infamous as it afterwards
became.

"Sejanus!" they exclaimed, with one voice, closing in to read what the minister had written.

"Sejanus to C. Coecilius Rufus, Duumvir.

"ROME, XIX. Kal. Sept.

"Caesar hath good report of Quintus Arrius, the tribune. In particular he bath heard of his
valor, manifested in the western seas, insomuch that it is his will that the said Quintus be
transferred instantly to the East.

"It is our Caesar's will, further, that you cause a hundred triremes, of the first class, and
full appointment, to be despatched without delay against the pirates who have appeared in the
Aegean, and that Quintus be sent to command the fleet so despatched.

"Details are thine, my Caecilius.

"The necessity is urgent, as thou will be advised by the reports enclosed for thy perusal and
the information of the said Quintus.

"SEJANUS."

Arrius gave little heed to the reading. As the ship drew more plainly out of the perspective,
she became more and more an attraction to him. The look with which he watched her was that
of an enthusiast. At length he tossed the loosened folds of his toga in the air; in reply to
the signal, over the aplustre, or fan-like fixture at the stern of the vessel, a scarlet flag
was displayed; while several sailors appeared upon the bulwarks, and swung themselves hand
over hand up the ropes to the antenna, or yard, and furled the sail. The bow was put round,
and the time of the oars increased one half; so that at racing speed she bore down directly
towards him and his friends. He observed the manoeuvring with a perceptible brightening of
the eyes. Her instant answer to the rudder, and the steadiness with which she kept her course,
were especially noticeable as virtues to be relied upon in action.

"By the Nymphae!" said one of the friends, giving back the roll, "we may not longer say our
friend will be great; he is already great. Our love will now have famous things to feed upon.
What more hast thou for us?"

"Nothing more," Arrius replied. "What ye have of the affair is by this time old news in Rome,
especially between the palace and the Forum. The duumvir is discreet; what I am to do, where
go to find my fleet, he will tell on the ship, where a sealed package is waiting me. If, however,
ye have offerings for any of the altars to-day, pray the gods for a friend plying oar and sail
somewhere in the direction of Sicily. But she is here, and will come to," he said, reverting
to the vessel. "I have interest in her masters; they will sail and fight with me. It is not
an easy thing to lay ship side on a shore like this; so let us judge their training and skill."

"What, is she new to thee?"

"I never saw her before; and, as yet, I know not if she will bring me one acquaintance."

"Is that well?"

"It matters but little. We of the sea come to know each other quickly; our loves, like our
hates, are born of sudden dangers."

The vessel was of the class called naves liburnicae--long, narrow, low in the water, and modelled
for speed and quick manoeuvre. The bow was beautiful. A jet of water spun from its foot as
she came on, sprinkling all the prow, which rose in graceful curvature twice a man's stature
above the plane of the deck. Upon the bending of the sides were figures of Triton blowing shells.
Below the bow, fixed to the keel, and projecting forward under the water-line, was the rostrum,
or beak, a device of solid wood, reinforced and armed with iron, in action used as a ram. A
stout molding extended from the bow the full length of the ship's sides, defining the bulwarks,
which were tastefully crenelated; below the molding, in three rows, each covered with a cap
or shield of bull-hide, were the holes in which the oars were worked--sixty on the right, sixty
on the left. In further ornamentation, caducei leaned against the lofty prow. Two immense ropes
passing across the bow marked the number of anchors stowed on the foredeck.

The simplicity of the upper works declared the oars the chief dependence of the crew. A mast,
set a little forward of midship, was held by fore and back stays and shrouds fixed to rings
on the inner side of the bulwarks. The tackle was that required for the management of one great
square sail and the yard to which it was hung. Above the bulwarks the deck was visible.

Save the sailors who had reefed the sail, and yet lingered on the yard, but one man was to
be seen by the party on the mole, and he stood by the prow helmeted and with a shield.

The hundred and twenty oaken blades, kept white and shining by pumice and the constant wash
of the waves, rose and fell as if operated by the same hand, and drove the galley forward with
a speed rivalling that of a modern steamer.

So rapidly, and apparently, so rashly, did she come that the landsmen of the tribune's party
were alarmed. Suddenly the man by the prow raised his hand with a peculiar gesture; whereupon
all the oars flew up, poised a moment in air, then fell straight down. The water boiled and
bubbled about them; the galley shook in every timber, and stopped as if scared. Another gesture
of the hand, and again the oars arose, feathered, and fell; but this time those on the right,
dropping towards the stern, pushed forward; while those on the left, dropping towards the bow,
pulled backwards. Three times the oars thus pushed and pulled against each other. Round to
the right the ship swung as upon a pivot; then, caught by the wind, she settled gently broadside
to the mole.

The movement brought the stern to view, with all its garniture--Tritons like those at the bow;
name in large raised letters; the rudder at the side; the elevated platform upon which the
helmsman sat, a stately figure in full armor, his hand upon the rudder-rope; and the aplustre,
high, gilt, carved, and bent over the helmsman like a great runcinate leaf.

In the midst of the rounding-to, a trumpet was blown brief and shrill, and from the hatchways
out poured the marines, all in superb equipment, brazen helms, burnished shields and javelins.
While the fighting-men thus went to quarters as for action, the sailors proper climbed the
shrouds and perched themselves along the yard. The officers and musicians took their posts.
There was no shouting or needless noise. When the oars touched the mole, a bridge was sent
out from the helmsman's deck. Then the tribune turned to his party and said, with a gravity
he had not before shown:

"Duty now, O my friends."

He took the chaplet from his head and gave it to the dice-player.

"Take thou the myrtle, O favorite of the tesserae!" he said. "If I return, I will seek my sestertii
again; if I am not victor, I will not return. Hang the crown in thy atrium."

To the company he opened his arms, and they came one by one and received his parting embrace.

"The gods go with thee, O Quintus!" they said.

"Farewell," he replied.

To the slaves waving their torches he waved his hand; then he turned to the waiting ship, beautiful
with ordered ranks and crested helms, and shields and javelins. As he stepped upon the bridge,
the trumpets sounded, and over the aplustre rose the vexillum purpureum, or pennant of a commander
of a fleet.

CHAPTER II

The tribune, standing upon the helmsman's deck with the order of the duumvir open in his hand,
spoke to the chief of the rowers.[1]

    [1] Called hortator.

"What force hast thou?"

"Of oarsmen, two hundred and fifty-two; ten supernumeraries.

"Making reliefs of--"

"Eighty-four."

"And thy habit?"

"It has been to take off and put on every two hours."

The tribune mused a moment.

"The division is hard, and I will reform it, but not now. The oars may not rest day or night."

Then to the sailing-master he said,

"The wind is fair. Let the sail help the oars."

When the two thus addressed were gone, he turned to the chief pilot.[2]

    [2] Called rector.

"What service hast thou had?"

"Two-and-thirty years."

"In what seas chiefly?"

"Between our Rome and the East."

"Thou art the man I would have chosen."

The tribune looked at his orders again.

"Past the Camponellan cape, the course will be to Messina. Beyond that, follow the bend of
the Calabrian shore till Melito is on thy left, then-- Knowest thou the stars that govern in
the Ionian Sea?"

"I know them well."

"Then from Melito course eastward for Cythera. The gods willing, I will not anchor until in
the Bay of Antemona. The duty is urgent. I rely upon thee."

A prudent man was Arrius--prudent, and of the class which, while enriching the altars at Praeneste
and Antium, was of opinion, nevertheless, that the favor of the blind goddess depended more
upon the votary's care and judgment than upon his gifts and vows. All night as master of the
feast he had sat at table drinking and playing; yet the odor of the sea returned him to the
mood of the sailor, and he would not rest until he knew his ship. Knowledge leaves no room
for chances. Having begun with the chief of the rowers, the sailing-master, and the pilot,
in company with the other officers--the commander of the marines, the keeper of the stores,
the master of the machines, the overseer of the kitchen or fires--he passed through the several
quarters. Nothing escaped his inspection. When he was through, of the community crowded within
the narrow walls he alone knew perfectly all there was of material preparation for the voyage
and its possible incidents; and, finding the preparation complete, there was left him but one
thing further--thorough knowledge of the personnel of his command. As this was the most delicate
and difficult part of his task, requiring much time, he set about it his own way.

At noon that day the galley was skimming the sea off Paestum. The wind was yet from the west,
filling the sail to the master's content. The watches had been established. On the foredeck
the altar had been set and sprinkled with salt and barley, and before it the tribune had offered
solemn prayers to Jove and to Neptune and all the Oceanidae, and, with vows, poured the wine
and burned the incense. And now, the better to study his men, he was seated in the great cabin,
a very martial figure.

The cabin, it should be stated, was the central compartment of the galley, in extent quite
sixty-five by thirty feet, and lighted by three broad hatchways. A row of stanchions ran from
end to end, supporting the roof, and near the centre the mast was visible, all bristling with
axes and spears and javelins. To each hatchway there were double stairs descending right and
left, with a pivotal arrangement at the top to allow the lower ends to be hitched to the ceiling;
and, as these were now raised, the compartment had the appearance of a skylighted hall.

The reader will understand readily that this was the heart of the ship, the home of all aboard--eating-room,
sleeping-chamber, field of exercise, lounging-place off duty--uses made possible by the laws
which reduced life there to minute details and a routine relentless as death.

At the after-end of the cabin there was a platform, reached by several steps. Upon it the chief
of the rowers sat; in front of him a sounding-table, upon which, with a gavel, he beat time
for the oarsmen; at his right a clepsydra, or water-clock, to measure the reliefs and watches.
Above him, on a higher platform, well guarded by gilded railing, the tribune had his quarters,
overlooking everything, and furnished with a couch, a table, and a cathedra, or chair, cushioned,
and with arms and high back--articles which the imperial dispensation permitted of the utmost
elegance.

Thus at ease, lounging in the great chair, swaying with the motion of the vessel, the military
cloak half draping his tunic, sword in belt, Arrius kept watchful eye over his command, and
was as closely watched by them. He saw critically everything in view, but dwelt longest upon
the rowers. The reader would doubtless have done the same: only he would have looked with much
sympathy, while, as is the habit with masters, the tribune's mind ran forward of what he saw,
inquiring for results.

The spectacle was simple enough of itself. Along the sides of the cabin, fixed to the ship's
timbers, were what at first appeared to be three rows of benches; a closer view, however, showed
them a succession of rising banks, in each of which the second bench was behind and above the
first one, and the third above and behind the second. To accommodate the sixty rowers on a
side, the space devoted to them permitted nineteen banks separated by intervals of one yard,
with a twentieth bank divided so that what would have been its upper seat or bench was directly
above the lower seat of the first bank. The arrangement gave each rower when at work ample
room, if he timed his movements with those of his associates, the principle being that of soldiers
marching with cadenced step in close order. The arrangement also allowed a multiplication of
banks, limited only by the length of the galley.

As to the rowers, those upon the first and second benches sat, while those upon the third,
having longer oars to work, were suffered to stand. The oars were loaded with lead in the handles,
and near the point of balance hung to pliable thongs, making possible the delicate touch called
feathering, but, at the same time, increasing the need of skill, since an eccentric wave might
at any moment catch a heedless fellow and hurl him from his seat. Each oar-hole was a vent
through which the laborer opposite it had his plenty of sweet air. Light streamed down upon
him from the grating which formed the floor of the passage between the deck and the bulwark
over his head. In some respects, therefore, the condition of the men might have been much worse.
Still, it must not be imagined that there was any pleasantness in their lives. Communication
between them was not allowed. Day after day they filled their places without speech; in hours
of labor they could not see each other's faces; their short respites were given to sleep and
the snatching of food. They never laughed; no one ever heard one of them sing. What is the
use of tongues when a sigh or a groan will tell all men feel while, perforce, they think in
silence? Existence with the poor wretches was like a stream under ground sweeping slowly, laboriously
on to its outlet, wherever that might chance to be.

O Son of Mary! The sword has now a heart--and thine the glory! So now; but, in the days of
which we are writing, for captivity there was drudgery on walls, and in the streets and mines,
and the galleys both of war and commerce were insatiable. When Druilius won the first sea-fight
for his country, Romans plied the oars, and the glory was to the rower not less than the marine.
These benches which now we are trying to see as they were testified to the change come with
conquest, and illustrated both the policy and the prowess of Rome. Nearly all the nations had
sons there, mostly prisoners of war, chosen for their brawn and endurance. In one place a Briton;
before him a Libyan; behind him a Crimean. Elsewhere a Scythian, a Gaul, and a Thebasite. Roman
convicts cast down to consort with Goths and Longobardi, Jews, Ethiopians, and barbarians from
the shores of Maeotis. Here an Athenian, there a red-haired savage from Hibernia, yonder blue-eyed
giants of the Cimbri.

In the labor of the rowers there was not enough art to give occupation to their minds, rude
and simple as they were. The reach forward, the pull, the feathering the blade, the dip, were
all there was of it; motions most perfect when most automatic. Even the care forced upon them
by the sea outside grew in time to be a thing instinctive rather than of thought. So, as the
result of long service, the poor wretches became imbruted--patient, spiritless, obedient--creatures
of vast muscle and exhausted intellects, who lived upon recollections generally few but dear,
and at last lowered into the semi-conscious alchemic state wherein misery turns to habit, and
the soul takes on incredible endurance.

From right to left, hour after hour, the tribune, swaying in his easy-chair, turned with thought
of everything rather than the wretchedness of the slaves upon the benches. Their motions, precise,
and exactly the same on both sides of the vessel, after a while became monotonous; and then
he amused himself singling out individuals. With his stylus he made note of objections, thinking,
if all went well, he would find among the pirates of whom he was in search better men for the
places.

There was no need of keeping the proper names of the slaves brought to the galleys as to their
graves; so, for convenience, they were usually identified by the numerals painted upon the
benches to which they were assigned. As the sharp eyes of the great man moved from seat to
seat on either hand, they came at last to number sixty, which, as has been said, belonged properly
to the last bank on the left-hand side, but, wanting room aft, had been fixed above the first
bench of the first bank. There they rested.

The bench of number sixty was slightly above the level of the platform, and but a few feet
away. The light glinting through the grating over his head gave the rower fairly to the tribune's
view--erect, and, like all his fellows, naked, except a cincture about the loins. There were,
however, some points in his favor. He was very young, not more than twenty. Furthermore, Arrius
was not merely given to dice; he was a connoisseur of men physically, and when ashore indulged
a habit of visiting the gymnasia to see and admire the most famous athletae. From some professor,
doubtless, he had caught the idea that strength was as much of the quality as the quantity
of the muscle, while superiority in performance required a certain mind as well as strength.
Having adopted the doctrine, like most men with a hobby, he was always looking for illustrations
to support it.

The reader may well believe that while the tribune, in the search for the perfect, was often
called upon to stop and study, he was seldom perfectly satisfied--in fact, very seldom held
as long as on this occasion.

In the beginning of each movement of the oar, the rower's body and face were brought into profile
view from the platform; the movement ended with the body reversed, and in a pushing posture.
The grace and ease of the action at first suggested a doubt of the honesty of the effort put
forth; but it was speedily dismissed; the firmness with which the oar was held while in the
reach forward, its bending under the push, were proofs of the force applied; not that only,
they as certainly proved the rower's art, and put the critic in the great arm-chair in search
of the combination of strength and cleverness which was the central idea of his theory.

In course of the study, Arrius observed the subject's youth; wholly unconscious of tenderness
on that account, he also observed that he seemed of good height, and that his limbs, upper
and nether, were singularly perfect. The arms, perhaps, were too long, but the objection was
well hidden under a mass of muscle, which, in some movements, swelled and knotted like kinking
cords. Every rib in the round body was discernible; yet the leanness was the healthful reduction
so strained after in the palaestrae. And altogether there was in the rower's action a certain
harmony which, besides addressing itself to the tribune's theory, stimulated both his curiosity
and general interest.

Very soon he found himself waiting to catch a view of the man's face in full. The head was
shapely, and balanced upon a neck broad at the base, but of exceeding pliancy and grace. The
features in profile were of Oriental outline, and of that delicacy of expression which has
always been thought a sign of blood and sensitive spirit. With these observations, the tribune's
interest in the subject deepened.

"By the gods," he said to himself, "the fellow impresses me! He promises well. I will know
more of him."

Directly the tribune caught the view he wished--the rower turned and looked at him.

"A Jew! and a boy!"

Under the gaze then fixed steadily upon him, the large eyes of the slave grew larger--the blood
surged to his very brows--the blade lingered in his hands. But instantly, with an angry crash,
down fell the gavel of the hortator. The rower started, withdrew his face from the inquisitor,
and, as if personally chidden, dropped the oar half feathered. When he glanced again at the
tribune, he was vastly more astonished--he was met with a kindly smile.

Meantime the galley entered the Straits of Messina, and, skimming past the city of that name,
was after a while turned eastward, leaving the cloud over AEtna in the sky astern.

Often as Arrius resumed to his platform in the cabin he returned to study the rower, and he
kept saying to himself, "The fellow hath a spirit. A Jew is not a barbarian. I will know more
of him."

CHAPTER III

The fourth day out, and the Astroea--so the galley was named--speeding through the Ionian Sea.
The sky was clear, and the wind blew as if bearing the good-will of all the gods.

As it was possible to overtake the fleet before reaching the bay east of the island of Cythera,
designated for assemblage, Arrius, somewhat impatient, spent much time on deck. He took note
diligently of matters pertaining to his ship, and as a rule was well pleased. In the cabin,
swinging in the great chair, his thought continually reverted to the rower on number sixty.

"Knowest thou the man just come from yon bench?" he at length asked of the hortator.

A relief was going on at the moment.

"From number sixty?" returned the chief.

"Yes."

The chief looked sharply at the rower then going forward.

"As thou knowest," he replied "the ship is but a month from the maker's hand, and the men are
as new to me as the ship."

"He is a Jew," Arrius remarked, thoughtfully.

"The noble Quintus is shrewd."

"He is very young," Arrius continued.

"But our best rower," said the other. "I have seen his oar bend almost to breaking."

"Of what disposition is he?"

"He is obedient; further I know not. Once he made request of me."

"For what?"

"He wished me to change him alternately from the right to the left."

"Did he give a reason?"

"He had observed that the men who are confined to one side become misshapen. He also said that
some day of storm or battle there might be sudden need to change him, and he might then be
unserviceable."

"Perpol! The idea is new. What else hast thou observed of him?"

"He is cleanly above his companions."

"In that he is Roman," said Arrius, approvingly. "Have you nothing of his history?"

"Not a word."

The tribune reflected awhile, and turned to go to his own seat.

"If I should be on deck when his time is up," he paused to say, "send him to me. Let him come
alone."

About two hours later Arrius stood under the aplustre of the galley; in the mood of one who,
seeing himself carried swiftly towards an event of mighty import, has nothing to do but wait--the
mood in which philosophy vests an even-minded man with the utmost calm, and is ever so serviceable.
The pilot sat with a hand upon the rope by which the rudder paddles, one on each side of the
vessel, were managed. In the shade of the sail some sailors lay asleep, and up on the yard
there was a lookout. Lifting his eyes from the solarium set under the aplustre for reference
in keeping the course, Arrius beheld the rower approaching.

"The chief called thee the noble Arrius, and said it was thy will that I should seek thee here.
I have come."

Arrius surveyed the figure, tall, sinewy, glistening in the sun, and tinted by the rich red
blood within--surveyed it admiringly, and with a thought of the arena; yet the manner was not
without effect upon him: there was in the voice a suggestion of life at least partly spent
under refining influences; the eyes were clear and open, and more curious than defiant. To
the shrewd, demanding, masterful glance bent upon it, the face gave back nothing to mar its
youthful comeliness--nothing of accusation or sullenness or menace, only the signs which a
great sorrow long borne imprints, as time mellows the surface of pictures. In tacit acknowledgment
of the effect, the Roman spoke as an older man to a younger, not as a master to a slave.

"The hortator tells me thou art his best rower."

"The hortator is very kind," the rower answered.

"Hast thou seen much service?"

"About three years."

"At the oars?"

"I cannot recall a day of rest from them."

"The labor is hard; few men bear it a year without breaking, and thou--thou art but a boy."

"The noble Arrius forgets that the spirit hath much to do with endurance. By its help the weak
sometimes thrive, when the strong perish."

"From thy speech, thou art a Jew."

"My ancestors further back than the first Roman were Hebrews."

"The stubborn pride of thy race is not lost in thee," said Arrius, observing a flush upon the
rower's face.

"Pride is never so loud as when in chains."

"What cause hast thou for pride?"

"That I am a Jew."

Arrius smiled.

"I have not been to Jerusalem," he said; "but I have heard of its princes. I knew one of them.
He was a merchant, and sailed the seas. He was fit to have been a king. Of what degree art thou?"

"I must answer thee from the bench of a galley. I am of the degree of slaves. My father was
a prince of Jerusalem, and, as a merchant, he sailed the seas. He was known and honored in
the guest-chamber of the great Augustus."

"His name?"

"Ithamar, of the house of Hur."

The tribune raised his hand in astonishment.

"A son of Hur--thou?"

After a silence, he asked,

"What brought thee here?"

Judah lowered his head, and his breast labored hard. When his feelings were sufficiently mastered,
he looked the tribune in the face, and answered,

"I was accused of attempting to assassinate Valerius Gratus, the procurator."

"Thou!" cried Arrius, yet more amazed, and retreating a step. "Thou that assassin! All Rome
rang with the story. It came to my ship in the river by Lodinum."

The two regarded each other silently.

"I thought the family of Hur blotted from the earth," said Arrius, speaking first.

A flood of tender recollections carried the young man's pride away; tears shone upon his cheeks.

"Mother--mother! And my little Tirzah! Where are they? O tribune, noble tribune, if thou knowest
anything of them"--he clasped his hands in appeal--"tell me all thou knowest. Tell me if they
are living--if living, where are they? and in what condition? Oh, I pray thee, tell me!"

He drew nearer Arrius, so near that his hands touched the cloak where it dropped from the latter's
folded arms.

"The horrible day is three years gone," he continued--"three years, O tribune, and every hour
a whole lifetime of misery--a lifetime in a bottomless pit with death, and no relief but in
labor--and in all that time not a word from any one, not a whisper. Oh, if, in being forgotten,
we could only forget! If only I could hide from that scene--my sister torn from me, my mother's
last look! I have felt the plague's breath, and the shock of ships in battle; I have heard
the tempest lashing the sea, and laughed, though others prayed: death would have been a riddance.
Bend the oar--yes, in the strain of mighty effort trying to escape the haunting of what that
day occurred. Think what little will help me. Tell me they are dead, if no more, for happy
they cannot be while I am lost. I have heard them call me in the night; I have seen them on
the water walking. Oh, never anything so true as my mother's love! And Tirzah--her breath was
as the breath of white lilies. She was the youngest branch of the palm--so fresh, so tender,
so graceful, so beautiful! She made my day all morning. She came and went in music. And mine
was the hand that laid them low! I--"

"Dost thou admit thy guilt?" asked Arrius, sternly.

The change that came upon Ben-Hur was wonderful to see, it was so instant and extreme. The
voice sharpened; the hands arose tight-clenched; every fibre thrilled; his eyes inflamed.

"Thou hast heard of the God of my fathers," he said; "of the infinite Jehovah. By his truth
and almightiness, and by the love with which he hath followed Israel from the beginning, I
swear I am innocent!"

The tribune was much moved.

"O noble Roman!" continued Ben-Hur, "give me a little faith, and, into my darkness, deeper
darkening every day, send a light!"

Arrius turned away, and walked the deck.

"Didst thou not have a trial?" he asked, stopping suddenly.

"No!"

The Roman raised his head, surprised.

"No trial--no witnesses! Who passed judgment upon thee?"

Romans, it should be remembered, were at no time such lovers of the law and its forms as in
the ages of their decay.

"They bound me with cords, and dragged me to a vault in the Tower. I saw no one. No one spoke
to me. Next day soldiers took me to the seaside. I have been a galley-slave ever since."

"What couldst thou have proven?"

"I was a boy, too young to be a conspirator. Gratus was a stranger to me. If I had meant to
kill him, that was not the time or the place. He was riding in the midst of a legion, and it
was broad day. I could not have escaped. I was of a class most friendly to Rome. My father
had been distinguished for his services to the emperor. We had a great estate to lose. Ruin
was certain to myself, my mother, my sister. I had no cause for malice, while every consideration--property,
family, life, conscience, the Law--to a son of Israel as the breath of his nostrils--would
have stayed my hand, though the foul intent had been ever so strong. I was not mad. Death was
preferable to shame; and, believe me, I pray, it is so yet."

"Who was with thee when the blow was struck?"

"I was on the house-top--my father's house. Tirzah was with me--at my side--the soul of gentleness.
Together we leaned over the parapet to see the legion pass. A tile gave way under my hand,
and fell upon Gratus. I thought I had killed him. Ah, what horror I felt!"

"Where was thy mother?"

"In her chamber below."

"What became of her?"

Ben-Hur clenched his hands, and drew a breath like a gasp.

"I do not know. I saw them drag her away--that is all I know. Out of the house they drove every
living thing, even the dumb cattle, and they sealed the gates. The purpose was that she should
not return. I, too, ask for her. Oh for one word! She, at least, was innocent. I can forgive--but
I pray thy pardon, noble tribune! A slave like me should not talk of forgiveness or of revenge.
I am bound to an oar for life."

Arrius listened intently. He brought all his experience with slaves to his aid. If the feeling
shown in this instance were assumed, the acting was perfect; on the other hand, if it were
real, the Jew's innocence might not be doubted; and if he were innocent, with what blind fury
the power had been exercised! A whole family blotted out to atone an accident! The thought
shocked him.

There is no wiser providence than that our occupations, however rude or bloody, cannot wear
us out morally; that such qualities as justice and mercy, if they really possess us, continue
to live on under them, like flowers under the snow. The tribune could be inexorable, else he
had not been fit for the usages of his calling; he could also be just; and to excite his sense
of wrong was to put him in the way to right the wrong. The crews of the ships in which he served
came after a time to speak of him as the good tribune. Shrewd readers will not want a better
definition of his character.

In this instance there were many circumstances certainly in the young man's favor, and some
to be supposed. Possibly Arrius knew Valerius Gratus without loving him. Possibly he had known
the elder Hur. In the course of his appeal, Judah had asked him of that; and, as will be noticed,
he had made no reply.

For once the tribune was at loss, and hesitated. His power was ample. He was monarch of the
ship. His prepossessions all moved him to mercy. His faith was won. Yet, he said to himself,
there was no haste--or, rather, there was haste to Cythera; the best rower could not then be
spared; he would wait; he would learn more; he would at least be sure this was the prince Ben-Hur,
and that he was of a right disposition. Ordinarily, slaves were liars.

"It is enough," he said aloud. "Go back to thy place."

Ben-Hur bowed; looked once more into the master's face, but saw nothing for hope. He turned
away slowly, looked back, and said,

"If thou dost think of me again, O tribune, let it not be lost in thy mind that I prayed thee
only for word of my people--mother, sister."

He moved on.

Arrius followed him with admiring eyes.

"Perpol!" he thought. "With teaching, what a man for the arena! What a runner! Ye gods! what
an arm for the sword or the cestus!--Stay!" he said aloud.

Ben-Hur stopped, and the tribune went to him.

"If thou wert free, what wouldst thou do?"

"The noble Arrius mocks me!" Judah said, with trembling lips.

"No; by the gods, no!"

"Then I will answer gladly. I would give myself to duty the first of life. I would know no
other. I would know no rest until my mother and Tirzah were restored to home. I would give
every day and hour to their happiness. I would wait upon them; never a slave more faithful.
They have lost much, but, by the God of my fathers, I would find them more!"

The answer was unexpected by the Roman. For a moment he lost his purpose.

"I spoke to thy ambition," he said, recovering. "If thy mother and sister were dead, or not
to be found, what wouldst thou do?"

A distinct pallor overspread Ben-Hur's face, and he looked over the sea. There was a struggle
with some strong feeling; when it was conquered, he turned to the tribune.

"What pursuit would I follow?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Tribune, I will tell thee truly. Only the night before the dreadful day of which I have spoken,
I obtained permission to be a soldier. I am of the same mind yet; and, as in all the earth
there is but one school of war, thither I would go."

"The palaestra!" exclaimed Arrius.

"No; a Roman camp."

"But thou must first acquaint thyself with the use of arms."

Now a master may never safely advise a slave. Arrius saw his indiscretion, and, in a breath,
chilled his voice and manner.

"Go now," he said, "and do not build upon what has passed between us. Perhaps I do but play
with thee. Or"--he looked away musingly--"or, if thou dost think of it with any hope, choose
between the renown of a gladiator and the service of a soldier. The former may come of the
favor of the emperor; there is no reward for thee in the latter. Thou art not a Roman. Go!"

A short while after Ben-Hur was upon his bench again.

A man's task is always light if his heart is light. Handling the oar did not seem so toilsome
to Judah. A hope had come to him, like a singing bird. He could hardly see the visitor or hear
its song; that it was there, though, he knew; his feelings told him so. The caution of the
tribune--"Perhaps I do but play with thee"--was dismissed often as it recurred to his mind.
That he had been called by the great man and asked his story was the bread upon which he fed
his hungry spirit. Surely something good would come of it. The light about his bench was clear
and bright with promises, and he prayed.

"O God! I am a true son of the Israel thou hast so loved! Help me, I pray thee!"

CHAPTER IV

In the Bay of Antemona, east of Cythera the island, the hundred galleys assembled. There the
tribune gave one day to inspection. He sailed then to Naxos, the largest of the Cyclades, midway
the coasts of Greece and Asia, like a great stone planted in the centre of a highway, from
which he could challenge everything that passed; at the same time, he would be in position
to go after the pirates instantly, whether they were in the AEgean or out on the Mediterranean.

As the fleet, in order, rowed in towards the mountain shores of the island, a galley was descried
coming from the north. Arrius went to meet it. She proved to be a transport just from Byzantium,
and from her commander he learned the particulars of which he stood in most need.

The pirates were from all the farther shores of the Euxine. Even Tanais, at the mouth of the
river which was supposed to feed Palus Maeotis, was represented among them. Their preparations
had been with the greatest secrecy. The first known of them was their appearance off the entrance
to the Thracian Bosphorus, followed by the destruction of the fleet in station there. Thence
to the outlet of the Hellespont everything afloat had fallen their prey. There were quite sixty
galleys in the squadron, all well manned and supplied. A few were biremes, the rest stout triremes.
A Greek was in command, and the pilots, said to be familiar with all the Eastern seas, were
Greek. The plunder had been incalculable. The panic, consequently, was not on the sea alone;
cities, with closed gates, sent their people nightly to the walls. Traffic had almost ceased.

Where were the pirates now?

To this question, of most interest to Arrius, he received answer.

After sacking Hephaestia, on the island of Lemnos, the enemy had coursed across to the Thessalian
group, and, by last account, disappeared in the gulfs between Euboea and Hellas.

Such were the tidings.

Then the people of the island, drawn to the hill-tops by the rare spectacle of a hundred ships
careering in united squadron, beheld the advance division suddenly turn to the north, and the
others follow, wheeling upon the same point like cavalry in a column. News of the piratical
descent had reached them, and now, watching the white sails until they faded from sight up
between Rhene and Syros, the thoughtful among them took comfort, and were grateful. What Rome
seized with strong hand she always defended: in return for their taxes, she gave them safety.

The tribune was more than pleased with the enemy's movements; he was doubly thankful to Fortune.
She had brought swift and sure intelligence, and had lured his foes into the waters where,
of all others, destruction was most assured. He knew the havoc one galley could play in a broad
sea like the Mediterranean, and the difficulty of finding and overhauling her; he knew, also,
how those very circumstances would enhance the service and glory if, at one blow, he could
put a finish to the whole piratical array.

If the reader will take a map of Greece and the AEgean, he will notice the island of Euboea
lying along the classic coast like a rampart against Asia, leaving a channel between it and
the continent quite a hundred and twenty miles in length, and scarcely an average of eight
in width. The inlet on the north had admitted the fleet of Xerxes, and now it received the
bold raiders from the Euxine. The towns along the Pelasgic and Meliac gulfs were rich and their
plunder seductive. All things considered, therefore, Arrius judged that the robbers might be
found somewhere below Thermopylae. Welcoming the chance, he resolved to enclose them north
and south, to do which not an hour could be lost; even the fruits and wines and women of Naxos
must be left behind. So he sailed away without stop or tack until, a little before nightfall,
Mount Ocha was seen upreared against the sky, and the pilot reported the Euboean coast.

At a signal the fleet rested upon its oars. When the movement was resumed, Arrius led a division
of fifty of the galleys, intending to take them up the channel, while another division, equally
strong, turned their prows to the outer or seaward side of the island, with orders to make
all haste to the upper inlet, and descend sweeping the waters.

To be sure, neither division was equal in number to the pirates; but each had advantages in
compensation, among them, by no means least, a discipline impossible to a lawless horde, however
brave. Besides, it was a shrewd count on the tribune's side, if, peradventure, one should be
defeated, the other would find the enemy shattered by his victory, and in condition to be easily
overwhelmed.

Meantime Ben-Hur kept his bench, relieved every six hours. The rest in the Bay of Antemona
had freshened him, so that the oar was not troublesome, and the chief on the platform found
no fault.

People, generally, are not aware of the ease of mind there is in knowing where they are, and
where they are going. The sensation of being lost is a keen distress; still worse is the feeling
one has in driving blindly into unknown places. Custom had dulled the feeling with Ben-Hur,
but only measurably. Pulling away hour after hour, sometimes days and nights together, sensible
all the time that the galley was gliding swiftly along some of the many tracks of the broad
sea, the longing to know where he was, and whither going, was always present with him; but
now it seemed quickened by the hope which had come to new life in his breast since the interview
with the tribune. The narrower the abiding-place happens to be, the more intense is the longing;
and so he found. He seemed to hear every sound of the ship in labor, and listened to each one
as if it were a voice come to tell him something; he looked to the grating overhead, and through
it into the light of which so small a portion was his, expecting, he knew not what; and many
times he caught himself on the point of yielding to the impulse to speak to the chief on the
platform, than which no circumstance of battle would have astonished that dignitary more.

In his long service, by watching the shifting of the meager sunbeams upon the cabin floor when
the ship was under way, he had come to know, generally, the quarter into which she was sailing.
This, of course, was only of clear days like those good-fortune was sending the tribune. The
experience had not failed him in the period succeeding the departure from Cythera. Thinking
they were tending towards the old Judean country, he was sensitive to every variation from
the course. With a pang, he had observed the sudden change northward which, as has been noticed,
took place near Naxos: the cause, however, he could not even conjecture; for it must be remembered
that, in common with his fellow-slaves, he knew nothing of the situation, and had no interest
in the voyage. His place was at the oar, and he was held there inexorably, whether at anchor
or under sail. Once only in three years had he been permitted an outlook from the deck. The
occasion we have seen. He had no idea that, following the vessel he was helping drive, there
was a great squadron close at hand and in beautiful order; no more did he know the object of
which it was in pursuit.

When the sun, going down, withdrew his last ray from the cabin, the galley still held northward.
Night fell, yet Ben-Hur could discern no change. About that time the smell of incense floated
down the gangways from the deck.

"The tribune is at the altar," he thought. "Can it be we are going into battle?"

He became observant.

Now he had been in many battles without having seen one. From his bench he had heard them above
and about him, until he was familiar with all their notes, almost as a singer with a song.
So, too, he had become acquainted with many of the preliminaries of an engagement, of which,
with a Roman as well as a Greek, the most invariable was the sacrifice to the gods. The rites
were the same as those performed at the beginning of a voyage, and to him, when noticed, they
were always an admonition.

A battle, it should be observed, possessed for him and his fellow-slaves of the oar an interest
unlike that of the sailor and marine; it came, not of the danger encountered but of the fact
that defeat, if survived, might bring an alteration of condition--possibly freedom--at least
a change of masters, which might be for the better.

In good time the lanterns were lighted and hung by the stairs, and the tribune came down from
the deck. At his word the marines put on their armor. At his word again, the machines were
looked to, and spears, javelins, and arrows, in great sheaves, brought and laid upon the floor,
together with jars of inflammable oil, and baskets of cotton balls wound loose like the wicking
of candles. And when, finally, Ben-Hur saw the tribune mount his platform and don his armor,
and get his helmet and shield out, the meaning of the preparations might not be any longer
doubted, and he made ready for the last ignominy of his service.

To every bench, as a fixture, there was a chain with heavy anklets. These the hortator proceeded
to lock upon the oarsmen, going from number to number, leaving no choice but to obey, and,
in event of disaster, no possibility of escape.

In the cabin, then, a silence fell, broken, at first, only by the sough of the oars turning
in the leathern cases. Every man upon the benches felt the shame, Ben-Hur more keenly than
his companions. He would have put it away at any price. Soon the clanking of the fetters notified
him of the progress the chief was making in his round. He would come to him in turn; but would
not the tribune interpose for him?

The thought may be set down to vanity or selfishness, as the reader pleases; it certainly,
at that moment, took possession of Ben-Hur. He believed the Roman would interpose; anyhow,
the circumstance would test the man's feelings. If, intent upon the battle, he would but think
of him, it would be proof of his opinion formed--proof that he had been tacitly promoted above
his associates in misery--such proof as would justify hope.

Ben-Hur waited anxiously. The interval seemed like an age. At every turn of the oar he looked
towards the tribune, who, his simple preparations made, lay down upon the couch and composed
himself to rest; whereupon number sixty chid himself, and laughed grimly, and resolved not
to look that way again.

The hortator approached. Now he was at number one--the rattle of the iron links sounded horribly.
At last number sixty! Calm from despair, Ben-Hur held his oar at poise, and gave his foot to
the officer. Then the tribune stirred--sat up--beckoned to the chief.

A strong revulsion seized the Jew. From the hortator, the great man glanced at him; and when
he dropped his oar all the section of the ship on his side seemed aglow. He heard nothing of
what was said; enough that the chain hung idly from its staple in the bench, and that the chief,
going to his seat, began to beat the sounding-board. The notes of the gavel were never so like
music. With his breast against the leaded handle, he pushed with all his might--pushed until
the shaft bent as if about to break.

The chief went to the tribune, and, smiling, pointed to number sixty.

"What strength!" he said.

"And what spirit!" the tribune answered. "Perpol! He is better without the irons. Put them
on him no more."

So saying, he stretched himself upon the couch again.

The ship sailed on hour after hour under the oars in water scarcely rippled by the wind. And
the people not on duty slept, Arrius in his place, the marines on the floor.

Once--twice--Ben-Hur was relieved; but he could not sleep. Three years of night, and through
the darkness a sunbeam at last! At sea adrift and lost, and now land! Dead so long, and, lo!
the thrill and stir of resurrection. Sleep was not for such an hour. Hope deals with the future;
now and the past are but servants that wait on her with impulse and suggestive circumstance.
Starting from the favor of the tribune, she carried him forward indefinitely. The wonder is,
not that things so purely imaginative as the results she points us to can make us so happy,
but that we can receive them as so real. They must be as gorgeous poppies under the influence
of which, under the crimson and purple and gold, reason lies down the while, and is not. Sorrows
assuaged, home and the fortunes of his house restored; mother and sister in his arms once more--such
were the central ideas which made him happier that moment than he had ever been. That he was
rushing, as on wings, into horrible battle had, for the time, nothing to do with his thoughts.
The things thus in hope were unmixed with doubts--they WERE. Hence his joy so full, so perfect,
there was no room in his heart for revenge. Messala, Gratus, Rome, and all the bitter, passionate
memories connected with them, were as dead plagues--miasms of the earth above which he floated,
far and safe, listening to singing stars.

The deeper darkness before the dawn was upon the waters, and all things going well with the
Astroea, when a man, descending from the deck, walked swiftly to the platform where the tribune
slept, and awoke him. Arrius arose, put on his helmet, sword, and shield, and went to the commander
of the marines.

"The pirates are close by. Up and ready!" he said, and passed to the stairs, calm, confident,
insomuch that one might have thought, "Happy fellow! Apicius has set a feast for him."

CHAPTER V

Every soul aboard, even the ship, awoke. Officers went to their quarters. The marines took
arms, and were led out, looking in all respects like legionaries. Sheaves of arrows and armfuls
of javelins were carried on deck. By the central stairs the oil-tanks and fire-balls were set
ready for use. Additional lanterns were lighted. Buckets were filled with water. The rowers
in relief assembled under guard in front of the chief. As Providence would have it, Ben-Hur
was one of the latter. Overhead he heard the muffled noises of the final preparations--of the
sailors furling sail, spreading the nettings, unslinging the machines, and hanging the armor
of bull-hide over the side. Presently quiet settled about the galley again; quiet full of vague
dread and expectation, which, interpreted, means READY.

At a signal passed down from the deck, and communicated to the hortator by a petty officer
stationed on the stairs, all at once the oars stopped.

What did it mean?

Of the hundred and twenty slaves chained to the benches, not one but asked himself the question.
They were without incentive. Patriotism, love of honor, sense of duty, brought them no inspiration.
They felt the thrill common to men rushed helpless and blind into danger. It may be supposed
the dullest of them, poising his oar, thought of all that might happen, yet could promise himself
nothing; for victory would but rivet his chains the firmer, while the chances of the ship were
his; sinking or on fire, he was doomed to her fate.

Of the situation without they might not ask. And who were the enemy? And what if they were
friends, brethren, countrymen? The reader, carrying the suggestion forward, will see the necessity
which governed the Roman when, in such emergencies, he locked the hapless wretches to their seats.

There was little time, however, for such thought with them. A sound like the rowing of galleys
astern attracted Ben-Hur, and the Astroea rocked as if in the midst of countering waves. The
idea of a fleet at hand broke upon him--a fleet in manoeuvre--forming probably for attack.
His blood started with the fancy.

Another signal came down from the deck. The oars dipped, and the galley started imperceptibly.
No sound from without, none from within, yet each man in the cabin instinctively poised himself
for a shock; the very ship seemed to catch the sense, and hold its breath, and go crouched
tiger-like.

In such a situation time is inappreciable; so that Ben-Hur could form no judgment of distance
gone. At last there was a sound of trumpets on deck, full, clear, long blown. The chief beat
the sounding-board until it rang; the rowers reached forward full length, and, deepening the
dip of their oars, pulled suddenly with all their united force. The galley, quivering in every
timber, answered with a leap. Other trumpets joined in the clamor--all from the rear, none
forward--from the latter quarter only a rising sound of voices in tumult heard briefly. There
was a mighty blow; the rowers in front of the chief's platform reeled, some of them fell; the
ship bounded back, recovered, and rushed on more irresistibly than before. Shrill and high
arose the shrieks of men in terror; over the blare of trumpets, and the grind and crash of
the collision, they arose; then under his feet, under the keel, pounding, rumbling, breaking
to pieces, drowning, Ben-Hur felt something overridden. The men about him looked at each other
afraid. A shout of triumph from the deck--the beak of the Roman had won! But who were they
whom the sea had drunk? Of what tongue, from what land were they?

No pause, no stay! Forward rushed the Astroea; and, as it went, some sailors ran down, and
plunging the cotton balls into the oil-tanks, tossed them dripping to comrades at the head
of the stairs: fire was to be added to other horrors of the combat.

Directly the galley heeled over so far that the oarsmen on the uppermost side with difficulty
kept their benches. Again the hearty Roman cheer, and with it despairing shrieks. An opposing
vessel, caught by the grappling-hooks of the great crane swinging from the prow, was being
lifted into the air that it might be dropped and sunk.

The shouting increased on the right hand and on the left; before, behind, swelled an indescribable
clamor. Occasionally there was a crash, followed by sudden peals of fright, telling of other
ships ridden down, and their crews drowned in the vortexes.

Nor was the fight all on one side. Now and then a Roman in armor was borne down the hatchway,
and laid bleeding, sometimes dying, on the floor.

Sometimes, also, puffs of smoke, blended with steam, and foul with the scent of roasting human
flesh, poured into the cabin, turning the dimming light into yellow murk. Gasping for breath
the while, Ben-Hur knew they were passing through the cloud of a ship on fire, and burning
up with the rowers chained to the benches.

The Astroea all this time was in motion. Suddenly she stopped. The oars forward were dashed
from the hands of the rowers, and the rowers from their benches. On deck, then, a furious trampling,
and on the sides a grinding of ships afoul of each other. For the first time the beating of
the gavel was lost in the uproar. Men sank on the floor in fear or looked about seeking a hiding-place.
In the midst of the panic a body plunged or was pitched headlong down the hatchway, falling
near Ben-Hur. He beheld the half-naked carcass, a mass of hair blackening the face, and under
it a shield of bull-hide and wicker-work--a barbarian from the white-skinned nations of the
North whom death had robbed of plunder and revenge. How came he there? An iron hand had snatched
him from the opposing deck--no, the Astroea had been boarded! The Romans were fighting on their
own deck? A chill smote the young Jew: Arrius was hard pressed--he might be defending his own
life. If he should be slain! God of Abraham forefend! The hopes and dreams so lately come,
were they only hopes and dreams? Mother and sister--house--home--Holy Land--was he not to see
them, after all? The tumult thundered above him; he looked around; in the cabin all was confusion--the
rowers on the benches paralyzed; men running blindly hither and thither; only the chief on
his seat imperturbable, vainly beating the sounding-board, and waiting the orders of the tribune--in
the red murk illustrating the matchless discipline which had won the world.

The example had a good effect upon Ben-Hur. He controlled himself enough to think. Honor and
duty bound the Roman to the platform; but what had he to do with such motives then? The bench
was a thing to run from; while, if he were to die a slave, who would be the better of the sacrifice?
With him living was duty, if not honor. His life belonged to his people. They arose before
him never more real: he saw them, their arms outstretched; he heard them imploring him. And
he would go to them. He started--stopped. Alas! a Roman judgment held him in doom. While it
endured, escape would be profitless. In the wide, wide earth there was no place in which he
would be safe from the imperial demand; upon the land none, nor upon the sea. Whereas he required
freedom according to the forms of law, so only could he abide in Judea and execute the filial
purpose to which he would devote himself: in other land he would not live. Dear God! How he
had waited and watched and prayed for such a release! And how it had been delayed! But at last
he had seen it in the promise of the tribune. What else the great man's meaning? And if the
benefactor so belated should now be slain! The dead come not back to redeem the pledges of
the living. It should not be--Arrius should not die. At least, better perish with him than
survive a galley-slave.

Once more Ben-Hur looked around. Upon the roof of the cabin the battle yet beat; against the
sides the hostile vessels yet crushed and grided. On the benches, the slaves struggled to tear
loose from their chains, and, finding their efforts vain, howled like madmen; the guards had
gone upstairs; discipline was out, panic in. No, the chief kept his chair, unchanged, calm
as ever--except the gavel, weaponless. Vainly with his clangor he filled the lulls in the din.
Ben-Hur gave him a last look, then broke away--not in flight, but to seek the tribune.

A very short space lay between him and the stairs of the hatchway aft. He took it with a leap,
and was half-way up the steps--up far enough to catch a glimpse of the sky blood-red with fire,
of the ships alongside, of the sea covered with ships and wrecks, of the fight closed in about
the pilot's quarter, the assailants many, the defenders few--when suddenly his foothold was
knocked away, and he pitched backward. The floor, when he reached it, seemed to be lifting
itself and breaking to pieces; then, in a twinkling, the whole after-part of the hull broke
asunder, and, as if it had all the time been lying in wait, the sea, hissing and foaming, leaped
in, and all became darkness and surging water to Ben-Hur.

It cannot be said that the young Jew helped himself in this stress. Besides his usual strength,
he had the indefinite extra force which nature keeps in reserve for just such perils to life;
yet the darkness, and the whirl and roar of water, stupefied him. Even the holding his breath
was involuntary.

The influx of the flood tossed him like a log forward into the cabin, where he would have drowned
but for the refluence of the sinking motion. As it was, fathoms under the surface the hollow
mass vomited him forth, and he arose along with the loosed debris. In the act of rising, he
clutched something, and held to it. The time he was under seemed an age longer than it really
was; at last he gained the top; with a great gasp he filled his lungs afresh, and, tossing
the water from his hair and eyes, climbed higher upon the plank he held, and looked about him.

Death had pursued him closely under the waves; he found it waiting for him when he was risen--waiting
multiform.

Smoke lay upon the sea like a semitransparent fog, through which here and there shone cores
of intense brilliance. A quick intelligence told him that they were ships on fire. The battle
was yet on; nor could he say who was victor. Within the radius of his vision now and then ships
passed, shooting shadows athwart lights. Out of the dun clouds farther on he caught the crash
of other ships colliding. The danger, however, was closer at hand. When the Astroea went down,
her deck, it will be recollected, held her own crew, and the crews of the two galleys which
had attacked her at the same time, all of whom were ingulfed. Many of them came to the surface
together, and on the same plank or support of whatever kind continued the combat, begun possibly
in the vortex fathoms down. Writhing and twisting in deadly embrace, sometimes striking with
sword or javelin, they kept the sea around them in agitation, at one place inky-black, at another
aflame with fiery reflections. With their struggles he had nothing to do; they were all his
enemies: not one of them but would kill him for the plank upon which he floated. He made haste
to get away.

About that time he heard oars in quickest movement, and beheld a galley coming down upon him.
The tall prow seemed doubly tall, and the red light playing upon its gilt and carving gave
it an appearance of snaky life. Under its foot the water churned to flying foam.

He struck out, pushing the plank, which was very broad and unmanageable. Seconds were precious--half
a second might save or lose him. In the crisis of the effort, up from the sea, within arm's
reach, a helmet shot like a gleam of gold. Next came two hands with fingers extended--large
hands were they, and strong--their hold once fixed, might not be loosed. Ben-Hur swerved from
them appalled. Up rose the helmet and the head it encased--then two arms, which began to beat
the water wildly--the head turned back, and gave the face to the light. The mouth gaping wide;
the eyes open, but sightless, and the bloodless pallor of a drowning man--never anything more
ghastly! Yet he gave a cry of joy at the sight, and as the face was going under again, he caught
the sufferer by the chain which passed from the helmet beneath the chin, and drew him to the plank.

The man was Arrius, the tribune.

For a while the water foamed and eddied violently about Ben-Hur, taxing all his strength to
hold to the support and at the same time keep the Roman's head above the surface. The galley
had passed, leaving the two barely outside the stroke of its oars. Right through the floating
men, over heads helmeted as well as heads bare, she drove, in her wake nothing but the sea
sparkling with fire. A muffled crash, succeeded by a great outcry, made the rescuer look again
from his charge. A certain savage pleasure touched his heart--the Astroea was avenged.

After that the battle moved on. Resistance turned to flight. But who were the victors? Ben-Hur
was sensible how much his freedom and the life of the tribune depended upon that event. He
pushed the plank under the latter until it floated him, after which all his care was to keep
him there. The dawn came slowly. He watched its growing hopefully, yet sometimes afraid. Would
it bring the Romans or the pirates? If the pirates, his charge was lost.

At last morning broke in full, the air without a breath. Off to the left he saw the land, too
far to think of attempting to make it. Here and there men were adrift like himself. In spots
the sea was blackened by charred and sometimes smoking fragments. A galley up a long way was
lying to with a torn sail hanging from the tilted yard, and the oars all idle. Still farther
away he could discern moving specks, which he thought might be ships in flight or pursuit,
or they might be white birds a-wing.

An hour passed thus. His anxiety increased. If relief came not speedily, Arrius would die.
Sometimes he seemed already dead, he lay so still. He took the helmet off, and then, with greater
difficulty, the cuirass; the heart he found fluttering. He took hope at the sign, and held
on. There was nothing to do but wait, and, after the manner of his people, pray.

CHAPTER VI

The throes of recovery from drowning are more painful than the drowning. These Arrius passed
through, and, at length, to Ben-Hur's delight, reached the point of speech.

Gradually, from incoherent questions as to where he was, and by whom and how he had been saved,
he reverted to the battle. The doubt of the victory stimulated his faculties to full return,
a result aided not a little by a long rest--such as could be had on their frail support. After
a while he became talkative.

"Our rescue, I see, depends upon the result of the fight. I see also what thou hast done for
me. To speak fairly, thou hast saved my life at the risk of thy own. I make the acknowledgment
broadly; and, whatever cometh, thou hast my thanks. More than that, if fortune doth but serve
me kindly, and we get well out of this peril, I will do thee such favor as becometh a Roman
who hath power and opportunity to prove his gratitude. Yet, yet it is to be seen if, with thy
good intent, thou hast really done me a kindness; or, rather, speaking to thy good-will"--he
hesitated--"I would exact of thee a promise to do me, in a certain event, the greatest favor
one man can do another--and of that let me have thy pledge now."

"If the thing be not forbidden, I will do it," Ben-Hur replied.

Arrius rested again.

"Art thou, indeed, a son of Hur, the Jew?" he next asked.

"It is as I have said."

"I knew thy father--"

Judah drew himself nearer, for the tribune's voice was weak--he drew nearer, and listened eagerly--at
last he thought to hear of home.

"I knew him, and loved him," Arrius continued.

There was another pause, during which something diverted the speaker's thought.

"It cannot be," he proceeded, "that thou, a son of his, hast not heard of Cato and Brutus.
They were very great men, and never as great as in death. In their dying, they left this law--A
Roman may not survive his good-fortune. Art thou listening?"

"I hear."

"It is a custom of gentlemen in Rome to wear a ring. There is one on my hand. Take it now."

He held the hand to Judah, who did as he asked.

"Now put it on thine own hand."

Ben-Hur did so.

"The trinket hath its uses," said Arrius next. "I have property and money. I am accounted rich
even in Rome. I have no family. Show the ring to my freedman, who hath control in my absence;
you will find him in a villa near Misenum. Tell him how it came to thee, and ask anything,
or all he may have; he will not refuse the demand. If I live, I will do better by thee. I will
make thee free, and restore thee to thy home and people; or thou mayst give thyself to the
pursuit that pleaseth thee most. Dost thou hear?"

"I could not choose but hear."

"Then pledge me. By the gods--"

"Nay, good tribune, I am a Jew."

"By thy God, then, or in the form most sacred to those of thy faith--pledge me to do what I
tell thee now, and as I tell thee; I am waiting, let me have thy promise."

"Noble Arrius, I am warned by thy manner to expect something of gravest concern. Tell me thy
wish first."

"Wilt thou promise then?"

"That were to give the pledge, and-- Blessed be the God of my fathers! yonder cometh a ship!"

"In what direction?"

"From the north."

"Canst thou tell her nationality by outward signs?"

"No. My service hath been at the oars."

"Hath she a flag?"

"I cannot see one."

Arrius remained quiet some time, apparently in deep reflection.

"Does the ship hold this way yet?" he at length asked.

"Still this way."

"Look for the flag now."

"She hath none."

"Nor any other sign?"

"She hath a sail set, and is of three banks, and cometh swiftly--that is all I can say of her."

"A Roman in triumph would have out many flags. She must be an enemy. Hear now," said Arrius,
becoming grave again, "hear, while yet I may speak. If the galley be a pirate, thy life is
safe; they may not give thee freedom; they may put thee to the oar again; but they will not
kill thee. On the other hand, I--"

The tribune faltered.

"Perpol!" he continued, resolutely. "I am too old to submit to dishonor. In Rome, let them
tell how Quintus Arrius, as became a Roman tribune, went down with his ship in the midst of
the foe. This is what I would have thee do. If the galley prove a pirate, push me from the
plank and drown me. Dost thou hear? Swear thou wilt do it."

"I will not swear," said Ben-Hur, firmly; "neither will I do the deed. The Law, which is to
me most binding, O tribune, would make me answerable for thy life. Take back the ring"--he
took the seal from his finger--"take it back, and all thy promises of favor in the event of
delivery from this peril. The judgment which sent me to the oar for life made me a slave, yet
I am not a slave; no more am I thy freedman. I am a son of Israel, and this moment, at least,
my own master. Take back the ring."

Arrius remained passive.

"Thou wilt not?" Judah continued. "Not in anger, then, nor in any despite, but to free myself
from a hateful obligation, I will give thy gift to the sea. See, O tribune!"

He tossed the ring away. Arrius heard the splash where it struck and sank, though he did not look.

"Thou hast done a foolish thing," he said; "foolish for one placed as thou art. I am not dependent
upon thee for death. Life is a thread I can break without thy help; and, if I do, what will
become of thee? Men determined on death prefer it at the hands of others, for the reason that
the soul which Plato giveth us is rebellious at the thought of self-destruction; that is all.
If the ship be a pirate, I will escape from the world. My mind is fixed. I am a Roman. Success
and honor are all in all. Yet I would have served thee; thou wouldst not. The ring was the
only witness of my will available in this situation. We are both lost. I will die regretting
the victory and glory wrested from me; thou wilt live to die a little later, mourning the pious
duties undone because of this folly. I pity thee."

Ben-Hur saw the consequences of his act more distinctly than before, yet he did not falter.

"In the three years of my servitude, O tribune, thou wert the first to look upon me kindly.
No, no! There was another." The voice dropped, the eyes became humid, and he saw plainly as
if it were then before him the face of the boy who helped him to a drink by the old well at
Nazareth. "At least," he proceeded, "thou wert the first to ask me who I was; and if, when
I reached out and caught thee, blind and sinking the last time, I, too, had thought of the
many ways in which thou couldst be useful to me in my wretchedness, still the act was not all
selfish; this I pray you to believe. Moreover, seeing as God giveth me to know, the ends I
dream of are to be wrought by fair means alone. As a thing of conscience, I would rather die
with thee than be thy slayer. My mind is firmly set as thine; though thou wert to offer me
all Rome, O tribune, and it belonged to thee to make the gift good, I would not kill thee.
Thy Cato and Brutus were as little children compared to the Hebrew whose law a Jew must obey."

"But my request. Hast--"

"Thy command would be of more weight, and that would not move me. I have said."

Both became silent, waiting.

Ben-Hur looked often at the coming ship. Arrius rested with closed eyes, indifferent.

"Art thou sure she is an enemy?" Ben-Hur asked.

"I think so," was the reply.

"She stops, and puts a boat over the side."

"Dost thou see her flag?"

"Is there no other sign by which she may be known if Roman?"

"If Roman, she hath a helmet over the mast's top."

"Then be of cheer. I see the helmet."

Still Arrius was not assured.

"The men in the small boat are taking in the people afloat. Pirates are not humane."

"They may need rowers," Arrius replied, recurring, possibly, to times when he had made rescues
for the purpose.

Ben-Hur was very watchful of the actions of the strangers.

"The ship moves off," he said.

"Whither?"

"Over on our right there is a galley which I take to be deserted. The new-comer heads towards
it. Now she is alongside. Now she is sending men aboard."

Then Arrius opened his eyes and threw off his calm.

"Thank thou thy God," he said to Ben-Hur, after a look at the galleys, "thank thou thy God,
as I do my many gods. BRITISH NEWS, a clear epitome of all domestic occurrences, under the various
heads of Public Meetings, Trade, Agriculture, Accidents and Offences, Police, Proceedings of the
Courts of Law and Sessions, Court and Fashionable News, Church and University Intelligence,
Military and Naval Affairs copiously given, the Money Market, and the miscellaneous news of
the week up to midnight on Saturday. The Local News of Ireland and Scotland, under separate
heads.

In the conduct of this department of the ATLAS recourse is had to many exclusive sources of
information, and correspondents have been established who furnish
expressly the latest intelligence.

The Gazettes and Tables of Markets, and all matters interesting to the Commercial World, are
especially attended to. Preserving an independence in its editorial capacity, the ATLAS affords
a faithful reflection of the opinions and proceedings of all political parties.

The attention that is observed in the purity of language and selection of subjects, down to the
minutest paragraph in the ATLAS, recommends it especially to the use of families and the guardians
of youth; and the copious details it affords of Military and Naval
Affairs, invest it with valuable attractions for the members of these
professions, and the residents in the Colonies.

LITERATURE.

The Contributions to this department are from the pens of Professors and Gentlemen of acknowledged
reputation, and are classified under the following heads:--

1.--ORIGINAL
ESSAYS ON MEN AND THINGS, embodying a lively commentary on passing
events and men and manners.

2.--THEATRICAL CRITICISMS upon the written and acted Drama, in which
both are reviewed in a spirit of truth and perfect candour.

3.--REVIEWS of all new works of ability, with numerous extracts. Independent and free from all
literary and personal prejudices, the opinions of the Reviewers in
the ATLAS may be consulted with confidence in their integrity.

4.--LITERARY
MEMORANDA, notes of all novelties in literature abroad and at home,
and summary criticisms on all works of minor importance.

5.--MUSIC
AND MUSICIANS, or scientific criticisms on vocal and instrumental
performers, operas, and new music, on the Continent as well as in
England, with occasional engraved illustrations. One side of the structure was taken up with military
trophies; among which by far the most conspicuous and most admired were twenty prows, complemented
by their corresponding aplustra, cut bodily from as many galleys; and over them, so as to be
legible to the eighty thousand spectators in the seats, was this inscription:

  ----------------------------------------------
  TAKEN FROM THE PIRATES IN THE GULF OF EURIPUS,
                        BY
                  QUINTUS ARRIUS,
                     DUUMVIR.
  ----------------------------------------------

BOOK FOURTH

  "Alva.   Should the monarch prove unjust--
  And, at this time--

  Queen.         Then I must wait for justice
  Until it come; and they are happiest far
  Whose consciences may calmly wait their right."
                       Schiller, Don Carlos (act iv., sc. xv.)

CHAPTER I

The month to which we now come is July, the year that of our Lord 29, and the place Antioch,
then Queen of the East, and next to Rome the strongest, if not the most populous, city in the
world.

There is an opinion that the extravagance and dissoluteness of the age had their origin in
Rome, and spread thence throughout the empire; that the great cities but reflected the manners
of their mistress on the Tiber. This may be doubted. The reaction of the conquest would seem
to have been upon the morals of the conqueror. In Greece she found a spring of corruption;
so also in Egypt; and the student, having exhausted the subject, will close the books assured
that the flow of the demoralizing river was from the East westwardly, and that this very city
of Antioch, one of the oldest seats of Assyrian power and splendor, was a principal source
of the deadly stream.

A transport galley entered the mouth of the river Orontes from the blue waters of the sea.
It was in the forenoon. The heat was great, yet all on board who could avail themselves of
the privilege were on deck--Ben-Hur among others.

The five years had brought the young Jew to perfect manhood. Though the robe of white linen
in which he was attired somewhat masked his form, his appearance was unusually attractive.
For an hour and more he had occupied a seat in the shade of the sail, and in that time several
fellow-passengers of his own nationality had tried to engage him in conversation, but without
avail. His replies to their questions had been brief, though gravely courteous, and in the
Latin tongue. The purity of his speech, his cultivated manners, his reticence, served to stimulate
their curiosity the more. Such as observed him closely were struck by an incongruity between
his demeanor, which had the ease and grace of a patrician, and certain points of his person.
Thus his arms were disproportionately long; and when, to steady himself against the motion
of the vessel, he took hold of anything near by, the size of his hands and their evident power
compelled remark; so the wonder who and what he was mixed continually with a wish to know the
particulars of his life. In other words, his air cannot be better described than as a notice--This
man has a story to tell.

The galley, in coming, had stopped at one of the ports of Cyprus, and picked up a Hebrew of
most respectable appearance, quiet, reserved, paternal. Ben-Hur ventured to ask him some questions;
the replies won his confidence, and resulted finally in an extended conversation.

It chanced also that as the galley from Cyprus entered the receiving bay of the Orontes, two
other vessels which had been sighted out in the sea met it and passed into the river at the
same time; and as they did so both the strangers threw out small flags of brightest yellow.
There was much conjecture as to the meaning of the signals. At length a passenger addressed
himself to the respectable Hebrew for information upon the subject.

"Yes, I know the meaning of the flags," he replied; "they do not signify nationality--they
are merely marks of ownership."

"Has the owner many ships?"

"He has."

"You know him?"

"I have dealt with him."

The passengers looked at the speaker as if requesting him to go on. Ben-Hur listened with interest.

"He lives in Antioch," the Hebrew continued, in his quiet way. "That he is vastly rich has
brought him into notice, and the talk about him is not always kind. There used to be in Jerusalem
a prince of very ancient family named Hur."

Judah strove to be composed, yet his heart beat quicker.

"The prince was a merchant, with a genius for business. He set on foot many enterprises, some
reaching far East, others West. In the great cities he had branch houses. The one in Antioch
was in charge of a man said by some to have been a family servant called Simonides, Greek in
name, yet an Israelite. The master was drowned at sea. His business, however, went on, and
was scarcely less prosperous. After a while misfortune overtook the family. The prince's only
son, nearly grown, tried to kill the procurator Gratus in one of the streets of Jerusalem.
He failed by a narrow chance, and has not since been heard of. In fact, the Roman's rage took
in the whole house--not one of the name was left alive. Their palace was sealed up, and is
now a rookery for pigeons; the estate was confiscated; everything that could be traced to the
ownership of the Hurs was confiscated. The procurator cured his hurt with a golden salve."

The passengers laughed.

"You mean he kept the property," said one of them.

"They say so," the Hebrew replied; "I am only telling a story as I received it. And, to go
on, Simonides, who had been the prince's agent here in Antioch, opened trade in a short time
on his own account, and in a space incredibly brief became the master merchant of the city.
In imitation of his master, he sent caravans to India; and on the sea at present he has galleys
enough to make a royal fleet. They say nothing goes amiss with him. His camels do not die,
except of old age; his ships never founder; if he throw a chip into the river, it will come
back to him gold."

"How long has he been going on thus?"

"Not ten years."

"He must have had a good start."

"Yes, they say the procurator took only the prince's property ready at hand--his horses, cattle,
houses, land, vessels, goods. The money could not be found, though there must have been vast
sums of it. What became of it has been an unsolved mystery."

"Not to me," said a passenger, with a sneer.

"I understand you," the Hebrew answered. "Others have had your idea. That it furnished old
Simonides his start is a common belief. The procurator is of that opinion--or he has been--for
twice in five years he has caught the merchant, and put him to torture."

Judah griped the rope he was holding with crushing force.

"It is said," the narrator continued, "that there is not a sound bone in the man's body. The
last time I saw him he sat in a chair, a shapeless cripple, propped against cushions."

"So tortured!" exclaimed several listeners in a breath.

"Disease could not have produced such a deformity. Still the suffering made no impression upon
him. All he had was his lawfully, and he was making lawful use of it--that was the most they
wrung from him. Now, however, he is past persecution. He has a license to trade signed by Tiberius
himself."

"He paid roundly for it, I warrant."

"These ships are his," the Hebrew continued, passing the remark. "It is a custom among his
sailors to salute each other upon meeting by throwing out yellow flags, sight of which is as
much as to say, 'We have had a fortunate voyage.'"

The story ended there.

When the transport was fairly in the channel of the river, Judah spoke to the Hebrew.

"What was the name of the merchant's master?"

"Ben-Hur, Prince of Jerusalem."

"What became of the prince's family?"

"The boy was sent to the galleys. I may say he is dead. One year is the ordinary limit of life
under that sentence. The widow and daughter have not been heard of; those who know what became
of them will not speak. They died doubtless in the cells of one of the castles which spot the
waysides of Judea."

Judah walked to the pilot's quarter. So absorbed was he in thought that he scarcely noticed
the shores of the river, which from sea to city were surpassingly beautiful with orchards of
all the Syrian fruits and vines, clustered about villas rich as those of Neapolis. No more
did he observe the vessels passing in an endless fleet, nor hear the singing and shouting of
the sailors, some in labor, some in merriment. The sky was full of sunlight, lying in hazy
warmth upon the land and the water; nowhere except over his life was there a shadow.

Once only he awoke to a momentary interest, and that was when some one pointed out the Grove
of Daphne, discernible from a bend in the river.

CHAPTER II

When the city came into view, the passengers were on deck, eager that nothing of the scene
might escape them. The respectable Jew already introduced to the reader was the principal spokesman.

"The river here runs to the west," he said, in the way of general answer. "I remember when
it washed the base of the walls; but as Roman subjects we have lived in peace, and, as always
happens in such times, trade has had its will; now the whole river front is taken up with wharves
and docks. Yonder"--the speaker pointed southward--"is Mount Casius, or, as these people love
to call it, the Mountains of Orontes, looking across to its brother Amnus in the north; and
between them lies the Plain of Antioch. Farther on are the Black Mountains, whence the Ducts
of the Kings bring the purest water to wash the thirsty streets and people; yet they are forests
in wilderness state, dense, and full of birds and beasts."

"Where is the lake?" one asked.

"Over north there. You can take horse, if you wish to see it--or, better, a boat, for a tributary
connects it with the river."

"The Grove of Daphne!" he said, to a third inquirer. "Nobody can describe it; only beware!
It was begun by Apollo, and completed by him. He prefers it to Olympus. People go there for
one look--just one--and never come away. They have a saying which tells it all--'Better be
a worm and feed on the mulberries of Daphne than a king's guest.'"

"Then you advise me to stay away from it?"

"Not I! Go you will. Everybody goes, cynic philosopher, virile boy, women, and priests--all
go. So sure am I of what you will do that I assume to advise you. Do not take quarters in the
city--that will be loss of time; but go at once to the village in the edge of the grove. The
way is through a garden, under the spray of fountains. The lovers of the god and his Penaean
maid built the town; and in its porticos and paths and thousand retreats you will find characters
and habits and sweets and kinds elsewhere impossible. But the wall of the city! there it is,
the masterpiece of Xeraeus, the master of mural architecture."

All eyes followed his pointing finger.

"This part was raised by order of the first of the Seleucidae. Three hundred years have made
it part of the rock it rests upon."

The defense justified the encomium. High, solid, and with many bold angles, it curved southwardly
out of view.

"On the top there are four hundred towers, each a reservoir of water," the Hebrew continued.
"Look now! Over the wall, tall as it is, see in the distance two hills, which you may know
as the rival crests of Sulpius. The structure on the farthest one is the citadel, garrisoned
all the year round by a Roman legion. Opposite it this way rises the Temple of Jupiter, and
under that the front of the legate's residence--a palace full of offices, and yet a fortress
against which a mob would dash harmlessly as a south wind."

At this point the sailors began taking in sail, whereupon the Hebrew exclaimed, heartily, "See!
you who hate the sea, and you who have vows, get ready your curses and your prayers. The bridge
yonder, over which the road to Seleucia is carried, marks the limit of navigation. What the
ship unloads for further transit, the camel takes up there. Above the bridge begins the island
upon which Calinicus built his new city, connecting it with five great viaducts so solid time
has made no impression upon them, nor floods nor earthquakes. Of the main town, my friends,
I have only to say you will be happier all your lives for having seen it."

As he concluded, the ship turned and made slowly for her wharf under the wall, bringing even
more fairly to view the life with which the river at that point was possessed. Finally, the
lines were thrown, the oars shipped, and the voyage was done. Then Ben-Hur sought the respectable
Hebrew.

"Let me trouble you a moment before saying farewell."

The man bowed assent.

"Your story of the merchant has made me curious to see him. You called him Simonides?"

"Yes. He is a Jew with a Greek name."

"Where is he to be found?"

The acquaintance gave a sharp look before he answered,

"I may save you mortification. He is not a money-lender."

"Nor am I a money-borrower," said Ben-Hur, smiling at the other's shrewdness.

The man raised his head and considered an instant.

"One would think," he then replied, "that the richest merchant in Antioch would have a house
for business corresponding to his wealth; but if you would find him in the day, follow the
river to yon bridge, under which he quarters in a building that looks like a buttress of the
wall. Before the door there is an immense landing, always covered with cargoes come and to
go. The fleet that lies moored there is his. You cannot fail to find him."

"I give you thanks."

"The peace of our fathers go with you."

"And with you."

With that they separated.

Two street-porters, loaded with his baggage, received Ben-Hur's orders upon the wharf.

"To the citadel," he said; a direction which implied an official military connection.

Two great streets, cutting each other at right angles, divided the city into quarters. A curious
and immense structure, called the Nymphaeum, arose at the foot of the one running north and
south. When the porters turned south there, the new-comer, though fresh from Rome, was amazed
at the magnificence of the avenue. On the right and left there were palaces, and between them
extended indefinitely double colonnades of marble, leaving separate ways for footmen, beasts,
and chariots; the whole under shade, and cooled by fountains of incessant flow.

Ben-Hur was not in mood to enjoy the spectacle. The story of Simonides haunted him. Arrived
at the Omphalus--a monument of four arches wide as the streets, superbly illustrated, and erected
to himself by Epiphanes, the eighth of the Seleucidae--he suddenly changed his mind.

"I will not go to the citadel to-night," he said to the porters. "Take me to the khan nearest
the bridge on the road to Seleucia."

The party faced about, and in good time he was deposited in a public house of primitive but
ample construction, within stone's-throw of the bridge under which old Simonides had his quarters.
He lay upon the house-top through the night. In his inner mind lived the thought, "Now--now
I will hear of home--and mother--and the dear little Tirzah. If they are on earth, I will find
them."

CHAPTER III

Next day early, to the neglect of the city, Ben-Hur sought the house of Simonides. Through
an embattled gateway he passed to a continuity of wharves; thence up the river midst a busy
press, to the Seleucian Bridge, under which he paused to take in the scene.

There, directly under the bridge, was the merchant's house, a mass of gray stone, unhewn, referable
to no style, looking, as the voyager had described it, like a buttress of the wall against
which it leaned. Two immense doors in front communicated with the wharf. Some holes near the
top, heavily barred, served as windows. Weeds waved from the crevices, and in places black
moss splotched the otherwise bald stones.

The doors were open. Through one of them business went in; through the other it came out; and
there was hurry, hurry in all its movements.

On the wharf there were piles of goods in every kind of package, and groups of slaves, stripped
to the waist, going about in the abandon of labor.

Below the bridge lay a fleet of galleys, some loading, others unloading. A yellow flag blew
out from each masthead. From fleet and wharf, and from ship to ship, the bondmen of traffic
passed in clamorous counter-currents.

Above the bridge, across the river, a wall rose from the water's edge, over which towered the
fanciful cornices and turrets of an imperial palace, covering every foot of the island spoken
of in the Hebrew's description. But, with all its suggestions, Ben-Hur scarcely noticed it.
Now, at last, he thought to hear of his people--this, certainly, if Simonides had indeed been
his father's slave. But would the man acknowledge the relation? That would be to give up his
riches and the sovereignty of trade so royally witnessed on the wharf and river. And what was
of still greater consequence to the merchant, it would be to forego his career in the midst
of amazing success, and yield himself voluntarily once more a slave. Simple thought of the
demand seemed a monstrous audacity. Stripped of diplomatic address, it was to say, You are
my slave; give me all you have, and--yourself.

Yet Ben-Hur derived strength for the interview from faith in his rights and the hope uppermost
in his heart. If the story to which he was yielding were true, Simonides belonged to him, with
all he had. For the wealth, be it said in justice, he cared nothing. When he started to the
door determined in mind, it was with a promise to himself--"Let him tell me of mother and Tirzah,
and I will give him his freedom without account."

He passed boldly into the house.

The interior was that of a vast depot where, in ordered spaces, and under careful arrangement,
goods of every kind were heaped and pent. Though the light was murky and the air stifling,
men moved about briskly; and in places he saw workmen with saws and hammers making packages
for shipments. Down a path between the piles he walked slowly, wondering if the man of whose
genius there were here such abounding proofs could have been his father's slave? If so, to
what class had he belonged? If a Jew, was he the son of a servant? Or was he a debtor or a
debtor's son? Or had he been sentenced and sold for theft? These thoughts, as they passed,
in nowise disturbed the growing respect for the merchant of which he was each instant more
and more conscious. A peculiarity of our admiration for another is that it is always looking
for circumstances to justify itself.

At length a man approached and spoke to him.

"What would you have?"

"I would see Simonides, the merchant."

"Will you come this way?"

By a number of paths left in the stowage, they finally came to a flight of steps; ascending
which, he found himself on the roof of the depot, and in front of a structure which cannot
be better described than as a lesser stone house built upon another, invisible from the landing
below, and out west of the bridge under the open sky. The roof, hemmed in by a low wall, seemed
like a terrace, which, to his astonishment, was brilliant with flowers; in the rich surrounding,
the house sat squat, a plain square block, unbroken except by a doorway in front. A dustless
path led to the door, through a bordering of shrubs of Persian rose in perfect bloom. Breathing
a sweet attar-perfume, he followed the guide.

At the end of a darkened passage within, they stopped before a curtain half parted. The man
called out,

"A stranger to see the master."

A clear voice replied, "In God's name, let him enter."

A Roman might have called the apartment into which the visitor was ushered his atrium. The
walls were paneled; each panel was comparted like a modern office-desk, and each compartment
crowded with labelled folios all filemot with age and use. Between the panels, and above and
below them, were borders of wood once white, now tinted like cream, and carved with marvellous
intricacy of design. Above a cornice of gilded balls, the ceiling rose in pavilion style until
it broke into a shallow dome set with hundreds of panes of violet mica, permitting a flood
of light deliciously reposeful. The floor was carpeted with gray rugs so thick that an invading
foot fell half buried and soundless.

In the midlight of the room were two persons--a man resting in a chair high-backed, broad-armed,
and lined with pliant cushions; and at his left, leaning against the back of the chair, a girl
well forward into womanhood. At sight of them Ben-Hur felt the blood redden his forehead; bowing,
as much to recover himself as in respect, he lost the lifting of the hands, and the shiver
and shrink with which the sitter caught sight of him--an emotion as swift to go as it had been
to come. When he raised his eyes the two were in the same position, except the girl's hand
had fallen and was resting lightly upon the elder's shoulder; both of them were regarding him
fixedly.

"If you are Simonides, the merchant, and a Jew"--Ben-Hur stopped an instant--"then the peace
of the God of our father Abraham upon you and--yours."

The last word was addressed to the girl.

"I am the Simonides of whom you speak, by birthright a Jew," the man made answer, in a voice
singularly clear. "I am Simonides, and a Jew; and I return you your salutation, with prayer
to know who calls upon me."

Ben-Hur looked as he listened, and where the figure of the man should have been in healthful
roundness, there was only a formless heap sunk in the depths of the cushions, and covered by
a quilted robe of sombre silk. Over the heap shone a head royally proportioned--the ideal head
of a statesman and conqueror--a head broad of base and domelike in front, such as Angelo would
have modelled for Caesar. White hair dropped in thin locks over the white brows, deepening
the blackness of the eyes shining through them like sullen lights. The face was bloodless,
and much puffed with folds, especially under the chin. In other words, the head and face were
those of a man who might move the world more readily than the world could move him--a man to
be twice twelve times tortured into the shapeless cripple he was, without a groan, much less
a confession; a man to yield his life, but never a purpose or a point; a man born in armor,
and assailable only through his loves. To him Ben-Hur stretched his hands, open and palm up,
as he would offer peace at the same time he asked it.

"I am Judah, son of Ithamar, late head of the House of Hur, and a prince of Jerusalem."

The merchant's right hand lay outside the robe--a long, thin hand, articulate to deformity
with suffering. It closed tightly; otherwise there was not the slightest expression of feeling
of any kind on his part; nothing to warrant an inference of surprise or interest; nothing but
this calm answer,

"The princes of Jerusalem, of the pure blood, are always welcome in my house; you are welcome.
Give the young man a seat, Esther."

The girl took an ottoman near by, and carried it to Ben-Hur. As she arose from placing the
seat, their eyes met.

"The peace of our Lord with you," she said, modestly. "Be seated and at rest."

When she resumed her place by the chair, she had not divined his purpose. The powers of woman
go not so far: if the matter is of finer feeling, such as pity, mercy, sympathy, that she detects;
and therein is a difference between her and man which will endure as long as she remains, by
nature, alive to such feelings. She was simply sure he brought some wound of life for healing.

Ben-Hur did not take the offered seat, but said, deferentially, "I pray the good master Simonides
that he will not hold me an intruder. Coming up the river yesterday, I heard he knew my father."

"I knew the Prince Hur. We were associated in some enterprises lawful to merchants who find
profit in lands beyond the sea and the desert. But sit, I pray you--and, Esther, some wine
for the young man. Nehemiah speaks of a son of Hur who once ruled the half part of Jerusalem;
an old house; very old, by the faith! In the days of Moses and Joshua even some of them found
favor in the sight of the Lord, and divided honors with those princes among men. It can hardly
be that their descendant, lineally come to us, will refuse a cup of wine-fat of the genuine
vine of Sorek, grown on the south hill-sides of Hebron."

By the time of the conclusion of this speech, Esther was before Ben-Hur with a silver cup filled
from a vase upon a table a little removed from the chair. She offered the drink with downcast
face. He touched her hand gently to put it away. Again their eyes met; whereat he noticed that
she was small, not nearly to his shoulder in height; but very graceful, and fair and sweet
of face, with eyes black and inexpressibly soft. She is kind and pretty, he thought, and looks
as Tirzah would were she living. Poor Tirzah! Then he said aloud,

"No, thy father--if he is thy father?"--he paused.

"I am Esther, the daughter of Simonides," she said, with dignity.

"Then, fair Esther, thy father, when he has heard my further speech, will not think worse of
me if yet I am slow to take his wine of famous extract; nor less I hope not to lose grace in
thy sight. Stand thou here with me a moment!"

Both of them, as in common cause, turned to the merchant. "Simonides!" he said, firmly, "my
father, at his death, had a trusted servant of thy name, and it has been told me that thou
art the man!"

There was a sudden start of the wrenched limbs under the robe, and the thin hand clenched.

"Esther, Esther!" the man called, sternly; "here, not there, as thou art thy mother's child
and mine--here, not there, I say!"

The girl looked once from father to visitor; then she replaced the cup upon the table, and
went dutifully to the chair. Her countenance sufficiently expressed her wonder and alarm.

Simonides lifted his left hand, and gave it into hers, lying lovingly upon his shoulder, and
said, dispassionately, "I have grown old in dealing with men--old before my time. If he who
told thee that whereof thou speakest was a friend acquainted with my history, and spoke of
it not harshly, he must have persuaded thee that I could not be else than a man distrustful
of my kind. The God of Israel help him who, at the end of life, is constrained to acknowledge
so much! My loves are few, but they are. One of them is a soul which"--he carried the hand
holding his to his lips, in manner unmistakable--"a soul which to this time has been unselfishly
mine, and such sweet comfort that, were it taken from me, I would die."

Esther's head drooped until her cheek touched his.

"The other love is but a memory; of which I will say further that, like a benison of the Lord,
it hath a compass to contain a whole family, if only"--his voice lowered and trembled--"if
only I knew where they were."

Ben-Hur's face suffused, and, advancing a step, he cried, impulsively, "My mother and sister!
Oh, it is of them you speak!"

Esther, as if spoken to, raised her head; but Simonides returned to his calm, and answered,
coldly, "Hear me to the end. Because I am that I am, and because of the loves of which I have
spoken, before I make return to thy demand touching my relations to the Prince Hur, and as
something which of right should come first, do thou show me proofs of who thou art. Is thy
witness in writing? Or cometh it in person?"

The demand was plain, and the right of it indisputable. Ben-Hur blushed, clasped his hands,
stammered, and turned away at loss. Simonides pressed him.

"The proofs, the proofs, I say! Set them before me--lay them in my hands!"

Yet Ben-Hur had no answer. He had not anticipated the requirement; and, now that it was made,
to him as never before came the awful fact that the three years in the galley had carried away
all the proofs of his identity; mother and sister gone, he did not live in the knowledge of
any human being. Many there were acquainted with him, but that was all. Had Quintus Arrius
been present, what could he have said more than where he found him, and that he believed the
pretender to be the son of Hur? But, as will presently appear in full, the brave Roman sailor
was dead. Judah had felt the loneliness before; to the core of life the sense struck him now.
He stood, hands clasped, face averted, in stupefaction. Simonides respected his suffering,
and waited in silence.

"Master Simonides," he said, at length, "I can only tell my story; and I will not that unless
you stay judgment so long, and with good-will deign to hear me."

"Speak," said Simonides, now, indeed, master of the situation--"speak, and I will listen the
more willingly that I have not denied you to be the very person you claim yourself."

Ben-Hur proceeded then, and told his life hurriedly, yet with the feeling which is the source
of all eloquence; but as we are familiar with it down to his landing at Misenum, in company
with Arrius, returned victorious from the AEgean, at that point we will take up the words.

"My benefactor was loved and trusted by the emperor, who heaped him with honorable rewards.
The merchants of the East contributed magnificent presents, and he became doubly rich among
the rich of Rome. May a Jew forget his religion? or his birthplace, if it were the Holy Land
of our fathers? The good man adopted me his son by formal rites of law; and I strove to make
him just return: no child was ever more dutiful to father than I to him. He would have had
me a scholar; in art, philosophy, rhetoric, oratory, he would have furnished me the most famous
teacher. I declined his insistence, because I was a Jew, and could not forget the Lord God,
or the glory of the prophets, or the city set on the hills by David and Solomon. Oh, ask you
why I accepted any of the benefactions of the Roman? I loved him; next place, I thought with
his help, array influences which would enable me one day to unseal the mystery close-locking
the fate of my mother and sister; and to these there was yet another motive of which I shall
not speak except to say it controlled me so far that I devoted myself to arms, and the acquisition
of everything deemed essential to thorough knowledge of the art of war. In the palaestrae and
circuses of the city I toiled, and in the camps no less; and in all of them I have a name,
but not that of my fathers. The crowns I won--and on the walls of the villa by Misenum there
are many of them--all came to me as the son of Arrius, the duumvir. In that relation only am
I known among Romans.... In steadfast pursuit of my secret aim, I left Rome for Antioch, intending
to accompany the Consul Maxentius in the campaign he is organizing against the Parthians. Master
of personal skill in all arms, I seek now the higher knowledge pertaining to the conduct of
bodies of men in the field. The consul has admitted me one of his military family. But yesterday,
as our ship entered the Orontes, two other ships sailed in with us flying yellow flags. A fellow-passenger
and countryman from Cyprus explained that the vessels belonged to Simonides, the master-merchant
of Antioch; he told us, also, who the merchant was; his marvellous success in commerce; of
his fleets and caravans, and their coming and going; and, not knowing I had interest in the
theme beyond my associate listeners, he said Simonides was a Jew, once the servant of the Prince
Hur; nor did he conceal the cruelties of Gratus, or the purpose of their infliction."

At this allusion Simonides bowed his head, and, as if to help him conceal his feelings and
her own deep sympathy, the daughter hid her face on his neck. Directly he raised his eyes,
and said, in a clear voice, "I am listening."

"O good Simonides!" Ben-Hur then said, advancing a step, his whole soul seeking expression,
"I see thou art not convinced, and that yet I stand in the shadow of thy distrust."

The merchant held his features fixed as marble, and his tongue as still.

"And not less clearly, I see the difficulties of my position," Ben-Hur continued. "All my Roman
connection I can prove; I have only to call upon the consul, now the guest of the governor
of the city; but I cannot prove the particulars of thy demand upon me. I cannot prove I am
my father's son. They who could serve me in that--alas! they are dead or lost."

He covered his face with his hands; whereupon Esther arose, and, taking the rejected cup to
him, said, "The wine is of the country we all so love. Drink, I pray thee!"

The voice was sweet as that of Rebekah offering drink at the well near Nahor the city; he saw
there were tears in her eyes, and he drank, saying, "Daughter of Simonides, thy heart is full
of goodness; and merciful art thou to let the stranger share it with thy father. Be thou blessed
of our God! I thank thee."

Then he addressed himself to the merchant again:

"As I have no proof that I am my father's son, I will withdraw that I demanded of thee, O Simonides,
and go hence to trouble you no more; only let me say I did not seek thy return to servitude
nor account of thy fortune; in any event, I would have said, as now I say, that all which is
product of thy labor and genius is thine; keep it in welcome. I have no need of any part thereof.
When the good Quintus, my second father, sailed on the voyage which was his last, he left me
his heir, princely rich. If, therefore, thou cost think of me again, be it with remembrance
of this question, which, as I do swear by the prophets and Jehovah, thy God and mine, was the
chief purpose of my coming here: What cost thou know--what canst thou tell me--of my mother
and Tirzah, my sister--she who should be in beauty and grace even as this one, thy sweetness
of life, if not thy very life? Oh! what canst thou tell me of them?"

The tears ran down Esther's cheeks; but the man was wilful: in a clear voice, he replied,

"I have said I knew the Prince Ben-Hur. I remember hearing of the misfortune which overtook
his family. I remember the bitterness with which I heard it. He who wrought such misery to
the widow of my friend is the same who, in the same spirit, hath since wrought upon me. I will
go further, and say to you, I have made diligent quest concerning the family, but--I have nothing
to tell you of them. They are lost."

Ben-Hur uttered a great groan.

"Then--then it is another hope broken!" he said, struggling with his feelings. "I am used to
disappointments. I pray you pardon my intrusion; and if I have occasioned you annoyance, forgive
it because of my sorrow. I have nothing now to live for but vengeance. Farewell."

At the curtain he turned, and said, simply, "I thank you both."

"Peace go with you," the merchant said.

Esther could not speak for sobbing.

And so he departed.

CHAPTER IV

Scarcely was Ben-Hur gone, when Simonides seemed to wake as from sleep: his countenance flushed;
the sullen light of his eyes changed to brightness; and he said, cheerily,

"Esther, ring--quick!"

She went to the table, and rang a service-bell.

One of the panels in the wall swung back, exposing a doorway which gave admittance to a man
who passed round to the merchant's front, and saluted him with a half-salaam.

"Malluch, here--nearer--to the chair," the master said, imperiously. "I have a mission which
shall not fail though the sun should. Hearken! A young man is now descending to the store-room--tall,
comely, and in the garb of Israel; follow him, his shadow not more faithful; and every night
send me report of where he is, what he does, and the company he keeps; and if, without discovery,
you overhear his conversations, report them word for word, together with whatever will serve
to expose him, his habits, motives, life. Understand you? Go quickly! Stay, Malluch: if he
leave the city, go after him--and, mark you, Malluch, be as a friend. If he bespeak you, tell
him what you will to the occasion most suited, except that you are in my service, of that,
not a word. Haste--make haste!"

The man saluted as before, and was gone.

Then Simonides rubbed his wan hands together, and laughed. 

All this is comprehensible. But the perplexing inquiry is, whence did the successive grades
of animals emerge?

That they could not contemporaneously exist; when the whole earth was a shoreless sea, and that animals
could not live is certain; but were they created in succession by
the Divine fiat, or did they emerge, as our author supposes and elaborately
tries to prove, from the humblest primitive forms, by an inscrutable
law of progression--evidenced, he contends, by geological facts--though
by some his facts are disputed--and certainly not confirmed by any
animal changes observable within the limits of human experience?

There is another alternative offers, which would dispense both with the author's hypothesis
and the need of successive organic creations by a special Providence. Is it a geological fact, since
life began, that the earth has simultaneously undergone throughout its entire surface the revolutions
assigned to it? May it not always, from that period, have consisted, as it now does, of water
and dry land, alternately changing their sites, but always apart, and allowing of the contemporary
existence on some portion of its surface of all the varieties of tribes ever found upon it?
The fossiliferous rocks that formed the primeval sea-beds could only
be deposited by the abrasion from the anterior and higher rocks.

It has always appeared to us that this conjecture is worthy of consideration,
and, if found tenable, would reconcile many perplexities.

Upon subjects so obscure, and to which the human intellect has been only recently directed,
it is not surprising that men of science have not arrived at uniformity
of conclusion.

Unable to reconcile phenomena with positive knowledge, there are names of no mean repute who would
reserve certain domains of creation as the fields of special interventions.

Out through the roses, and by beds of lesser flowers, all triumphs of careful attendance, but
now unnoticed, he was rolled to a position from which he could view the palace-tops over against
him on the island, the bridge in lessening perspective to the farther shore, and the river
below the bridge crowded with vessels, all swimming amidst the dancing splendors of the early
sun upon the rippling water. There the servant left him with Esther.

The much shouting of laborers, and their beating and pounding, did not disturb him any more
than the tramping of people on the bridge floor almost overhead, being as familiar to his ear
as the view before him to his eye, and therefore unnoticeable, except as suggestions of profits
in promise.

Esther sat on the arm of the chair nursing his hand, and waiting his speech, which came at
length in the calm way, the mighty will having carried him back to himself.

"When the young man was speaking, Esther, I observed thee, and thought thou wert won by him."

Her eyes fell as she replied,

"Speak you of faith, father, I believed him."

"In thy eyes, then, he is the lost son of the Prince Hur?"

"If he is not--" She hesitated.

"And if he is not, Esther?"

"I have been thy handmaiden, father, since my mother answered the call of the Lord God; by
thy side I have heard and seen thee deal in wise ways with all manner of men seeking profit,
holy and unholy; and now I say, if indeed the young man be not the prince he claims to be,
then before me falsehood never played so well the part of righteous truth."

"By the glory of Solomon, daughter, thou speakest earnestly. Dost thou believe thy father his
father's servant?"

"I understood him to ask of that as something he had but heard."

For a time Simonides' gaze swam among his swimming ships, though they had no place in his mind.

"Well, thou art a good child, Esther, of genuine Jewish shrewdness, and of years and strength
to hear a sorrowful tale. Wherefore give me heed, and I will tell you of myself, and of thy
mother, and of many things pertaining to the past not in thy knowledge or thy dreams--things
withheld from the persecuting Romans for a hope's sake, and from thee that thy nature should
grow towards the Lord straight as the reed to the sun.... I was born in a tomb in the valley
of Hinnom, on the south side of Zion. My father and mother were Hebrew bond-servants, tenders
of the fig and olive trees growing, with many vines, in the King's Garden hard by Siloam; and
in my boyhood I helped them. They were of the class bound to serve forever. They sold me to
the Prince Hur, then, next to Herod the King, the richest man in Jerusalem. From the garden
he transferred me to his storehouse in Alexandria of Egypt, where I came of age. I served him
six years, and in the seventh, by the law of Moses, I went free."

Esther clapped her hands lightly.

"Oh, then, thou art not his father's servant!"

"Nay, daughter, hear. Now, in those days there were lawyers in the cloisters of the Temple
who disputed vehemently, saying the children of servants bound forever took the condition of
their parents; but the Prince Hur was a man righteous in all things, and an interpreter of
the law after the straitest sect, though not of them. He said I was a Hebrew servant bought,
in the true meaning of the great lawgiver, and, by sealed writings, which I yet have, he set
me free."

"And my mother?" Esther asked.

"Thou shalt hear all, Esther; be patient. Before I am through thou shalt see it were easier
for me to forget myself than thy mother.... At the end of my service, I came up to Jerusalem
to the Passover. My master entertained me. I was in love with him already, and I prayed to
be continued in his service. He consented, and I served him yet another seven years, but as
a hired son of Israel. In his behalf I had charge of ventures on the sea by ships, and of ventures
on land by caravans eastward to Susa and Persepolis, and the lands of silk beyond them. Perilous
passages were they, my daughter; but the Lord blessed all I undertook. I brought home vast
gains for the prince, and richer knowledge for myself, without which I could not have mastered
the charges since fallen to me.... One day I was a guest in his house in Jerusalem. A servant
entered with some sliced bread on a platter. She came to me first. It was then I saw thy mother,
and loved her, and took her away in my secret heart. After a while a time came when I sought
the prince to make her my wife. He told me she was bond-servant forever; but if she wished,
he would set her free that I might be gratified. She gave me love for love, but was happy where
she was, and refused her freedom. I prayed and besought, going again and again after long intervals.
She would be my wife, she all the time said, if I would become her fellow in servitude. Our
father Jacob served yet other seven years for his Rachel. Could I not as much for mine? But
thy mother said I must become as she, to serve forever. I came away, but went back. Look, Esther,
look here."

He pulled out the lobe of his left ear.

"See you not the scar of the awl?"

"I see it," she said; "and, oh, I see how thou didst love my mother!"

"Love her, Esther! She was to me more than the Shulamite to the singing king, fairer, more
spotless; a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon. The master,
even as I required him, took me to the judges, and back to his door, and thrust the awl through
my ear into the door, and I was his servant forever. So I won my Rachel. And was ever love
like mine?"

Esther stooped and kissed him, and they were silent, thinking of the dead.

"My master was drowned at sea, the first sorrow that ever fell upon me," the merchant continued.
"There was mourning in his house, and in mine here in Antioch, my abiding-place at the time.
Now, Esther, mark you! When the good prince was lost, I had risen to be his chief steward,
with everything of property belonging to him in my management and control. Judge you how much
he loved and trusted me! I hastened to Jerusalem to render account to the widow. She continued
me in the stewardship. I applied myself with greater diligence. The business prospered, and
grew year by year. Ten years passed; then came the blow which you heard the young man tell
about--the accident, as he called it, to the Procurator Gratus. The Roman gave it out an attempt
to assassinate him. Under that pretext, by leave from Rome, he confiscated to his own use the
immense fortune of the widow and children. Nor stopped he there. That there might be no reversal
of the judgment, he removed all the parties interested. From that dreadful day to this the
family of Hur have been lost. The son, whom I had seen as a child, was sentenced to the galleys.
The widow and daughter are supposed to have been buried in some of the many dungeons of Judea,
which, once closed upon the doomed, are like sepulchers sealed and locked. They passed from
the knowledge of men as utterly as if the sea had swallowed them unseen. We could not hear
how they died--nay, not even that they were dead."

Esther's eyes were dewy with tears.

"Thy heart is good, Esther, good as thy mother's was; and I pray it have not the fate of most
good hearts--to be trampled upon by the unmerciful and blind. But hearken further. I went up
to Jerusalem to give help to my benefactress, and was seized at the gate of the city and carried
to the sunken cells of the Tower of Antonia; why, I knew not, until Gratus himself came and
demanded of me the moneys of the House of Hur, which he knew, after our Jewish custom of exchange,
were subject to my draft in the different marts of the world. He required me to sign to his
order. I refused. He had the houses, lands, goods, ships, and movable property of those I served;
he had not their moneys. I saw, if I kept favor in the sight of the Lord, I could rebuild their
broken fortunes. I refused the tyrant's demands. He put me to torture; my will held good, and
he set me free, nothing gained. I came home and began again, in the name of Simonides of Antioch,
instead of the Prince Hur of Jerusalem. Thou knowest, Esther, how I have prospered; that the
increase of the millions of the prince in my hands was miraculous; thou knowest how, at the
end of three years, while going up to Caesarea, I was taken and a second time tortured by Gratus
to compel a confession that my goods and moneys were subject to his order of confiscation;
thou knowest he failed as before. Broken in body, I came home and found my Rachel dead of fear
and grief for me. The Lord our God reigned, and I lived. From the emperor himself I bought
immunity and license to trade throughout the world. To-day--praised be He who maketh the clouds
his chariot and walketh upon the winds!--to-day, Esther, that which was in my hands for stewardship
is multiplied into talents sufficient to enrich a Caesar."

He lifted his head proudly; their eyes met; each read the other's thought. "What shall I with
the treasure, Esther?" he asked, without lowering his gaze.

"My father," she answered, in a low voice, "did not the rightful owner call for it but now?"

Still his look did not fail.

"And thou, my child; shall I leave thee a beggar?"

"Nay, father, am not I, because I am thy child, his bond-servant? And of whom was it written,
'Strength and honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to come?'"

A gleam of ineffable love lighted his face as he said, "The Lord hath been good to me in many
ways; but thou, Esther, art the sovereign excellence of his favor."

He drew her to his breast and kissed her many times.

"Hear now," he said, with clearer voice--"hear now why I laughed this morning. The young man
faced me the apparition of his father in comely youth. My spirit arose to salute him. I felt
my trial-days were over and my labors ended. Hardly could I keep from crying out. I longed
to take him by the hand and show the balance I had earned, and say, 'Lo, 'tis all thine! and
I am thy servant, ready now to be called away.' And so I would have done, Esther, so I would
have done, but that moment three thoughts rushed to restrain me. I will be sure he is my master's
son--such was the first thought; if he is my master's son, I will learn somewhat of his nature.
Of those born to riches, bethink you, Esther, how many there are in whose hands riches are
but breeding curses"--he paused, while his hands clutched, and his voice shrilled with passion--"Esther,
consider the pains I endured at the Roman's hands; nay, not Gratus's alone: the merciless wretches
who did his bidding the first time and the last were Romans, and they all alike laughed to
hear me scream. Consider my broken body, and the years I have gone shorn of my stature; consider
thy mother yonder in her lonely tomb, crushed of soul as I of body; consider the sorrows of
my master's family if they are living, and the cruelty of their taking-off if they are dead;
consider all, and, with Heaven's love about thee, tell me, daughter, shall not a hair fall
or a red drop run in expiation? Tell me not, as the preachers sometimes do--tell me not that
vengeance is the Lord's. Does he not work his will harmfully as well as in love by agencies?
Has he not his men of war more numerous than his prophets? Is not his the law, Eye for eye,
hand for hand, foot for foot? Oh, in all these years I have dreamed of vengeance, and prayed
and provided for it, and gathered patience from the growing of my store, thinking and promising,
as the Lord liveth, it will one day buy me punishment of the wrong-doers? And when, speaking
of his practise with arms, the young man said it was for a nameless purpose, I named the purpose
even as he spoke--vengeance! and that, Esther, that it was--the third thought which held me
still and hard while his pleading lasted, and made me laugh when he was gone."

Esther caressed the faded hands, and said, as if her spirit with his were running forward to
results, "He is gone. Will he come again?"

"Ay, Malluch the faithful goes with him, and will bring him back when I am ready."

"And when will that be, father?"

"Not long, not long. He thinks all his witnesses dead. There is one living who will not fail
to know him, if he be indeed my master's son."

"His mother?"

"Nay, daughter, I will set the witness before him; till then let us rest the business with
the Lord. I am tired. Call Abimelech."

Esther called the servant, and they returned into the house.

CHAPTER V

When Ben-Hur sallied from the great warehouse, it was with the thought that another failure
was to be added to the many he had already met in the quest for his people; and the idea was
depressing exactly in proportion as the objects of his quest were dear to him; it curtained
him round about with a sense of utter loneliness on earth, which, more than anything else,
serves to eke from a soul cast down its remaining interest in life.

Through the people, and the piles of goods, he made way to the edge of the landing, and was
tempted by the cool shadows darkening the river's depth. The lazy current seemed to stop and
wait for him. In counteraction of the spell, the saying of the voyager flashed into memory--"Better
be a worm, and feed upon the mulberries of Daphne, than a king's guest." He turned, and walked
rapidly down the landing and back to the khan.

"The road to Daphne!" the steward said, surprised at the question Ben-Hur put to him. "You
have not been here before? Well, count this the happiest day of your life. You cannot mistake
the road. The next street to the left, going south, leads straight to Mount Sulpius, crowned
by the altar of Jupiter and the Amphitheater; keep it to the third cross street, known as Herod's
Colonnade; turn to your right there, and hold the way through the old city of Seleucus to the
bronze gates of Epiphanes. There the road to Daphne begins--and may the gods keep you!"

A few directions respecting his baggage, and Ben-Hur set out.

The Colonnade of Herod was easily found; thence to the brazen gates, under a continuous marble
portico, he passed with a multitude mixed of people from all the trading nations of the earth.

It was about the fourth hour of the day when he passed out the gate, and found himself one
of a procession apparently interminable, moving to the famous Grove. The road was divided into
separate ways for footmen, for men on horses, and men in chariots; and those again into separate
ways for outgoers and incomers. The lines of division were guarded by low balustrading, broken
by massive pedestals, many of which were surmounted with statuary. Right and left of the road
extended margins of sward perfectly kept, relieved at intervals by groups of oak and sycamore
trees, and vine-clad summer-houses for the accommodation of the weary, of whom, on the return
side, there were always multitudes. The ways of the footmen were paved with red stone, and
those of the riders strewn with white sand compactly rolled, but not so solid as to give back
an echo to hoof or wheel. The number and variety of fountains at play were amazing, all gifts
of visiting kings, and called after them. Out southwest to the gates of the Grove, the magnificent
thoroughfare stretched a little over four miles from the city.

In his wretchedness of feeling, Ben-Hur barely observed the royal liberality which marked the
construction of the road. Nor more did he at first notice the crowd going with him. He treated
the processional displays with like indifference. To say truth, besides his self-absorption,
he had not a little of the complacency of a Roman visiting the provinces fresh from the ceremonies
which daily eddied round and round the golden pillar set up by Augustus as the centre of the
world. It was not possible for the provinces to offer anything new or superior. He rather availed
himself of every opportunity to push forward through the companies in the way, and too slow-going
for his impatience. By the time he reached Heracleia, a suburban village intermediate the city
and the Grove, he was somewhat spent with exercise, and began to be susceptible of entertainment.
Once a pair of goats led by a beautiful woman, woman and goats alike brilliant with ribbons
and flowers, attracted his attention. Then he stopped to look at a bull of mighty girth, and
snowy white, covered with vines freshly cut, and bearing on its broad back a naked child in
a basket, the image of a young Bacchus, squeezing the juice of ripened berries into a goblet,
and drinking with libational formulas. As he resumed his walk, he wondered whose altars would
be enriched by the offerings. A horse went by with clipped mane, after the fashion of the time,
his rider superbly dressed. He smiled to observe the harmony of pride between the man and the
brute. Often after that he turned his head at hearing the rumble of wheels and the dull thud
of hoofs; unconsciously he was becoming interested in the styles of chariots and charioteers,
as they rustled past him going and coming. Nor was it long until he began to make notes of
the people around him. He saw they were of all ages, sexes, and conditions, and all in holiday
attire. One company was uniformed in white, another in black; some bore flags, some smoking
censers; some went slowly, singing hymns; others stepped to the music of flutes and tabrets.
If such were the going to Daphne every day in the year, what a wondrous sight Daphne must be!
At last there was a clapping of hands, and a burst of joyous cries; following the pointing
of many fingers, he looked and saw upon the brow of a hill the templed gate of the consecrated
Grove. The hymns swelled to louder strains; the music quickened time; and, borne along by the
impulsive current, and sharing the common eagerness, he passed in, and, Romanized in taste
as he was, fell to worshiping the place.

Rearward of the structure which graced the entrance-way--a purely Grecian pile--he stood upon
a broad esplanade paved with polished stone; around him a restless exclamatory multitude, in
gayest colors, relieved against the iridescent spray flying crystal-white from fountains; before
him, off to the southwest, dustless paths radiated out into a garden, and beyond that into
a forest, over which rested a veil of pale-blue vapor. Ben-Hur gazed wistfully, uncertain where
to go. A woman that moment exclaimed,

"Beautiful! But where to now?"

Her companion, wearing a chaplet of bays, laughed and answered, "Go to, thou pretty barbarian!
The question implies an earthly fear; and did we not agree to leave all such behind in Antioch
with the rusty earth? The winds which blow here are respirations of the gods. Let us give ourselves
to waftage of the winds."

"But if we should get lost?"

"O thou timid! No one was ever lost in Daphne, except those on whom her gates close forever."

"And who are they?" she asked, still fearful.

"Such as have yielded to the charms of the place and chosen it for life and death. Hark! Stand
we here, and I will show you of whom I speak."

Upon the marble pavement there was a scurry of sandalled feet; the crowd opened, and a party
of girls rushed about the speaker and his fair friend, and began singing and dancing to the
tabrets they themselves touched. The woman, scared, clung to the man, who put an arm about
her, and, with kindled face, kept time to the music with the other hand overhead. The hair
of the dancers floated free, and their limbs blushed through the robes of gauze which scarcely
draped them. Words may not be used to tell of the voluptuousness of the dance. One brief round,
and they darted off through the yielding crowd lightly as they had come.

"Now what think you?" cried the man to the woman.

"Who are they?" she asked.

"Devadasi--priestesses devoted to the Temple of Apollo. There is an army of them. They make
the chorus in celebrations. This is their home. Sometimes they wander off to other cities,
but all they make is brought here to enrich the house of the divine musician. Shall we go now?"

Next minute the two were gone.

Ben-Hur took comfort in the assurance that no one was ever lost in Daphne, and he, too, set
out--where, he knew not.

A sculpture reared upon a beautiful pedestal in the garden attracted him first. It proved to
be the statue of a centaur. An inscription informed the unlearned visitor that it exactly represented
Chiron, the beloved of Apollo and Diana, instructed by them in the mysteries of hunting, medicine,
music, and prophecy. The inscription also bade the stranger look out at a certain part of the
heavens, at a certain hour of the clear night, and he would behold the dead alive among the
stars, whither Jupiter had transferred the good genius.

The wisest of the centaurs continued, nevertheless, in the service of mankind. In his hand
he held a scroll, on which, graven in Greek, were paragraphs of a notice:

                          "O Traveller!
                      "Art thou a stranger?

"I. Hearken to the singing of the brooks, and fear not the rain of the fountains; so will the
Naiades learn to love thee.

"II. The invited breezes of Daphne are Zephyrus and Auster; gentle ministers of life, they
will gather sweets for thee; when Eurus blows, Diana is elsewhere hunting; when Boreas blusters,
go hide, for Apollo is angry.

"III. The shades of the Grove are thine in the day; at night they belong to Pan and his Dryades.
Disturb them not.

"IV. Eat of the Lotus by the brooksides sparingly, unless thou wouldst have surcease of memory,
which is to become a child of Daphne.

"V. Walk thou round the weaving spider--'tis Arachne at work for Minerva.

"VI. Wouldst thou behold the tears of Daphne, break but a bud from a laurel bough--and die.

                            "Heed thou!
                      "And stay and be happy."

Ben-Hur left the interpretation of the mystic notice to others fast enclosing him, and turned
away as the white bull was led by. The boy sat in the basket, followed by a procession; after
them again, the woman with the goats; and behind her the flute and tabret players, and another
procession of gift-bringers.

"Whither go they?" asked a bystander.

Another made answer, "The bull to Father Jove; the goat--"

"Did not Apollo once keep the flocks of Admetus?"

"Ay, the goat to Apollo!"

The goodness of the reader is again besought in favor of an explanation. A certain facility
of accommodation in the matter of religion comes to us after much intercourse with people of
a different faith; gradually we attain the truth that every creed is illustrated by good men
who are entitled to our respect, but whom we cannot respect without courtesy to their creed.
To this point Ben-Hur had arrived. Neither the years in Rome nor those in the galley had made
any impression upon his religious faith; he was yet a Jew. In his view, nevertheless, it was
not an impiety to look for the beautiful in the Grove of Daphne.

The remark does not interdict the further saying, if his scruples had been ever so extreme,
not improbably he would at this time have smothered them. He was angry; not as the irritable,
from chafing of a trifle; nor was his anger like the fool's, pumped from the wells of nothing,
to be dissipated by a reproach or a curse; it was the wrath peculiar to ardent natures rudely
awakened by the sudden annihilation of a hope--dream, if you will--in which the choicest happinesses
were thought to be certainly in reach. In such case nothing intermediate will carry off the
passion--the quarrel is with Fate.

Let us follow the philosophy a little further, and say to ourselves, it were well in such quarrels
if Fate were something tangible, to be despatched with a look or a blow, or a speaking personage
with whom high words were possible; then the unhappy mortal would not always end the affair
by punishing himself.

In ordinary mood, Ben-Hur would not have come to the Grove alone, or, coming alone, he would
have availed himself of his position in the consul's family, and made provision against wandering
idly about, unknowing and unknown; he would have had all the points of interest in mind, and
gone to them under guidance, as in the despatch of business; or, wishing to squander days of
leisure in the beautiful place, he would have had in hand a letter to the master of it all,
whoever he might be. This would have made him a sightseer, like the shouting herd he was accompanying;
whereas he had no reverence for the deities of the Grove, nor curiosity; a man in the blindness
of bitter disappointment, he was adrift, not waiting for Fate, but seeking it as a desperate
challenger.

Every one has known this condition of mind, though perhaps not all in the same degree; every
one will recognize it as the condition in which he has done brave things with apparent serenity;
and every one reading will say, Fortunate for Ben-Hur if the folly which now catches him is
but a friendly harlequin with whistle and painted cap, and not some Violence with a pointed
sword pitiless.

CHAPTER VI

Ben-Hur entered the woods with the processions. He had not interest enough at first to ask
where they were going; yet, to relieve him from absolute indifference, he had a vague impression
that they were in movement to the temples, which were the central objects of the Grove, supreme
in attractions.

Presently, as singers dreamfully play with a flitting chorus, he began repeating to himself,
"Better be a worm, and feed on the mulberries of Daphne, than a king's guest." Then of the
much repetition arose questions importunate of answer. Was life in the Grove so very sweet?
Wherein was the charm? Did it lie in some tangled depth of philosophy? Or was it something
in fact, something on the surface, discernible to every-day wakeful senses? Every year thousands,
forswearing the world, gave themselves to service here. Did they find the charm? And was it
sufficient, when found, to induce forgetfulness profound enough to shut out of mind the infinitely
diverse things of life? those that sweeten and those that embitter? hopes hovering in the near
future as well as sorrows born of the past? If the Grove were so good for them, why should
it not be good for him? He was a Jew; could it be that the excellences were for all the world
but children of Abraham? Forthwith he bent all his faculties to the task of discovery, unmindful
of the singing of the gift-bringers and the quips of his associates.

In the quest, the sky yielded him nothing; it was blue, very blue, and full of twittering swallows--so
was the sky over the city.

Further on, out of the woods at his right hand, a breeze poured across the road, splashing
him with a wave of sweet smells, blent of roses and consuming spices. He stopped, as did others,
looking the way the breeze came.

"A garden over there?" he said, to a man at his elbow.

"Rather some priestly ceremony in performance--something to Diana, or Pan, or a deity of the
woods."

The answer was in his mother tongue. Ben-Hur gave the speaker a surprised look.

"A Hebrew?" he asked him.

The man replied with a deferential smile,

"I was born within a stone's-throw of the market-place in Jerusalem."

Ben-Hur was proceeding to further speech, when the crowd surged forward, thrusting him out
on the side of the walk next the woods, and carrying the stranger away. The customary gown
and staff, a brown cloth on the head tied by a yellow rope, and a strong Judean face to avouch
the garments of honest right, remained in the young man's mind, a kind of summary of the man.

This took place at a point where a path into the woods began, offering a happy escape from
the noisy processions. Ben-Hur availed himself of the offer.

He walked first into a thicket which, from the road, appeared in a state of nature, close,
impenetrable, a nesting-place for wild birds. A few steps, however, gave him to see the master's
hand even there. The shrubs were flowering or fruit-bearing; under the bending branches the
ground was pranked with brightest blooms; over them the jasmine stretched its delicate bonds.
From lilac and rose, and lily and tulip, from oleander and strawberry-tree, all old friends
in the gardens of the valleys about the city of David, the air, lingering or in haste, loaded
itself with exhalations day and night; and that nothing might be wanting to the happiness of
the nymphs and naiads, down through the flower-lighted shadows of the mass a brook went its
course gently, and by many winding ways.

Out of the thicket, as he proceeded, on his right and left, issued the cry of the pigeon and
the cooing of turtle-doves; blackbirds waited for him, and bided his coming close; a nightingale
kept its place fearless, though he passed in arm's-length; a quail ran before him at his feet,
whistling to the brood she was leading, and as he paused for them to get out of his way, a
figure crawled from a bed of honeyed musk brilliant with balls of golden blossoms. Ben-Hur
was startled. Had he, indeed, been permitted to see a satyr at home? The creature looked up
at him, and showed in its teeth a hooked pruning-knife; he smiled at his own scare, and, lo!
the charm was evolved! Peace without fear--peace a universal condition--that it was!

He sat upon the ground beneath a citron-tree, which spread its gray roots sprawling to receive
a branch of the brook. The nest of a titmouse hung close to the bubbling water, and the tiny
creature looked out of the door of the nest into his eyes. "Verily, the bird is interpreting
to me," he thought. "It says, 'I am not afraid of you, for the law of this happy place is Love.'"

The charm of the Grove seemed plain to him; he was glad, and determined to render himself one
of the lost in Daphne. In charge of the flowers and shrubs, and watching the growth of all
the dumb excellences everywhere to be seen, could not he, like the man with the pruning-knife
in his mouth, forego the days of his troubled life--forego them forgetting and forgotten?

But by-and-by his Jewish nature began to stir within him.

The charm might be sufficient for some people. Of what kind were they?

Love is delightful--ah! how pleasant as a successor to wretchedness like his. But was it all
there was of life? All?

There was an unlikeness between him and those who buried themselves contentedly here. They
had no duties--they could not have had; but he--

"God of Israel!" he cried aloud, springing to his feet, with burning cheeks--"Mother! Tirzah!
Cursed be the moment, cursed the place, in which I yield myself happy in your loss!"

He hurried away through the thicket, and came to a stream flowing with the volume of a river
between banks of masonry, broken at intervals by gated sluiceways. A bridge carried the path
he was traversing across the stream; and, standing upon it, he saw other bridges, no two of
them alike. Under him the water was lying in a deep pool, clear as a shadow; down a little
way it tumbled with a roar over rocks; then there was another pool, and another cascade; and
so on, out of view; and bridges and pools and resounding cascades said, plainly as inarticulate
things can tell a story, the river was running by permission of a master, exactly as the master
would have it, tractable as became a servant of the gods.

Here, there, happy in flight, intoxicated in pause, from object to object, point to point,
now in the meadow, now on the heights, now lingering to penetrate the groves and observe the
processions, then lost in efforts to pursue the paths and streams which trended mazily into
dim perspectives to end finally in-- Ah, what might be a fitting end to scene so beautiful!
What adequate mysteries were hidden behind an introduction so marvellous! Here and there, the
speech was beginning, his gaze wandered, so he could not help the conviction, forced by the
view, and as the sum of it all, that there was peace in the air and on the earth, and invitation
everywhere to come and lie down here and be at rest.

Suddenly a revelation dawned upon him--the Grove was, in fact, a temple--one far-reaching,
wall-less temple!

Never anything like it!

The architect had not stopped to pother about columns and porticos, proportions or interiors,
or any limitation upon the epic he sought to materialize; he had simply made a servant of Nature--art
can go no further. So the cunning son of Jupiter and Callisto built the old Arcadia; and in
this, as in that, the genius was Greek.

From the bridge Ben-Hur went forward into the nearest valley.

He came to a flock of sheep. The shepherd was a girl, and she beckoned him, "Come!"

Farther on, the path was divided by an altar--a pedestal of black gneiss, capped with a slab
of white marble deftly foliated, and on that a brazier of bronze holding a fire. Close by it,
a woman, seeing him, waved a wand of willow, and as he passed called him, "Stay!" And the temptation
in her smile was that of passionate youth.

On yet further, he met one of the processions; at its head a troop of little girls, nude except
as they were covered with garlands, piped their shrill voices into a song; then a troop of
boys, also nude, their bodies deeply sun-browned, came dancing to the song of the girls; behind
them the procession, all women, bearing baskets of spices and sweets to the altars--women clad
in simple robes, careless of exposure. As he went by they held their hands to him, and said,
"Stay, and go with us." One, a Greek, sang a verse from Anacreon:

  "For to-day I take or give;
  For to-day I drink and live;
  For to-day I beg or borrow;
  Who knows about the silent morrow?"

But he pursued his way indifferent, and came next to a grove luxuriant, in the heart of the
vale at the point where it would be most attractive to the observing eye. As it came close
to the path he was travelling, there was a seduction in its shade, and through the foliage
he caught the shining of what appeared a pretentious statue; so he turned aside, and entered
the cool retreat.

The grass was fresh and clean. The trees did not crowd each other; and they were of every kind
native to the East, blended well with strangers adopted from far quarters; here grouped in
exclusive companionship palm-trees plumed like queens; there sycamores, overtopping laurels
of darker foliage; and evergreen oaks rising verdantly, with cedars vast enough to be kings
on Lebanon; and mulberries; and terebinths so beautiful it is not hyperbole to speak of them
as blown from the orchards of Paradise.

The statue proved to be a Daphne of wondrous beauty. Hardly, however, had he time to more than
glance at her face: at the base of the pedestal a girl and a youth were lying upon a tiger's
skin asleep in each other's arms; close by them the implements of their service--his axe and
sickle, her basket--flung carelessly upon a heap of fading roses.

The exposure startled him. Back in the hush of the perfumed thicket he discovered, as he thought,
that the charm of the great Grove was peace without fear, and almost yielded to it; now, in
this sleep in the day's broad glare--this sleep at the feet of Daphne--he read a further chapter
to which only the vaguest allusion is sufferable. The law of the place was Love, but Love without
Law.

And this was the sweet peace of Daphne!

This the life's end of her ministers!

For this kings and princes gave of their revenues!

For this a crafty priesthood subordinated nature--her birds and brooks and lilies, the river,
the labor of many hands, the sanctity of altars, the fertile power of the sun!

It would be pleasant now to record that as Ben-Hur pursued his walk assailed by such reflections,
he yielded somewhat to sorrow for the votaries of the great outdoor temple; especially for
those who, by personal service, kept it in a state so surpassingly lovely. How they came to
the condition was not any longer a mystery; the motive, the influence, the inducement, were
before him. Some there were, no doubt, caught by the promise held out to their troubled spirits
of endless peace in a consecrated abode, to the beauty of which, if they had not money, they
could contribute their labor; this class implied intellect peculiarly subject to hope and fear;
but the great body of the faithful could not be classed with such. Apollo's nets were wide,
and their meshes small; and hardly may one tell what all his fishermen landed: this less for
that they cannot be described than because they ought not to be. Enough that the mass were
of the sybarites of the world, and of the herds in number vaster and in degree lower--devotees
of the unmixed sensualism to which the East was almost wholly given. Not to any of the exaltations--not
to the singing-god, or his unhappy mistress; not to any philosophy requiring for its enjoyment
the calm of retirement, nor to any service for the comfort there is in religion, nor to love
in its holier sense--were they abiding their vows. Good reader, why shall not the truth be
told here? Why not learn that, at this age, there were in all earth but two peoples capable
of exaltations of the kind referred to--those who lived by the law of Moses, and those who
lived by the law of Brahma. They alone could have cried you, Better a law without love than
a love without law.

Besides that, sympathy is in great degree a result of the mood we are in at the moment: anger
forbids the emotion. On the other hand, it is easiest taken on when we are in a state of most
absolute self-satisfaction. Ben-Hur walked with a quicker step, holding his head higher; and,
while not less sensitive to the delightfulness of all about him, he made his survey with calmer
spirit, though sometimes with curling lip; that is to say, he could not so soon forget how
nearly he himself had been imposed upon.

CHAPTER VII

In front of Ben-Hur there was a forest of cypress-trees, each a column tall and straight as
a mast. Venturing into the shady precinct, he heard a trumpet gayly blown, and an instant after
saw lying upon the grass close by the countryman whom he had run upon in the road going to
the temples. The man arose, and came to him.

"I give you peace again," he said, pleasantly.

"Thank you," Ben-Hur replied, then asked, "Go you my way?"

"I am for the stadium, if that is your way."

"The stadium!"

"Yes. The trumpet you heard but now was a call for the competitors."

"Good friend," said Ben-Hur, frankly, "I admit my ignorance of the Grove; and if you will let
me be your follower, I will be glad."

"That will delight me. Hark! I hear the wheels of the chariots. They are taking the track."

Ben-Hur listened a moment, then completed the introduction by laying his hand upon the man's
arm, and saying, "I am the son of Arrius, the duumvir, and thou?"

"I am Malluch, a merchant of Antioch."

"Well, good Malluch, the trumpet, and the gride of wheels, and the prospect of diversion excite
me. I have some skill in the exercises. In the palaestrae of Rome I am not unknown. FOREIGN
NEWS, the current events in foreign countries, arranged in the form
of historical narrative, collated carefully from contemporary authorities,
and distributed under the heads of the different countries and colonies
to which they belong.



Passing through the belt of forest, they came to a field with a track laid out upon it, in
shape and extent exactly like those of the stadia. The course, or track proper, was of soft
earth, rolled and sprinkled, and on both sides defined by ropes, stretched loosely upon upright
javelins. For the accommodation of spectators, and such as had interests reaching forward of
the mere practise, there were several stands shaded by substantial awnings, and provided with
seats in rising rows. In one of the stands the two new-comers found places.

Ben-Hur counted the chariots as they went by--nine in all.

"I commend the fellows," he said, with good-will. "Here in the East, I thought they aspired
to nothing better than the two; but they are ambitious, and play with royal fours. Let us study
their performance."

Eight of the fours passed the stand, some walking, others on the trot, and all unexceptionably
handled; then the ninth one came on the gallop. Ben-Hur burst into exclamation.

"I have been in the stables of the emperor, Malluch, but, by our father Abraham of blessed
memory! I never saw the like of these."

The last four was then sweeping past. All at once they fell into confusion. Some one on the
stand uttered a sharp cry. Ben-Hur turned, and saw an old man half-risen from an upper seat,
his hands clenched and raised, his eyes fiercely bright, his long white beard fairly quivering.
Some of the spectators nearest him began to laugh.

"They should respect his beard at least. Who is he?" asked Ben-Hur.

"A mighty man from the Desert, somewhere beyond Moab, and owner of camels in herds, and horses
descended, they say, from the racers of the first Pharaoh--Sheik Ilderim by name and title."

Thus Malluch replied.

The driver meanwhile exerted himself to quiet the four, but without avail. Each ineffectual
effort excited the sheik the more.

"Abaddon seize him!" yelled the patriarch, shrilly. "Run! fly! do you hear, my children?" The
question was to his attendants, apparently of the tribe. "Do you hear? They are Desert-born,
like yourselves. Catch them--quick!"

The plunging of the animals increased.

"Accursed Roman!" and the sheik shook his fist at the driver. "Did he not swear he could drive
them--swear it by all his brood of bastard Latin gods? Nay, hands off me--off, I say! They
should run swift as eagles, and with the temper of hand-bred lambs, he swore. Cursed be he--cursed
the mother of liars who calls him son! See them, the priceless! Let him touch one of them with
a lash, and"--the rest of the sentence was lost in a furious grinding of his teeth. "To their
heads, some of you, and speak them--a word, one is enough, from the tent-song your mothers
sang you. Oh, fool, fool that I was to put trust in a Roman!"

Some of the shrewder of the old man's friends planted themselves between him and the horses.
An opportune failure of breath on his part helped the stratagem.

Ben-Hur, thinking he comprehended the sheik, sympathized with him. Far more than mere pride
of property--more than anxiety for the result of the race--in his view it was within the possible
for the patriarch, according to his habits of thought and his ideas of the inestimable, to
love such animals with a tenderness akin to the most sensitive passion.

They were all bright bays, unspotted, perfectly matched, and so proportioned as to seem less
than they really were. Delicate ears pointed small heads; the faces were broad and full between
the eyes; the nostrils in expansion disclosed membrane so deeply red as to suggest the flashing
of flame; the necks were arches, overlaid with fine mane so abundant as to drape the shoulders
and breast, while in happy consonance the forelocks were like ravellings of silken veils; between
the knees and the fetlocks the legs were flat as an open hand, but above the knees they were
rounded with mighty muscles, needful to upbear the shapely close-knit bodies; the hoofs were
like cups of polished agate; and in rearing and plunging they whipped the air, and sometimes
the earth, with tails glossy-black and thick and long. The sheik spoke of them as the priceless,
and it was a good saying.

In this second and closer look at the horses, Ben-Hur read the story of their relation to their
master. They had grown up under his eyes, objects of his special care in the day, his visions
of pride in the night, with his family at home in the black tent out on the shadeless bosom
of the desert, as his children beloved. That they might win him a triumph over the haughty
and hated Roman, the old man had brought his loves to the city, never doubting they would win,
if only he could find a trusty expert to take them in hand; not merely one with skill, but
of a spirit which their spirits would acknowledge. Unlike the colder people of the West, he
could not protest the driver's inability, and dismiss him civilly; an Arab and a sheik, he
had to explode, and rive the air about him with clamor.

Before the patriarch was done with his expletives, a dozen hands were at the bits of the horses,
and their quiet assured. About that time, another chariot appeared upon the track; and, unlike
the others, driver, vehicle, and races were precisely as they would be presented in the Circus
the day of final trial. For a reason which will presently be more apparent, it is desirable
now to give this turnout plainly to the reader.

There should be no difficulty in understanding the carriage known to us all as the chariot
of classical renown. One has but to picture to himself a dray with low wheels and broad axle,
surmounted by a box open at the tail end. Such was the primitive pattern. Artistic genius came
along in time, and, touching the rude machine, raised it into a thing of beauty--that, for
instance, in which Aurora, riding in advance of the dawn, is given to our fancy.

The jockeys of the ancients, quite as shrewd and ambitious as their successors of the present,
called their humblest turnout a two, and their best in grade a four; in the latter, they contested
the Olympics and the other festal shows founded in imitation of them.

The same sharp gamesters preferred to put their horses to the chariot all abreast; and for
distinction they termed the two next the pole yoke-steeds, and those on the right and left
outside trace-mates. It was their judgment, also, that, by allowing the fullest freedom of
action, the greatest speed was attainable; accordingly, the harness resorted to was peculiarly
simple; in fact, there was nothing of it save a collar round the animal's neck, and a trace
fixed to the collar, unless the lines and a halter fall within the term. Wanting to hitch up,
the masters pinned a narrow wooden yoke, or cross-tree, near the end of the pole, and, by straps
passed through rings at the end of the yoke, buckled the latter to the collar. The traces of
the yokesteeds they hitched to the axle; those of the trace-mates to the top rim of the chariot-bed.
There remained then but the adjustment of the lines, which, judged by the modern devices, was
not the least curious part of the method. For this there was a large ring at the forward extremity
of the pole; securing the ends to that ring first, they parted the lines so as to give one
to each horse, and proceeded to pass them to the driver, slipping them separately through rings
on the inner side of the halters at the mouth.

With this plain generalization in mind, all further desirable knowledge upon the subject can
be had by following the incidents of the scene occurring.

The other contestants had been received in silence; the last comer was more fortunate. While
moving towards the stand from which we are viewing the scene, his progress was signalized by
loud demonstrations, by clapping of hands and cheers, the effect of which was to centre attention
upon him exclusively. His yoke-steeds, it was observed, were black, while the trace-mates were
snow-white. In conformity to the exacting canons of Roman taste, they had all four been mutilated;
that is to say, their tails had been clipped, and, to complete the barbarity, their shorn manes
were divided into knots tied with flaring red and yellow ribbons. 

"When we assert," says the pious and amiable author, "a perpetual Divine agency, we readily
acknowledge that matters are so contrived as not to need a Divine interposition in a different
manner from that in which it had been constantly exerted. And it must be evident that an unremitting
energy, displayed in such circumstances, greatly exalts our idea of God, instead of depressing
it; and, therefore, by the way, is so much more likely to be true."
 The axle, in keeping with the wheels, was tipped with heads of snarling
tigers done in brass, and the bed was woven of willow wands gilded with gold.

The coming of the beautiful horses and resplendent chariot drew Ben-Hur to look at the driver
with increased interest.

Who was he?

When Ben-Hur asked himself the question first, he could not see the man's face, or even his
full figure; yet the air and manner were familiar, and pricked him keenly with a reminder of
a period long gone.

Who could it be?

Nearer now, and the horses approaching at a trot. From the shouting and the gorgeousness of
the turnout, it was thought he might be some official favorite or famous prince. Such an appearance
was not inconsistent with exalted rank. Kings often struggled for the crown of leaves which
was the prize of victory. Nero and Commodus, it will be remembered, devoted themselves to the
chariot. Ben-Hur arose and forced a passage down nearly to the railing in front of the lower
seat of the stand. His face was earnest, his manner eager.

And directly the whole person of the driver was in view. A companion rode with him, in classic
description a Myrtilus, permitted men of high estate indulging their passion for the race-course.
Ben-Hur could see only the driver, standing erect in the chariot, with the reins passed several
times round his body--a handsome figure, scantily covered by a tunic of light-red cloth; in
the right hand a whip; in the other, the arm raised and lightly extended, the four lines. The
pose was exceedingly graceful and animated. The cheers and clapping of hands were received
with statuesque indifference. Ben-Hur stood transfixed--his instinct and memory had served
him faithfully--THE DRIVER WAS MESSALA.

By the selection of horses, the magnificence of the chariot, the attitude, and display of person--above
all, by the expression of the cold, sharp, eagle features, imperialized in his countrymen by
sway of the world through so many generations, Ben-Hur knew Messala unchanged, as haughty,
confident, and audacious as ever, the same in ambition, cynicism, and mocking insouciance.

CHAPTER VIII

As Ben-Hur descended the steps of the stand, an Arab arose upon the last one at the foot, and
cried out,

"Men of the East and West--hearken! The good Sheik Ilderim giveth greeting. With four horses,
sons of the favorites of Solomon the Wise, he bath come up against the best. Needs he most
a mighty man to drive them. Whoso will take them to his satisfaction, to him he promiseth enrichment
forever. Here--there--in the city and in the Circuses, and wherever the strong most do congregate,
tell ye this his offer. So saith my master, Sheik Ilderim the Generous."

The proclamation awakened a great buzz among the people under the awning. By night it would
be repeated and discussed in all the sporting circles of Antioch. Ben-Hur, hearing it, stopped
and looked hesitatingly from the herald to the sheik. Malluch thought he was about to accept
the offer, but was relieved when he presently turned to him, and asked, "Good Malluch, where
to now?"

The worthy replied, with a laugh, "Would you liken yourself to others visiting the Grove for
the first time, you will straightway to hear your fortune told."

"My fortune, said you? Though the suggestion has in it a flavor of unbelief, let us to the
goddess at once."

"Nay, son of Arrius, these Apollonians have a better trick than that. Instead of speech with
a Pythia or a Sibyl, they will sell you a plain papyrus leaf, hardly dry from the stalk, and
bid you dip it in the water of a certain fountain, when it will show you a verse in which you
may hear of your future."

The glow of interest departed from Ben-Hur's face.

"There are people who have no need to vex themselves about their future," he said, gloomily.

"Then you prefer to go to the temples?"

"The temples are Greek, are they not?"

"They call them Greek."

"The Hellenes were masters of the beautiful in art; but in architecture they sacrificed variety
to unbending beauty. Their temples are all alike. How call you the fountain?"

"Castalia."

"Oh! it has repute throughout the world. Let us thither."

Malluch kept watch on his companion as they went, and saw that for the moment at least his
good spirits were out. To the people passing he gave no attention; over the wonders they came
upon there were no exclamations; silently, even sullenly, he kept a slow pace.

The truth was, the sight of Messala had set Ben-Hur to thinking. It seemed scarce an hour ago
that the strong hands had torn him from his mother, scarce an hour ago that the Roman had put
seal upon the gates of his father's house. He recounted how, in the hopeless misery of the
life--if such it might be called--in the galleys, he had had little else to do, aside from
labor, than dream dreams of vengeance, in all of which Messala was the principal. There might
be, he used to say to himself, escape for Gratus, but for Messala--never! And to strengthen
and harden his resolution, he was accustomed to repeat over and over, Who pointed us out to
the persecutors? And when I begged him for help--not for myself--who mocked me, and went away
laughing? And always the dream had the same ending. The day I meet him, help me, thou good
God of my people!--help me to some fitting special vengeance!

And now the meeting was at hand.

Perhaps, if he had found Messala poor and suffering, Ben-Hur's feeling had been different;
but it was not so. He found him more than prosperous; in the prosperity there was a dash and
glitter--gleam of sun on gilt of gold.

So it happened that what Malluch accounted a passing loss of spirit was pondering when the
meeting should be, and in what manner he could make it most memorable.

They turned after a while into an avenue of oaks, where the people were going and coming in
groups; footmen here, and horsemen; there women in litters borne slaves; and now and then chariots
rolled by thunderously.

At the end of the avenue the road, by an easy grade, descended into a lowland, where, on the
right hand, there was a precipitous facing of gray rock, and on the left an open meadow of
vernal freshness. Then they came in view of the famous Fountain of Castalia.

Edging through a company assembled at the point, Ben-Hur beheld a jet of sweet water pouring
from the crest of a stone into a basin of black marble, where, after much boiling and foaming,
it disappeared as through a funnel.

By the basin, under a small portico cut in the solid wall, sat a priest, old, bearded, wrinkled,
cowled--never being more perfectly eremitish. From the manner of the people present, hardly
might one say which was the attraction, the fountain, forever sparkling, or the priest, forever
there. He heard, saw, was seen, but never spoke. Occasionally a visitor extended a hand to
him with a coin in it. With a cunning twinkle of the eyes, he took the money, and gave the
party in exchange a leaf of papyrus.

The receiver made haste to plunge the papyrus into the basin; then, holding the dripping leaf
in the sunlight, he would be rewarded with a versified inscription upon its face; and the fame
of the fountain seldom suffered loss by poverty of merit in the poetry. Before Ben-Hur could
test the oracle, some other visitors were seen approaching across the meadow, and their appearance
piqued the curiosity of the company, his not less than theirs.

He saw first a camel, very tall and very white, in leading of a driver on horseback. A houdah
on the animal, besides being unusually large, was of crimson and gold. Two other horsemen followed
the camel with tall spears in hand.

"What a wonderful camel!" said one of the company.

"A prince from afar," another one suggested.

"More likely a king."

"If he were on an elephant, I would say he was a king."

A third man had a very different opinion.

"A camel--and a white camel!" he said, authoritatively. "By Apollo, friends, they who come
yonder--you can see there are two of them--are neither kings nor princes; they are women!"

In the midst of the dispute the strangers arrived.

The camel seen at hand did not belie his appearance afar. A taller, statelier brute of his
kind no traveller at the fountain, though from the remotest parts, had ever beheld. Such great
black eyes! such exceedingly fine white hair! feet so contractile when raised, so soundless
in planting, so broad when set!--nobody had ever seen the peer of this camel. And how well
he became his housing of silk, and all its frippery of gold in fringe and gold in tassel! The
tinkling of silver bells went before him, and he moved lightly, as if unknowing of his burden.

But who were the man and woman under the houdah?

Every eye saluted them with the inquiry.

If the former were a prince or a king, the philosophers of the crowd might not deny the impartiality
of Time. When they saw the thin, shrunken face buried under an immense turban, the skin of
the hue of a mummy, making it impossible to form an idea of his nationality, they were pleased
to think the limit of life was for the great as well as the small. They saw about his person
nothing so enviable as the shawl which draped him.

The woman was seated in the manner of the East, amidst veils and laces of surpassing fineness.
Above her elbows she wore armlets fashioned like coiled asps, and linked to bracelets at the
wrists by strands of gold; otherwise the arms were bare and of singular natural grace, complemented
with hands modelled daintily as a child's. One of the hands rested upon the side of the carriage,
showing tapered fingers glittering with rings, and stained at the tips till they blushed like
the pink of mother-of-pearl. She wore an open caul upon her head, sprinkled with beads of coral,
and strung with coin-pieces called sunlets, some of which were carried across her forehead,
while others fell down her back, half-smothered in the mass of her straight blue-black hair,
of itself an incomparable ornament, not needing the veil which covered it, except as a protection
against sun and dust. From her elevated seat she looked upon the people calmly, pleasantly,
and apparently so intent upon studying them as to be unconscious of the interest she herself
was exciting; and, what was unusual--nay, in violent contravention of the custom among women
of rank in public--she looked at them with an open face.

It was a fair face to see; quite youthful; in form, oval: complexion not white, like the Greek;
nor brunet, like the Roman; nor blond, like the Gaul; but rather the tinting of the sun of
the Upper Nile upon a skin of such transparency that the blood shone through it on cheek and
brow with nigh the ruddiness of lamplight. The eyes, naturally large, were touched along the
lids with the black paint immemorial throughout the East. The lips were slightly parted, disclosing,
through their scarlet lake, teeth of glistening whiteness. To all these excellences of countenance
the reader is finally besought to superadd the air derived from the pose of a small head, classic
in shape, set upon a neck long, drooping, and graceful--the air, we may fancy, happily described
by the word queenly. 

Needless to say that the traders always do their best to excite the natives' cupidity by exhibiting
the most tempting objects, and, careful as the islander may be when buying necessaries, he is
careless enough when luxuries are in question.
That instant the sound of wheels and the trampling of horses in rapid motion broke the silence
her beauty had imposed, and, with a great outcry, the bystanders parted in every direction,
hurrying to get away.

"The Roman has a mind to ride us down. Look out!" Malluch shouted to Ben-Hur, setting him at
the same time an example of hasty flight.

The latter faced to the direction the sounds came from, and beheld Messala in his chariot pushing
the four straight at the crowd. This time the view was near and distinct.

The parting of the company uncovered the camel, which might have been more agile than his kind
generally; yet the hoofs were almost upon him, and he resting with closed eyes, chewing the
endless cud with such sense of security as long favoritism may be supposed to have bred in
him. The Ethiopian wrung his hands afraid. In the houdah, the old man moved to escape; but
he was hampered with age, and could not, even in the face of danger, forget the dignity which
was plainly his habit. It was too late for the woman to save herself. Ben-Hur stood nearest
them, and he called to Messala,

"Hold! Look where thou goest! Back, back!"

The patrician was laughing in hearty good-humor; and, seeing there was but one chance of rescue,
Ben-Hur stepped in, and caught the bits of the left yoke-steed and his mate. "Dog of a Roman!
Carest thou so little for life?" he cried, putting forth all his strength. The two horses reared,
and drew the others round; the tilting of the pole tilted the chariot; Messala barely escaped
a fall, while his complacent Myrtilus rolled back like a clod to the ground. Seeing the peril
past, all the bystanders burst into derisive laughter.

The matchless audacity of the Roman then manifested itself. Loosing the lines from his body,
he tossed them to one side, dismounted, walked round the camel, looked at Ben-Hur, and spoke
partly to the old man and partly to the woman.

"Pardon, I pray you--I pray you both. I am Messala," he said; "and, by the old Mother of the
earth, I swear I did not see you or your camel! As to these good people--perhaps I trusted
too much to my skill. I sought a laugh at them--the laugh is theirs. Good may it do them!"

The good-natured, careless look and gesture he threw the bystanders accorded well with the
speech. To hear what more he had to say, they became quiet. Assured of victory over the body
of the offended, he signed his companion to take the chariot to a safer distance, and addressed
himself boldly to the woman.

"Thou hast interest in the good man here, whose pardon, if not granted now, I shall seek with
the greater diligence hereafter; his daughter, I should say."

She made him no reply.

"By Pallas, thou art beautiful! Beware Apollo mistake thee not for his lost love. I wonder
what land can boast herself thy mother. Turn not away. A truce! a truce! There is the sun of
India in thine eyes; in the corners of thy mouth, Egypt hath set her love-signs. Perpol! Turn
not to that slave, fair mistress, before proving merciful to this one. Tell me at least that
I am pardoned."

At this point she broke in upon him.

"Wilt thou come here?" she asked, smiling, and with gracious bend of the head to Ben-Hur.

"Take the cup and fill it, I pray thee," she said to the latter. "My father is thirsty."

"I am thy most willing servant!"

Ben-Hur turned about to do the favor, and was face to face with Messala. Their glances met;
the Jew's defiant; the Roman's sparkling with humor.

"O stranger, beautiful as cruel!" Messala said, waving his hand to her. "If Apollo get thee
not, thou shalt see me again. Not knowing thy country, I cannot name a god to commend thee
to; so, by all the gods, I will commend thee to--myself!"

Seeing that Myrtilus had the four composed and ready, he returned to the chariot. The woman
looked after him as he moved away, and whatever else there was in her look, there was no displeasure.
Presently she received the water; her father drank; then she raised the cup to her lips, and,
leaning down, gave it to Ben-Hur; never action more graceful and gracious.

"Keep it, we pray of thee! It is full of blessings--all thine!"

Immediately the camel was aroused, and on his feet, and about to go, when the old man called,

"Stand thou here."

Ben-Hur went to him respectfully.

"Thou hast served the stranger well to-day. There is but one God. In his holy name I thank
thee. I am Balthasar, the Egyptian. In the Great Orchard of Palms, beyond the village of Daphne,
in the shade of the palms, Sheik Ilderim the Generous abideth in his tents, and we are his
guests. Seek us there. Thou shalt have welcome sweet with the savor of the grateful."

Ben-Hur was left in wonder at the old man's clear voice and reverend manner. As he gazed after
the two departing, he caught sight of Messala going as he had come, joyous, indifferent, and
with a mocking laugh.

CHAPTER IX

As a rule, there is no surer way to the dislike of men than to behave well where they have
behaved badly. In this instance, happily, Malluch was an exception to the rule. The affair
he had just witnessed raised Ben-Hur in his estimation, since he could not deny him courage
and address; could he now get some insight into the young man's history, the results of the
day would not be all unprofitable to good master Simonides.

On the latter point, referring to what he had as yet learned, two facts comprehended it all--the
subject of his investigation was a Jew, and the adopted son of a famous Roman. The derogation must
lie in the erroneous construction which a weak human creature puts upon the truth. And practically
it is the true infidel state of mind which prompts apprehension regarding any fact of nature,
or any conclusion of sound argument." With all his sounding, the ways and means of
solution were not at call. In the heat of the perplexity, Ben-Hur himself came to his help.
He laid his hand on Malluch's arm and drew him out of the crowd, which was already going back
to its interest in the gray old priest and the mystic fountain.

"Good Malluch," he said, stopping, "may a man forget his mother?"

The question was abrupt and without direction, and therefore of the kind which leaves the person
addressed in a state of confusion. Malluch looked into Ben-Hur's face for a hint of meaning,
but saw, instead, two bright-red spots, one on each cheek, and in his eyes traces of what might
have been repressed tears; then he answered, mechanically, "No!" adding, with fervor, "never;"
and a moment after, when he began to recover himself, "If he is an Israelite, never!" And when
at length he was completely recovered--"My first lesson in the synagogue was the Shema; my
next was the saying of the son of Sirach, 'Honor thy father with thy whole soul, and forget
not the sorrows of thy mother.'"

The red spots on Ben-Hur's face deepened.

"The words bring my childhood back again; and, Malluch, they prove you a genuine Jew. I believe
I can trust you."

Ben-Hur let go the arm he was holding, and caught the folds of the gown covering his own breast,
and pressed them close, as if to smother a pain, or a feeling there as sharp as a pain.

