One fine May morning a long time after Hanrahan had left Margaret Rooney's house, he was walking
the road near Collooney, and the sound of the birds singing in the bushes that were white with
blossom set him singing as he went. It was to his own little place he was going, that was no
more than a cabin, but that pleased him well. For he was tired of so many years of wandering
from shelter to shelter at all times of the year, and although he was seldom refused a welcome
and a share of what was in the house, it seemed to him sometimes that his mind was getting
stiff like his joints, and it was not so easy to him as it used to be to make fun and sport
through the night, and to set all the boys laughing with his pleasant talk, and to coax the
women with his songs. And a while ago, he had turned into a cabin that some poor man had left
to go harvesting and had never come to again. And when he had mended the thatch and made a
bed in the corner with a few sacks and bushes, and had swept out the floor, he was well content
to have a little place for himself, where he could go in and out as he liked, and put his head
in his hands through the length of an evening if the fret was on him, and loneliness after
the old times. One by one the neighbours began to send their children in to get some learning
from him, and with what they brought, a few eggs or an oaten cake or a couple of sods of turf,
he made out a way of living. The Journal of Botanical Research.

The pages in the Journal were like a look through an open window. Outside of classified projects
in "harmless" fields of research the work of science went on, papers
were published, reputations were made, freedom still existed. But it was not long till a hare ran across his path, and
made away into the fields, through the loose stones of the wall. And he knew it was no good
sign a hare to have crossed his path, and he remembered the hare that had led him away to Slieve
Echtge the time Mary Lavelle was waiting for him, and how he had never known content for any
length of time since then. 'And it is likely enough they are putting some bad thing before
me now,' he said.

And after he said that he heard the sound of crying in the field beside him, and he looked
over the wall. And there he saw a young girl sitting under a bush of white hawthorn, and crying
as if her heart would break. Her face was hidden in her hands, but her soft hair and her white
neck and the young look of her, put him in mind of Bridget Purcell and Margaret Gillane and
Maeve Connelan and Oona Curry and Celia Driscoll, and the rest of the girls he had made songs
for and had coaxed the heart from with his flattering tongue.

She looked up, and he saw her to be a girl of the neighbours, a farmer's daughter. 'What is
on you, Nora?' he said. 'Nothing you could take from me, Red Hanrahan.' 'If there is any sorrow
on you it is I myself should be well able to serve you,' he said then, 'for it is I know the
history of the Greeks, and I know well what sorrow is and parting, and the hardship of the
world. And if I am not able to save you from trouble,' he said, 'there is many a one I have
saved from it with the power that is in my songs, as it was in the songs of the poets that
were before me from the beginning of the world. And it is with the rest of the poets I myself
will be sitting and talking in some far place beyond the world, to the end of life and time,'
he said. The girl stopped her crying, and she said, 'Owen Hanrahan, I often heard you have
had sorrow and persecution, and that you know all the troubles of the world since the time
you refused your love to the queen-woman in Slieve Echtge; and that she never left you in quiet
since. But when it is people of this earth that have harmed you, it is yourself knows well
the way to put harm on them again. And will you do now what I ask you, Owen Hanrahan?' she
said. 'I will do that indeed,' said he.

'It is my father and my mother and my brothers,' she said, 'that are marrying me to old Paddy
Doe, because he has a farm of a hundred acres under the mountain. And it is what you can do,
Hanrahan,' she said, 'put him into a rhyme the same way you put old Peter Kilmartin in one
the time you were young, that sorrow may be over him rising up and lying down, that will put
him thinking of Collooney churchyard and not of marriage. And let you make no delay about it,
for it is for to-morrow they have the marriage settled, and I would sooner see the sun rise
on the day of my death than on that day.'

'I will put him into a song that will bring shame and sorrow over him; but tell me how many
years has he, for I would put them in the song?'

'O, he has years upon years. He is as old as you yourself, Red Hanrahan.' 'As old as myself,'
said Hanrahan, and his voice was as if broken; 'as old as myself; there are twenty years and
more between us! It is a bad day indeed for Owen Hanrahan when a young girl with the blossom
of May in her cheeks thinks him to be an old man. And my grief!' he said, 'you have put a thorn
in my heart.'

He turned from her then and went down the road till he came to a stone, and he sat down on
it, for it seemed as if all the weight of the years had come on him in the minute. He was scarcely aware
when Gordon slipped a bound journal volume into his hands and walked with him to the door--and
closed it behind him.

* * * * *

Collins left Gordon's office in Administration moving slowly, one arm hanging loosely by his
side, the other clutching the book. The corridor stretched ahead into B Wing with its laboratories
flooded with the glow of mid-morning sunshine, bright and unreal.
His mind was dazed, his thinking processes stopped in a kind of stunned
unbelief. He could not even quit now. An undercurrent of fear ran
close to the surface of his confused mind. It was the end of science,
the end of all his work. And with those thoughts there came on him
a great anger against old age and all it brought with it. And just then he looked up and saw
a great spotted eagle sailing slowly towards Ballygawley, and he cried out: 'You, too, eagle
of Ballygawley, are old, and your wings are full of gaps, and I will put you and your ancient
comrades, the Pike of Dargan Lake and the Yew of the Steep Place of the Strangers into my rhyme,
that there may be a curse on you for ever.'

There was a bush beside him to the left, flowering like the rest, and a little gust of wind
blew the white blossoms over his coat. 'May blossoms,' he said, gathering them up in the hollow
of his hand, 'you never know age because you die away in your beauty, and I will put you into
my rhyme and give you my blessing.'

He rose up then and plucked a little branch from the bush, and carried it in his hand. But
it is old and broken he looked going home that day with the stoop in his shoulders and the
darkness in his face.

When he got to his cabin there was no one there, and he went and lay down on the bed for a
while as he was used to do when he wanted to make a poem or a praise or a curse. And it was
not long he was in making it this time, for the power of the curse-making bards was upon him.
And when he had made it he searched his mind how he could send it out over the whole countryside.

Some of the scholars began coming in then, to see if there would be any school that day, and
Hanrahan rose up and sat on the bench by the hearth, and they all stood around him.

They thought he would bring out the Virgil or the Mass book or the primer, but instead of that
he held up the little branch of hawthorn he had in his hand yet. 'Children,' he said, 'this
is a new lesson I have for you to-day.

'You yourselves and the beautiful people of the world are like this blossom, and old age is
the wind that comes and blows the blossom away. And I have made a curse upon old age and upon
the old men, and listen now while I give it out to you.' And this is what he said--

   The poet, Owen Hanrahan, under a bush of may
   Calls down a curse on his own head because it withers grey;
   Then on the speckled eagle cock of Ballygawley Hill,
   Because it is the oldest thing that knows of cark and ill;
   And on the yew that has been green from the times out of mind
   By the Steep Place of the Strangers and the Gap of the Wind;
   And on the great grey pike that broods in Castle Dargan Lake
   Having in his long body a many a hook and ache;
   Then curses he old Paddy Bruen of the Well of Bride
   Because no hair is on his head and drowsiness inside.
   Then Paddy's neighbour, Peter Hart, and Michael Gill, his friend,
   Because their wandering histories are never at an end.
   And then old Shemus Cullinan, shepherd of the Green Lands
   Because he holds two crutches between his crooked hands;
   Then calls a curse from the dark North upon old Paddy Doe,
   Who plans to lay his withering head upon a breast of snow,
   Who plans to wreck a singing voice and break a merry heart,
   He bids a curse hang over him till breath and body part;
   But he calls down a blessing on the blossom of the may,
   Because it comes in beauty, and in beauty blows away.

He said it over to the children verse by verse till all of them could say a part of it, and
some that were the quickest could say the whole of it.

'That will do for to-day,' he said then. 'And what you have to do now is to go out and sing
that song for a while, to the tune of the Green Bunch of Rushes, to everyone you meet, and
to the old men themselves.'

'I will do that,' said one of the little lads; 'I know old Paddy Doe well. Last Saint John's
Eve we dropped a mouse down his chimney, but this is better than a mouse.'

'I will go into the town of Sligo and sing it in the street,' said another of the boys. 'Do
that,' said Hanrahan, 'and go into the Burrough and tell it to Margaret Rooney and Mary Gillis,
and bid them sing to it, and to make the beggars and the bacachs sing it wherever they go.'
The children ran out then, full of pride and of mischief, calling out the song as they ran,
and Hanrahan knew there was no danger it would not be heard.

He was sitting outside the door the next morning, looking at his scholars as they came by in
twos and threes. They were nearly all come, and he was considering the place of the sun in
the heavens to know whether it was time to begin, when he heard a sound that was like the buzzing
of a swarm of bees in the air, or the rushing of a hidden river in time of flood. Then he saw
a crowd coming up to the cabin from the road, and he took notice that all the crowd was made
up of old men, and that the leaders of it were Paddy Bruen, Michael Gill and Paddy Doe, and
there was not one in the crowd but had in his hand an ash stick or a blackthorn. As soon as
they caught sight of him, the sticks began to wave hither and thither like branches in a storm,
and the old feet to run.

He waited no longer, but made off up the hill behind the cabin till he was out of their sight.

After a while he came back round the hill, where he was hidden by the furze growing along a
ditch. And when he came in sight of his cabin he saw that all the old men had gathered around
it, and one of them was just at that time thrusting a rake with a wisp of lighted straw on
it into the thatch.

'My grief,' he said, 'I have set Old Age and Time and Weariness and Sickness against me, and
I must go wandering again. And, O Blessed Queen of Heaven,' he said, 'protect me from the Eagle
of Ballygawley, the Yew Tree of the Steep Place of the Strangers, the Pike of Castle Dargan
Lake, and from the lighted wisps of their kindred, the Old Men!'

HANRAHAN'S VISION.

It was in the month of June Hanrahan was on the road near Sligo, but
he did not go into the town, but turned towards Beinn Bulben; for
there were thoughts of the old times coming upon him, and he had no
mind to meet with common men.
   For O, the strong farmers
   That would let the spade lie,
   Their hearts would be like a cup
   That somebody had drunk dry.

   Michael will unhook his trumpet
   From a bough overhead,
   And blow a little noise
   When the supper has been spread.
   Gabriel will come from the water
   With a fish tail, and talk
   Of wonders that have happened
   On wet roads where men walk,
   And lift up an old horn
   Of hammered silver, and drink
   Till he has fallen asleep
   Upon the starry brink.

Hanrahan had begun to climb the mountain then, and he gave over singing, for it was a long
climb for him, and every now and again he had to sit down and to rest for a while. And one
time he was resting he took notice of a wild briar bush, with blossoms on it, that was growing
beside a rath, and it brought to mind the wild roses he used to bring to Mary Lavelle, and
to no woman after her.

And at last, at the fall of day, he came to the Steep Gap of the Strangers, and there he laid
himself down along a ridge of rock, and looked into the valley, that was full of grey mist
spreading from mountain to mountain.

And it seemed to him as he looked that the mist changed to shapes of shadowy men and women,
and his heart began to beat with the fear and the joy of the sight. And his hands, that were
always restless, began to pluck off the leaves of the roses on the little branch, and he watched
them as they went floating down into the valley in a little fluttering troop.

Suddenly he heard a faint music, a music that had more laughter in it and more crying than
all the music of this world. And his heart rose when he heard that, and he began to laugh out
loud, for he knew that music was made by some who had a beauty and a greatness beyond the people
of this world. And it seemed to him that the little soft rose leaves as they went fluttering
down into the valley began to change their shape till they looked like a troop of men and women
far off in the mist, with the colour of the roses on them. And then that colour changed to
many colours, and what he saw was a long line of tall beautiful young men, and of queen-women,
that were not going from him but coming towards him and past him, and their faces were full
of tenderness for all their proud looks, and were very pale and worn, as if they were seeking
and ever seeking for high sorrowful things. And shadowy arms were stretched out of the mist
as if to take hold of them, but could not touch them, for the quiet that was about them could
not be broken. "Chain reactions," Collins finished softly, "but--"

"The article itself is well disguised, but it's a parable. It's botany on the surface, but it
gets over enough chain-reaction theory to be good physics, if you read it right. You see botany is
what you might call my code field."

The bright light of noon shimmered on the white buildings and green lawns beyond the lab windows.
Collins was silent and thoughtful.

"Well, that's about all. Gordon knows. He's in with us, but the Government
doesn't suspect--yet. Oh, they may catch on to us. Information may
leak out to the enemy. There's some chance, but when we're caught
we'll think of something else. Most of us believe it's worth the chance.
There's a risk in anything." It rose higher and higher till it was level with the edge of the steep rock,
and then the shapes grew to be solid, and a new procession half lost in mist passed very slowly
with uneven steps, and in the midst of each shadow there was something shining in the starlight.
They came nearer and nearer, and Hanrahan saw that they also were lovers, and that they had
heart-shaped mirrors instead of hearts, and they were looking and ever looking on their own
faces in one another's mirrors. They passed on, sinking downward as they passed, and other
shapes rose in their place, and these did not keep side by side, but followed after one another,
holding out wild beckoning arms, and he saw that those who were followed were women, and as
to their heads they were beyond all beauty, but as to their bodies they were but shadows without
life, and their long hair was moving and trembling about them, as if it lived with some terrible
life of its own. And then the mist rose of a sudden and hid them, and then a light gust of
wind blew them away towards the north-east, and covered Hanrahan at the same time with a white
wing of cloud.

He stood up trembling and was going to turn away from the valley, when he saw two dark and
half-hidden forms standing as if in the air just beyond the rock, and one of them that had
the sorrowful eyes of a beggar said to him in a woman's voice, 'Speak to me, for no one in
this world or any other world has spoken to me for seven hundred years.'

'Tell me who are those that have passed by,' said Hanrahan.

'Those that passed first,' the woman said, 'are the lovers that had the greatest name in the
old times, Blanad and Deirdre and Grania and their dear comrades, and a great many that are
not so well known but are as well loved. And because it was not only the blossom of youth they
were looking for in one another, but the beauty that is as lasting as the night and the stars,
the night and the stars hold them for ever from the warring and the perishing, in spite of
the wars and the bitterness their love brought into the world. And those that came next,' she
said, 'and that still breathe the sweet air and have the mirrors in their hearts, are not put
in songs by the poets, because they sought only to triumph one over the other, and so to prove
their strength and beauty, and out of this they made a kind of love. And as to the women with
shadow-bodies, they desired neither to triumph nor to love but only to be loved, and there
is no blood in their hearts or in their bodies until it flows through them from a kiss, and
their life is but for a moment. All these are unhappy, but I am the unhappiest of all, for
I am Dervadilla, and this is Dermot, and it was our sin brought the Norman into Ireland. And
the curses of all the generations are upon us, and none are punished as we are punished. It
was but the blossom of the man and of the woman we loved in one another, the dying beauty of
the dust and not the everlasting beauty. When we died there was no lasting unbreakable quiet
about us, and the bitterness of the battles we brought into Ireland turned to our own punishment.
We go wandering together for ever, but Dermot that was my lover sees me always as a body that
has been a long time in the ground, and I know that is the way he sees me. Ask me more, ask
me more, for all the years have left their wisdom in my heart, and no one has listened to me
for seven hundred years.'

A great terror had fallen upon Hanrahan, and lifting his arms above his head he screamed out
loud three times, and the cattle in the valley lifted their heads and lowed, and the birds
in the wood at the edge of the mountain awaked out of their sleep and fluttered through the
trembling leaves. But a little below the edge of the rock, the troop of rose leaves still fluttered
in the air, for the gateway of Eternity had opened and shut again in one beat of the heart.

THE DEATH OF HANRAHAN.

