It seems at first sight strange that the Independents should have been "gay," and, even with
a reserve, frolicsome, for they were originally the soldiers of Cromwell's "New Model," "honest
and religious men." But Wood describes them as he knew them many years after Naseby and Marston
Moor, when their character had changed with changing circumstances. Triumphant success seldom
improves the morale of any party. Oxford proved a Capua to the Independents who lived in it
after the strain of war was over: the very principle of Independency, liberty of opinion and
action given to every Christian congregation, came to be applied to the life of the individual:
freedom to reject any doctrine or practice which you do not like naturally ends in much gaiety
and frolicsomeness, especially if your lines are cast in pleasant places: it becomes difficult
not to slide into practical Antinomianism. What a place to live in for eleven years! yet Wilkins
did so with success and general applause. He was inclined by temperament to the freedom of
mellowed Independency rather than to the stiffness of the Presbyterians, who more successfully
than their rivals resisted the enervating influences of life in Oxford. Circumstances as well
as inclination led him to become an Independent: his marriage with Cromwell's sister, and the
appointment to be one of the Commissioners to execute the office of Chancellor, perhaps also
his appointment to the Wardenship, all tended to draw him to the side of Ireton and the Protector.
Of the latter he saw much, and was consulted by him on academical and ecclesiastical affairs.
Lord Morley thinks that "the second imputation must be apocryphal." That is by no means clear:
Cromwell may have said what Wilkins probably did not invent, meaning that he thought Episcopacy
good enough for England, for Englishmen were incapable of any better constitution; or he may
have modified his judgment of Episcopacy,--who knows all that Cromwell came to think in his
latter days, a time when most men revise their opinions? He may have felt the disenchantment
which awaits success.

Wilkins' marked success, both in his College and in his University, can be explained only by
the fact that he possessed the qualities necessary for the work he had to do,--strong common-sense,
moderation, and geniality. He had to live, as the most prominent man, in a society composed
of three factions crowded together within the narrow limits of a University town, which even
in quiet times is not always the abode of peace. He had to deal with the most burning questions,
religious and political, which divide communities: questions which had been stifled for a time
by force, and therefore, when force was removed or slackened, came back into vigorous life,
and were constantly and bitterly discussed. But he was the man for the time and the place.

His College flourished under his wise and kindly rule. Dr Pope tells us that "many country
gentlemen, of all persuasions, but especially those then called Cavaliers and Malignants for
adhering to the King and to the Church, sent their sons to his College to be under his government.
The affluence of gentlemen was so great that I may fairly say of Wadham College that it was
never before in so flourishing a condition." The "affluence of gentlemen" of all sorts, Fellow
Commoners, Commoners, Servitors, and migrants from Cambridge, was, in 1649, fifteen; in 1650,
fifty-one; in 1651, twenty-four; in 1652, forty. In the ten complete years of Wilkins' Wardenship
the average of admissions was thirty. The large admission made in 1650 was due to the reputation
of Wilkins as an able and tolerant College Head, as well as to the belief that the tumult of
war had died away. Men's thoughts were turning to civil affairs and the ordinary business of
life, especially to education, the preparation for it.

In the registers of the period between 1648 and 1659, are found many names either of distinction
in themselves, or of interest as showing that the connection of Wadham with the western counties
was well maintained. Walter Pope, who has been already mentioned, was appointed Scholar by
the Visitors in 1648, perhaps on the suggestion of the new Warden, his half-brother. He filled
many offices in the College, was one of the original Fellows of the Royal Society, and became
Professor of Astronomy in Gresham College. He deserves to be remembered as the author of a
quaint and interesting little book, in which he gives a brief account of Wilkins, Lawrence
Rooke, and Isaac Barrow, as well as a complete life of Seth Ward, Bishop of Salisbury. It is
full of digressions on the manners and customs of the time, written with much humour, and is
worthy of a humble place beside the diaries of Evelyn and Pepys.

Seth Ward was a Scholar of Sidney Sussex, ejected from his College and from Cambridge because
"he refused the Covenant and other oaths." He went to London, and, like Wren and Wallis, studied
mathematics under William Oughtred, the author of the 'Clavis Mathematica,'--"a little book,
but a great one as to the contents,"--which brought its author a great name, as well it might.
When in London Ward met Wilkins and formed a lifelong friendship with him. They were both men
of learning, moderate, dexterous, and successful. Ward entered Wadham as a Fellow Commoner
in October 1649, became Savilian Professor of Astronomy, and in 1659 President of Trinity.
Like Wilkins, he was ejected from his Headship at the Restoration, and like him obtained high
preferment under the new régime and became a Bishop. Both of them, when in Oxford, "became
liable to the persecutions of peevish people who ceased not to clamour, and even to article
against them as Cavaliers in their hearts--meer moral men without the Power of Godliness."
"You must know," continues Pope, "that a moral and unblamable person, if he did not herd with
them, was an abomination to that Party. I have heard one of them deliver himself in this manner."
The "manner" is impossible to quote; it is to the effect that the speaker's opponents were
hypocrites and Pharisees of the worst kind, and "in a desperate condition, on whom Jesus Christ
can take no hold." The passage is instructive; it reveals the exasperation of party feeling
in those times, and gives much food for reflection.

Christopher Wren belongs both to Wadham and to All Souls. He was admitted Fellow Commoner of
Wadham in 1649, and migrated to All Souls in 1653, but maintained his connection with his first
College, and for several years occupied the chamber over the gateway. Of him, the close friend
of Wilkins, the scientist and architect, the President of the Royal Society, nothing more need
here be said. His portrait hangs in Wadham College Hall, beneath that of Robert Blake.

Less known is Thomas Sprat, admitted Scholar of Wadham in 1651. Of him Wood says that he was
"an excellent poet and orator, and one who arrived at a great mastery of the English language."
His reputation does not rest on his poetry: he was known by the strange and dubious title of
"Pindarick Sprat." Sprat became Bishop of Rochester and Chaplain to Charles II., though in
his youth he had written an Ode on the death of Oliver Cromwell.

Lawrence Rooke was admitted in 1650 from King's College, Cambridge. He accompanied Ward in
his migration to Oxford, "and seated himself in Wadham College for the benefit of his conversation."
Pope "never was acquainted with any person who knew more and spoke less." He was a prominent
member of the band of philosophers who met in Wilkins' Lodgings; and after the Restoration
held the Professorship of Astronomy in Gresham College, and was a Fellow of the Royal Society.
Pope's account of him is well worth reading: of his travels in France; of his encounter with
the redoubtable Thomas Hobbes, whose quadrature of the circle he proved false: that hard-headed
philosopher's logic or "computation" must have failed him on this occasion, for finding, as
he thought, errors in Rooke's criticism, he concluded that his own solution must be true. With
Ward and Wallis Hobbes had still more fierce encounters on the same question.

Gilbert Ironside, admitted in 1650, became Warden, Vice-Chancellor of the University, and,
as his father had been, Bishop of Bristol, and finally of Hereford. He was the "rudest man
in the University," and that without respect of persons, for he remonstrated, in a tone not
far removed from rudeness, with James II. when he visited Oxford in 1687 to enforce his mandate
on Magdalen College.

William Lloyd, who entered Wadham in 1655, was a learned Divine, with his learning at command,
of whom Burnet says that "he had the most learning in ready cash of any one he knew." He devoted
himself to the interpretation of prophecy. His labours were rewarded by the title of Pseudopropheta
Canus, bestowed on him when he was old and white-haired, by the terræ filius of 1703. He had
himself in his younger days shown some tendency to irreverent joking, by inventing an Eastern
Patriarch, a native of London, a man of venerable appearance and dressed to suit the character,
who deceived some eminent members of the University, and gave them his blessing; an incident
of which Lloyd used to make his "bragge" long afterwards. He became Bishop of St Asaph, and
was one of the Seven Bishops committed to the Tower. William III. rewarded him with the Bishoprics
of Lichfield and Coventry, and finally of Worcester.

Samuel Parker matriculated in 1657, and became Bishop of Oxford in 1686. In the following year
he was intruded by James II. into the President's place at Magdalen College, but held his office
for only five months. He died in his Lodgings, and was buried in the ante-chapel, but honoured
by no memorial to mark the place of his interment. His must have been a dismal reign.

Beside these names of bishops and philosophers occur names of interest of various kinds: historic
names--Russell, Lovelace, Windham, Strangways; one also of quite different associations, Sedley,
who entered Wadham in 1656, the boon companion later of Rochester, who, also a Wadham undergraduate,
was his junior by four years. Both of them were libertines and wits, who received at their
College, it may be presumed, an education the precepts of which they did not practise at the
Court of Charles II. Other entries show the continued connection of the College with the West
of England--with Somerset, the Wadhams' county; with Devon, Dorset, Hampshire, and Gloucestershire.

Enough has been said to prove that Wadham under Wilkins was a college of high reputation and
efficiency. It was a nursery of bishops, contributing to the bench no less than six, including
Wilkins himself; a nursery also of Fellows of the Royal Society,--Wilkins, Ward, Rooke, Wren,
Sprat, and Pope were original members of the "invisible college." Not only to the Church and
to Science did Wadham do good service, but more directly to the State, by educating together
impartially the youth of both the great parties. "When the hurly-burly's done, when the battle's
lost and won," it is above all things desirable to allay bitter feelings, and bring the former
combatants together. For this most difficult and delicate of tasks Wilkins was well qualified.
He was beloved by the Cavaliers because he treated all his undergraduates kindly, Royalists
and Puritans alike, in marked contrast with other Heads of Houses, who appear to have dealt
faithfully with young Malignants, the sons of their political opponents.

That Wilkins possessed great administrative abilities and vigour is shown by his work in the
University and in his College. He had seen much of the world, and was in the prime of life,
and already a man of eminence--a combination of qualities as rare in Heads of Houses as in
Cabinet Ministers. He persuaded the Visitors that Wadham and Trinity were fitted, specially
and immediately, in 1651 for freedom to elect their Fellows--a privilege of which all the Colleges
had been deprived in 1648. The administration of the College estates and finances was carefully
revised, and the Statutes were amended. Wilkins' life was varied and full of activities outside
as well as within his College. He was selected to deal with problems more difficult and pressing
than Compulsory Pass Greek, or degrees for women. Was Oxford to be dismantled? Its security
had been threatened by a rising of the "Levellers"; and in 1649 Wilkins, along with the Proctor
and a Canon of Christ Church, was appointed to confer with the mayor and the citizens on this
important question, not then decided.

Two years later he served on a Commission appointed to consider how to suppress troubles caused
by sturdy beggars, "poore soldiers, cashiered or maimed, and Irish people with petitions, that
pretended to be undon by the late rebellion there,"--the miserable sequel of the civil war.
He helped in the revision of the College and University Statutes, and on the nomination of
Cromwell was made one of the Commissioners for executing the office of Chancellor, proving
himself a man of affairs as well as of learning. For ten years, as critical as any in the history
of Oxford, he took a leading part in its academical and municipal administration.

Yet he found time to avail himself of the privilege to marry given to the Warden of Wadham:
it was accorded to him by a dispensation of the Visitors, who doubtless thought that enforced
celibacy savoured of Popery. The privilege was withdrawn after the Restoration, as being a
concession made by Puritans, whose views on the marriage of the clergy were not the views of
the High Church party. Leave to marry was given to all Wardens of Wadham by a special Act of
Parliament in 1806, and not, as the College story goes, by a clause tacked on to a Canal or
Turnpike Bill.

Pope's account of Wilkins' marriage is a strange solution of an always interesting question,
and not altogether complimentary to the lady of his choice. "Dr Ward," he says, "rid out of
this storm,"--the storm of obloquy which broke out on him and Wilkins as being "mere moral
men." Wilkins "put into the port of matrimony," apparently as a harbour of refuge in distress.
He married Robina, the Protector's sister, widow of Dr Peter French, Canon of Christ Church.
Her first husband was "a pious, humble, and learned person, and an excellent preacher," the
best, in Pope's opinion, of the censorious party. Ward did not imitate his friend, though,
if we believe Pope, he had many opportunities for doing so. "He was never destitute of friends
of the Fair Sex, never without proffers of Wives," which became increasingly frequent as he
rose in the world. Pope professes to have known "several persons of great quality and estates
who found ways to make it known to Ward, that if he would address himself to them in the honourable
way of marriage, he should not want a kind entertainment." But he, then Bishop of Salisbury,
had before his eyes the fate of one of his predecessors who married after he became a bishop,
and "upon that had received so severe a reprimand from his brother, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and laid it so much to heart that it accelerated his death." This story may be apocryphal;
it is certainly startling. Do ladies of quality still give such hints to bishops? Do bishops
die of a rebuke from the archbishop of their province?

