"Two persons appear to have been told, as their services were required, both of whom have been
examined before you--the servant girl and Mr. Frederick Brown. The former has sworn that she
mentioned it to no one, and there is no reason to disbelieve her. The latter proved himself
not so trustworthy. It seems that with that foolish flippancy which distinguishes him he told
his friend's secret to other friends of his as a good joke. But you must remember that Mr.
Brown's friends were not the prisoner's friends--that they rather were in such different circles,
that what was said in one, would be very little likely to find its way into the other; and
above all, that those to whom Mr. Brown or his friends communicated it, would think that the
brother was the last person who should be told of it. Again, had the prisoner known the projected
elopement, and intended to make use of it for the perpetration of a preconcerted murder, would
he--could he have acted as he did? Could he have waited for such an unexpected accident as
his sister's fainting before he drew near to his victim. His sister had walked down the avenue,
and after waiting some time in the road, returned and sat down upon a fallen tree; it was whilst
so seated that she heard the brother open the hall-door; had she, as she expected, met her
lover at the hour appointed, they would have been far beyond the prisoner's reach before he
had left the house;--would he have allowed this to be the case, had it been his intention to
take advantage of the opportunity? It is absurd to argue on such a point. It is unnecessary
almost to call your attention to things which must so manifestly present themselves to you.
The whole of this case has received additional weight and importance from official authority.
It has been considered worthy of especial government interference. My learned friend has come
express from the metropolis for the purpose of conducting it;--a rumour has been spread abroad
that most conclusive evidence would be produced to prove that a prisoner from the better orders
of society had joined, and headed one of those illegal bodies of men whose existence is supposed
to be the cause of the troubles of this distracted country; and that he had, in unison with
these schemes, committed a foul and deliberate murder; and my learned friend has not hesitated
to tell you that it is essentially necessary to use the utmost extent of legal severity, that
an end may be put to the agrarian outrages which are now becoming so frightfully prevalent
in the country. Has anything been proved to warrant this official zeal--this government interference?
No, nothing; not one iota; but still these paraphernalia of office, this more than ordinary
anxiety to obtain a verdict, may have an effect upon your minds most prejudicial to my client.
I have no doubt as to your actual verdict. I have no doubt that you will--nay, I know that
you must--acquit that young man of murder. But I beseech you to remember that, though in the
indictment he has been charged with murder only, he has been by the servant of government,
by my learned friend on the other side, accused of other grievous crimes; and I implore you
by your verdict, to purge his character of the stain which has been so unjustly attached to
it, if you find, on examination of the evidence, no cause to suppose that he had been a participator
in the councils of such societies. I beseech you to do him that justice, which can now only
be done by the strong expression of your unanimous assurance of absolute innocence. I beseech
you to reject from your minds those pre-conceived opinions so injurious to the prisoner, with
which the present unfortunate state of your country may so naturally have influenced you, and
to remember that it is your duty, as jurors, to confine yourself to the individual case before
you; and that the doctrine laid down by my learned friend, that you should make an example
in one case for the sake of prevention of crimes in others, is most unconstitutional, and would
imply, that whilst the solemn oath you have taken is still vibrating in your ears, your object
should be far wide from that for which you have been assembled--that of making a fair and true
trial between your sovereign and the prisoner. I shall now call a few witnesses, and then leave
the case, with confidence, in your hands."

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE LAST WITNESS.

When Mr. O'Malley had finished his address to the jury, it was past seven o'clock, and the
judge suggested that as it would be evidently impracticable to finish the case that night,
so as to release the jury, they might as well at this point adjourn it till the morrow. To
this Mr. Allewinde readily assented; but Mr. O'Malley declared that though he was most unwilling
to detain his lordship and the court at that late hour, he must request permission to be allowed
to examine one of his witnesses, as otherwise his caution in having had him ordered out of
court, would have been in vain. It was most essential, he said, that his examination of Mr.
Keegan should take place before that man could have an opportunity of conversing with his servant,
Brady; whereupon the judge consented to hearing Keegan's evidence that evening, and forthwith
the name of Hyacinth Keegan was called out in a loud voice by the crier, and was repeated by
every policeman in court, till a stranger to the proceedings would have thought that Hyacinth
Keegan's society was the one thing desirable in Carrick-on-Shannon.

It would be drawing this trial out to a weary length to give the whole of his evidence; but
Mr. O'Malley's questions were such as the attorney found it almost impossible to answer. He
was asked in the first place whether he at present received the rents from Ballycloran, and
then whether he received them on his own behalf; the latter he denied, but when told that if
he denied the fact Mr. Flannelly would be brought forward to prove it, he at last owned that
Mr. Flannelly had promised to make over that property to him; he then denied that any conversation
had passed between him and Brady as to the nature of the evidence the latter was to give at
the trial, or that he had expressed any anxiety on any occasion that a verdict might be given
against the prisoner; he confessed that he might, in conversation, have attributed the loss
of his foot to the influence of the prisoner; but he could not remember that he had ever said
that Macdermot should pay for it with his life. In answering the different questions put to
him, he hesitated and blundered so much--stammered so often, and spoke so low, that every one
in court was convinced that he was perjuring himself; but still he persisted in denying everything.
The only good effect Mr. O'Malley could get from his evidence was, that the master frequently
contradicted what had been said by the servant. But then Brady had shown so much confidence
and self-assurance in his replies, and Keegan so much hesitation and confusion, that it was
much more probable that the jury would believe the former, than the latter; and if so, Keegan's
contradicting the statements made by Brady, would not serve to invalidate the material evidence
given by that man.

When Mr. Keegan came down from the chair, the court broke up for the night, and the jury were
informed that the sheriff would afford them all the accommodation in his power;--and with long
faces they were marched away to durance vile.

The court, which, during the trial, had been so densely crowded, again became desolate and
silent. Baron Hamilton, with his brother Kilpatrick, retired to their dinner, which they had
well earned; and the coffee-rooms at the hotels again became crammed with hungry guests, clamorous
for food; and the evening was passed in speculations as to what would be the verdict in the
case to which they had all been listening.

In the barristers' mess-room all the feuds of the day were forgotten, and a most jovial party
was assembled. As each bottle of claret succeeded the other, fresh anecdotes were told, and
innumerable puns were made. Mr. Allewinde was quite great; his forensic dignity was all laid
aside, and he chatted to the juniors with most condescending familiarity.

Mr. O'Laugher became the originator of incessant peals of laughter; all that had taken place
during the day he turned into food for merriment; not for one moment did he hold his tongue,
nor once did he say a foolish thing. He was the pet of the barroom. The Connaught bar was famous
for Mr. O'Laugher; and they knew it, and were proud of him.

Of all of them assembled there but one seemed to have any memory of the sadness of the scene
that they had that day witnessed. How should they? Or rather how miserable would be a barrister's
life, were he to be affected by the misery which he is so constantly obliged to witness in
a criminal court. On this occasion, however, the anxiety which Mr. O'Malley had expressed when
addressing the jury had not been feigned, and the doubt which he felt as to the fate of his
client lay heavy on him. He was aware that he had failed in shaking Brady's testimony, and
he feared that in spite of all he had done to prove the depravity of that man's character,
the jury would be too much inclined to believe him.

It had been decided that Feemy was not to be brought into Carrick from Drumsna till such time
as Mr. O'Malley sent out word that she would be required; and when he found how late it was
before he began his speech, he had told Father John in court that she would not be wanted on
that day. She had, therefore, been left tranquilly at Mrs. McKeon's, who had fetched her to
her own house from Ballycloran on the morning of the trial.

When Larry Macdermot saw the car at the door, in which Feemy was to go away, he was dreadfully
wrath. He first of all declared that his daughter should not be taken away to Mr. Keegan's--that
his own son had deserted him and tried to sell the estate, and that now they meant to rob him
of his daughter! And he wept like a child, when he was told that unless she went of her own
accord, the house would be broken open, and she would be taken away by force. It was in vain
that Mary McGovery endeavoured to make him understand that Feemy's presence was necessary in
Carrick, and that she had to appear as a witness at her brother's trial.

Whenever Thady's trial was spoken of;--and Mary, by continually recurring to the subject, had
made the old man at last comprehend that his son was to be tried;--but whenever it was spoken
of now, he merely expressed his approbation, and a wish that Thady might be punished, for making
friends with such a reptile as Keegan--for deserting his father, and planning to cheat him
out of his house and his property. Mary took great pains to set him right, and bellowed into
his ear as if he were deaf instead of stupid, twenty times a day, that Thady was to be tried
for Ussher's death; but Larry couldn't be got to remember that Ussher was dead, and would continually
ask his daughter when her lover was coming back to live with them, and defend them and the
property against the machinations of Keegan and her brother.

All the Thursday Feemy remained at Drumsna, every moment expecting that she would be immediately
called in to go to Carrick. She sat the whole day in the drawing-room, close by the fire, with
her friend's cloak around her, without speaking to any one. The girls had come and spoken kindly
to her when she first arrived; but their mother had told them that they had better not attempt
to converse with her. Mrs. McKeon herself sat with her the whole day, and spoke to her a gentle
word now and again; but she purposely abstained from troubling her, and she made no allusion
whatever to the subject on which she had thought so much, and on which her own suspicions had
been corroborated by Mary's information. Necessary as it was that the poor girl should tell
some one, this was not the time to press her.

There sat Feemy. Ah! how different from the girl described in the opening of this tale. Her
cheek was pale and wan, and the flesh had gone, and the yellow skin fell in from her cheekbone
to her mouth, giving her almost a ghastly appearance; her eyes appeared larger than ever, but
they were quenched with weeping, and dull with grief; her hair was drawn back carelessly behind
her ears, and her lips were thin and bloodless. Two or three times during the day Mrs. McKeon
had given her half a glass of wine, which she had drank on being told to do so, and she had
once tried to eat a bit of bread. But she had soon put it down again, for it seemed to choke her.

About five o'clock Mrs. McKeon learnt that Feemy would not be called for that day, and the
poor girl was then induced to go to bed; but nothing could persuade her to allow any one to
assist her. It was wonderful how she could have undressed herself, and dressed herself the
next morning, she seemed so weak and powerless!

Tony and Father John got home to dinner about eight. They were both in good spirits, for Mr.
O'Malley's speech had been so convincing to them, that they conceived it could not but be equally
so to the jury. They forgot that they had previously assured themselves of Thady's evidence,
and that therefore they were prepared to believe every word said on his behalf; but that this
would by no means be the case with the jury. They were very sanguine, and Tony insisted that
Counsellor O'Malley's health should be drunk with all the honours.

On the morning they went early into town; they had obtained from the clerk of the peace permission
to make use of a small room within the court, and here Feemy and Mrs. McKeon were to remain
undisturbed till the former was called for; then that lady was to bring her into court, and
even undertook to go upon the table with her, and repeat to the jury, if she would be allowed
to do so, the evidence, which they were all sure Feemy herself would not be able to give in
a voice loud enough to be heard by any one. When the car stopped at the court-house in Carrick-on-Shannon,
it was found absolutely necessary to carry her into the room, for she had apparently lost all
power of action. She neither cried nor sobbed now; but gazed listlessly before her, with her
eyes fixed upon vacancy, as the two strong men lifted her from the car, and supported her between
them by her arms up the steps into the court-house.

"This will never do," said Tony to his friend after leaving her in the room; "this will never
do; she'll never be able to say a word on the table; it's only cruelty, Father John, bringing
her here."

"But O'Malley says she must come," said Father John; "he says, if she can take the oath, and
speak but three or four words to Mrs. McKeon, that will do."

"She'll never do it; she'll never be able to take the oath; she'll have to be carried on the
table, and when there, she'll faint. Poor Thady! if he's acquitted, the first thing he'll have
to learn will be her disgrace. You must tell him of that, Father John; no one else can."

"Poor fellow; it will be worse to him than all. But she brought him to this, and she must save
him if she can."

"I tell you," said Tony, "she'll never speak a word upon that table; we'd better tell O'Malley
at once; 't would be only cruelty to put her there."

They both accordingly went to O'Malley, who was now in court, and told him that they thought
Feemy Macdermot could not be safely brought there. He, however, still declared that it was
imperative for her brother's safety that she should appear, even if it were utterly impossible
to get her to speak; and that as she had been the person in fault, and has he had had all the
suffering, the cruelty would be to him, if she were not brought forward.

Father John returned to the private room, and tried to make her speak. He kneeled down before
her, and again began explaining to her the purpose for which she was there, and implored her
to exert herself to save her brother. She once or twice opened her mouth, as if speaking, but
uttered no sound. She understood, however, what the priest said to her, for she gently pressed
his hand when he took hold of hers, and nodded her head to him, when he begged her to exert
herself.

In the meantime Mr. O'Malley was continuing the examination of his witnesses. The first who
appeared on this the second morning of the trial was Corney Dolan, who unfortunately came prepared
to swear anything which he thought might benefit the prisoner. He said he remembered the evening
of the wedding, he remembered the conversation at which the prisoner had been present, that
he was quite sure Ussher's name wasn't mentioned--or at any rate that if mentioned, it was
not accompanied by any threat--that, the only plan of violence alluded to during the evening
was that one or two of the boys said that they would duck Keegan in a bog hole if he came to
receive rents at Ballycloran.

This was all very well, as long as the questions were put to him by Mr. O'Malley; but he was
forced to tell a somewhat different tale when examined by Mr. Allewinde, by whom he was made
to own that there had been projects abroad for murdering Ussher, though he still maintained
that none of them had been alluded to by the party at Mrs. Mehan's. He was also made to give
himself so bad a character that it was more than probable that the jury would not believe a
word he had said.

Father John was the next; he was only called on to prove that Thady had been intoxicated when
he left the party at Mrs. Mehan's, and to speak as to character. With tears in his eyes he
corroborated all that the barrister had said in his speech in praise of his poor young friend;
he described him as honest, industrious, and manly--patient under his own wrongs, but unable
to endure quietly those inflicted on his family.

Tony McKeon was the next, and with the exception of Feemy, the last; and he too had only to
speak as to character.

Just as Father John had been getting into the chair, a policeman had come into court and whispered
to Doctor Blake, who was sitting in one of the lower benches; and the Doctor immediately got
up from his seat and went away with the man.

Father John had not observed the occurrence; but when he was leaving the table, and as Tony
was getting up, the latter whispered to him, "Blake has been called out. Just look to Feemy."

And at the same moment Mr. O'Malley said out aloud:

"Mr. Magrath, if I might trouble you so far, would you have the kindness to bring Miss Macdermot
into court? I do not anticipate that we shall have much delay with Mr. McKeon's evidence."

Father John immediately hurried into the room, where Mrs. McKeon had been left with her charge;
and his heart trembled within him as he remembered the death-like look the poor girl had when
he left her but an hour since, and reflected that it was too probably to her aid that Doctor
Blake had been called.

