INTRODUCTION

In the first decade of the present century Persia was for a short time the pivot of the Oriental
interest of English and Indian statesmen. But little known and scarcely visited during the
preceding century, it suddenly and simultaneously focussed the ambitions of Russia, the apprehensions
of Great Britain, the Asiatic schemes of France. The envoys of great Powers flocked to its
court, and vied with each other in the magnificence of the display and the prodigality of the
gifts with which they sought to attract the superb graces of its sovereign, Fath Ali Shah.
Among these supplicants for the Persian alliance, then appraised at much beyond its real value,
the most assiduous and also the most profuse were the British, agitated at one moment by the
prospect of an Afghan invasion of India, at another by the fear of an overland march against
Delhi of the combined armies of Napoleon and the Tsar. These apprehensions were equally illusory;
but while they lasted they supplied the excuse for a constant stream of embassies, some from
the British sovereign, others from the viceregal court at Calcutta, and were reproduced in
a bewildering succession of Anglo-Persian Treaties. Sir John Malcolm, Sir Harford Jones, Sir
Gore Ouseley, and Sir Henry Ellis were the plenipotentiaries who negotiated these several instruments;
and the principal coadjutor of the last three diplomats was James Justinian Morier, the author
of “Hajji Baba.”

Born and nurtured in an Oriental atmosphere (though educated at Harrow), he was one of three
out of four sons, whom their father, himself British Consul at Constantinople, dedicated to
the Diplomatic or Consular service in Eastern Europe or in Asia. His Persian experience began
when at the age of twenty-eight he accompanied Sir Harford Jones as private secretary, in 1808-1809,
on that mission from the British Court direct which excited the bitter jealousy and provoked
the undignified recriminations of the Indian Government. After the Treaty had been concluded,
James Morier returned to England, being accompanied by the Persian envoy to the Court of St.
James, who figures in this narrative as Mirza Firouz, and whose droll experiences in this country
he subsequently related in the volume entitled “Hajji Baba in England.” While at home, Morier
wrote the first of the two works upon Persia, and his journeys and experiences in and about
that country, which, together with the writings of Sir John Malcolm, and the later publications
of Sir W. Ouseley, Sir R. Ker Porter, and J. Baillie Frazer, familiarised the cultivated Englishman
of the first quarter of this century with Persian history and habits to a degree far beyond
that enjoyed by the corresponding Englishman of the present day. 

After crossing near Cologne a fertile plain, littered with factories and country houses, the
penetrating via Königsdorf tunnel, under a ridge of hills hilly particular basin separating the
Rhine from its tributary, the Erft, short plain beautiful of Horrem, whose rich vegetation watered
by the waters of that stream, and whose horizons are highlighted many castles of the nobles of the
country, and then strikes in Düren, industrial city of more 8,000 inhabitants, noted for its
cloth and paper mills, but grace in its contours or set.

Soon the train saves the small Roer River, a tributary of the Meuse, and the traveler can admire
although the speed of a succession of views Cosmorama, the graceful landscapes more was developed
in this picturesque region of the basin of the Meuse. The tunnels are repeated presents the most
undulating terrain in all directions, are often Mining and coke in activity, which increase the
interest and variety of landscapes, and after two hour journey, the train stops at the quaint
and historic Aquisgram hundred times (or Aix-la-Chapelle), Charlemagne's favorite city, a time the second
capital of the vast empire of the West founded by the extraordinary monarch of feudalism.

Aquisgram name (in German Aachen) has been so famous in the history of feudal as in diplomacy, and
even the memory of the most important facts is almost vulgar in Europe, it will be useful to
recall certain events, as they and two or three monuments are, with mineral water, very popular,
all Aquisgram interest. Aquensis was in the Roman Civitas, which some antiquaries or historians,
was born the unforgettable Charlemagne was the most beloved resident, the legend for reasons
explained and died there in 814, the great founder of a continental empire, heir to the Caesars by
right of conquest, hero and legislator at the same time, the organizer of the great feudal,
and author of the famous pact with the papacy that linking the Church and the State for the link
of interest, made the popes kings - a monarchy of the Church - the religion of despotism - of real
authority a divine right, and condemns humanity to a fight of about eleven centuries is now nearing completion,
thanks to the solution prepared by the Italian revolution.

If at the time of feudalism and Aquisgram Germanic Empire was the city's consecration emperors, and had
such high rank as a city-free imperial synod meeting place and subsistence, in modern times has been
too diplomatic conferences have had considerable influence on changes to the European public law.
Suffice it to recall there was signed the famous 1668 peace on the race of Louis XIV with Spain,
for of the Low Countries, as well as peace even more famous, which ended in 1748, to war the succession
of Austria. Aquisgram was also in the signing of the treaty of 1818, important for various reasons
for European policy.

       * * * * *

Aquisgram, thanks to the progress of their active manufacturing, primarily of cloth, machines
and pins, has been very healthy changes in its structure, which have made almost entirely
lost its former glory. Today only the beautiful Cathedral, the Palace municipal and one or
two more monuments and some streets and building houses old, remember what was Aquisgram. The city
is transformed so that it seems scarcely, partly under construction. Its two parts, ancient and
modern, united, having missing walls that separated them, the second is absorbed at the first
with beautiful, wide streets, bordered by elegant plant buildings, and everywhere note the
activity of industry and commerce. For the rest, the city, located on land graceful undulating and
surrounded by hills, is whole picturesque, and the influence of passengers seeking the healing waters
that abound Aquisgram increases local interest during the summer months.

The most interesting monument there, under the historical point of view, is the City Palace, very
curious about his old Gothic facade and its circular tower, which was part the former imperial
palace, and notably within the magnificent frescoes of great salon, antiques it contains and
evokes memories for events memorable, to which I referred.

But under the artistic point of view of preference Cathedral called attention, being, in some
parts, one of the most beautiful in Germany, but unfortunately surrounded buildings that hide
in the bottom and make you lose your perspective on one side. If I possessed the knowledge and
artistic criteria necessary to judge rightly the value of ancient monuments, HOWEVER I refrain
to the description of Aquisgram chapel or cathedral, and because I will not bother the reader
with descriptions of this species, and because in fact the monument to which I refer is so
complicated in its texture and so contradictory in detail does not lend itself to any general
appreciation. I have not ever seen a cathedral as multiple forms, differing and irregular like Aquisgram,
in which contrast and clash all the more different styles, from Roman and Byzantine to the rococo
the time of Louis XV, it also has, as seen in the nave principal and the two oldest chapels, all
the beauties of Gothic art, as was in the fifteenth century, overloaded with admirable reliefs
and sculptures. Aquisgram Cathedral is therefore a mass of buildings on antagonism and displacement
evident absurdity, whose merit appears only dealing separately with its oldest parts, such
as the Byzantine rotunda and the nave and Gothic chapels.

The interior of this curious monument is full of very precious relics,
some of its value and merit as jewelry or works of art, others for
their historical significance, and the most notable by their relationship
(real or supposed) to the life of Jesus Christ.

Thus, one can say that Names of Jesus and Charlemagne summarized here the most venerable traditions.
To penetrate beneath those arches and outright seeing the traveler at every step any evocation
of the great emperor Europe, now in his modest grave, twice desecrated by his successors, now
in the many Justinian served the furniture of feudalism.

Everything is funny, interesting to chronicle more or less degree, but impressive little child's
mind the New World, educated at the still turbulent democracy, can
not look with interest these relics of the ancient rulers of Europe,
great figures of a civilization buried forever.

What it does stop the stares every traveler has nourished his soul with the comforting maxims
of Christianity, is the set of relics, richly preserved in admirable polls, belonging, say,
the founder of this noble religion itself. I do not know how much faith deserves historical authenticity
of these relics that chronicle account of Charlemagne came to power, one of the hands of Ivan,
patriarch of Jerusalem, and others (in 799 and 806) of the patriarch John and Aaroun-al-Raschid.
Be that as it may, the fact is that these relics are preserved with great reverence, and these
include: Jesus diapers, hair of the Virgin Mary, the sheet on which John the Baptist was beheaded,
many fragments of those objects were used to the agony of Golgotha, and to the blood of a
saint and the prodigious oil (say sacred scholars) emerged from the tomb of Santa Catarina, buried
by angels on Mount Sinai.

Of all these relics, some (membrane serve Jesus, the Virgin and San Juan) up a kind of aristocracy,
who can only see the eyes of crowned heads, or that are not displayed only every seven years.
The silk fabrics that are involved these objects are tiny fragments distributed to those who
are fortunate enough to attend a timely manner; and happen to be
talismans of great benefit (?).

I suspect that this distribution must be very productive, judging by the considerable income
that the mere sight of these relics tries to the cathedral. In Europe, where there is speculation
all the kings and princes paid toll on their palaces and museums, including the bishops and
canons at the cathedral doors. And do not miss the last his reason of logic, as if to enter heaven
must pay the passport on the ground, with equal reason be paid to the igleslas entry.

Tolerant as I am for all religious beliefs, provided they are harmless respect the reverence
that the vulgar displays of sacred relics. But I confess that Aachen Cathedral visit could not help
but make some bitter reflections. Would ask sadly, to see the holy relics: "The Roman Catholic
clergy has always great care to keep intact many objects can appear
as symbols of Christianity while almost completely forgotten, since
the V century, the substance, spirit, meekness and selflessness of
this glorious religion.

The symbol has become subject of speculation, and next to these relics (real or false) of the
Crucified, reign the testimony of idolatry and iconolatry condemned by the Divine Master whose
remains are venerated, sold the exhibition of what belonged to whom ú tormented all gave to the
brothers, so life has been banned in its name, with brutal violence, those who did not believe
same as the guardians of the temple was held by the dazzling luxury of gold and jewels, hiding what
he remembers the life of the proletarian par excellence, and hath made their an unholy relics same
classification aristocratic, in honor of believers and unbelievers crowned. How far is humanity
still, after eighteen and a half centuries, sincere and pure practice of the tenets preached
by the divine Redeemer who appears to venerate their relics! "

* * * * *

Aachen was the last city of Germany on the Rhine that we see in our first excursion. Later narrate
my impressions of Speyer and other cities that have not known but in 1860 they ran through southern
Germany, central and setentrional. The liberal, industrious and progressive Belgium, daughter
of the Revolution, called our attention as a country in every respect worthy of close and careful
study.

       Unfortunately, when it comes to Europe for a few years, leaving the
country in the New World, it is impossible to make real internal travel.

If you want to know as many people as possible, so that they can compare and deduct from his teaching
some useful comparisons, we must be content with Quick trips, made, usually by rail or to
the vapor. So my stories modestly reduced to mere impressions, which in any case claim the indulgence
of the reader.

I have not been possible to cover the south and south-west of Belgium, which are in the south-eastern
counties most picturesque in the country, corresponding to the basins of the Meuse and its tributary
the Sambra. Of all that interesting region, where the large coal and iron mines, very funny
and difficult mountains, and active cities of Charleroi, Namur, Huy and Liège we could only visit
the latter, which is the metropolis of central Meuse, one of the
most affluent industrial businesses in Belgium.

Reserve the rest for later.

From Aachen to Liège runs one of the most interesting railroads which are known Europe, so
interesting by the charm and variety of landscapes as the merit of works of art that show
the unsurpassed ability of the Belgians for construction railway. Two tunnel near Aachen and the
beautiful viaduct Astenet, work considerable merit, are remarkable
journey to Terlbesthal, Prussian city-rineana (The last on the road)
with 12 or 13.000 people live in industrial activity.

Immediately Via after entering Belgian territory and sinks into the tortuous and very pretty
valley Vesdre, stream tributary of the Meuse, which caracoles narrow channel through the middle
of a maze hilly, mountainous ones, others carefully cultivated or exploited in their rich
deposits of coal and iron seams.

The train stops for a minute at the foot of the Limburg poor, tiny town, delaying on the mountainside almost
dispossessed of their name to reach Dolhain (lower villa situated in the valley) seems to
be lamenting their lost and forgotten glories of ancient capital of a grand duchy. Nearby is the
town of Verviers, the most important town of the region, where the traveler stops to show his passport
and to check bags at the office.

Verviers is a medium city of more than 28,000 people (or 40,000, if includes the population
of adjacent villages) entirely new plant, favored by international traffic and the proximity of
Spa (city water very trendy) as well as Liege and Aachen, and composed entirely of factories,
warehouses and rooms manufacturers and workers. The manufacture of cloth, wool yarns and fabrics
of many kinds made in Verviers has great proportions, producing nearly one hundred million francs
annually. Their cloths and other kinds of wool are mainly consumed in America and the Belgian
army, and can say without exaggeration that Verviers is' the Leeds of the Belgians. " The city
anticipates very visibly, and she herself made the machines needed to yarns and fabrics. Especially
useful to consider recommending to the Colombian Hispanic interesting part of the Belgian manufacturing,
because the products are well suited Verviers for consumption by people of medium-sized facilities,
owing to its robustness and low price. I long held that it was understood that the Belgian market
is one that most agree to the Spanish-Colombians, for a large number of articles.

Verviers after the interest of the track's all in the topography and the railway works, until,
in the Meuse valley, Liège to the populous.

The Belgian nation, although relatively small, is, without doubt, one of the most interesting
Europe, whether it is considered under the artistic point of view, whether under the political
ú economic.

Despite the modesty of its territorial proportions, I think Belgium is in Europe, after England, the
country where a Colombian-born in the tumult of a rudimentary democracy
can study and understand the phenomenon more advantage of the intimate
alliance that the nature of things ba established between freedom
and civilization, making run couples who serve and support each other,
and can not live one without the other in a way that is productive
for the welfare of mankind.

It would be wrong to want to hold a false historical scholarship in this narrative intended only
to offer to my fellow Colombian world the mere memory of some prints. I must therefore confine
myself to refresh the reader's memory of events culminating Belgian history, some of which coincided
with the revolutions in France show solidarity that ideas, matured and released by the time
they create between people, but being separated by differences of race and tradition.

It is well known that the Belgian provinces, originally Celtic population, then Germanized
through immigration of barbarians ultra-Rhine, were subjugated by Caesar, remained under Roman domination
until the time of the invasion of the Franks that spread to Gaul French. Belgium suffered the
same fate as France and many other countries, being part carlovingiano the immense empire, then divided
into as many portions between the heirs Charlemagne. Hence the creation of different states of the
old feudal divided Belgium, under the names of the principality of
Liege, duchies of Brabant and Limburg, counties of Flanders, Hainau
and Namur, the Marquis of Antwerp and Mechelen Manor.

Family links were linking all those members, who formed after a single body of personal union
under the common authority of the dukes of Burgundy, famous for its power and the bloody wars
that resulted. Later another famous family bond drained concentration, by passing the domain
of Belgium to the Austrian house of Habsburg, for that this country is the dowry of the daughter
of Charles the Bold (Mary), married to Maximilian, first emperor of this name in Germany.
In the sixteenth century (1506) Philip the Fair, King of Castile
and successor of Mary of Burgundy for the Belgian provinces, the heritage
transmitted in to Charles I of Spain and V of Germany, and from then
until 1598 the Spanish domination replaced the Austrian.

However, as a nation in those times were eclipsed entirely to the sovereignty of princes, depending
on the kind of personal events, the death of Clara-Isabel, daughter Philip II (who gave in dowry
the Austrian Low Countries, to marry the Archduke Albert of Austria, in 1598) he restored the country
to domination brutal and stagnant Spanish viceroys; domination that lasted 71 years (from 1633
to 1715) finally ended the new assignment made to Austria under Rastadt peace treaty. Perhaps
Belgium is the only European country that maintains relatively pleasing testimonies and memories
of Austrian domination, that there was so smooth and fruitful, as
in those days was possible.

However, the Emperor Joseph II began there reforms that defied strong traditions city ​​of the
country, deeply rooted, and after the revolution broke out, in terms that the nation had been
emancipated and established in 1789 under the name "United Provinces of Belgium ', in a time
when the revolution had just formalized in France.

But despite the force of the revolution Brabantine, the country was again subdued by the Austria
in 1791, only to be the theater of the French wars and become, from 1794 to 1814, annexed
to France and divided into nine departments. It is in great part to the double movement of
revolution and independence verified for 26 years (from 1789 to 1815) and to the influence French institutions
engendered by the republic, to be healthy Belgian town regeneration giving evidence so clear.
Almost is worth remembering that the treaty London (in 1814) and Vienna (in 1815) founded the
reunion in a single monarchy Provinces Dutch and Belgian, under the
dynasty of Orange; union broken in 1830 by the glorious revolution
with which the Belgians gained their independence.

Europe, recognizing the independence in 1831 Belgium and the perpetual neutrality of the country,
gave a mortal blow to the building erected by the despots in 1815, said while the existence
of a small town that has surprised the world with the noble spectacle of liberty and progress
of all kinds. The rest belongs the domain of the contemporary, and therefore it is useless
to recall here.
 Still is the
sending of the royal khalat or dress of office adopted as an ingenious method of discharging
the arrears of wages due to the royal ministers or servants. In chapter xxxiii. the sub-lieutenant
to the chief executioner gives an admirable account, as true now as when penned, of the methods
by which salaries are capable of being recruited in Persia; and the speech of the grand vizier
in chapter lxxviii., on political morality as interpreted in that country, would, I am confident,
have been enthusiastically re-echoed by every subsequent incumbent of that high office.

The art, however, in which Morier especially excels is of introducing, so to speak by a side
wind, as a subordinate incident in the narrative, or as a spontaneous comment on the lips of
the various dramatis personae, informing and luminous knowledge upon the local charactistics
of places, or the social customs of peoples. For instance, he takes advantage of being at Meshed
to bring in the passion-play of Hussein, as annually enacted by the Shiah Mohammedans in the
month of Moharrem; of mentioning Herat to introduce the bad-i-sad-o-bist-ruz or famous ‘wind
of 120 days’; of conducting his hero to Kum, to describe the curious prescription of bast or
sanctuary that still adheres to that sacred spot; and of his arrival at Bagdad, to inflict
upon him the familiar pest of the Bagdad pimple. His description of camp-life among the Turcomans
is only surpassed in fidelity by his corresponding picture of the vagrant existence of the
border Cûrds; nor is there anywhere to be found a more dramatic realisation of the incidents
of a nomad encampment, the arrangement and meals and etiquette, the striking of the tents,
and the straggling march of the tribes with their flocks and herds, than in the narrative of
the child-hood of the Cûrdish slave Zeenab.

It is to be noted that Morier represents her as a Yezeedi or devil-worshipper (though it is
more than doubtful whether the Yezeedis could ever with justice be so described), and attributes
her origin to one of the incestuous nocturnal orgies that were said to be practised by that
people, and that gave rise to the epithet Chiragh Sunderun, or Lamp Extinguishers. It is to
be observed, however, that in such a case Zeenab would have known her parentage on the maternal
rather than on the paternal side; whereas Morier, by a curious error, represents her as knowing
her father, but being in ignorance of the identity of her mother.

In different chapters of “Hajji Baba” we are further initiated into the domestic life and habits
of the Persians. We learn that it is considered a mark of respect for a man to keep his hands
and feet hidden beneath the folds of his dress. In two places we have mention of the profoundly
Persian device of conforming with the letter, while trifling with the spirit of the religious
law, by neatly ripping open a seam as a substitute for rending the fabric of a garment in token
of woe. We are reminded of the prohibition from exacting interest that is imposed upon the
true believer, and of the still common custom of divination by extracting a fall from the pages
of Hafiz or Saadi. We may gain a good deal of information about the culinary methods of Turcomans,
Persians, and Cûrds; the operations of the hammam or bath are disclosed to us, and we are surreptitously
introduced along with the hero to the mysteries the Persian harem or anderûn, and its petty
existence, inane frivolity, open jealousy, and clandestine intrigue. The death and funeral
of the old barber provide an opportunity for a valuable account of Persian customs upon those
occasions.

Similarly the story of Yûsûf and Mariam is utilised to furnish an equally interesting description
of the Armenian ritual in cases of betrothal and marriage. Incidentally the return of the poet
Asker from his captivity among the Turcomans acquaints us with the curious habit of bringing
back a person supposed to be dead, not by the door, but through the roof; and when Hajji Baba,
from the terrace of the doctor’s house, listens to ‘the distant din of the king’s band, the
crash of the drums, and the swell of the trumpets, announcing sunset,’ he is alluding to a
custom that has prevailed for centuries in all the Mohammedan courts of Central Asia and India,
that is supposed to be a relic of extinct sun-worship, and that is still observed in seats
of royal or princely rule, alike at Tehran, Ispahan and Kabul.

Mention should not be omitted, in passing, of the perfect familiarity of the author both with
cultured and colloquial Persian and with the Persian classics. An Oriental metaphor, however
hyperbolical, slips as easily from his lips as though it had always rested there. Quotations
from Hafiz and Saadi play as large and as apposite a part in his dialogue as they do to this
day in the conversation of any well-educated Asiatic who has been brought up in countries where
Persian is the language of literature and fashion. No one who has not been in the East can
fully appreciate the talent for self-detachment and for successful assimilation of an alien
mode of thought and expression which such an exercise demands.

Nor, though this is beside the main purpose of the work, should we shut our eyes to the side-lights
which are thrown upon foreign nations; and which, while they lend additional testimony to the
insight of the writer, are invaluable as showing the point of view from which European institutions
and customs were then and are still for the most part regarded by the Asiatic Mussulman. How
amusing is the description, placed in chapter xix., in the mouth of the Chief Physician, of
the main external differences between Persians and Europeans, and in the ensuing chapter, of
the contemporary costume, regarded by the Persians as so improper, of the English doctor who
came in the train of Sir Harford Jones. In those days the only Feringhis known to the Persians
were the English, the Russians, and the French; and it no doubt was a matter of genuine surprise
to the Persian ambassador to find when he arrived at Constantinople that the Franks consisted
of many nations with as many kings. The Persians were particularly concerned to find out the
truth about ‘the infidel Boonapoort,’ whose career they much admired from its supposed resemblance
to that of their own hero Nadir Shah. Nor is there less humour in Hajji Baba’s attempt to make
progress in the study of their language by writing down the words that he heard most frequently
in the conversation of the French envoys, viz. sacré, Paris, and l’Empereur. That the Persian
Court was thoroughly alive to the jealous and interested struggle of the two Powers, England
and France, to acquire political ascendency at Tehran, is sufficiently evident from the history
of the period, but is admirably illustrated by the diplomatic argument placed in chapter lxxvi
in the mouth of Fath Ali Shah. Finally, can a pupil of Party Government, and much more a member
of the House of Commons, read without a delicious emotion this description of the system under
which is conducted the government of the greatest empire in the world?--

  ‘Then they have certain houses full of madmen, who meet half the year
  round for the purpose of quarrelling. If one set says white, the other
  cries black; and they throw more words away in settling a common
  question than would suffice one of our muftis during a whole reign.
  In short, nothing can be settled in the state, be it only whether a
  rebellious Aga is to have his head cut off and his property
  confiscated, or some such trifle, until these people have wrangled.’

Such are among the many merits of this admirable, and, I would fain add, immortal book. Even
were the Persians be blotted out of existence as a nation, even though Tehran, and Meshed,
and Shiraz were to share the fate of Persepolis and Susa, it would yet remain as a portrait
of unrivalled humour and accuracy of a people who, though now in their decadence, have played
an immense and still play a not wholly insignificant part in the complex drama of Asiatic politics.
It is the picture of a people, light-hearted, nimble-witted, and volatile, but subtle, hypocritical,
and insincere; metaphysicians and casuists, courtiers and rogues, gentlemen and liars, hommes
d’esprit and yet incurable cowards. To explain the history and to elucidate the character of
this composite people great tomes have been written. I am conscious myself of having added
no inconsiderable quota to their bulk; but if all this solid literature were to be burned by
an international hangman to-morrow, and were “Hajji Baba” and the “Sketches” of Sir John Malcolm
alone to survive, I believe that the future diplomatist or traveller who visited Persia, or
the scholar who explored it from a distance, would from their pages derive more exact information
about Persian manners, and acquire a surer insight into Persian character, than he would gain
from years of independent study or months of local residence. Together the two works are an
epitome of modern and moribund Iran.

GEORGE N. CURZON.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

Of Hajji Baba’s birth and education.

CHAPTER II

Hajji Baba commences his travels--His encounter with the Turcomans, and his captivity.

CHAPTER III

Into what hands Hajji Baba falls, and the fortune which his razors proved to him.

CHAPTER IV

Of his ingenuity in rescuing his master’s money from the Turcoman, and of his determination
to keep it.

CHAPTER V

Hajji Baba becomes a robber in his own defence, and invades his native city.

CHAPTER VI

Concerning the three prisoners taken by the Turcomans, and of the booty made in the caravanserai.

CHAPTER VII

Hajji Baba evinces a feeling disposition--History of the poet Asker.

CHAPTER VIII

Hajji Baba escapes from the Turcomans--The meaning of ‘falling from the frying-pan into the
fire’ illustrated.

CHAPTER IX

Hajji Baba, in his distress, becomes a saka, or water-carrier.

CHAPTER X

He makes a soliloquy, and becomes an itinerant vendor of smoke.

CHAPTER XI

History of Dervish Sefer, and of two other dervishes.

CHAPTER XII

Hajji Baba finds that fraud does not remain unpunished, even in this world--He makes fresh plans.

CHAPTER XIII

Hajji Baba leaves Meshed, is cured of his sprain, and relates a story.

CHAPTER XIV

Of the man he meets, and the consequences of the encounter.

CHAPTER XV

Hajji Baba reaches Tehran, and goes to the poet’s house.

CHAPTER XVI

He makes plans for the future, and is involved in a quarrel.

CHAPTER XVII

He puts on new clothes, goes to the bath, and appears in a new character.

CHAPTER XVIII

The poet returns from captivity--the consequences of it for Hajji Baba.

CHAPTER XIX

Hajji Baba gets into the service of the king’s physician--Of the manner he was first employed
by him.

CHAPTER XX

He succeeds in deceiving two of the faculty, getting a pill from one, and a piece of gold from
the other.

CHAPTER XXI

He describes the manner in which the Shah of Persia takes medicine.

CHAPTER XXII

Hajji Baba asks the doctor for a salary, and of the success of his demand.

CHAPTER XXIII

He becomes dissatisfied with his situation, is idle, and falls in love

CHAPTER XXIV

He has an interview with the fair Zeenab, who relates how she passes her time in the doctor’s
harem.

CHAPTER XXV

The lovers meet again, and are very happy--Hajji Baba sings.

CHAPTER XXVI

The history of Zeenab, the Cûrdish slave.

CHAPTER XXVII

Of the preparations made by the chief physician to receive the Shah as his guest, and of the
great expense which threatened him.

CHAPTER XXVIII

Concerning the manner of the Shah’s reception; of the present made him, and the conversation
which ensued.

CHAPTER XXIX

A description of the entertainment, which is followed by an event destructive to Hajji Baba’s
happiness.

CHAPTER XXX

Hajji Baba meets with a rival in the Shah himself, and loses the fair object of his affections.

CHAPTER XXXI

His reflections on the loss of Zeenab--He is suddenly called upon to exert his skill as a doctor.

CHAPTER XXXII

Hajji is appointed to a situation under government--He becomes an executioner.

CHAPTER XXXIII

He accompanies the Shah to his camp, and gets some insight into his profession.

CHAPTER XXXIV

Employed in his official capacity, Hajji Baba gives a specimen of Persian despotism.

CHAPTER XXXV

Fortune, which pretended to frown, in fact smiles upon Hajji Baba, and promotes him to be sub-lieutenant
to the chief executioner.

CHAPTER XXXVI

Although by trade an executioner, he shows a feeling heart--He meets with a young man and woman
in distress.

CHAPTER XXXVII

The history of Yûsûf, the Armenian, and his wife Mariam.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

Sequel of the foregoing history, and of the resolution which Hajji Baba takes in consequence.

CHAPTER XXXIX

The Armenian Yûsûf proves himself worthy of Hajji Baba’s confidence.

CHAPTER XL

Hajji Baba gives an account of his proceedings to his superiors, and shows himself a friend
to the distressed.

CHAPTER XLI

He describes an expedition against the Russians, and does ample justice to the cowardice of
his chief.

CHAPTER XLII

He proceeds to the king’s camp, and gives a specimen of lying on a grand scale.

CHAPTER XLIII

He relates a horrid tale, the consequences of which plunge him in the greatest misery.

CHAPTER XLIV

Hajji Baba meets with an old friend, who cheers him up, gives him good advice, and secures
him from danger.

CHAPTER XLV

He takes refuge in a sanctuary, where his melancholy thoughts are diverted by a curious story.

CHAPTER XLVI

He becomes a saint, and associates with the most celebrated divine in Persia.

CHAPTER XLVII

Hajji Baba is robbed by his friend, and left utterly destitute; but is released from his confinement.

CHAPTER XLVIII

Hajji Baba reaches Ispahan, and his paternal roof, just time enough to close the eyes of his
dying father.

CHAPTER XLIX

He becomes heir to property which is not to be found, and his suspicions thereon.

CHAPTER L

Showing the steps he takes to discover his property, and who the diviner, Teez Negah, was.

CHAPTER LI

Of the diviner’s success in making discoveries, and of the resolution which Hajji Baba takes
in consequence.

CHAPTER LII

Hajji Baba quits his mother, and becomes the scribe to a celebrated man of the law.

CHAPTER LIII

The mollah Nadân gives an account of his new scheme for raising money, and for making men happy.

CHAPTER LIV

Hajji Baba becomes a promoter of matrimony, and of the register he keeps.

CHAPTER LV

Of the man Hajji Baba meets, thinking him dead; and of the marriage which he brings about.

CHAPTER LVI

Showing how the ambition of the mollah Nadân involves both him and his disciples in ruin.

CHAPTER LVII

Hajji Baba meets with an extraordinary adventure in the bath, which miraculously saves him
from the horrors of despair.

CHAPTER LVIII

Of the consequences of the adventure, which threaten danger, but end in apparent good fortune.

CHAPTER LIX

Hajji Baba does not shine in honesty--The life and adventures of the mollah Nadân.

CHAPTER LX

Hajji and the mollah make plans suited to their critical situation, showing that no confidence
can exist between rogues.

CHAPTER LXI

The punishment due to Hajji Baba falls upon Nadân, which makes the former a staunch predestinarian.

CHAPTER LXII

Hajji Baba hears an extraordinary sequel to his adventure in the bath, and feels all the alarms
of guilt.

CHAPTER LXIII

He is discovered and seized, but his good stars again befriend and set him free.

CHAPTER LXIV

He reaches Bagdad, meets his first master, and turns his views to commerce.

CHAPTER LXV

He purchases pipe-sticks, and inspires a hopeless passion in the breast of his old master’s
daughter.

CHAPTER LXVI

He becomes a merchant, leaves Bagdad, and accompanies a caravan to Constantinople.

CHAPTER LXVII

Hajji Baba makes a conquest of the widow of an emir, which at first alarms, but afterwards
elates him.

CHAPTER LXVIII

He obtains an interview with the fair Shekerleb, makes a settlement upon her, and becomes her
husband.

CHAPTER LXIX

From a vender of pipe-sticks he becomes a rich Aga, but feels all the inconvenience of supporting
a false character.

CHAPTER LXX

His desire to excite envy lays the foundation of his disgrace--He quarrels with his wife.

CHAPTER LXXI

He is discovered to be an impostor, loses his wife, and the wide world is again before him.

CHAPTER LXXII

An incident in the street diverts his despair--He seeks consolation in the advice of old Osman.

CHAPTER LXXIII

In endeavouring to gain satisfaction from his enemies he acquires a friend--Some account of
Mirza Firouz.

CHAPTER LXXIV

He becomes useful to an ambassador, who makes him a partaker of his confidence.

CHAPTER LXXV

Of his first essays in public life, and of the use he was to his employer.

CHAPTER LXXVI

Hajji Baba writes the history of Europe and with his ambassador returns to Persia.

CHAPTER LXXVII

The ceremony of receiving a Frank ambassador at the court is described.

CHAPTER LXXVIII

Hajji is noticed by the grand vizier, and is the means of gratifying that minister’s favourite
passion.

CHAPTER LXXIX

Of the manner in which he turned his influence to use, and how he was again noticed by the vizier.

CHAPTER LXXX

The conclusion--Misfortune seems to take leave of Hajji Baba, who returns to his native city
a greater man than when he first left.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Hajji shaves the camel-driver.

The chaoûsh tells what he will do when he meets the robbers.

Hajji’s master and the great Turkoman.

Hajji Baba bleeds the Banou.

Turcomans attack the caravanserai.

The prince’s tent-pitcher strikes Hajji over the mouth with his slipper.

Hajji carries the great water-sack.

The dervish slays the ape.

Hajji and the disguised Mohtesib.

Hajji receives the ferosles.

Hajji is cauterised for his sprain.

The shaving of the ass.

‘I pretended to receive a violent twitch.’

Hajji and Zeenab.

Hajji sings to Zeenab.

The khanum ill-treats Zeenab.

The procession of slaves before the Shah.

‘An explosion took place in the very room.’

‘I beheld her fair form in the air, falling down the giddy height.’

The two Russians drive back the Persians.

Death of Zeenab.

Hajji takes sanctuary.

The baked head.

‘“O mercy! mercy!” cried Kior Ali.’

‘To where the dead body of a Jew lay extended.’

Hajji’s father dying.

The diviner and the rice.

Hajji interviews the fair candidates for marriage.

The mock marriage.

The degradation of Hajji and the mollah.

Drowning of the mollah bashi.

Hajji in the mollah bashi’s house.

Hajji leaves the village hurriedly after collecting the money.

Hajji meets Osman Aga again.

The curing of Hajji Baba.

Shekerleb approaches Hajji.

Hajji curses Shekerleb and her relations.

Hajji disrobes.

Hajji relates his story to Mirza Firouz.

The British ambassadors and the Shah.

INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE

TO THE REV. DR. FUNDGRUBEN CHAPLAIN TO THE SWEDISH EMBASSY AT THE OTTOMAN PORTE

ESTEEMED AND LEARNED SIR, You will be astonished to see yourself addressed by one, of whose
existence you are, perhaps, ignorant, and whose name doubtless long since been erased from
your memory. But when I put you in mind of an English traveller, who (forgive my precision)
sixteen years ago was frequently admitted to enjoy the pleasure of your conversation, and who
was even honoured with a peculiar share of your attention, perhaps then you may indulgently
recollect him, and patiently submit to peruse the following volumes, to which he now takes
the liberty of prefixing your name.

At the time to which I allude, your precious hours were employed in searching into the very
depths of hieroglyphic lore, and you were then almost entirely taken up in putting together
the fruits of those your researches, which have since appeared, and astonished the world in
that very luminous work, entitled “The Biography of Celebrated Mummies.” I have frequently
since reflected upon the debt of gratitude which you imposed by allowing me to engross so much
of your time, and upon matters of comparatively trivial importance, when your mind must have
been so much engaged upon those grave and weighty subjects, which you have treated with such
vast learning, clearness, and perspicuity in your above-mentioned treatise. In particular I
have ever borne in mind a conversation when one beautiful moonlight night, reclining upon a
sofa of the Swedish palace, and looking out of those windows which command so magnificent and
extensive a view of the city and harbour of Constantinople, we discussed subjects which had
reference to the life and manners of the extraordinary people its inhabitants.

Excuse me for reporting back your own words; but as the subject interested me much, I recollect
well the observation you made, that no traveller had ever satisfied you in his delineation
of Asiatic manners; ‘for,’ said you, ‘in in general their mode of treating the subject is by
sweeping assertions, which leave no precise image on the mind, or by disjointed and insulated
facts, which, for the most part, are only of consequence as they relate to the individual traveller
himself.’ We were both agreed, that of all the books which have ever been published on the
subject, the “Arabian Nights’ Entertainments” give the truest picture of the Orientals, and
that, for the best of all reasons, because it is the work of one of their own community. ‘But,’
said you, ‘notwithstanding they have been put into an European dress, weeded of their numerous
repetitions, and brought as near to the level of our ideas as can be, still few would be likely
to understand them thoroughly who have not lived some time in the East, and who have not had
frequent opportunities of associating with its inhabitants. For,’ you added, opening a volume
of that work at the same time, ‘to make a random observation upon the first instance which
occurs here in the history of the three Calendars, I see that Anima, after having requested
the porter whom she had met to follow her with his basket, stopped at a closed door, and having
rapped, a Christian with a long white beard opened it, into whose hand she put some money without
saying a single word. But the Christian, who knew what she wanted, went in again, and a little
while after returned, bringing a large pitcher full of excellent wine.’ You observed, ‘that
although we who lived in Turkey might know that wine was in most cities prohibited to be sold
openly, and that if it was to be found it would be in the house of a Christian, many of whom
disposed of it in a mysterious manner to the Mohammedans; yet that circumstance would not immediately
occur to the mere European reader, who, perhaps, would expect something to be forthcoming in
the future narrative, from what is, in fact, only a trait of common life.’

I then suggested, that, perhaps, if an European would give a correct idea of Oriental manners,
which would comprehend an account of the vicissitudes attendant upon the life of an Eastern,
of his feelings about his government, of his conduct in domestic life, of his hopes and plans
of advancement, of his rivalities and jealousies, in short, of everything that is connected
both with the operations of the mind and those of the body, perhaps his best method would be
to collect so many facts and anecdotes of actual life as would illustrate the different stations
and ranks which compose a Mussulman community, and then work them into one connected narrative,
upon the plan of that excellent picture of European life, “Gil Blas” of Le Sage.

To this you were pleased to object, because you deemed it almost impossible that an European,
even supposing him to have rejected his own faith and adopted the Mohammedan, as in the case
of Monsieur de Bonneval, who rose to high rank in the Turkish government, and of Messrs. C----
and B---- in more modern times (the former a Topchi Bashi, or general of artillery, the latter
an attendant upon the Capitan Pasha), could ever so exactly seize those nice shades and distinctions
of purpose, in action and manner, which a pure Asiatic only could. To support your argument,
you illustrated it by observing, that neither education, time, nor talent, could ever give
to a foreigner, in any given country, so complete a possession of its language as to make him
pass for a native; and that, do what he would, some defect in idiom, or even some too great
precision in grammar, would detect him. ‘But,’ said you, ‘if a native Oriental could ever be
brought to understand so much of the taste of Europeans, in investigations of this nature,
as to write a full and detailed history of his own life, beginning with his earliest education,
and going through to its decline, we might then stand a chance of acquiring the desired knowledge.

This conversation, reverend sir, has remained treasured up in my mind; for having lived much
in Eastern countries, I never lost sight of the possibility of either falling in with a native
who might have written his own adventures, or of forming such an intimacy with one, as might
induce him faithfully to recite them, and thus afford materials for the work which my imagination
had fondly conceived might be usefully put together. I have always held in respect most of
the customs and habits of the Orientals, many of which, to the generality of Europeans, appear
so ridiculous and disgusting, because I have ever conceived them to be copies of ancient originals.
For, who can think the custom of eating with one’s fingers disgusting, as now done in the East,
when two or more put their hands into the same mess, and at the same time read that part of
our sacred history which records, ‘He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,’ etc.? I must
own, every time that, dining with my Eastern friends, I performed this very natural operation
(although, at the same time, let it be understood that I have a great respect for knives and
forks), I could not help feeling myself to be a living illustration of an ancient custom, and
a proof of the authenticity of those records upon which our happiness depends. Whenever I heard
the exclamation so frequently used in Persia, on the occasion of little miseries, ‘What ashes
are fallen on my head!’ instead of seeing anything ridiculous in the expression, I could not
but meditate on the coincidence which so forcibly illustrated one of the commonest expressions
of grief as recorded in ancient writ.

It is an ingenious expression which I owe to you, sir, that the manners of the East are, as
it were, stereotype. Although I do not conceive that they are quite so strongly marked, yet,
to make my idea understood, I would say that they are like the last impressions taken from
a copperplate engraving, where the whole of the subject to be represented is made out, although
parts of it from much use have been obliterated.

If I may be allowed the expression, a picturesqueness pervades the whole being of Asiatics,
which we do not find in our own countries, and in my eyes makes everything relating to them
so attractive as to create a desire to impart to others the impressions made upon myself. Thus,
in viewing a beautiful landscape, the traveller, be he a draughtsman or not, tant bien que
mal, endeavours to make a representation of it; and thus do I apologise for venturing before
the public even in the character of a humble translator.

Impressed with such feelings you may conceive the fulness of my joy, when not very long after
the conversation above mentioned, having returned to England, I was fortunate enough to be
appointed to fill an official situation in the suite of an ambassador, which our government
found itself under the necessity of sending to the Shah of Persia. Persia, that imaginary seat
of Oriental splendour! that land of poets and roses! that cradle of mankind, that uncontaminated
source of Eastern manners lay before me, and I was delighted with the opportunities which would
be afforded me of pursuing my favourite subject. I had an undefined feeling about the many
countries I was about to visit, which filled my mind with vast ideas of travel.

     ‘Sive per Syrtes iter aestuosas,
     Sive facturus per inhospitalem
     Caucasum, vel quae loca fabulosus
     Lambit Hydaspes.’

I was in some degree like a French lady of my acquaintance, who had so general a notion of
the East, that upon taking leave of her, she enjoined me to get acquainted with a friend of
hers, living, as she said, quelque part dans les Indes, and whom, to my astonishment, I found
residing at the Cape of Good Hope!

I will not say that all my dreams were realised; for, perhaps, no country in the world less
comes up to one’s expectation than Persia, whether in the beauties of nature, or the dress
and magnificence of its inhabitants. But in what regards manners and customs, it appears to
me that no Asiatics bear so strong the stamp of an ancient origin as they. Even in their features
I thought to have distinguished a decided originality of expression; which was confirmed when
I remarked, that the numerous faces seen among the sculptures of Persepolis, so perfect as
if chiselled but yesterday, were so many likenesses of modern Persians, more particularly of
the natives of the province of Fars.

During my long residence there, I never lost the recollection of our conversation on the sofa
of the Swedish palace; and every time I added an anecdote or an observation illustrative of
Oriental manners to my store, or a sketch to my collection, I always thought of the Reverend
Doctor Fundgruben, and sighed after that imaginary manuscript which some imaginary native of
the East must have written as a complete exposition of the life of his countrymen.

I will not say, learned sir, that the years I passed in Persia were years of happiness, or
that during that time I could so far keep up an illusion, that I was living among the patriarchs
in the first ages of the world, or among those Persians whose monarchs gave laws to almost
the whole of Asia: no, I sighed for shaven chins and swallow-tailed coats; and, to speak the
truth, though addressing an antiquary of your celebrity, I felt that I would rather be one
among the crowd in the Graben at Vienna, or in our own Bond Street, than at liberty to range
in the ease of solitude among the ruins of the palaces of Darius.

At length the day of my departure came, and I left Persia with books filled with remarks, and
portfolios abounding in original sketches. My ideas during the journey were wholly taken up
with schemes for the future, and, perhaps, like every other traveller, I nourished a sort of
sly and secret conviction that I had seen and observed things which no one before me had ever
done; and that when I came to publish to the world the fruits of my discoveries, I should create
a sensation equal at least to the discovery of a new planet.

I passed at the foot of the venerable Mount Ararat, and was fortunate enough to meet with a
favourable moment for traversing the cold regions of Arminia, ‘nec Armeniis in oris stat glacies
iners menses per omnes’; and I crossed the dangerous borders of Turkey and Persia without any
event occurring worthy of record. But I must request your indulgent attention to what befell
me at Tocat; for it is to that occurrence you are indebted for this letter, and the world for
the accompanying volume.

It was at the close of a fatiguing days journey, that I and my escort, consisting of two Tatars,
two servants, and the conductors of our baggage and post-horses, entered the city of Tocat.
Our approach was as usual announced by the howls of the Surujees, who more than usually exerted
their lungs in my service, because they felt that these sounds, the harbingers of rest and
entertainment, could but be agreeable to weary and jaded travellers like ourselves. The moon
was shining bright as our cavalcade clattered over the long paved road leading to the city,
and lighted up, in awful grandeur, the turret-topped peaks which rear their heads on the crest
of the surrounding abrupt crags. On entering the post-house, I was immediately conducted into
the travellers’ room, where, having disencumbered myself of my cloak, arms, and heavy boots,
and putting myself at ease in my slippers and loose dress, I quietly enjoyed, the cup of strong
coffee and the chibouk, which were immediately handed to me, and after that my dish of rice,
my tough fowl, and my basin of sour curds.

I was preparing to take my night’s rest on the sofas of the post-house, where my bed had been
spread, when a stranger unceremoniously walked into the room, and stood before me. I remarked
that he was a Persian, and, by his dress, a servant. At any other moment I should have been
happy to see and converse with him; because having lived so long in Persia, I felt myself,
in some measure, identified with its natives, and now in a country where both nations were
treated with the same degree of contempt, my fellow-feeling for them became infinitely stronger.

I discovered that he had a tale of misery to unfold, from the very doleful face that he was
pleased to make on the occasion, and I was not mistaken. It was this,--that his master, one
Mirza Hajji Baba, now on his return from Constantinople, where he had been employed on the
Shah’s business, had fallen seriously ill, and that he had been obliged to stop at Tocat; that
he had taken up his abode at the caravanserai, where he had already spent a week, during which
time he had been attended by a Frank doctor, an inhabitant of Tocat, who, instead of curing,
had, in fact, brought him to his last gasp,--that having heard of my arrival from Persia, he
had brightened up and requested, without loss of time, that I would call upon him, for he was
sure the presence of one coming from his own country would alone restore him to health. In
short, his servant, as is usual on such occasions, finished his speech by saying, that, with
the exception of God and myself, he had nothing left to depend upon in this life.

I immediately recollected who Mirza Hajji Baba was; for though I had lost sight of him for
several years, yet once on a time I had seen much of him, and had taken great interest in everything
that regarded him, owing to his having been in England, whither, in quality of secretary, he
accompanied the first ambassador which Persia had sent in modern times. He had since been employed
in various ways in the government, sometimes in high, and sometimes in lower situations, undergoing
the vicissitudes which are sure to attend every Persian; and at length had been sent to Constantinople,
as resident agent at the Porte on the part of the Shah.

I did not hesitate an instant, tired and jaded as I was, immediately to accompany his servant;
and in the same garb in which I was, only throwing a cloak over my shoulders, I walked in all
haste to the caravanserai.

There, on a bed spread in the middle of a small room, surrounded by several of his servants,
I found the sick Mirza, looking more like a corpse than a living body. When I had first known
him he was a remarkably handsome man, with a fine aquiline nose, oval face, an expressive countenance,
and a well-made person. He had now passed the meridian of life, but his features were still
fine, and his eye full of fire. As soon as he saw he recognised me, and the joy which he felt
at the meeting broke out in a great animation of his features, and in the thousand exclamations
so common to a Persian’s lips.

‘See,’ said he, ‘what a fortunate destiny mine is, that at a moment when I thought the angel
of death was about to seize me for his own, the angel of life comes and blows a fresh existence
into my nostrils.’

After his first transports were over, I endeavoured to make him explain what was the nature
of his complaint, and how it had hitherto been treated. I saw enough by his saffron hue, that
bile was the occasion of his disorder; and, as I had had great experience in treating it during
my stay in Persia, I did not hesitate to cheer up his hopes by an assurance of being able to
relieve him.

‘What can I say?’ said he. ‘I thought at first that I had been struck with the plague. My head
ached intensely, my eyes became dim, I had a pain in my side, and a nauseous taste in my mouth,
and expected to die on the third day; but no, the symptoms still continue, and I am alive.
As soon as I arrived here, I enquired for a physician, and was told there were two practitioners
in the town, a Jew and a Frank. Of course I chose the latter; but ’tis plain, that my evil
star had a great deal to say in the choice I made. I have not yet been able to discover to
what tribe among the Franks he belongs,--certainly he is not an Englishman. But a more extraordinary
ass never existed in this world, be his nation what it may. I began by telling him that I was
very, very ill. All he said in answer, with a grave face, was “Mashallah! Praise be to God!”
and when, in surprise and rage, I cried out, “But I shall die, man!” with the same grave face,
he said, “Inshallah! Please God!” My servants were about to thrust him from the room, when
they found that he knew nothing of our language excepting these two words, which he had only
learnt to misapply. Supposing that he still might know something of his profession, I agreed
to take his medicine; but I might have saved myself the trouble, for I have been daily getting
worse.’

Here the Mirza stopped to take breath. I did not permit him to exert himself further; but,
without loss of time, returned the post-house, applied to my medicine-chest, and prepared a
dose of calomel, which was administered that evening with due solemnity. I then retired to rest.

The next morning I repaired to his bedside, and there, to my great satisfaction, found that
my medicine had performed wonders. The patient’s eyes were opened, the headache had in great
measure ceased, and he was, in short, a different person. I was received by him and his servants
with all the honours due to the greatest sage, and they could not collect words sufficiently
expressive of their admiration of my profound skill. As they were pouring forth their thanks
and gratitude, looking up I saw a strange figure in the room, whose person I must take the
liberty to describe, so highly ludicrous and extravagant did it appear. He was of the middle
size, rather inclined to be corpulent, with thick black eyebrows, dark eyes, a three days’
beard, and mustachios. He wore the Turkish bag dress, from his shoulders downwards, yellow
pabouches, shawl to his waist, and carried a long cane in his hand; but from his shoulders
up he was an European, a neckcloth, his hair dressed in the aile de pigeon fashion, a thick
tail clubbed, and over all an old-fashioned, three-cornered laced hat. This redoubtable personage
made me a bow, and at the same time accosted me in Italian. I was not long in discovering that
he was my rival the doctor, and that he was precisely what, from the description of the Mirza,
I expected him to be, viz. an itinerant quack, who, perhaps, might once have mixed medicines
in some apothecary’s shop in Italy or Constantinople, and who had now set up for himself in
this remote corner of Asia where he might physic and kill at his pleasure.

I did not shrink from his acquaintance, because I was certain that the life and adventures
of such a person must be highly curious and entertaining, and I cordially encouraged him in
his advances, hoping thus to acquire his confidence.

He very soon informed me who he was, and what were his pursuits, and did not seem to take the
least umbrage at my having prescribed for his patient without previously consulting him. His
name was Ludovico Pestello, and he pretended to have studied at Padua, where he had got his
diploma. But these corporations, held
by the nation, are the true strength of anti-national and reactionary party which aims not
only freely exploit the people, but also under the dominance infeudarlo of the papal court Hence
the ardent struggle and not a little passionate about the game, and serious dangers of liberal
institutions, but not cease the day the state, practicing principles rigidly, to remove all protection
pecuniary cults, to emancipate really and put a stop to the exactions and the immobilization of the
properties belonging to the institutions to which I refer.

In recent years the press and the courts have demonstrated many and very serious scandals in the
conduct of these communities, which are said depository of faith, piety and beneficence, and commissioned
to win souls for heaven and teach the people, notwithstanding large hoard fortunes. Many acts of
embezzlement and fraud, seduction and lust, of abduction and concealment innocent youth (particularly
Israel and Protestant) and extremely ugly speculation, and political fraud or election campaigns,
have been tested, in charge of communities, monks and missionaries, coming to light in horrible
process. The opinion is rightly outraged, and the seriousness of the illness has been thinking
seriously about remedies.

With regard to the nature and type of the Belgian population, both vary, as modified who have
suffered two major races, but in general it shows little effect of differences in the features
of the faces, customs and characters, and everywhere 've ever come up some do not know what a hybrid
or uncertain that indicates the contact of neighboring races. HOWEVER, noticing that in Flanders
all looks more marked, although unattractive, distinguished cities of Ghent and Bruges, such as Antwerp,
for some material expression social and personal enough or property.

       

* * * * *

As a basis for comparison of progress made in European societies, statistics Belgium is one of
the most interesting. HOWEVER, I must prove that, very general facts, In order not to annoy the
reader with figures, so while calling particular the attention of
the Colombian people to the Belgian industry, huge in its proportions
on, which is one of the most estimable and popular in Europe, whose
relations agree Colombian trade much.

After three days’ administration of calomel, Hajji Baba’s complexion was nearly restored to
its original hue; and as he might now be said to be free from danger, and in a fair way of
recovery, I proposed proceeding on my journey. The poor man could not find words for the expression
of his gratitude, and I saw that he was labouring hard to discover a present worthy of my acceptance.
At length, just before taking my leave, he desired his servants to leave us alone, and spoke
to me in the following words:--

‘You have saved my life; you are my old friend and my deliverer. What can I do to show my gratitude?
Of worldly goods I have but few: it is long since I have received any salary from my government,
and the little money I have here will barely suffice, to take me to my own country. Besides,
I know the English,--they are above such considerations; it would be in vain to offer them
a pecuniary reward. But I have that by me which, perhaps, may have some value in your eyes;
I can assure you that it has in mine. Ever since I have known your nation, I have remarked
their inquisitiveness, and eagerness after knowledge. Whenever I have travelled with them,
I observed they record their observations in books; and when they return home, thus make their
fellow-countrymen acquainted with the most distant regions of the globe. Will you believe me,
that I, Persian as I am, have followed their example; and that during the period of my residence
at Constantinople, I have passed my time in writing a detailed history of my life, which, although
that of a very obscure and ordinary individual, is still so full of vicissitude and adventure,
that I think it would not fail to create an interest if published in Europe? I offer it to
you; and in so doing, I assure you that I wish to show you the confidence I place in your generosity,
for I never would have offered it to any one else. Will you accept it?’

Conceive, my dear sir, conceive my happiness upon hearing this--upon at length getting into
my possession precisely the sort of work which you so long since had looked upon as a desideratum
in the history of mankind, and which I had utterly despaired of ever seeing in reality.

My eyes, I am sure, glistened with pleasure when I expressed my sense of the Mirza’s liberality;
and as fast as I refused his offer (for I thought it but generous to do so upon the terms he
proposed), the more he pressed it upon me.

As a further inducement, he said, that he was going back to his country, uncertain if he enjoyed
the favour of the Shah; and as he had freely expressed his sentiments, which included his observations
upon England, he was afraid, should he be in disgrace, and his work be found upon him, that
it might lead to his destruction.

Unable to withstand these entreaties, I at length acceded to his request, and became the possessor
of the manuscript. It forms the subject of the following work; and tell me, can I dedicate
it to any but him who first awakened my mind to its value? If you will do me the favour to
peruse it, you will find I have done my best endeavour to adapt it to the taste of European
readers, divesting it of the numerous repetitions, and the tone of exaggeration and hyperbole
which pervade the compositions of the Easterns; but still you will, no doubt, discover much
of that deviation from truth, and perversion of chronology, which characterise them. However,
of the matter contained in the book, this I must say, that having lived in the country myself
during the time to which it refers, I find that most of the incidents are grounded upon fact,
which, although not adhered to with that scrupulous regard to truth which we might expect from
an European writer, yet are sufficient to give an insight into manners. Many of them will,
no doubt, appear improbable to those who have never visited the scenes upon which they were
acted; and it is natural it should be so, because, from the nature of circumstances, such events
could only occur in Eastern countries.

A distinct line must ever be drawn between ‘the nations who wear the hat and those who wear
the beard’; and they must ever hold each other’s stories as improbable, until a more general
intercourse of common life takes place between them. What is moral and virtuous with the one,
is wickedness with the other,--that which the Christian reviles as abominable, is by the Mohammedan
held sacred. Although the contrast between their respective manners may be very amusing, still
it is most certain that the former will ever feel devoutly grateful that he is neither subject
to Mohammedan rule, nor educated in Mohammedan principles; whilst the latter, in his turn,
looking upon the rest of mankind as unclean infidels, will continue to hold fast to his bigoted
persuasion, until some powerful interposition of Providence shall dispel the moral and intellectual
darkness which, at present, overhangs so large a portion of the Asiatic world.

Fearing to increase the size of the work, I have refrained adding the numerous notes which
my long residence in Persia would have enabled me to do, and have only occasionally made explanations
necessary to understand the narrative. In the same fear, I have not ventured to take Hajji
out of his own country. His remarks upon England during his residence there, and during his
travels, may perhaps be thought worthy of future notice; and should they be called for, I will
do my best endeavour to interpret his feelings as near to nature as possible.

I must now, dear sir, take my leave, expressing my regret at your absence from Constantinople
on my return from Persia; for had I then been fortunate enough to meet you, no doubt, from
the valuable hints which you would have afforded me, the work now presented to you would have
been in every way more worthy of your acceptance. But you were far better engaged; you were
seeking another oasis in the wilds of the desert (that emblem of yourself in hieroglyphic lore),
to which, so I was informed, you expected to have been guided information gained in the inside
wrappers of one of your most interesting mummies.

May your footsteps have been fortunate, and may I live to have the pleasure of assuring you
by word of mouth how truly I am, esteemed and learned sir,

Your very devoted and Obliged humble servant, PEREGRINE PERSIC.

LONDON, 1st December 1823.

THE ADVENTURES OF HAJJI BABA

CHAPTER I

Of Hajji Baba’s birth and education.

My father, Kerbelai Hassan, was one of the most celebrated barbers of Ispahan. He was married,
when only seventeen years of age, to the daughter of a chandler, who lived in the neighbourhood
of his shop; but the connexion was not fortunate, for his wife brought him no offspring, and
he, in consequence, neglected her. His dexterity in the use of a razor had gained for him,
together with no little renown, such great custom, particularly among the merchants, that after
twenty years’ industry, he found he could afford to add a second wife to his harem; and succeeded
in obtaining the daughter of a rich money-changer, whose head he had shaved, during that period,
with so much success, that he made no difficulty in granting his daughter to my father. In
order to get rid, for a while, of the importunities and jealousy of his first wife, and also
to acquire the good opinion of his father-in-law (who, although noted for clipping money, and
passing it for lawful, affected to be a saint), he undertook a pilgrimage to the tomb of Hosein,
at Kerbelah. He took his new wife with him, and she was delivered of me on the road. Before
the journey took place he was generally known, simply as ‘Hassan the barber’; but ever after
he was honoured by the epithet of Kerbelai; and I, to please my mother, who spoilt me, was
called Hajjî or the pilgrim, a name which has stuck to me through life, and procured for me
a great deal of unmerited respect; because, in fact, that honoured title is seldom conferred
on any but those who have made the great pilgrimage to the tomb of the blessed Prophet of Mecca.

My father having left his business during his absence to his chief apprentice, resumed it with
increased industry on his return; and the reputation of a zealous Mussulman, which he had acquired
by his journey, attracted the clergy, as well as the merchants, to his shop. It being intended
that I should be brought up to the strap, I should perhaps have received no more education
than was necessary to teach me my prayers, and I not been noticed by a mollah, (or priest),
who kept a school in an adjoining mosque, whom my father (to keep up the character he had acquired
of being a good man) used to shave once a week, as he was wont to explain, purely for the love
of God. 

Dominated in the days prior to unification Belgian bishops who had the character and authority
of sovereign princes, even feudal, Liege knew at all times resist to the encroachments that could
undermine its municipal liberties, always showing the energy of its working population, and
in spite of the struggles that shook its existence until the beginning of this century, has preserved
and increased prosperity, thanks to the character of its inhabitants and its industrial activity.

Few
peoples in the region of French or Celtic have been so determined
and zealous for the maintenance of their liberties as Liège, always
combative and courageous always energetic in its resolutions, work-loving,
enterprising and persevering.

Race of the regions that are central to Liege is the most beautiful and robust of Belgium,
and history of political and social life offers repeated and interesting features that prove
qualities very decent moral appreciation. In truth, Liège is one of the cities that best characterized
in Belgium the genius of the nation multiple and complex type of progress or civilization of that
country. Local traditions, the liberal spirit, the interest in literature, beautiful monuments
of ancient art, industrial activity and mining, agriculture prosperous and speed of communications,
Liege agree to form this noble and fruitful harmony of the progress that characterized the present
century.

And HOWEVER, nothing offers more obvious contrasts the interior structure and overview Liège. A
picturesque group of small mountains that seem to flow towards the
city, determined there one of the most smiling valleys I've met in
the regions of Europe that lean towards the Channel and North Sea.

Three valleys meet here: the Meuse, the of bream (Ourthe) stream that has its junction at the
upper end of the city itself, and the Vesdre, which is coupled with a little lower Meuse. The concurrence
of the three valleys and its rivers, the game of the hills that dominate, forming a magnificent
setting of rich vegetation, and undulations in the background, producing an exquisite set topo-hydrographic
whose charm is complemented by the vast mass of the city, capricious and irregular forms, The strongest
aspect of the master from the tops of two hills, and the cheerful aspect of the surrounding countryside,
filled with plantations and Verjel, gracious country houses, factories and other items that indicate
activity and wellness. I have not seen in any other Belgian provinces have gone a picture as
charming as Liège.

But to penetrate into the city, divided by the Meuse into two very unequal parts, dissipates to
the point the impression that the whole landscape has just produced. The streets are or lonely
or a little animated, if they are walking on mealtimes, or when the
mass working population is employed in factories, unless it be that
one penetrates to the Square market and that of Lambert.

If in the outskirts of the city or in the beautiful boulevards ranging from Mechelen Railway Station
to Theatre Square, stand to each other new and elegant side buildings all have ground almost uniform
inside or the old part of town it seems obscured by a huge crepe, with an atmosphere charged
dust and gases from coal that is consumed there in large quantity. Suffice to say that Liege
important center of coal exploitation, lies over vast underground galleries, with per seat,
as some cities in England, a bed carbon. Thus, the city that works on the surface and within
its rich dark soil, is now essentially a manufacturer, and the curious traveler can not see
his laborious inhabitants, old, sad, winding streets and interesting monuments, but the through
smoke and coal dust constantly bouncing its numerous factory chimneys and forges.

My master bought a strong, ambling mule for his own riding; whilst I was provided with a horse,
which, besides myself, bore the kaliân[2] (for he adopted the Persian style of smoking), the
fire-pan and leather bottle, the charcoal, and also my own wardrobe. A black slave, who cooked
for us, spread the carpets, loaded and unloaded the beasts, bestrode another mule, upon which
were piled the bedding, carpets, and kitchen utensils. A third, carrying a pair of trunks,
in which was my master’s wardrobe, and every other necessary, completed our equipment.

The day before our departure, the prudent Osman had taken precaution to sew into the cotton
wadding of his heavy turban fifty ducats, a circumstance known only to him and me, and these
were to serve in case of accidents; for the remainder of his cash, with which he intended to
make his purchases, was sewn up in small white leather bags, and deposited in the very centre
of the trunks.

The caravan being ready to depart consisted of about five hundred mules and horses, and two
hundred camels, most of which were laden with merchandize for the north of Persia, and escorted
by about one hundred and fifty men, composed of merchants, their servants, and the conductors
of the caravan. Besides these, a small body of pilgrims bound to the tomb of Imâm Reza at Meshed
joined the caravan, and gave a character of sanctity to the procession of which its other members
were happy to take advantage, considering in what high estimation persons bound upon so laudable
a purpose as a pilgrimage are always supposed to be held.

Every man on these occasions is armed, and my master, who always turned his head away whenever
a gun was fired, and became pale at the sight of a drawn sword, now appeared with a long carbine
slung obliquely across his back, and a crooked sword by his side, whilst a pair of huge pistols
projected from his girdle; the rest of his surface was almost made up of the apparatus of cartouch-boxes,
powder-flasks, ramrods, &c. I also was armed cap-à-pie, only in addition to what my master
carried, I was honoured by wielding a huge spear. The black slave had a sword with only half
a blade, and a gun without a lock.

We started at break of day from the northern suburb of Ispahan, led by the chaoûshes[3] of
the pilgrimage, who announced our departure by loud cries and the beating of their copper drums.
We soon got acquainted with our fellow travellers, who were all armed; but who, notwithstanding
their martial equipment, appeared to be very peaceably disposed persons. I was delighted with
the novelty of the scene, and could not help galloping and curvetting my horse to the annoyance
of my master, who in a somewhat crabbed tone, bid me keep in mind that the beast would not
last the journey if I wore it out by unseasonable feats of horsemanship. I soon became a favourite
with all the company, many of whom I shaved after the day’s march was over. As for my master,
it is not too much to say that I was a great source of comfort to him, for after the fatigue
of sitting his mule was at an end, I practised many of the arts which I had acquired at the
bath to do away the stiffness of his limbs, by kneading his body all over, and rubbing him
with my hands.

We proceeded without impediment to Tehran, where we sojourned ten days to rest our mules, and
to increase our numbers. The dangerous part of the journey was to come, as a tribe of Turcomans,
who were at war with the king of Persia, were known to infest the road, and had lately attacked
and plundered a caravan, whilst at the same time they had carried those who composed it into
captivity. Such were the horrors related of the Turcomans, that many of our party, and my master
in particular, were fearful of proceeding to Meshed; but the account he received of the enormous
price of lamb-skins at Constantinople was so alluring, that, in spite of everything, he resolved
not to be frightened out of his prospect of gain.

A chaoûsh had long been collecting pilgrims at Tehran and its vicinity, in the expectation
of the arrival of our caravan, and as soon as we made our appearance, he informed us, that
he was ready to join us with a numerous band, a reinforcement which he assured us we ought
to receive with gratitude, considering the dangers which we were about to encounter. He was
a character well known on the road between Tehran and Meshed, and enjoyed a great reputation
for courage, which he had acquired for having cut off a Turcoman’s head whom he had once found
dead on the road. His appearance was most formidable, being in person tall and broad-shouldered,
with a swarthy sunburnt face, ornamented by a few stiff hairs by way of beard at the end of
a bony chin. Clad in a breastplate of iron, a helmet with a chain cape flapping over his shoulders,
a curved sword by his side, pistols in his girdle, a shield slung behind his back, and a long
spear in his hand, he seemed to bid defiance to danger. He made such boast of his prowess,
and talked of the Turcomans with such contempt, that my master determined to proceed under
his immediate escort. The caravan was ready to depart a week after the festival of the New
Year’s day[4], and after having performed our devotions at the great mosque of the congregation
on the Friday, we went to the village of Shahabdul Azim, whence the whole body was to proceed
the next day on its journey.

We advanced by slow marches over a parched and dreary country, that afforded little to relieve
the eye or cheer the heart. Whenever we approached a village, or met travellers on the road,
our conductors, made invocations of Allah and of the Prophet in loud and shrill tones, accompanied
by repeated blows with a leather thong on the drums suspended to their saddle-bow. Our conversation
chiefly turned upon the Turcomans, and although we were all agreed that they were a desperate
enemy, yet we managed to console ourselves by the hope that nothing could withstand our numbers
and appearance, and by repeatedly exclaiming, ‘In the name of God, whose dogs are they, that
they should think of attacking us?’ Every one vaunted his own courage. My master above the
rest, with his teeth actually chattering from apprehension, boasted of what he would do, in
case we were attacked; and, to hear his language, one would suppose that he had done nothing
all his life but fight and slaughter Turcomans. The chaoûsh, who overheard his boastings, and
who was jealous of being considered the only man of courage of the party, said aloud, ‘No one
can speak of the Turcomans until they have seen them--and none but an “eater of lions” (at
the same time pulling up his moustaches toward his ears) ever came unhurt out of their clutches.
Saadi speaks truth when he sayeth, “A young man, though he hath strength of arm, and the force
of an elephant, will kick his heel ropes[5] to pieces with fear in the day of battle.”’

But Osman Aga’s principal hope of security, and of faring better than others in case we were
attacked, was in the circumstance of his being a follower of Omar;[6] and, by way of proclaiming
it, he wound a piece of green muslin round his cap, and gave himself out as an emir, or a descendant
of the Prophet, to whom, as the reader may guess, he was no more allied than to the mule upon
which he rode.

We had proceeded in this manner for several days, when the chaoûsh informed us, in a solemn
and important manner, that we were now approaching to the places where the Turcomans generally
lie in wait for caravans, and directed that we should all march in a compact body, and invited
us to make preparations for a desperate resistance in case we were attacked. The first impulse
of my master was to tie his gun, sword, and pistols on one of his baggage mules. He then complained
of an affection in the bowels, and so abandoning all his former intentions of engaging in combat,
wrapped himself up in the folds of his cloak, put on a face of great misery, took to counting
his beads, ever and anon repeating the prayer of Staferallah, or ‘God forgive me,’ and, thus
prepared, resigned himself to his destiny. His greatest dependence for protection he seemed
to have placed upon the chaoûsh, who, among other reasons for asserting his indifference to
danger, pointed to the numerous talismans and spells that he wore bound on his arms, and which,
he boldly maintained, would avert the arrow of a Turcoman at any time.

This double-bladed sword of a man, and one or two of the boldest of the caravan, rode ahead,
at some distance, as an advanced guard, and every now and then, by way of keeping up their
courage, galloped their horses, brandishing their lances, and thrusting them forward into the air.

At length, what we so much apprehended actually came to pass. We heard some shots fired, and
then our ears were struck by wild and barbarous shoutings. The whole of us stopped in dismay,
and men and animals, as if by common instinct, like a flock of small birds when they see a
hawk at a distance, huddled ourselves together into one compact body. But when we in reality
perceived a body of Turcomans coming down upon us, the scene instantly changed. Some ran away;
others, and among them my master, losing all their energies, yielded to intense fear, and began
to exclaim, ‘Oh Allah!--Oh Imâms!--Oh Mohammed the prophet; we are gone! we are dying! we are
dead!’ The muleteers unloosed their loads from their beasts, and drove them away. A shower
of arrows, which the enemy discharged as they came on, achieved their conquest, and we soon
became their prey. The chaoûsh, who had outlived many a similar fray, fled in the very first
encounter, and we neither saw nor heard any more of him. The invaders soon fell to work upon
the baggage, which was now spread all over the plain.

My master had rolled himself up between two bales of goods to wait the event, but was discovered
by a Turcoman of great size, and of a most ferocious aspect, who, taking him at first for part
of the baggage, turned him over on his back, when (as we see a wood-louse do) he opened out
at full length, and expressed all his fears by the most abject entreaties. He tried to soften
the Turcoman by invoking Omar, and cursing Ali; but nothing would do; the barbarian was inexorable:
he only left him in possession of his turban, out of consideration to its colour, but in other
respects he completely stripped him, leaving him nothing but his drawers and shirt, and clothing
himself with my master’s comfortable cloak and trousers before his face. My clothes being scarcely
worth the taking, I was permitted to enjoy them unmolested, and I retained possession of my
case of razors, to my no small satisfaction.

The Turcomans having completed their plunder, made a distribution of the prisoners. We were
blindfolded, and placed each of us behind a horseman, and after having travelled for a whole
day in this manner, we rested at night in a lonely dell. The next day we were permitted to
see, and found ourselves on roads known only to the Turcomans.

Passing through wild and unfrequented tracts of mountainous country, we at length discovered
a large plain, which was so extensive that it seemed the limits of the world, and was covered
with the black tents and the numerous flocks and herds of our enemies.

The distribution of their prisoners which had been made by the Turcomans, turned out to be
so far fortunate, that Osman Aga and I fell into the hands of one master, the savage robber
whom I have before mentioned. He was called Aslan Sultan,[7] or Lion Chief, and proved to be
the captain of a considerable encampment, which we reached almost immediately after descending
from the mountains into the plain. His tents were situated on the borders of a deep ravine,
at the bottom of which flowed a stream that took its rise in a chain of neighbouring hills;
and green pastures, teeming with cattle, were spread around as far as the eye could reach.
Our other fellow sufferers were carried into a more distant part of the country, and distributed
among the different tribes of Turcomans who inhabit this region.

At our appearance the whole encampment turned out to look at us, whilst our conqueror was greeted
with loud welcomes, we were barked at and nearly devoured by a pack of large sheep dogs, who
had soon selected us out as strangers. My master’s green shawl had hitherto procured some degree
of respect; but the chief wife, or the Banou,[8] as she was called, was seized at first sight
with a strong desire to possess it; so he was with no other covering to his head than his padded
caoûk, or tiara, which contained his money. That too was longed for by another wife, who said
that it would just do to stuff the pack-saddle which had galled her camel’s back, and it was
taken from his head and thrown, among other lumber into a corner of the tent. He did all he
could to keep possession of this last remnant of his fortune, but to no purpose; in lieu of
it he received an old sheep-skin cap, which had belonged to some unfortunate man, who, like
us, had been a prisoner, and who had lately died of grief and wretchedness. And HOWEVER .... What is man! ... placate the
snakes and those not tame ever!

It is ascertained that the snake thing is safe during a large part of each year, on which rest and sleep,
and that his aggression almost always requires some provocation, and due to intermittent produced
by cold, heat, hunger or sexual status. And these phenomena, that science explained by the analysis
of animal body, are evident in the galleries zoological easily. There the viewer can read in the
reptile's eyes, especially the huge boa, the gradations irritability. There is something in the
eye, breath and spiral movements of this monster, it attracts, fascinates and magnetized,
as the temptation of sin, and at the same time yields to the magnetic influence of man. I have
seen snakes in the garden of London contrasts very curious expression (according to people
who were watching closely), and I have made think hard about the phenomena of animal magnetism
and electricity, explaining certain singularities that some suppose fabulous, but they are
perfectly accurate. The smell and some other things influence much about reptiles. So, I noticed
with astonishment that snakes attitude changed, shaking or numbness, looking meekly with mistrust
or with anger, to zoom, hiding or find out more or less, according to the different posters that
made them the presence or the look, smell, voice or face of the crowd. Maybe one day science
will prove no intelligence or a natural instinct which leads the animal to run under the atmosphere
of man or in any situation these or other events, making the philosopher hesitating between
hypotheses more or less risky, but only the action of a magnetic or electric fluid, common to
all objects of creation (albeit with different inflections of intensity, residence and mode
of action) produce analogies and phenomena that do believe in the community intelligence. And
the day that physical science demonstrate that, if not a delusion, psychology will have advanced
greatly, illuminating the path of humanity, where the still prevailing darkness of the hypothesis.

The
Crystal Palace for fish and marine animals of small size, and mainly to molluscs, is small
but neat.

Each group there is a transparent ballot box, living in their element and between the rocks, sand
and vegetation of the sea floor. The arborescent corals and other animals, molluscs most beautiful,
and all that is capricious, admirable in that tiny, mysterious world of life beneath the waves
stirred appears there miniature package, the sight of the visitor, to reveal many of the wonders
the ocean. All this has an infinite poetry, an indefinable charm, that reveals the system of
compensation created by nature, and the supreme foresight with which each body respiration, movement
or nutrition has been arranged to correspond to the needs typical of the region or the element in
which the animal lives.

Leaving the beautiful Zoological Gardens (for full description of
which would be required many volumes) made me a reflection on the
association of industry and science physics, and these and morality,
or rather, all facts that represent progress human.

At first glance this magnificent garden or paradise Joint London is nothing more than an establishment
science, a stimulus for the excursions of a naturalist, and an element of speculation, and
recreation. But watching closely is that this is also a training school of moral and philosophical
education for the people. Why? - Easy to demonstrate it with three thoughts that come naturally to mind.

The crowd constantly visiting these places, acquires a habit of sociability animals that will soften
very considerably the habits and passions.

What man does not includes, with respect to his social duties, accustomed to being provided
almost exclusively in relation with the species itself, it learns by observing the sociability
of animals among themselves and respect the man who is his master and usually stupid tyrant. Everyone
is coming and rivals in entertainments with domesticated brutes, and everyone has their favorite,
whom he flatters in each visit with treats that poor animal is with gratitude and affection.
 From being so often near the person
of the chief, I soon began to acquire great ascendancy over him; and although I was still watched
with care, yet I could already devise plans, which appeared to me to be practicable, for escaping
from this hateful servitude into which I was thrown, and I felt in a less degree than another
would have done the drudgery and wretchedness of my situation.

One of the first objects which I had in view for the furtherance of my plan of escape was to
obtain possession of the money which was sewed in the padding of my former master’s turban.
But it had been thrown into a corner of the women’s tent, to which I had no access, and it
required much ingenuity to get at it without creating suspicion. I had established my reputation
as a barber throughout ours and the neighbouring encampments, and had become a favourite of
the men; but although I had reason to believe that the Banou of my master would fain become
more intimately acquainted with me than she hitherto had been, yet as neither she nor any of
the other women could employ me in my profession as a shaver, our intercourse hitherto had
been confined to tender glances, occasional acts of kindness on her part, and of corresponding
marks of thankfulness and acknowledgement on mine. But as they knew enough of civilized life
to be aware that in Persia barbers were also surgeons--that besides shaving and rubbing in
the bath, they could bleed, draw teeth, and set a broken limb--the Banou soon discovered that
she wanted to be bled, and sent a deputation to ask me if I could perform that service for
her. Looking upon this as a favourable opportunity to learn some tidings of the object of my
solicitude, or perhaps to gain possession of it, I immediately answered that provided I was
furnished with a penknife, I hoped that I could bleed as dexterously as the best of my profession.
The instrument was produced, and one of the elders of the tribe, who pretended to a smattering
of astrology, announced that a conjunction of the planets favourable to such an operation would
take place on the following morning. At that auspicious moment, I was introduced into the women’s
tent, where I found the Banou seated on a carpet on the ground, waiting for me with great impatience.
She was not a person to excite sensations of a tender nature in a novice like me; for, in the
first place, she was of an unwieldy size (so different from the slim forms that we are taught
to prize in Persia)[10] that I looked upon her with disgust; and, in the next, I lived in such
terror of Aslan Sultan, that had I aspired to her favour, it must have been in the constant
dread of the loss of my ears. However, I was much noticed by her, and received great attentions
from her companions, who, looking upon me as a being of a superior order, all wanted to have
their pulses felt. Whilst making my preparations for bleeding the Banou, I cast my eyes about
the tent, in the hopes of seeing the prize, which I was anxious to possess. It struck me that
I might make the very operation in which I was engaged subservient to my views, and demanding
to feel the patient’s pulse once more, which I did with a look of intense meditation, I observed
that this was a complicated disorder--that the blood must not be allowed to flow upon the ground,
but be collected in a vessel, that I might examine it at leisure. This strange proposal of
mine raised an immediate outcry amongst the women; but with the Banou a deviation from the
usual practice only served to confirm her opinion of my superior skill. Here, however, a new
difficulty arose. The scanty stock of a Turcoman could ill afford to sacrifice any utensil
by applying it to a service which would defile it for ever. They were recapitulated one by
one, and all found too precious to be thrown away. I was hesitating whether I might venture
to go straight to my point, when the Banou bethought herself of an old leather drinking-cup,
which she desired one of the women to search for in a corner of the tent. ‘This will never
do: you can see the light through it,’ said I, holding it up towards the tent door, and pointing
to the seams with the penknife, which I held in my hand, and with I cut, at the same time,
half a dozen of the stitches.

‘Where is the cap of that old Emir?’ cried out the Banou.

‘It is mine,’ said the second wife; ‘I want it to stuff my saddle with.’

‘Yours!’ returned the other in a fury. ‘There is but one God! Am not I the Banou of this harem?
I will have it.’

‘You shall not,’ retorted the other.

Upon this an uproar ensued which became so loud and threatening, that I feared it would come
to the ears of Aslan Sultan, who very probably would have settled the dispute by taking at
once the bone of contention from the contending parties. But luckily the astrologer interfered,
and when he had assured the second wife that the blood of the Banou would be upon her head
if anything unfortunate happened on this occasion, she consented to give up her pretensions.
I accordingly prepared to bleed my patient; but when she saw the penknife, the cap underneath
to receive her blood, and the anxious faces of those about her, she became frightened, and
refused to permit me to proceed. Fearing after all that I should lose my prize, I put on a
very sagacious look, felt her pulse, and said that her refusal was unavailing, for that it
was her fate to be bled, and that she and every one knew nothing could avert an event which
had been decreed since the beginning of the world. To this there was no reply; and all agreeing
that she would commit a great sin were she to oppose herself to the decrees of Providence,
she put out her bare arm, and received the stab from my penknife with apparent fortitude. The
blood was caught, and, when the operation was over, I ordered that it should be conveyed to
a little distance from the camp, and that none but myself should be permitted to approach it,
as much of the good or evil that might accrue to the patient from bleeding depended upon what
happened to the blood after it had flown from the body. I waited until night, when everybody
was asleep, and then with great anxiety ripped up the lining, where to my joy I found the fifty
ducats, which I immediately concealed in an adjacent spot, and then dug a hole for the cap,
which I also concealed. In the morning I informed the Banou, that having seen some wolves prowling
about the tents, I feared that something unlucky might happen to her blood, and that I had
buried it, caoûk and all. This appeared to satisfy her; and by way of recompense for the service
I had rendered, she sent me a dish made with her own hands, consisting of a lamb roasted whole,
stuffed with rice and raisins, accompanied by a bowl of sour milk with salt in it.

I must confess that when I became possessed of the fifty ducats, a recollection of my poor
former master, who was leading a melancholy life in the mountains with the camels, whilst I
was living in comparative luxury, came across my mind, and I half resolved to restore them
to him; but by little and little I began to argue differently with myself. ‘Had it not been
for my ingenuity,’ said I, ‘the money was lost for ever; who therefore has a better claim to
it than myself? If he was to get possession of it again, it could be of no use to him in his
new profession, and it is a hundred to one but what it would be taken from him, therefore,
I had best keep it for the present: besides, it was his fate to lose, and mine to recover it.’
This settled every difficulty, and I looked upon myself as the legitimate possessor of fifty
ducats, which I conceived no law could take from me. Meanwhile, I made an attempt to convey
to him half of the roasted lamb which I had just received, through the means of a shepherd’s
boy who was going into the mountains, and who promised not to eat any of it by the wayside. 

If many of the rooms in the palace are dedicated to the cult of art and history Still others,
like gardens spacious, true miniature forests, which reproduce the vagaries of this sumptuous and
fragrant nature architecture, called vegetation. What of agglomerates beauties there! As soon
you cross a European garden, literally studded treasures sophisticated garden where the rose and
camellia flowers alternating with thousands of other educated with the meticulous and delicate
art, as one passes through the middle of a vast garden Colombian under the broad leaves of
banana, sugar cane and palm chontas, hacumas and coconut, and strains rosándose with fragrant
pines, vines flexible and air, the parasitic most beautiful, most elegant tree ferns and many
beautiful plants extremely capricious, growing at a temperature around artificial own and widths
mossy bed ponds where fish are stirred the torrid zone between aquatic weeds whimsically interwoven.

But
above all, a vast living room, imitating the nature of India, which produces more vivid illusion. Streams,
fountains, small waterfalls, shaded and mossy rocks, everything is
Dummy there with careful preparation, populated the scene of special
plants and more interesting.

In the background lie the huge snake coiled at the foot of the cliff, amid the litter; the terrible
sleeping lion at the entrance of his cave gloomy calmly licking panther
to their puppy, with the voluptuous warmth of the climate of fire,
in the shadow of the tree Hindustani.

And a hand, through a small grove of palm trees, carefully slide six or eight Indians armed with
spears, their ropes and their clubs and darts, in pursuit of a black
tiger, whose eyes sparkle and whose claws and muscle contractions
are the crispaturas fear and fierce anger to dominate the great villain
of the desert, when under attack and has to destroy to defend themselves.

The

groups are very natural, and while at times one feels the terror of reality believing the dense
forest to hear the wild cry of the Indian hunter or the roar of the beast harassed. The attitudes
of the Indians, their almost complete nudity, their cunning eyes, their faces mates and brown, their
primitive weapons, all in order to reveal or pretends to those statues of wax, life, passion, the
energy of his nature and its dangerous situation at hand.

India is there, with his greatness that astonishes with its terrible things, their chokes, frighten
their mythologies, their social misery, physical exuberance overwhelms the viewer born in the
West ....

To make more vivid contrast, a great concert music suddenly sounded under huge glass dome. It was Saturday,
the day when the visitors belong to the good society because it gives
the palace a great concert and admission is twice the other day a
week.

The turnout was very large, and the vast hall of private concerts was full. I left India to
go to Europe, trading through the wild scenes arias and overtures of refined civilization, and to
faith that did not win much with the change.

English music, judging from that concert loud, not very delicate and noble. There in the strains
of living do not know what's vulgar and prosaic, of rough and not
very spiritual, I extremely disliked, despite my ignorance of musical
art.

The singing was even worse. A Miss Louise, who was very much in vogue as Indian songstress
in those days did major expense in some solos, duets and trios, which encouraged the audience
to repeat. The execution was correct, as the English bill, pure and delicious voice by the sound
spontaneous but lacked the heat of inspiration, enthusiasm, life. So English society in point
of art, very correct, but cold, with no expansion and no fire. There is something indescribably
parsimonious in English songstress or the artist, in general, suggests that, across of harmony, in
bills of exchange, the merchant ships of the West Indies and madapolanes factories. The British
people is a society of social strength and greatness, not amalgamate well with the subtleties
of art and the great inspirations poetry. The audience at the palace the day I visited, was
generally well chosen, and HOWEVER, his most thunderous applause went to a choir vulgar but
extravagant (in English, understood), which had all the appearances of the atrocious cries
- hip-hap-hurray! - with which Anglais rampage all your entertainment and banquets. England
is a positive people, honest and calculating, but in very poor taste and manners too prosaic.

When I left the Crystal Palace, by necessity, as the night approached, it seemed that kept
me a secret force, fascinating and weakening my will. After penetrating to the colossal temple of
art, history and the wonderful diversity of civilization universal,
no one would ever leave.

You want to live there with the shadows and memories of all generations, and deliver the heart
and soul to the delight of contrasts and a boundless admiration.

Ten minutes later to get away from that monument that is the pride of the industrial power England
and the noblest testimony to his cosmopolitan civilization, - dragged into the bottom of a
car by that hurricane called iron locomotive, was the vague feeling
that remains forever in the memory after a magnificent dream.

I looked like a toy an illusion, - a spell without a name or likeness, in whose shadow, bright
wandering the splendid image of Colombia, but then when I shake the magical wonder said: No!
this it's all true, - is the reality of progress, is the admirable picture of this being multiple
immortal, divine, led by the hand of God in its pilgrimage to through the centuries whose human
name, and that is developing day by day, moment by moment, on the whole face of the globe, the immense
work of light, strength, life and well-being that protects us to all and is called CIVILIZATION!
...

* * * * *

Apart from what I quickly pointed out, London has many, many objects
worthy careful study, because they are of great interest to science,
industry, trade and social life.

       

His hundreds of printers and other places for advertising of thought deserve close attention,
for its greatness, the greatness of his brilliant production and
progress reached by the mechanism and typographic art.

Suffice it to say that there are printers, such as the Times, which
give permanent employment to thousands of writers, composers, editors
and employees of all kinds, and whose presses colossal with the proportions
of a building, produced more leaves per day that the press printed
gathered from throughout Colombia.

The material structure of the Bank of London, his administration, and its prodigious wealth way
to work, are objects which by themselves cause the attention and
curiosity traveler eager to understand and appreciate the economic
conditions of Britain.

Stun nomas thinking on the value of daily transactions that take place in the Bank London,
not to mention hundreds of private banks that enjoy immense credit and store in their boxes
and underground more money than is distributed worldwide. Banks is one of those leaving the sap
that gives life to all industrial enterprises of the globe, and is in the cabinets wealthy bankers
such as Rothschild, combining the most colossal speculation canals, telegraphs, railroads, mines,
etc., to every continent - or are resolved the big issues of international politics, by virtue of
loans and other combinations.

Bag, a monumental building, as the Bank of England, is no less interesting as by their organization,
and complicated by the role it does in all economic transactions
and major political events.

The LSE is the infallible thermometer credit of all governments and major banks in the world,
the general movement of political, fluctuations and changes in the value of the currency and the
popularity of most notable companies. Sanctuary immense credit, the stock is both the necropolis
a thousand fortunes collapsed and consumed there, and the birthplace of a thousand others that rise
suddenly on the ruins of the foolish, the deluded or those who have too much on the whims of
luck. Maelstrom for some, - wave beneficial for others, the bag - ocean of credit and speculation -
has the mobility treacherous sea, saving his life within inscrutable as death. God delivers the Colombian
people that institution, notwithstanding the great services offered! The Republicans do not need
people to measure their prosperity credit and other thermometer that of freedom and opinion.

Vapors,
Customs, the House post office, railway and telegraph, the popular institutes and charitable volunteers,
the sessions of Parliament, and many others objects of a public character in London require a very
thorough and careful study, - and their great factories, which are the true symbol of the prosperity
of England producer and trader.

But how to investigate that? - Studying such objects is known Great Britain, and to achieve such
a result is needed years of careful observation, touring the country in all directions. While that
has not had the fortune I must confess my ignorance, since I just watched as he passed a portion
of the exterior face complicated of that great society.

This waiver myself to general considerations that summarize the results of my impressions. Not only
would justly famous for a pedant, but I will expose to view contradicted all my findings, which
have a high risk of being wrong, knowledge is lacking of all of the details. He said so far how I've been
impressed by what I have personally seen very little in England.

The observation later give me a right to judge society that has seemed so grandly contradictory the
first time.

London has also, as artistic curiosities, some very notable public squares, not for what they
are in themselves, but by the beautiful monuments that contain at its center. Of this genus
are: the splendid Trafalgar Square, which contains the monumental statue Nelson, whose elevation
is 276 feet, the George IV, Sir Charles James Napier, etc., The Place
de la Bourse, where stands the magnificent equestrian statue of Wellington,
that of Cheapside, In the center is severe and manly figure of Robert
Peel, the great English reformer, Hyde Park, where you see the statue
of Achilles and the other of Wellington, - and a few other squares
bearing statues dedicated to men more or less historical.

In general, these monuments are very severe and simple, but the equestrian statues or pedestrian
are in bad taste and artistic execution flawed. The contemplation of these monuments glory
of the great citizens and gratitude or admiration of the people, caused me deep pleasure, because
in England these demonstrations are not the work of the governors, but the spontaneity of public opinion,
discerning the award regardless.

People who know how to honor the memory of its great citizens, immortalized in bronze or marble,
in public places, at the sight of all the world can never be a slave. His cult dedicated to
the motionless figure of patrician, keeps the fire of patriotism, legitimate national pride, and
encouragement that impels to seek greatness and glory in the sublime acts of devotion, selflessness
or heroism.

And the day of a popular conflict, the crowd know your point of reunion is at the foot of
the statue venerated because she reminds the citizen what they are worth the law, freedom and
honor the individual and the nation.

But the great interest that London holds, the nation's capital, millionaire all respects, does not
feel painful to leave an impression, when you get to the last suburbs of the vast metropolis (coming
from Colombia), experiences a feeling inexplicable in which there
is a mixture of fear and curiosity, or fascinating and fantastic illusion
certainly no one is prepared to find anywhere but greatness and wonders.

On

leaving London for Paris (whose conditions prevention is a very nice idea), the traveler feels
neither joy nor sadness, but lassitude, fatigue or indifference. Full of disappointments, has
the impression of social conflict that is revealed in the supreme wealth and the most remarkable
progress of civilization, next highest misfortunes, horrible inequalities, and shows incredible
misery and degradation and ever known in the New World.

So, leaving London to feel not know what a relief, because has delivered one of those people
who fades tingling of that huge noise that stuns, oppressive and fascination of such greatness
(in the good and the bad), which robs the spirit of its freedom of action and personality.

- March 23, at eight o'clock in the evening, I expected the vast London-Bridge Station the
time the express train was to leave the train at Dover. The people of the Customs did their job,
weighing the luggage, stamps, etc.., So that, ignoring my luggage, I go to Paris and discomfort
free tax records. Finally he heard the whistle of the locomotive long, - we took our seats in
the plush wagon and we leave as Hurricane interrupted in the shadows
of the vaults of the pier and the tunnels of the road and far from
the city, which looked like a huge ghost forms bizarre and undefinable.

*

* * * *

CHAPTER VI.

* * * * *

LONDON TO PARIS.

       Any description I would be impossible if to give a very rough idea
of ​​the landscape at least interesting that extends to both sides
of the railway from London to Dover.

The speed of walking and night prevented me from even looking at
external objects.

       The moon shone with the sad pallor give her light frost mists of
March; and if here and there quivered a park, a small canal, or off-white
walls a bridge - or stood out to either side of the majestic shadows
of trees, rural castles or buildings in some towns or small cities
- the variable scene looked great, but himself to impress the poet
to offer notions useful to the traveler.

Inside the car (wagon) that I would go with my family, had an interest of another kind, curious
fact, as is all of manners. The eight soft car seats were supplemented by an English and a
French couple. English, sort of barrel dimensions colossal, snoring and whistling as the locomotive,
delivered to the deepest sleep. It seemed that train movement away from uncomfortable to sleep,
give him your going fast and vibrant a kind of sweet fro. However, from time to time he woke
up startled, as if you do him a spring jump, and twice we hear him pronounce asleep, the words
Thousand pounds! (Thousand pounds) with a very noticeable tone of joy. Perhaps the good John
Bull dreamed advantageous to some speculation.

An Englishman does business to sleep.

The French couple was one of those bourgeois marriages are the average between vulgarity and good
sense. Since I spoke Spanish with my family, or sometimes bad English, French believed the two
to talk openly in their own language without fear to be understood. The lady, quite beautiful French
(rare in France), showed the most ardent desire to return to Paris to enjoy the pleasures of
fashion, which seemed to her one concern, while the husband only thought of future speculation,
deeply penetrated the Yankee spirit. For their disputes extravagant and grotesque realized coming
inside the United States, where they had spent several years and
made his fortune.

The contrast between the two types were interested in me because I sort of gave the key the French
character in both sexes. The French, by temperament extremely elastic, although parles preserved
in all its spirit of fun and much of its surface gaiety and its features distinctive, easily
adapts to all situations. Leaving his homeland with instincts generous, is metallized in the United
States, if fortune protects you, and returns Yankee all four sides. Turco is a French or Chinese,
if necessary, acquiring all race conditions or adoptive society, with rare ease.

The French, on the contrary, retains his personality everywhere. She is always flirtatious (Within
the meaning of the word harmless), and away from acquiring the pride of the English, the somewhat
prudish restraint of Spanish, the German gentle modesty, or the petulance pretentious women of
North America - remains faithful to that set of lightness and gallantry independence and charm,
indifference and futility apparent constant, which is somewhat contradictory type of the French.
So do not miss ever dominant concern to seek pleasure, to the worship
of fashion, seduced by the grace and shine wherever by the lure of
a spirituality of way (if I may paradoxa) allied to the futilities
materialism of both leads to women in general.

The worthy English snored even with all the energy of an opulent abdomen, and our two French
Heat still fought on its draft Parisian life when the train stopped at the pier in Dover.
 How came you to sleep in
a fine bed?’ said one.

‘It was not mine,’ he answered, ‘it was my master’s.’

‘He lies! he lies!’ they all cried out: ‘he is a merchant--you are a merchant. Own it, or we’ll
put you to death.’

In vain he asserted that he was only a carpet-spreader, nobody believed him, and he received
so many blows from different quarters, that at last he was obliged to roar out that he was
a merchant.

But I, who judged from the appearance of the man that he could not be a merchant, but that
he was what he owned himself to be, assured my companions that they had got but a sorry prize
in him, and advised them to release him; but immediately I was assailed in my turn with a thousand
maledictions, and was told, that if I chose to take part with my countrymen, I should share
their fate, and become a slave again--so I was obliged to keep my peace and permit the ruffians
to have their own way.

Their speculation in man-stealing having proved so unfortunate, they were in no very good humour
with their excursion, and there was a great difference of opinion amongst them, what should
be done with such worthless prisoners. Some were for keeping the cadi, and killing the poet
and the ferash, and others for preserving the cadi for ransom, and making the ferash a slave;
but all seemed to be for killing the poet.

I could not help feeling much compassion for this man, who in fact appeared to be from his
manners, and general deportment, a man of consequence, although he had pleaded poverty; and
seeing it likely to go very hard with him, I said, ‘What folly are you about to commit? Kill
the poet! why it will be worse than killing the goose with the golden egg. Don’t you know that
poets are sometimes very rich, and can, if they choose, become rich at all times, for they
carry their wealth in their heads? Did you never hear of the king who gave a famous poet a
miscal[18] of gold for every stanza which he composed? Is not the same thing said of the present
Shah? And--who knows?--perhaps your prisoner may be the King’s poet himself.’

‘Is that the case?’ said one of the gang; ‘then let him make stanzas for us immediately, and
if they don’t fetch a miscal each, he shall die.’

‘Make on! make on!’ exclaimed the whole of them to the poet, elated by so bright a prospect
of gain; ‘if you don’t, we’ll cut your tongue out.’

At length it was decided that all three should be preserved, and that as soon as they had made
a division of the booty, we should return to the plains of Kipchâk.

Aslan then called us together, and every man was obliged to produce what he had stolen. Some
brought bags of silver and others gold. Nor did they confine themselves to money only; gold
heads of pipes, a silver ewer, a sable pelisse, shawls, and a variety of other things, were
brought before us. When it came to my turn, I produced the heaviest bag of tomauns that had
yet been given in, which secured to me the applause of the company.

‘Well done! well done! Hajji,’ said they all to me; ‘he has become a good Turcoman: we could
not have done better ourselves.’

My master in particular was very loud in his praises, and said, ‘Hajji, my son, by my own soul,
by the head of my father, I swear that you have done bravely, and I will give you one of my
slaves for a wife, and you shall live with us--and you shall have a tent of your own, with
twenty sheep, and we’ll have a wedding, when I will give an entertainment to all the encampment.’

These words sunk deep in my mind, and only strengthened my resolution to escape on the very
first opportunity; but in the meanwhile I was very intent upon the division of the spoil which
was about to be made, as I hoped to be included for a considerable portion of it. To my great
mortification they gave me not a single dinar. In vain I exclaimed, in vain I entreated; all
I could hear was, ‘If you say a word more, we will cut your head off.’ So I was obliged to
console myself with my original fifty ducats, whilst my companions were squabbling about their
shares. At length it became a scene of general contention, and would have finished by bloodshed,
if a thought had not struck one of the combatants, who exclaimed, ‘We have got a cadi here;
why should we dispute? He shall decide between us.

So immediately the poor cadi was set in the midst of them, and was made to legislate upon goods,
part of which belonged in fact to himself, without even getting the percentage due to him as judge.

We made our retreat by the same road we came, but not with the same expedition, on account
of our prisoners. They sometimes walked and sometimes rode.

The general appearance of the poet had, from the first moment, interested me in his misfortunes;
and being a smatterer in learning myself, my vanity, perhaps, was flattered with the idea of
becoming the protector of a man of letters in distress. Without appearing to show any particular
partiality to him, I succeeded in being appointed to keep watch over him, under the plea that
I would compel him to make verses; and conversing in our language, we were able to communicate
with each other with great freedom without the fear of being understood. I explained my situation,
and informed him of my intentions to escape, and assured him that I would do everything in
my power to be useful to him. He seemed delighted to meet with kind words, where he expected
nothing but ill-treatment; and when I had thus acquired his confidence, he did not scruple
to talk to me freely about himself and his concerns. I discovered what I had before suspected,
that he was a man of consequence, for he was no less a personage than the court poet, enjoying
the title of Melek al Shoherah, or the Prince of Poets. He was on his road from Shiraz (whither
he had been sent by the Shah on business) to Tehran, and had that very day reached Ispahan,
when he had fallen into our hands. In order to beguile the tediousness of the road through
the Salt Desert, after I had related my adventures, I requested him to give me an account of
his, which he did in the following words:

‘I was born in the city of Kerman, and my name is Asker. My father was for a long time governor
of that city, during the reign of the eunuch Aga Mohammed Shah; and although the intrigues
that were set on foot against him to deprive him of his government were very mischievous, still
such was his respectability, that his enemies never entirely prevailed against him. His eyes
were frequently in danger, but his adroitness preserved them; and he had at last the good fortune
to die peaceably in his bed in the present Shah’s reign. I was permitted to possess the property
which he left, which amounted to about 10,000 tomauns. In my youth I was remarkable for the
attention which I paid to my studies, and before I had arrived at the age of sixteen I was
celebrated for writing a fine hand. I knew Hafiz entirely by heart, and had myself acquired
such a facility in making verses, that I might almost have been said to speak in numbers. There
was no subject that I did not attempt. I wrote on the loves of Leilah and Majnoun;[19] I never
heard the note of a nightingale, but I made it pour out its loves to the rose; and wherever
I went I never failed to produce my poetry and chant it out in the assembly. At this time the
king was waging war with Sadik Khan, a pretender to the throne, and a battle was fought, in
which his majesty commanded in person, and which terminated in the defeat of the rebel. I immediately
sang the king’s praises. In describing the contest I made Rustam appear standing in a cloud
over the field of battle; who seeing the king lay about him desperately, exclaims to himself,
“Lucky wight am I to be here instead of below, for certainly I should never escape from his
blows.” I also exerted my wit, and was much extolled when I said, that Sadik Khan and his troops
ought not to repine after all; for although they were vanquished, yet still the king, in his
magnanimity, had exalted their heads to the skies. In this, I alluded to a pillar of skulls
which his majesty had caused to be erected of the heads of the vanquished. These sayings of
mine were reported to the Shah, and he was pleased to confer upon me the highest honour which
a poet can receive; namely, causing my mouth to be filled with gold coin in the presence of
the whole court, at the great audience. This led to my advancement: and I was appointed to
attend at court, and to write verses on all occasions. In order to show my zeal, I represented
to the king, that as in former times our great Ferdousi had written his “Shah Nameh,” or the
History of the Kings, it behooved him, who was greater than any monarch Persia ever possessed,
to have a poet who should celebrate his reign; and I entreated permission to write a “Shahin
Shah Nameh,” or the History of the King of Kings; to which his majesty was most graciously
pleased to give his consent. One of my enemies at court was the lord high treasurer, who, without
any good reason, wanted to impose upon me a fine of 12,000 tomauns, which the king, on the
plea that I was the first poet of the age, would not allow. It happened one day, that in a
large assembly, the subject of discussion was the liberality of Mahmoud Shah Ghaznevi to Ferdousi,
who gave him a miscal of gold for every couplet in the Shah Nameh. Anxious that the king should
hear what I was about to say, I exclaimed: “The liberality of his present majesty is equal
to that of Mahmoud Shah--equal did I say?--nay greater; because in the one case, it was exercised
towards the most celebrated poet of Persia; and in my case, it is exercised towards the humble
individual now before you.”

‘All the company were anxious to hear how and when such great favours had been conferred upon
me. “In the first place,” said I, “when my father died, he left a property of 10,000 tomauns;
the king permitted me to inherit it; he might have taken it away--there are 10,000 tomauns.
Then the lord high treasurer wanted to fine me 12,000 tomauns; the king did not allow it--there
are 12,000 more. Then the rest is made up of what I have subsisted upon ever since I have been
in the Shah’s service, and so my sum is made out.” And then I took to my exclamations of “May
the king live for ever!--may his shadow never be less!--may he conquer all his enemies!”--all
of which I flattered myself was duly reported to his majesty: and some days after I was invested
with a dress of honour, consisting of a brocade coat, a shawl for the waist, and one for the
head, and a brocade cloak trimmed with fur. I was also honoured with the title of Prince of
Poets, by virtue of a royal firman, which, according to the usual custom, I wore in my cap
for three successive days, receiving the congratulations of my friends, and feeling of greater
consequence than I had ever done before. I wrote a poem, which answered the double purpose
of gratifying my revenge for the ill-treatment I had received from the lord high treasurer,
and of conciliating his good graces; for it had a double meaning all through: what he in his
ignorance mistook for praise, was in fact satire; and as he thought that the high-sounding
words in which it abounded (which, being mostly Arabic, he did not understand) must contain
an eulogium, he did not in the least suspect that they were in fact expressions containing
the grossest disrespect. In truth, I had so cloaked my meaning, that, without my explanation,
it would have been difficult for any one to have discovered it. But it was not alone in poetry
that I excelled. I had a great turn for mechanics, and several of my inventions were much admired
at court. I contrived a wheel for perpetual motion, which only wants one little addition to
make it go round for ever. I made different sorts of coloured paper; I invented a new sort
of ink-stand; and was on the high road to making cloth, when I was stopped by his majesty,
who said to me, “Asker, stick to your poetry: whenever I want cloth, my merchants bring it
from Europe.” And I obeyed his instructions; for on the approaching festival of the new year’s
day, when it is customary for each of his servants to make him a present, I wrote something
so happy about a toothpick, I which I presented in a handsome case, that the principal nobleman
of the court, at the great public audience of that sacred day, were ordered to kiss me on the
mouth for my pains. I compared his majesty’s teeth to pearls, and the toothpick to the pearl-diver;
his gums to a coral-bank, near which pearls are frequently found; and the long beard and mustachios
that encircled the mouth to the undulations of the ocean. I was complimented by everybody present
upon the fertility of my imagination. I was assured that Ferdousi was a downright ass when
compared to me. By such means, I enjoyed great favour with the Shah; and his majesty being
anxious to give me an opportunity of acquiring wealth as well as honours, appointed me to be
the bearer of the usual annual dress of honour which he sends to his son, the prince of the
province of Fars. I was received at Shiraz with the greatest distinctions, and presents were
made to me to a considerable amount; which, in addition to what I had levied from the villages
on the road, made a handsome sum. The event of last night has deprived me of all: all has been
stolen from me, and here you see me the most miserable of human beings. If you do not manage
to help me to escape, I fear that I shall die a prisoner. Perhaps the king may be anxious to
release me, but certainly he will never pay one farthing for my ransom. The lord high treasurer
is not my friend; and since I told the grand vizier, that with all his wisdom he did not know
how to wind up a watch, much less how it was made, I fear that he also will not care for my
loss. The money, with which I might have purchased my ransom, the barbarians have taken; and
where to procure a similar sum I know not.

As soon as the poet had finished his narrative, I assured him that I would do everything in
my power to serve him; but I recommended patience to him for the present, as I had not yet
devised the means of procuring my own liberty, and foresaw great difficulties in saving him
at the same time. It would be impossible to evade the watchfulness of our masters, as long
as we were in the open desert: their horses were as good as mine, and they were much better
acquainted with the country than I was. To run away from them under these circumstances would
be madness; therefore it was only left us to watch my opportunity that might be given us of escape.

We had reached the limits of the Salt Desert, and were about crossing the high road that leads
from Tehran to Meshed, about twenty parasangs to the east of Damgan, when Aslan Sultan made
a halt, and proposed that we should remain concealed for a day in the broken ground that borders
the road, in the hopes that fortune might throw us in the way of a passing caravan, which it
was his intention that we should pillage. At the very dawn of the following clay, a spy, who
had been stationed on an adjacent hill, came in great haste to report that he saw clouds of
dust rising in the direction of Damgan, and approaching towards us, on the road leading to Meshed.

Immediately we were all upon the alert. The Turcomans left their prisoners, bound hand and
foot, on the spot where we had rested, with the intention of returning to take them up as soon
as we should have rifled the caravan, and, fully equipped, we sallied forth with great caution,
determined on blood and plunder.

Aslan himself proceeded before the rest, in order to reconnoitre; and calling me to him, said,
‘Now, Hajji, here is an opportunity for distinguishing yourself. You shall accompany me; and
you will observe the precautions I use previous to showing our whole body, which it may be
necessary for you to know, in order that you may be able to conduct such an enterprise yourself
on some future occasion. I take you with me, in case I should be obliged to use an interpreter;
for frequently in these caravans, there is not a person who understands our language. We will
approach as near as we can, perhaps have a parley with the conductor, and if we cannot make
terms with him, we will fall on with our whole party.’

As the travellers approached, I perceived that Aslan Sultan became uneasy. ‘This is no caravan,
I fear,’ said he; ‘they march in too compact a body: besides, I hear no bells; the dust is
too great in one spot. I see spears!--it is an immense cavalcade--five led horses!--this is
no game for us.’

In fact, as they approached, it was easy to discover that it was no caravan, but some great
personage, the governor of a province at least, who was travelling, attended by a numerous
escort of horsemen and servants, and with all the pomp and glitter usual on such occasions.

My heart leaped within me when I saw this, for here was an excellent opportunity for escape.
Could I approach near enough to be taken prisoner by them, without exciting any previous suspicion
in my master, I should be safe; and although I might be ill-treated at first, still I trusted
to my eloquence to make my story believed. Accordingly, I said to my companion, ‘Let us approach
nearer’; and, without waiting for his permission, I excited my horse onwards. He immediately
followed, with an intention of stopping me; but we had no sooner cleared the small elevated
ground behind which we had posted ourselves, than we came in full view of the whole party,
and were scarcely a bow-shot from them. As soon as we were discovered, some six or seven of
their best horsemen were detached from the rest of the body, and, at the fullest speed of their
horses, came towards us. We turned about to fly: as much as Aslan urged on his steed, so much
did I restrain mine; and by this maneuver I was very soon overtaken and seized. To be knocked
off my horse, disarmed, plundered of my fifty ducats, my razors and all my other effects, was
but the business of a few seconds; and although I assured my new masters that I was in no intention
to leave them, still they persisted in tying my arms behind me, with my own shawl, which they
took from round my waist for that purpose. Thus pinioned, and receiving blows every now and
then, because I did not move fast enough, I was dragged before their chief, who had made a
halt, surrounded by his attendants.

From the sort of attentions which he received, and the low inclinations of the body that were
made before him, I imagined that he must be a royal personage, and I was soon informed as much,
when I came near; for several blows on the head were given me, as hints to make me prostrate
myself before a shahzadeh, or prince. A large circle being made, he ordered me to be released,
and, as soon as I felt myself free, at one bound I disengaged myself from those near me, and
seizing upon the skirt of his cloak,[21] as he was seated on his horse, exclaimed, ‘Penah be
shahzadeh! protection from the prince.’ One of the guards rushed forward to punish my audacity;
but the prince would not allow the sacred custom to be infringed, and promised me his protection.
Ordering his servants not to molest me, he, at the same time, commanded me to relate how I
came to be placed in the predicament in which I now stood.

Falling on my knees, and kissing the ground, I related my story in as concise a manner as possible;
and, to corroborate all that I had said, added, that if he would order his horsemen to attack
the party of Turcomans, who still were close at hand, they might release the king’s poet, with
two other Persians, who were prisoners in their hands, and they would fully confirm all that
I had asserted.

I had no sooner said this than the horsemen, who had pursued Aslan Sultan, returned, with looks
of great dismay, swearing by Ali and by the head of the king, that an immense body of Turcomans,
at least 1,000 strong, were marching down upon us, and that the prince must prepare to fight.
In vain I explained to them that they were only twenty in number--no body would believe me;
I was treated as a spy and a liar, and every one said that if the Turcomans did attack, they
would put me to death on the spot. The party then proceeded onwards at a good pace, looking
about in all directions for the expected enemy, and betraying all those symptoms of apprehension
which the very name of Turcoman excites throughout the whole of Persia.

My own horse had been taken from me, and I was permitted to ride upon a baggage mule, where
I had time to ponder over my wretched fate and miserable prospects. Without a farthing in my
pocket, without a friend, I saw nothing before me but starvation. I had not yet become a sufficiently
good Mussulman to receive comfort from predestination, and I absolutely sobbed aloud at my
own folly, for having voluntarily been the cause of my present misery. That fond partiality
for my own countrymen, which used to predominate so powerfully in my breast when I was a prisoner,
entirely forsook me here, and I cursed them aloud.

‘You call yourselves Mussulmans!’ said I to those around me: ‘you have not the feelings of
dogs. Dogs did I say? You are worse than Christian dogs--the Turcomans are men compared to you.’

Then when I found that this sort of language only produced laughter in my auditors, I tried
what entreaty would do. ‘For the love of Imam Hossein, for the sake of the Prophet, by the
souls of your children, why do you treat a stranger thus? Am I not a Mussulman like yourselves?
What have I done that I should be made to devour this grief? I sought refuge amongst you as
friends, and I am thrust away as an enemy.’

For all this I got no consolation, excepting from an old muleteer, by name Ali Katir, who had
just lighted his kalian, or water pipe, and giving it to me to smoke, said, ‘My son, everything
in this world is in the hand of God.’ Pointing to the mule upon which he rode, he added, ‘If
God has made this animal white, can Ali Katir make it black? It one day gets a feed of corn;
on the next it browses upon a thistle. Can we contend with fate? Smoke your pipe now and be
happy, and be thankful that it is no worse with you. Hafiz says, “Every moment of pleasure
that you enjoy, account it gain--who can say what will be the event of any thing?”’

This speech of the muleteer soothed me a little, and as he found that I was as well versed
in Hafiz as he,[22] and not backward in permitting myself to be comforted, he treated me with
much kindness, and made me a partaker of his mess during the remainder of the journey. He informed
me that the prince, into whose hands I had fallen, was the Shah’s fifth son, who had lately
been installed in the government of the province of Khorassan, and was now on his road to Meshed,
the seat of his jurisdiction. He was escorted by a greater number of attendants than ordinary,
on account of the alarming state of the Turcoman frontier, and it was said that he had instructions
to commence very active operations against that people, as many of whose heads as possible
he was invited to send to Tehran, to be piled up before the gate of the royal palace; and you
may account yourself very fortunate,’ added the muleteer, ‘that yours was not taken off your
shoulders. Had you happened to be fair, with little eyes, and without much hair, instead of
being a dark man, as you are, you certainly would have been put to death, and your head have
been pickled, and made to pass for that of a Turcoman.’

When we had reached our resting-place at night, which was a lonely caravanserai half in ruins,
situated on the skirts of the desert, I determined to endeavour to procure admittance to the
prince, and to make an effort to regain my fifty ducats, and my horse and arms, which I made
no scruple in claiming as my own, notwithstanding a certain little voice within me, which told
me that another had almost as much right to them as I had. I accordingly watched an opportunity,
just before the evening prayer, of presenting myself to him. He was seated on a carpet that
had been spread on the terrace of the caravanserai, reposing himself on his cushion, and before
his attendants had time to beat me off, I exclaimed, ‘Arzi darum, I have a petition to make.’
Upon which he ordered me to approach, and asked me what I wanted? I complained of the treatment
I had received from his servants who had first seized me--related how they had robbed me of
my fifty ducats; and then entreated that my horse and arms might be restored to me. He inquired
of those surrounding him who the men were that I complained of, and when their names were mentioned,
he sent his chief tent-pitcher to conduct them to him. As soon as they appeared, for they were
two, I recognized the aggressors, and affirmed them to be such to the prince.

‘Sons of dogs,’ said he to them, ‘where is the money you stole from this man?’

‘We took nothing,’ they immediately exclaimed.

‘We shall soon see that,’ answered he. ‘Call the ferashes,’ said he to one of his officers,
‘and let them beat the rogues on the soles of their feet till they produce the fifty ducats.’

They were immediately seized, and when their feet were in the air, strongly tied in the noose,
and after receiving a few blows, they confessed that they had taken the money, and produced
it. It was forthwith carried to the prince, who deliberately counted it over, and, putting
it under the cushion upon which he was reclining, released the culprits, and said in a loud
voice to me, ‘You are dismissed.’ I stood with my mouth wide open, hoping to see the money
handed over to me, when his master of the ceremonies took me by the shoulders and pushed me
away. I exclaimed, ‘And my money, where is it?’

‘What does he say?’ said the prince: ‘give him the shoe if he speaks again.’

When the master of the ceremonies, taking off his high green slipper, struck me over the mouth
with the heel of it, shod with iron, saying, ‘Do you speak to a king’s son thus? Go in peace,
and keep your eyes open, or you’ll have your ears cut off’; and so I was pushed and dragged
violently away.

I returned in utter despair to my muleteer, who appeared not in the least surprised at what
had happened and said, ‘What could you expect more? After all, is he not a prince? When once
he or any man in power gets possession of a thing, do you think that they will ever restore it?

We reached Meshed in due time, and the prince made his solemn entry amidst all the noise, parade,
and confusion, attendant upon such ceremonies. I found myself a solitary being, in a strange
city, distant from my friends, and from any creature to whom I might look for assistance, and
without even a pair of razors to comfort me. When I looked at my present means, I found that
they consisted of five tomauns--which I had managed to secrete from the sack I had stolen in
the caravanserai, and which I put between the lining of my cap--of a brown woollen coat, of
a sheep-skin jacket, a shirt, a pair of trousers, and a heavy pair of boots. I had lived upon
the muleteer as long as he enjoyed the daily allowance of provisions that he received during
the time when he was attached to the suite of the prince; but now that he and his mules were
discharged, I could not expect that he should continue to support me. I thought of again taking
to my profession; but who would trust their throats to a man who had the reputation of being
a Turcoman spy? Besides, although I might purchase razors, yet my means were not large enough
to set up a shop, and I was determined not to become a journeyman.

My friend the muleteer, who knew the ways and means of Meshed, recommended me strongly to become
a saka, or water-carrier. ‘You are young, and strong,’ said he: ‘you have a good voice, and
would entice people to drink by a harmonious cry. You have besides a great talent for cant
and palaver, and for laughing at one’s beard. The number of pilgrims who come to Meshed to
perform their devotions at the tomb of the Imâm is great, and charity being one of the principal
instruments which they use for the salvation of their souls, they give freely to those who
promise them the best reward. You must sell each draught in the name and for the sake Imâm
Hossein, our favourite saint. Always offer it gratis; but be sure you get money in hand before
you pour it out; and when your customer has drunk, say, with great emphasis, ‘May your draught
be propitious! May the holy Imâm take you under his protection! May you never suffer the thirst
of the blessed Hossein!’ and such like sort of speeches, which you must chant out so loud that
everybody may hear you. In short, to devotees who come some hundreds of parasangs to say their
prayers, you may say anything and everything, and you will be sure to be believed. I myself
have been a saka at Meshed, and know the trade. It has enabled me to buy a string of mules,
and to be the man you see.’

I followed my friend’s advice. I forthwith laid out my money in buying a leather sack, with
a brass cock, which I slung round my body, and also a bright drinking cup. After having filled
my sack with water, and let it soak for some time, in order to do away the bad smell of the
leather, I sallied forth, and proceeded to the tomb, where I immediately began my operations.
The cry I adopted was ‘Water, water! in the name of the Imâm, water.’ This I chanted with all
the force and swell of my lungs, and having practised under the tuition of the muleteer for
two days before, I was assured that I acquitted myself as well as the oldest practitioners.
As soon as I appeared, I immediately drew the attention of the other sakas, who seemed to question
the right I had to exercise their profession. When I showed myself at the reservoir, to draw
water, they would have quarrelled with me, and one attempted to push me in; but they found
I was resolute, and that my resolution was backed by a set of strong and active limbs, and
therefore confined themselves to abusive language, of which being the entire master, I soon
got the lead, and completely silenced them. Nature, in fact, seemed to have intended me for
a saka. The water which I had a moment before drawn from a filthy reservoir, I extolled as
having flowed from a spring created by Ali in person equal to the sacred well of Zem Zem, and
a branch of the river which flows through Paradise. It is inconceivable how it was relished,
and how considerable was the money I received for giving it gratis. I was always on the watch
to discover when a new set of pilgrims should arrive, and before they had even alighted from
their mules, all dusty from the road, and all happy at having escaped the Turcomans, I plied
them in the name of the Prophet with a refreshing draught, and made them recollect that, this
being the first devotional act which they performed on reaching Meshed, so out of gratitude
for their safe arrival, they ought to reward me liberally; and my admonitions were scarcely
ever disregarded.

The commemoration of the death of Hossein, which is so religiously kept throughout Persia,
was now close at hand, and I determined to put myself into training to appear as the water-carrier,
who on the last day of the festival, which is held the most sacred, performs a conspicuous
character in the tragedy. This was to be acted in public before the prince in the great open
square of the city, and I expected to acquire much reputation and profit from the feat of strength
which I should perform, which consists of carrying an immense sack full of water on the back,
accompanied by additional exertions. I had a rival, who accomplished the task on the last festival;
but as the sack I was about to carry contained infinitely more water than he could support,
my claim to superiority was not to be disputed. However, I was advised to be on my guard, for
he was of a jealous character, and would not lose an opportunity of doing me an injury if he
could. When the day arrived, the prince being seated in an upper room situated over the gate
of his palace, and the whole population of the city assembled to witness the religious ceremonies,
I appeared naked to the waist, with my body streaming with blood, slowly walking under the
weight of my immense sack. Having reached the window at which the prince was seated, I attracted
his notice by loud exclamations for his happiness and prosperity. He threw me down a gold coin,
and expressed himself pleased with my performance. In my exultation I invited several boys,
who were near at hand for the purpose, to pile themselves upon my load, which they did, to
the astonishment of the crowd, who encouraged me by their cries and applause. I called for
another boy, when my rival, who had watched his opportunity, sprang forwards and mounted himself
on the very top of all, hoping, no doubt, to crush me: but, exerting myself to the utmost of
my strength, I carried my burden clean off, amidst the animating shouts of the staring multitude.
But although in the heat of the exertion I felt no inconvenience, yet when I was disencumbered
I found that my back was sprained so severely, that I was totally unfitted for the trade of
a water-carrier for the future. I therefore sold my sack and other articles, and, with the
money that I had gained in water-selling, found myself well off, compared to the deplorable
situation in which I was on my arrival at Meshed. My friend the muleteer had departed some
time before the festival with a caravan for Tehran, so I was deprived of his counsels. I should
have demanded justice for the injury done me by my rival, and might have dragged him before
the cadi; but I was assured that in the Mohammedan law there is no provision made for a sprain.
It is written an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but there is no sprain for a sprain.
Had I had some powerful protector, who would have prosecuted the business for me, perhaps I
might have got redress; but a miserable creature like myself, unknown and unfriended, I could
have gained nothing, and should perhaps have stood a chance of losing the little money I had
acquired.

CHAPTER X

He makes a soliloquy, and becomes an itinerant vendor of smoke.

I held a consultation with myself as to what I should do next for my livelihood. Various walks
in life were open to me. The begging line was an excellent one in Meshed, and, judging from
my success as water-carrier, I should very soon have been at the head of the profession. I
might also have become a lûti,[23] and kept a bear; but it required some apprenticeship to
learn the tricks of the one, and to know how to tame the other: so I gave that up. Still I
might have followed my own profession, and have taken a shop; but I could not bear the thoughts
of settling, particularly in so remote a town as Meshed. At length I followed the bent of my
inclination, and, as I was myself devotedly fond of smoking, I determined to become an itinerant
seller of smoke. Accordingly I bought pipes of various sizes, a wooden tray, containing the
pipe-heads, which was strapped round my waist, an iron pot for fire, which I carried in my
hand, a pair of iron pincers, a copper jug for water, that was suspended by a hook, behind
my back, and some long bags for my tobacco. All these commodities were fastened about my body,
and when I was fully equipped, I might be said to look like a porcupine with all its quills
erect. My tobacco was of various sorts--Tabas, Shiraz, Susa, and Damascus. It is true that
I was not very scrupulous about giving it pure; for with a very small quantity of the genuine
leaf I managed to make a large store, with the assistance of different sorts of dungs. I had
a great tact in discovering amongst my customers the real connoisseur, and to him I gave it
almost genuine. My whole profits, in fact, depended upon my discrimination of characters. To
those of the middling ranks, I gave it half-mixed; to the lower sort, three-quarters; and to
the lowest, almost without any tobacco at all. Whenever I thought I could perceive a wry face,
I immediately exerted my ingenuity in favour of the excellence of my tobacco. I showed specimens
of the good, descanted on its superior qualities, and gave the history of the very gardener
who had reared it, and pledged myself to point out the very spot in his grounds where it grew.

I became celebrated in Meshed for the excellence of my pipes. My principal customer was a dervish,
who was so great a connoisseur that I never dared to give him any but pure tobacco; and although
I did not gain much by his custom, as he was not very exact in his payments, yet his conversation
was so agreeable, and he recommended so many of his friends to me, that I cultivated his good
will to the utmost of my power.

Dervish Sefer (for that was his name) was a man of peculiar aspect. He had a large aquiline
nose, piercing black eyes, a thick beard, and a great quantity of jet black hair flowing over
his shoulders. His conical cap was embroidered all over with sentences from the Koran, and
holy invocations: the skin of a red deer was fastened loosely upon his back, with the hairy
side outwards: he bore in hand a long steel staff, which he generally carried on his shoulder,
and in the other a calabash, suspended by three chains, which he extended whenever he deigned
to ask the charity of passengers. In his girdle he wore large agate clasps, from which hung
a quantity of heavy wooden beads; and, as he swung himself along through the streets and bazaars,
there was so much of wildness and solicitude in all his words and actions, that he did not
fail to inspire a certain awe in all beholders. This, I afterwards learn, was put on, in order
to suit the character which he had adopted; for when he smoked my pipes, if no one chanced
to be present, he was the most natural and unreserved of beings. Our acquaintance soon improved
into intimacy, and at length he introduced me into a small circle of dervishes, men of his
own turn and profession, with whom he lived almost exclusively, and I was invited to frequent
their meetings. It is true that this did not suit my views in the smoking line, for they amongst
them consumed more of my good tobacco than all the rest of my other customers put together;
but their society was so agreeable that I could not resist the temptation.

Dervish Sefer, one evening when we had smoked more than usual, said to me, ‘Hajji Baba, you
are too much of a man to be a seller of smoke all your life:--why do you not turn dervish,
like us? We hold men’s beards as cheap as dirt; and although our existence is precarious, yet
it is one of great variety, as well as of great idleness. We look upon mankind as fair game--we
live upon their weakness and credulity; and, from what I have seen of you, I think you would
do honour to our profession, and in time become as celebrated as even the famous Sheikh Saadi
himself.’ This speech was applauded by the other two, who pressed my entering upon their profession.
I was nothing loath, but I pleaded my ignorance of the necessary qualifications.

‘How is it possible,’ said I, ‘that a being so ignorant and unexperienced as I am can at once
attain to all the learning requisite for a dervish? I know how to read and write, ’tis true;
I have gone through the Koran, and have my Hafiz and Saadi nearly by heart; besides which,
I have read a great part of the Shah Nameh of Ferdûsi, but beyond that I am totally ignorant.’

‘Ah, my friend,’ said Dervish Sefer, ‘little do you know of dervishes, and still less of humankind.
It is not great learning that is required to make a dervish: assurance is the first ingredient.
With one-fiftieth part of the accomplishments that you have mentioned, and with only a common
share of effrontery, I promise you, that you may command not only the purses, but even the
lives of your hearers. If I chose to give myself the trouble, and incur the risks which Mahomed
himself did, I might even now become as great a prophet as he. It would be as easy for me to
cut the moon in two with my finger as it was for him, provided I once made my hearers have
confidence in me; and impudence will do that, and more, if exerted in a proper manner.’

When Dervish Sefer had done talking, his companions applauded what he had said, and they related
so many curious anecdotes of the feats which they had performed, that I became very anxious
to know more of these extraordinary men. They promised to relate the history of their lives
at our next meeting, and, in the meanwhile, recommended me strongly to turn my thoughts to
a line of life more dignified, and fuller of enjoyment, than that of a vagabond seller of adulterated
smoke.

CHAPTER XI

History of Dervish Sefer, and of two other dervishes.

When we had again collected ourselves together, each with a pipe in his hand, seated with our
backs against the wall, in a room, the window of which opened into a small square planted with
flowers, Dervish Sefer, as the acknowledged head of our society, began his story in the following
words:

‘I am the son of the Lûti Bashi, or head Merry-Andrew of the Prince of Shiraz, by a celebrated
courtezan of the name of Taous, or the Peacock. With such parents, I leave you to imagine the
education which I received. My principal associates, during my infancy, were the monkeys and
bears that belonged to my father and his friends, and, perhaps, it is to the numerous tricks
in which they were instructed, and to the facility with which they learnt them, that I am indebted
for the talent of mimicry that has been of so much use to me through life. At fifteen I was
an accomplished lûti. I could eat fire, spout water, and perform all sorts of sleight of hand,
and I should very probably have continued to prosper in this profession, had not the daughter
of the prince’s general of camel artillery become enamoured of me, as I danced on the tight-rope
before the court on the festival of the new year’s day. A young camel-driver under his orders
had a sister who served in the harem of the general: he was my most intimate friend, and his
sister gave him the intelligence of the effect my appearance had produced upon her mistress.
I immediately went to a mîrza or scribe, who lived in a small shed in a corner of the bazaar,
and requested of him to write a love-letter for me, with as much red ink in it as possible,
and crossed and re-crossed with all the complication he could devise. Nothing could be better
than this composition--for at the very outset it informed my mistress that I was dead, and
that my death was owing to the fire of her eyes, that had made roast meat of my heart. Notwithstanding
this assertion, I ventured at the end to say that as I had never yet seen her, I hoped that
she would contrive to grant me an interview. In the joy of my heart for the possession of such
a letter, in great confidence I told the scribe who my charmer was, which he had no sooner
heard, than hoping to receive a present for his trouble, he went forthwith and informed the
general himself of the fact. That the son of the Lûti Bashi should dare to look up to the daughter
of Zambûrekchi Bashi was a crime not to be forgiven, and as the latter had influence at court,
he procured an order for my instant removal from Shiraz. My father did not wish to incur the
prince’s displeasure, and fearing, from my growing celebrity, that I should very soon rival
him in his own profession, rather urged than delayed my departure. On the morning when I was
about quitting Shiraz, and was bidding adieu to my friends the monkeys, bears, and other animals
under his care, he said to me, “Sefer, my son, I should be sorry to part with you; but with
the education which you have received, and the peculiar advantages which you have had of living
almost entirely in the society of me and my beasts, it is impossible but that you will succeed
in life. I now endow you with what will ensure you a rapid fortune. I give you my chief ape,
the most accomplished of his species. Make a friend of him for your own sake, and love him
for mine; and I hope in time that you will reach the eminence to which your father has attained.”
Upon this he placed the animal upon my shoulder, and thus accompanied I left the paternal roof.

‘I took the road to Ispahan, in no very agreeable mood, for I scarcely knew whether to be happy
or sorry for this change in my circumstances. A monkey and independence were certainly delightful
things; but to leave my associates, and the places that were endeared to me from my infancy,
and, above all, to abandon that fair unknown, whom my imagination had pictured to me as lovely
as Shireen herself, were circumstances which appeared to me so distressing, that by the time
I had reached the hut of the dervish, at the Teng Allah Akbar, my mind sank into a miserable
fit of despondency. I seated myself on a stone, near the hut, and, with my monkey by my side,
I gave vent to my grief in a flood of tears, exclaiming, “Ah wahi! Ah wahi!” in accents the
most piteous that can be imagined.

‘These brought the dervish out, and when he had heard my tale, invited me into the hut, where
I found another dervish, of much more commanding aspect than the former. He was clad nearly
in the same manner that I am now (indeed, the cap I wear was his); but there was a wildness
about his looks that was quite imposing.

‘At the sight of me and my companion, he appeared struck by a sudden thought. He and the other
dervish having talked together in private, he proposed that I should accompany him to Ispahan,
promised that he would be kind to me, and, if I behaved well, would put me into the way of
making my fortune. I readily agreed, and after the dervish of the hut had given us a pipe to
smoke, we departed, walking at a good pace; without much being said between us during some time.

Dervish Bideen, for that was his name, at length began to question me very closely about my
former life, and hearing in what my accomplishments consisted, seemed to be well pleased. He
then descanted upon the advantages attending the life of a dervish, proved them to be superior
to the low pursuits of a lûti, and at length persuaded me to embrace his profession. He said,
that if I would look upon him as my master, he would teach me all he knew, and that, he assured
me, was no small portion of knowledge, inasmuch as he was esteemed the most perfect dervish
in Persia. He began to talk of magic and astrology, and gave me various receipts for making
spells and charms, to serve on every occasion in life; by the sale of which alone I should
be able to make my fortune. The tail of a hare, placed under the pillow of a child, he assured
me, produces sleep; and its blood, given to a horse, makes him fleet and long-winded. The eye
and the knuckle-bones of a wolf, attached to a boy’s person, give him courage; and its fat,
rubbed on a woman, will convert her husband’s love into indifference: its gall, used in the
same manner, produces fruitfulness. But the article which bore the greatest price in the seraglios
was the kûs keftar, the dried skin of a female hyena; which, if worn about the person, conciliated
the affection of all to the wearer. He discoursed long upon these and such-like subjects, until
he gradually excited so much interest in my heart, by thus placing my fortune apparently in
full view, that at length he ventured to make a proposal, which he easily judged would be disagreeable.

‘“Sefer,” said he to me, “you know not the treasure you possess in that ape,--I do not mean
as he stands now alive, but dead. If he were dead, I could extract such ingredients from him
to make charms, which would sell for their weight in gold in the harem of the Shah. You must
know, that the liver of an ape, and only of that particular species which you possess, is sure
to bring back the love of a desired object to the person who may possess it. Then the skin
of its nose, if worn round the neck, is a decisive preventive against poison; and the ashes
of the animal itself, after it has been burnt over a slow tire, will, if taken internally,
give all the qualities of the ape, cunning, adroitness, and the powers of imitation.” He then
proposed that we should kill the beast.

‘I was certainly alarmed at the proposal. I had been brought up with my ape; we had hitherto
gone through life together in prosperity as well as in adversity; and to lose him in this barbarous
manner was more than I could bear. I was about to give a flat refusal to the dervish, when
I observed that his countenance, which hitherto had been all smiles and good humour, had changed
to downright furiousness; and fearing that he would take by force that which I could not protect,
I, with all the reluctance imaginable, consented to the execution of his project. We then deviated
from the road; and having got into a solitary glen, we gathered together some dry stubble and
underwood, made a fire, striking a light with a flint and steel, which my companion carried
about him. He took my poor ape into his hands, and, without further ceremony, put it to death.
He then dissected it; and having taken from it the liver, and the skin off its nose, burnt
it in the pile we had made; and when all was over, carefully collected the ashes, which having
packed in a corner of his handkerchief, we proceeded on our journey.

‘We reached Ispahan in due time, where I exchanged such parts of my dress as belonged to the
lûti for the garb of a dervish, and then we proceeded to Tehran. Here my master’s appearance
produced great effect; for no sooner was it known that he was arrived, than all sorts of people
flocked to consult him. Mothers wanted protection for their children against the evil eye;
wives a spell against the jealousy of their husbands; warriors talismans to secure them from
harm in battle. But the ladies of the king’s seraglio were his principal customers. Their most
urgent demand was some powerful charm to ensure the attention of the king. The collection of
materials for this purpose, which the Dervish Bideen had made, was very great. He had the hairs
of a lynx, the back-bone of an owl, and bear’s grease in various preparations. To one of the
ladies, who, owing to her advanced age, was more pressing than the others, he sold the liver
of my monkey, assuring her, that as soon as she appeared wearing it about her person, his majesty
would distinguish her from her rivals. To another, who complained that she was never in favour,
and frustrated in all her schemes to attract notice, he administered a decoction of the monkey’s
ashes; and to a third, who wanted a charm to drive away wrinkles, he gave an ointment, which,
if property applied, and provided she did not laugh, or otherwise move the muscles of her face,
would effectually keep them smooth.

I was initiated into all these mysteries, and frequently was a party concerned in a fraud,
whenever my master was put to the necessity of doing something supernatural to support his
credit, if by chance his spells were palpably of no avail. But whatever profit arose either
from these services, or from the spoils of my monkey, he alone was the gainer, for I never
touched a ghauz[24]of it.

‘I accompanied the Dervish Bideen into various countries, where we practised our art: sometimes
we were adored as saints, and at others stoned for vagrants. Our journeys being performed on
foot, I had good opportunities to see every place in detail. We travelled from Tehran to Constantinople,
and from that capital to Grand Cairo, through Aleppo and Damascus. From Cairo we showed ourselves
at Mecca and Medina; and taking ship at Jedda, landed at Surat, in the Guzerat, whence we walked
to Lahore and Cashmire.

‘At this last place, the dervish, according to custom, endeavoured to deceive the natives;
but they were too enlightened for us, and we were obliged to steal away in disgrace; and we
at length fixed ourselves at Herat, where we were repaid for our former want of success by
the credulity of the Affghans, who were good enough to admit all that we chose to tell them.
But here, as the dervish was getting up a plan to appear as a prophet, and when our machinery
for performing miracles was nearly completed, he, who had promised eternal youth to thousands,
at length paid the debt of nature himself. He had shut himself up in a small hut, situated
at the top of a mountain near Herat, where we made the good people believe he was living upon
no other food than that which the Gins and Peris brought to him; but unfortunately he actually
died of a surfeit, having ate more of a roast lamb and sweetmeats than his nature could support.
For my own credit, I was obliged to say, that the Gins, jealous of us mortals for possessing
the society of so wonderful a person, had so inflated him with celestial food, that, leaving
no room for his soul, it had been completely blown out of his body, and carried away into the
fifth heaven by a strong north-east wind, which was blowing at the time. This wind, which lasts
for 120 days during the summer months, and without which the inhabitants would almost die with
heat, I endeavoured to make them believe was a miracle performed by the dervish in their favour,
as a parting legacy to them and their descendants for ever. The old men, indeed, who recollected
the wind ever since their youth, were incredulous; but their testimony bore but little weight,
compared to the influence which we had acquired. He was buried with the greatest honours; and
the prince of Herat himself, Eshek Mirza, lent his shoulder to bear his coffin to the grave.
A mausoleum was erected over it by some of the most pious of the Affghans, and it has ever
since been a place of pilgrimage from all the country round.

‘I remained at Herat for some time after the death of my companion, in order to enjoy the advantages
which might accrue to me from being the friend and disciple of one of such high reputation,
and I did not repent of my resolution. I disposed of my spells at great prices, and moreover
made a considerable sum by selling the combings of my deceased friend’s beard, and the cuttings
of his nails, which I assured my purchasers had been carefully preserved during the time of
his retirement in the mountains; although in fact they were chiefly collected from my own person.
When I had sold of these relics enough to make several respectable beards, and a proportionate
quantity of nails, I felt that if I persisted in the traffic, notwithstanding the inordinate
credulity of the Affghans, I might be discovered for a cheat, therefore I took my departure,
and, having travelled into various parts of Persia, I at length fixed myself among the Hezareh,
a large tribe, living for the most part in tents, and which occupy the open country between
Caboul and Candahar. My success among them was something quite beyond my expectation, for I
put into practice what the Dervish Bideen had planned at Herat, and actually appeared in the
character of a prophet.’

The Dervish Sefer then, laying his hand upon the shoulder of the dervish who sat next to him,
said, ‘My friend, here, was my accomplice on that occasion, and he will remember how ingeniously
we managed to make the Hezareh believe that we possessed a cauldron which was always full of
boiled rice--a miracle which even the most incredulous did not fail to believe, as long as
they got their share of it. In short, I am the celebrated Hazret Ishan himself; he of whom
you have lately heard so much in Khorassan; and although my sacred character was not proof
against the attacks made upon it by the arms of the Shah, yet, while it lasted, I collected
enough from the zeal and credulity of my disciples to enable me to pass the remainder of my
life in comfort. I have lived at Meshed for some time; and it is but a week ago that we contrived
to perform the miracle of giving sight to a blind girl; so now are held in the highest veneration.’

Here the Dervish Sefer ended his history, and then called upon his next neighbour to give an
account of himself. This was the dervish who had been his accomplice among the Hezareb, and
he began as follows:

‘My father was a celebrated man of the law, of the city of Kom, enjoying the reputation of
saying his prayers, making his ablutions, and keeping his fasts more regularly than any man
in Persia; in short, he was the cream of Shîahs, and the model of Mussulmans. He had many sons,
and we were brought up in the strictest practice of the external parts of our religion. The
rigour and severity with which we were treated were combated on our part by cunning and dissimulation.
These qualities gradually fixed themselves in our character; and without any consideration
for our circumstances, we were early branded as a nest of hypocrites, and as the greatest cheats
and liars of our birth-place. I, in particular, was so notorious that in my own defence I became
a dervish, and I owe the reputation which I have acquired in that calling to the following
fortunate circumstance.

‘I had scarcely arrived at Tehran, and had taken up my quarters opposite to a druggist’s shop,
when I was called up in a great hurry by an old woman, who informed me that her master, the
druggist, had just been taken exceedingly ill, after having eaten more than usual; that the
medicine which he had taken had not performed its office; and that his family wished to try
what a talisman would do for him: she therefore invited me to write one suited to his case.
As I had neither paper, pens, nor ink, I insisted upon going into his anderûn, or woman’s apartments,
and writing it there, to which she consented. I was introduced into a small square yard, and
then into a room, where I found the sick man extended on his bed on the ground, surrounded
by as many women as the place could hold, who cried aloud, and exclaimed, “Wahi, wahi, in the
name of God he dies, he dies!” The implements of medicine were spread about, which showed that
everything had been done either to kill or save him. A large basin, which had contained the
prescription, was seen on the shelf; the long glass tube, that instrument of torture, was in
a corner; and among other furniture, the dotor himself was seen seated, unconcernedly enjoying
his pipe, and who, having found that human means were inefficient, had had recourse to supernatural,
and had prescribed, as a last resource, the talisman, which it was my fate to write. A new
dervish excited new hopes, for I saw that I produced much stir as I entered the sick room,
I asked for paper with an air of authority, as if I felt great confidence in my own powers,
(although, in fact, I had never written a talisman before), and a large piece was produced,
which seemed to have been the wrapper to some drug or other. Pen and ink were also given me;
and then calling up all my gravity, I scrawled the paper over in a variety of odd characters,
which here and there contained the names of Allah, Mohamed, Ali, Hassan, and Hossein, and all
the Imâms, placing them in different anagrams, and substituting here and there figures instead
of letters. I then handed it over with great ceremony to the doctor, who, calling for water
and a basin, washed the whole from off the paper into the basin, whilst the bystanders offered
up prayers for the efficacy of the precious writing. The doctor then said, “In the name of
the prophet, let the patient take this; and if fate hath decreed that he is to live, then the
sacred names which he will now swallow will restore him: but if not, neither my skill, nor
that of any other man, can ever be of the least avail.”

‘The draught was administered, and every eye was immediately fixed upon the wretched man’s
face, as if a resuscitation was expected to ensue. He remained for some time without showing
any symptom of life; when, to the astonishment of all, not excepting myself and the doctor,
he groaned, opened his eyes, raised his head on his arm, then called for a basin, and at length
vomited in a manner that would have done credit to the prescription of Abu Avicenna himself.
In short, he recovered.

‘In my own mind, I immediately attributed the happy change to the drug which had once been
wrapped in the paper, and which, with the nausea of the ink, had produced the effect just described;
but I took care to let the bystanders know that the cure was entirely owing to the interference
and to the handwriting of one of my sanctity; and that but for me he would have died.

‘The doctor, on the other hand, took all the merit of the case to himself; for as soon as his
patient had opened his eyes, he exclaimed, “Did I not tell you so?” and in proportion as the
draught operated, he went on exulting thus: “There, there, see the efficacy of my prescription!
Had it not been for me, you would have seen the druggist dead before you.”

‘I, however, would not allow him to proceed, and said: “If you are a doctor, why did you not
cure your patient without calling for me? Keep to your blisters and to your bleedings, and
do not interfere with that which doth not belong to you.”

‘He answered, “Mr. Dervish, I make no doubt that you can write a very good talisman, and also
can get a very good price for it; but every one knows who and what dervishes are; and if their
talismans are ever of use, it is not their sanctity which makes them so.”

“Whose dog are you,” exclaimed I, in return, “to talk to me after this manner? I, who am a
servant of the prophet. As for you doctors, your ignorance is proverbial: you hide it by laying
all to fate: if by chance your patient recovers, then you take all the credit of the cure to
yourselves; should he die, you say, God hath decreed thus; what can the efforts of man avail?
Go to, go to; when you have nearly killed your next patient, and then know not what more to
ordain, send for me again, and I will cover your impudent ignorance by curing him as I have
just done the druggist.”

“By my head, and by your death,” returned the doctor, “I am not a man to hear this from any
one, much less from a dog of a dervish:” and immediately he got up and approached me in a threatening
attitude, making use of every epithet of abuse that he could think of.

‘I received him with suitable expressions of contempt, and we very soon came to blows; he so
effectually fastened upon my hair, and I upon his beard,[25] that we plucked out whole handfuls
from each other: we bit and spat, and fought with such fury, heedless of the sick man and the
cries of the women, that the uproar became very great, and perhaps would have terminated in
something serious, if one of the women had not run in to us, in great agitation, assuring us
that the Darogah’s officers (police men) were then knocking at the door of the house, and inquiring
whence proceeded all the disturbance.

‘This parted us; and then I was happy to find that the bystanders were in my favour, for they
expressed their contempt of the skill of the physician, whose only object was to obtain money
without doing his patients any good, whilst they looked upon me in the light of a divine person,
who in handwriting alone possessed the power of curing all manner of disease.

‘The doctor, seeing how ill matters were going for him, stole away with the best face he could;
but before he left the room, he stooped down, and collecting as many of the hairs of his beard,
which I had plucked from him, as he could find, to which he cunningly added some of my own
hair, he brandished them in my face, saying, “We shall see on whose side the laugh will be
when you are brought before the cadi to-morrow; for beards are worth a ducat per hair in Tehran,
and I doubt, with all your talismans, whether you can buy these that I hold in my hand.”

‘It was evident, that when his anger was cooled, out of regard to his own reputation, he would
not put his threat into execution; so the fear of being dragged before the justice gave me
no uneasiness, and I therefore only considered how to make the most of the fortunate circumstance
which had just taken place. The report that the druggist (who was the first in Tehran) had
been brought to life, when on the point of death, by a newly arrived dervish, was soon spread
about, and I became the object of general concern. From morning to night I was taken up in
writing talismans, for which I made my customers pay according to their means, and in a short
time I found myself the possessor of some hundreds of piastres. But unfortunately for me, I
did not meet with a dying druggist and a piece of his paper every day; and feeling myself reduced
to live upon the reputation of this one miracle, which I perceived to my sorrow daily diminished,
I made a virtue of necessity, and determining to make the tour of Persia, I immediately left
Tehran. To whichsoever city I bent my steps, I managed matters so adroitly, that I made my
reputation precede my arrival there. The druggist had given me an attestation under his seal,
that he had been restored to life by virtue of a talisman written by my hand, and this I exhibited
wherever I went, to corroborate the truth of the reports which had been circulated in my favour.
I am now living upon this reputation: it supports me very tolerably for the present, but whenever
I find that it begins to rail, I shall proceed elsewhere.’--The dervish here ended his history.

When the third dervish came to his turn to speak, he said: ‘My tale is but short, although
story-telling is my profession. I am the son of a schoolmaster, who, perceiving that I was
endowed with a very retentive memory, made me read and repeat to him most of the histories
with which our language abounds; and when he found that he had furnished my mind with a sufficient
assortment, he turned me out into the world under the garb of dervish, to relate them in public
to such audiences as my talents might gather round me.

‘My first essays were anything but successful. My auditors heard my stories, and then walked
away without leaving me any reward for my pains. Little by little I acquired experience. Instead
of being carried away, as I had at first permitted myself to he, by the interest of the story,
I made a pause when the catastrophe drew near, and then, looking around me, said, “All ye that
are present, if you will be liberal towards me, I will tell you what follows;” and I seldom
failed in collecting a good handful of copper coin.

The dervishes having finished their narratives, I thanked them for the entertainment and instruction
which they had afforded me, and I forthwith resolved to learn as much from them as possible,
in order to become a dervish myself, in case I should be obliged to abandon my present business.
Dervish Sefer instructed me in the numerous tricks which he practised, to impose himself upon
the world as a person of great sanctity; I learned the art of writing talismans from the second;
and the story-teller taught me some of the tales with which his head was stored, lent me his
books, and gave me general rules how to lead on the curiosity of an audience, until their money
should insensibly be enticed from their pockets.

In the meanwhile, I continued to sell my tobacco and my pipes; but owing to my intimacy with
the dervishes, who smoked away all my profits, I was obliged to adulterate the tobacco of my
other customers considerably more than usual; so that in fact they enjoyed little else than
the fumes of dung, straw, and decayed leaves.

One evening, when it was dusk, and about the time of closing the bazaars, an old woman in rags,
apparently bent double with age, stopped me, and requested me to dress a pipe for her to smoke.
She was closely veiled, and scarcely uttered a word beyond her want. I filled her one of my
very worst mixtures: she put it to her mouth; and at her spitting, coughing, and exclamations,
half a dozen stout fellows, with long twigs in their hands, immediately came up, seized me,
and threw me on my back. The supposed old woman then cast off her veil, and I beheld the Mohtesib
in person.[26]

‘At length, wretch of an Ispahani!’ said he, ‘I have caught you--you, that have so long been
poisoning the people of Meshed with your abominable mixtures. You shall receive as many strokes
on your feet as you have received shahies[27] for your pipes. 

Because of its size and population (50.000 inhabitants), Amiens is a city of third order in France;
but as capital for their department and bishopric, its public educational institutions and active
manufacturing, is among the cities of the second order. Amiens is a stronghold respectable,
and apart from the significant role he has done in the history of France, is famous (As recalled)
by the famous peace treaty there in 1802 between France, England, Spain and the Batavian Republic
and the Netherlands. Celebrity also has history of being the home of Peter the Hermit, preacher
of the Crusades.

The city has in its enclosure many important schools of all kinds, a beautiful library than 50,000
volumes and a regular botanical garden. It has inside and the suburbs many factories, with an active
production of gauze and silk and cotton velvets, black cloth satin, fine fabrics, wool and other
tissues of merit. Also manufactures chemicals, morocco, rope, etc., and has numerous dry cleaners.
It has about eight or nine printers, and is the legal seat of a Protestant consistory which
belongs to the Calvinist communion. Amiens around are beautiful by the spread of crops, factories
stand anywhere in the grasslands, picturesque cottages and varied, and the vast panorama that stretches
in all directions almost without interruption of inflections in the field.

If on the outskirts of Amiens, the landscape is very interesting because of the proximity of
the river dela Somme (which cuts the department) and near which the railway passes North -
where the traveler is coming to Paris through Clermont, between Beauvais and Compiegne, countryside
making more interesting proportions. The south-east down the river Marne, which joins the Seine
near Paris, shedding water that a narrow artificial channel, while railroad that runs alongside the
north-east the river Oise, the Aisne and thickened in Compiegne, narrow and miserable by volume
(for the Colombian traveler accustomed to seeing large rivers) but very useful for secondary inland
for irrigation. The railway passes over the Oise, and this river is continuing to go westward
to be confused with the Seine below Paris. The space between the Oise and the Marne is vast,
and as the hills are very rare the plain forms a horizon of meadows, fields culture, parks
and small forests, rural populations, quarries and mills scattered throughout looks very interesting
directions.

Towards the Oise near Paris and are large freestone quarries, limestone in appearance, but
mostly of a sandy loam that lends much to facilitate the huge existing buildings in Paris. Most
of those stones out of quarries in huge chunks or moles that rough square, go to Paris by canal,
or in gigantic chariots pulled by three, four or six of those horses who seem Norman have the
constitution of the rock, judging by its size, fitness and strength.

       

* * * * *

The alderredor of Paris are beautiful, in general, making them a rare contrast the military
fortifications and the huge wall that encloses circunvalacion to Paris, with the thousand objects
picturesque countryside and disparate groups of people nearby. The train passes cutting the
beautiful plain of Saint-Denis, leaving the small town west of the name (whose towers and chimneys dominate
the skyline), and penetrates in the big city French to the north, after crossing the district
da la Chapelle, nestled between the fortifications towards Saint-Denis,
Paris and the barrier, as it is a crowd gives small towns or districts
that are the continuation or the huge circular suburb of the capital
[1].

The city has around him not only the wall (with a pit depth) at field level exterior covered with
groves of pines, but also about fourteen or sixteen strong defense, which include first, the
famous old fortress of Vincennes, outside the Bastille in Paris, France mournful memory. All
these fortifications, With the exception of Vincennes, was established, as is well known, by order
of Louis Philippe, obeying the dual concern of defending Paris of a new invasion as 1815, and
to provide work to the workers. After having spent a huge sum of millions, that king no forecast
did nothing but cause serious harm to Paris and her surrounding,
and the future of freedom.

Indeed, the fortifications, without being of positive benefit under the military point of view for
the defense of Paris, not only have locked the city, impregnating the widening of suburbs, but, in
fact, can scarcely serve as a tool for oppression. Those fourteen strong are all towns that
serve as points of support for any military tyranny, since, studded with soldiers, hover to
Paris at any time when its population make a movement in the liberal sense. Thus, the workers of
Paris to work on those vast fortifications, did nothing to ensure
the closure of the city, putting under the power of military pressure.

Such is always the result of the fortifications. Freedom and justice are the best bastions of defense
for a civilized people, while the towns are in any case the bolts that hold, dominate and enslave
the cities. The English, on the contrary French rivals, has had the good sense to understand
that the strengths are not be next to factories, schools and monuments of civilization, -
because there a power that defends better than all the guns the shrine of a famous city and
treasures of art, industry and commerce, that power is the social interests supported freedom.
London has no more strength to its bridges, its vapors, its railways, factories and monuments
of every sort. Civilization is the best guarantee of this vast metropolis of affluence. But
France is a military country par excellence, and no wonder that Paris, the capital of the spirit
world, is surrounded by the instruments of force.

       

* * * * *

       

PART THREE.

       

FROM PARIS TO MADRID.

* * * * *

CHAPTER I.

* * * * *

Burgundy and Lyon.

Melun Railroads .-- .-- .-- Sens. Fontainebleau .-- Montereau Joigny Dijon .-- .-- .-- Impressions
Tonnerre nocturnal - Panorama de Lyon.

If you would like to have a comparative and comprehensive idea of ​​social revolution that has
occurred railways in Europe, nothing more appropriate to form a deep conviction as a journey
from Paris to Madrid, by way of Lyon, Marseille Alicante - or stroll among the rugged mountains
of Switzerland, on the banks of lovely lakes.

Who would have thought now twenty years that Switzerland, which is
a huge mountain divided by deep valleys and small lakes, will soon
be crossed by the locomotive?

And more still, who would have thought that in 1858, disregarding the sea and the Pyrenees, could
pass a traveler from Paris to Madrid in seventy-two hours, with a thousand comforts and overcoming
so multiplied obstacles? And yet, even accortarán rail distance.

Within two years two major routes of Valladolid and Zaragoza, as two huge arms pressing the Pyrenees
on one side and another, will link Madrid to Bordeaux in the west, and Perpignan in the east, and
then the capital of France and Spain will be one to thirty-six hours away (Since it is measured
by time) and the Pyrenees will not appear but as a monument granite and snow lifted by nature
to be a great day but the eternal testament to the wonders of the infinite work of civilization,
in which God works as supreme inspirer and creator, and man is associated as a tireless worker
who receives free salary, welfare and progress.

These reflections made me the March 24, 1859, exactly a year after arriving in Paris, the huge
pier from Lyon railway, giving a bye to the metropolis intellectual world, where it was half
my life and my love supreme treasure.

Sentíame almost exhausted and the artificial life that takes in Paris, where everything is the
result a kind of tacit convention of society - where fashion reigns as an absolute sovereign,
and the heart is not at its spontaneity and feels himself only when
it holds in the sanctuary of the family, fleeing the fascinating bustle
of a world that stirs endless turmoil.

Going to visit Spain, the old home of the heroic founders mine, - the home of my grandparents,
my language and all that nurtured my spirit in the happy days of early youth.

Great weather, gives early spring, invited to seek delight in the aspiration outdoors and in
the contemplation restless, somewhat fantastic, the countryside and small populations, which
leads to the ubiquity of the locomotive, making us go through the speed of the hurricane by
castles and hills, forests and cities, and it constitutes the little bumpy but wonderful panorama
of the central or southern France, as in all addresses the wealth of culture produces the same
results. Poetry needed because wherever the plow has civilized the land to the refinement, but if the
poet has few impressions that collect in the race, the traveler will find everywhere revelation
a relatively comforting progress.

The fort of Charenton was back, and the last suburb of Paris were
lost behind the slight inflection of the ground, while the east is
developing the vast countryside, stripped of natural charm, but rich
in details of civilization and culture.

Returning a bend of railroad discovers an extremely picturesque setting. The Seine, still unimportant,
because it has not yet received the waters of the Marne, which will increase its flow in the
outskirts of Paris, makes a bow there, dividing the small and attractive city of Melun, resting
on the side of a hill, dotted the edges of small forest of pines and oaks. Nothing is hard to
see from Melun buildings to draw attention as an art object; but the population is not just smiling
as all the banks that take a clean and murmuring river, but is interested in the commercial.
It is there that go down to Paris the heavy rowboats, or horse-drawn pipes filled with Burgundy
wine, wheat and firewood, lumber and charcoal, from the vast forests that these plains are preserved
with great care.

Thereafter, towards the south-east, the horizon opens and extends, without interruption by rather
than yellow or green hills, isolated and distant, always round and almost all of limestone or sandstone
formation, whose elevation varies between 80 and 200 apparently. For everywhere are beautiful villas of
simple and picturesque architecture, surrounded by willows and persistent pines, poplar or steep and
flexible, symmetrically grassland wherever demarcated, and small
engage in various crops (vines, wheat and vegetables) which reveal
for their outstanding condition and multiplied that wonderful edge
of the property division territorial so beneficial to France, due
to the great revolution which sold off assets inactive or dormant
and established equality in families.

The train cuts the undulating region of Fontainebleau, and does not distinguish or nearby city or
the famous palace, the scene of the loves and voluptuous parties the court of Louis XIV, and
the first fall or abdication of Napoleon proud. Hardly, to pass between forest oaks and pines,
is to one side the famous forest that is the specialty of Fontainebleau, rich in precious and
aromatic wood joinery and construction, and a sumptuous beauty bright green in spring and
summer, - varied and melancholy in the fall.

To leave behind the vast forest are found the high hills of Montereau, field the heroic battle
won in vain for one of the marshals of Napoleon on the eve of the abdication of Fontainebleau.
At the foot takes the city of Montereau, something considerable population and beautiful situation
at the confluence of the Yonne to the Seine, somewhat thickened and the union of the waters
of the Aube. The game of the hills to the plains, the two rivers and the city give the landscape
an enchanting look of freshness and joy. Montereau is a stopover point important in domestic
trade, has some significant manufacturing and is primarily a significant agricultural center
and the city has no interest in its structure, since the four or five towers stand out against
the pale background of the hills are a common architecture.

The railroad still skirting the left bank of Yona (Yonne), peaceful river, slow and Quiet, low
margins and light waves as all the rivers of France, which run plains almost totally leveled.
In Joigny, quaint little town, and a staging in navigation, we verify the confluence of the creek
Armanzon, in Yona, which runs parallel to a channel, either as elements
of a vast irrigation and communications thing slow but safe and cheap.

Among Joigny Montereau and the traveler has a rather pleasant surprise passing in front of the
city of Sens, which takes to the left bank of Yona, taking her back to a beautiful group of hills.
Sens, a town of over 25,000 inhabitants, very dealer, agriculture and manufacturing, in the
main square boasts a beautiful temple façade is a delicious taste is lies with delight the
eye, as it can find a great contrast with the prosaic art agriculture. The monument, to judge from afar
for the magnificent façade and the tower belongs to the Gothic genre
of the second part of the age average, the full arc and large spinner
with matching fluted columns groups and reliefs patiently capricious.

The curious can see how the feeling of the picturesque, the commercial instinct and foresight
have determined the formation hygienic standard of all populations of the journey. Rare is the
town or city, big or small, that does not rest on the bank of a river at the foot or in the
skirt of one or more hills defend it from the icy winds and violent east. This homogeneity
of situation makes them bear much resemblance in general appearance to the people that delay
between Paris and Lyon.

On the other hand, industry and the nature of the soil also keep complete homogeneity throughout
this vast plain covered with vineyards, called Burgundy, and, having received center to Dijon,
extends from Joigny to near Lyon. Sometimes they saw in the distance groups of tall chimneys that
reveal a small manufacturing center, and is funded channel or a river where the boats slowly
creep feeding trade items immediate consumption, and the hills disappear altogether, the soil
loses even the slightest accident to do so picturesque, and the vast plains, seemingly desolate,
lost in a limitless horizon where the eye wanders in vain looking for any object on which it
rested.

Sometimes also the horizon narrows slightly, from side to side, as the grouping the hills, and
are on the gentler slopes (protected from the hurricanes that often come from the mountains of
Jura or the Vosges) funny people grounded in the amphitheater stands
at the bottom of some old feudal castle, and offer a full set grace
and whimsy, interspersed with groups of pines and other trees, and
crowned with ribbons small forests whose shade brown contrasts with
the pale blue and white clouds a magnificent sky.

Burgundy is actually a vast vineyard, as if her round hills interrupted at intervals the plains,
wherever you see the rows of vines cover the vegetable spring and summer of generous spirits.

They
often stand to turn a corner miserable small villages, consisting of black huts, depressed and dismantled,
they reveal little too well-being and neglect. Most of those rickety shacks are rough stones
or bricks mismatched covered straw or broken tiles, the rains and wind have holes everywhere.

The
farmer in this region has a very intelligent and lively appearance, and his poor dress blue cotton
fabric, indicates that the lack of shelter in the winters afflicting
the population rural.

The donkey, very miserable dimension, replacing there the horse (quintessential urban animal
in France, which is by the way, is treated there to clubs, like almost all citizens of life and
passive obedience). And not only does the humble and resigned donkey agent agricultural work,
but he is honored with the shaft of the tartans and light carts rustic or riding with careless
confidence.

Tonnerre is a fairly large city (although the fifth order in France) for some manufacturing,
for its large trade in wine and as a center of production of that
item.

It is located to the left bank of Armanzon, stream channel where part of Burgundy linking
the Seine to the Saône, allowing the wonderful boat to pass through a throughout France, from
the mouth of the Seine in the English Channel to the Rhone in the Mediterranean.

Tonnerre no interest in monuments, and after losing sight of the field takes proportions that
make it seem sad and desolate.

While passing the path to Montbard Vitteaux rail takes its course through the middle grouped as
rugged hills of huge boulders, some tunnels drilled more or less deep, carved in granite rocks,
quartz crystals shale and siliceous extremely harsh, with no visible stratification, and agglomerated
in masses perpendicular. Nothing in all the way to Dijon no other hills of this formation, although
to what afar can see some high granite rocks bluish glow to the light of the sun monumental tombstones.

Dijon is a great and beautiful city of about 60.000 inhabitants who deserves great interest both
and historical capital, the seat was in the old and powerful dukes
of Burgundy, as for its superior architectural monuments, its institutes
literary, scientific and charitable and movement manufacturing, agricultural
and commercial.

The city lies in an open plain by three sides, taking the one the Ouche, tiny river, and the
other a group of beautiful hills. You its vast trade in wine, very cheap (since they are the most
popular consumer) and some well-esteemed, has several articles worthy of appreciation. Its factories
are numerous, and specialty is famous for the wool hats and plush representing strong values.

From
the railway station to see the arrows reach steep towers of many monuments. The most beautiful
are (as can be judged from a distance by the structure of the towers and facades): 1 the magnificent
church of Notre Dame, dating from the thirteenth and XIV, and boasts exquisite purity with all
the majesty and wonder of Christian art; is a masterpiece and his bold upper colonnades are of
great beauty, resting on an arcade spinner sumptuous three groups curds and Gothic reliefs: 2 º church
San Miguel, which was built in the XV and XVI, and expresses in its architecture mixed or transition
(very beautiful but not the severity of the Middle Ages) the step to art Gothic romance of effeminate
elegance of the Renaissance: 3 the cathedral of San Benigno, transition also, but much older,
because it corresponds to the time when the architecture moved from
the simple majesty of Roman art to the patient eccentricity and angularity
and reliefs of Gothic art, whose works are true legends in stone religious
artists by the people.

Dijon is the vertex of the angle formed by the railway from Paris to Lyon, for the line, after have
followed the direction south-east, turns south to pay first and then Saona the Rhone, along
picturesque valleys. The train passes in front of large populations as Beaune, Chalons, Macon
and Villefranche, all agricultural production centers.

Wines Beaune and Mâcon are estimated, the first on merit, and the second by the great varied
amount of production, which adapts to a wide use among all social classes.

The night covered with their shadows the vast plain, and I could not even have a general idea
aspect of the country between Dijon and Lyon. I'll just say that when passing through Macon,
concerned with pleasant memory, I felt possessed of a certain reverence towards this region
interesting. Mâcon glorious is the homeland of Lamartine, - the Patriarch of poetry in the
nineteenth century and could not less than to enjoy the breezes of
the country aspiring immortalized by youth, the lyre sublime glory
and to the woes of the French Tasso.

There was born and began to dream, sing and grow the divine poet, and he has kept his home with
a loving reverence, making Milly the sanctuary of the purest harmonies and noblest thoughts.

The
train rolled into the shadows with the speed of the wind, sending the locomotive of when then their
whistles echo effects that they woke up in the plain, and I, while other passengers were sleeping at
my side, smoked with relish, letting my mind wander in a whirlwind Memories of love and of musings
on the future of mankind, while, sinking gaze at the endless shadow that covered the countryside,
looking for some light in her womb fugitive or some other more pronounced
and vigorous shadow produced by a prominent building here or there
near the road.

Suddenly a train was going almost rubbing in the opposite direction, as an angry dragon, launched
its breath of fire and steam to disappear at the same instant. Nothing but great one of those
train crossings, mostly in the dark vault of a tunnel, where the whistle of the locomotive
looks like a cry of supreme agony or death. It is very trivial opinion that the railroads have
removed the poetry of travel giving a character extremely prosaic. Indeed, if a station, near
a beautiful city or a rich landscape, comparing the poetic spiritualism a monument near the piles
of coal prosaic stone and wagons, the disadvantage is that powerful instrument for locomotion journey
that has made a career, a crowd of hurricanes and impressions that are just beginning born when vanish
like a nightmare. The railway, leveling the ground and shortening immense distances and time,
eliminated the pilgrimage and the traveler is a Asmodeus kind enough
not to contemplate what is presented to the side of the wagon quickly.

And HOWEVER, I think the railways by removing much of the poetry of
matter have created a new poetry, much more vigorous and fruitful,
poetry may be called mixed poetry of the spirit. Then as to the horse, it was as much mine as his; particularly since the peasant, with
his own, must now be close at hand: so without more ceremony, I unfolded the handkerchief,
which still lay in his lap, and taking out the letter to the steward, I mounted the horse:
I applied the stirrups to his sides;[31] I galloped off; and in a very short time had left
the sleeper far behind me, and had made considerable progress on the road to the capital.

As I rode along, I considered what was now my best line of conduct, and in what manner I should
best introduce myself to the poet’s family, so as to make my story good, and secure for myself
the reward which had been destined for the courier. I calculated that I should have at least
a good day’s start of him; for when he awoke, he probably would be obliged to walk some distance
before he got another horse, should he not regain his own, which was very doubtful; and appearing
on foot as he did, it would be a hundred to one if anybody would believe his story, and he,
most probably, would now be refused the loan of a beast to carry him on. I resolved, therefore
immediately upon reaching Tehran, to sell the horse, and its accoutrements, for what they would
fetch; I would then exchange my dervish’s dress for the common dress of the country; and making
myself up as one come from off a long journey, present myself at the gate of the poet’s house,
and there make the best story I could, which would be a sufficiently easy matter, considering
how well I was acquainted with every circumstance relating to him.

I entered Tehran early in the morning by the Shah Abdul Azîm gate, just as it was opened, and
immediately exhibited my horse for sale at the market, which is daily held there, for that
purpose. I had proved it to be a good beast, from the rate at which I had travelled since taking
my hasty leave of the courier; but a horse-dealer, to whom I showed it, made out so clearly
that it was full of defects, that I thought myself in luck, if I got anything at all for it.
It was chup--it had the ableh[32]--it was old, and its teeth had been burnt;--in short, it
seemed to have every quality that a horse ought not to have. I was therefore surprised when
he offered me five tomauns for it, provided I threw him the bridle and saddle into the bargain;
and he seemed as surprised when I took him at his word, and accepted of his offer. He paid
me down one half of the money, and then offered me a half-starved ass in payment of the remainder;
but this I refused, and he promised to pay me in full when we met again. I was too much in
haste to continue bargaining any longer; so going straightway to the bazaar, I bought a black
cap, laid by my dervish’s tiara, and having equipped myself in a manner to be taken for one
come from off a journey, I inquired my way to the house of the poet.

It was situated in a pleasant quarter of the town, surrounded by gardens filled with poplars
and pomegranate trees, and in a street through which ran a stream of water, bordered by beautiful
chenars.[33] But the house itself seemed indeed to speak the absence of its master: the gate
was half closed; there was no stir about it; and when I entered the first court, I could perceive
but few indications of an inhabitant. This looked ill for my promised reward. At length, making
my way to the upper room, that was situated over the gate, I there saw a man of about fifty
years old, seated on a felt carpet, smoking his kaliân, whom I found to be the very person
I was in search of, viz. the Nazir or steward.

I immediately exclaimed, ‘Good news! the khan is coming.’

‘Yani cheh? what do you mean?’ said he; ‘which khan? where? when?’

When I had explained myself, and had presented the letter addressed to him, he seemed to be
thrown into a mixed state of feigned joy and real sorrow, amazement, and apprehension.

‘But are you very sure,’ said he, ‘that the khan is alive?’

‘Very sure,’ returned I; ‘and before to-morrow is over, you will receive another courier, who
will give you many more particulars of his safety, and who will bring letters to the king,
viziers, and others.’

He then began to make all sorts of incoherent exclamations; ‘This is a wonderful business!
What dust has fallen upon our heads? Where shall I go? What shall I do?’

When he had a little recovered himself, I endeavoured to persuade him to give me an explanation
of his emotions on this occasion, and tell me why he felt so agitated, and apparently distressed,
at what ought only to be a matter of joy. All I could hear from him was, ‘He must be dead;
everybody says he is dead; his wife dreamt that she had lost her largest tooth--the one that
gave her such aching pain, and therefore he is dead; besides the king has settled it so. He
cannot be alive; he must not be alive.’

‘Well,’ said I, ‘if he is dead, be it so; all I can say is, that he was one of the true believers
at Asterabad, not six days ago; and that he will soon prove in person, by showing himself at
Tehran, in the course of another week.’

After the Nazir had sat, and wondered, and ruminated for some time, he said, ‘You will not
be surprised at my perplexity when I tell you of the state of things here, in consequence of
the report of my master’s death. In the first place, the Shah has seized all his property:
his house, furniture, and live stock, including his Georgian slaves, are to be given to Khur
Ali Mirza, one of the king’s younger sons: his village now belongs to the prime vizier: his
place is about to be bestowed upon Mirza Fûzûl; and, to crown all, his wife has married his
son’s tutor.

I determined to wait the arrival of the poet, and through his interference to endeavour to
get into some situation, where I might gain my bread honestly, and acquire a chance of advancing
myself in life, without having recourse to the tricks and frauds which I had hitherto practised:
for I was tired of herding with the low and the vulgar; and I saw so many instances before
me of men rising in the world, and acquiring both riches and honour, who had sprung from an
origin quite as obscure as my own, that I already anticipated my elevation, and even settled
in my own mind how I should act when I was a prime vizier.

‘Who,’ said I to myself, ‘was the Shah’s chief favourite, Ismael Beg tellai, or the golden,
but a ferash, or a tent pitcher? He is neither handsomer nor better spoken than I; and if ever
there should be an opportunity of comparing our horsemanship, I think one who has been brought
up amongst the Turcomans would show him what riding is, in spite of his reputation. Well; and
the famous lord high treasurer, who fills the king’s coffers with gold, and who does not forget
his own--who and what was he? A barber’s son is quite as good as a greengrocer’s, and, in our
respective cases, a great deal better too; for I can read and write, whereas his excellency,
as report says, can do neither. He eats and drinks what he likes; he puts on a new coat every
day; and after the Shah, has the choice of all the beauties of Persia; and all this without
half my sense, or half my abilities: for to hear the world talk, one must believe him to be
little better than a khûr be teshdeed, i.e. a doubly accented ass.’

I continued wrapt up in these sort of meditations, seated with my back against the wall of
one of the crowded avenues which lead to the gate of the royal palace, and had so worked up
my imagination by the prospect of my future greatness, that on rising to walk away, I instinctively
pushed the crowd from before me, as if such respect from them was due to one of my lofty pretensions.
Some stared at me, some abused me, and others took me for a madman; and indeed when I came
to myself, and looked at my tattered clothes and my beggarly appearance, I could not help smiling
at their surprise, and at my folly; and straightway went into the cloth bazaar in the determination
of fitting myself out in decent apparel, as the first step towards my change of life.

Making my way through the crowd, I was stopped by a violent quarrel between three men, who
were abusing each other with more than ordinary violence. I pushed into the circle which surrounded
them, and there, to my dismay, discovered the courier, whom I had deceived, seconded by a peasant,
attacking the horse-dealer, whom they had just pulled off the horse, which I had sold him.

‘That is my horse,’ said the peasant.

‘That is my saddle,’ said the courier.

‘They are mine,’ exclaimed the horse-dealer.

I immediately saw the danger in which I stood, and was about to slink away, when I was perceived
by the horse-dealer, who seized hold of my girdle, and said, ‘This is the man I bought the
horse of.’ As soon as I was recognized by the courier, immediately the whole brunt of the quarrel,
like a thunder-cloud, burst on my head, and I was almost overwhelmed by its violence. Rascal,
thief, cheat, were epithets which were dinned into my ears without mercy.

‘Where’s my horse?’ cried one.

‘Give me my saddle,’ vociferated the other.

‘Return me my money,’ roared out the third.

‘Take him to the cadi,’ said the crowd.

In vain I bawled, swore, and bade defiance; in vain I was all smoothness and conciliation:
it was impossible for the first ten minutes to gain a hearing: every one recited his griefs.
The courier’s rage was almost ungovernable; the peasant complained of the injustice which had
been done him; and the horse-dealer called me every sort of name, for having robbed him of
his money. I first talked to the one, then coaxed the other, and endeavoured to bully the third.
To the courier I said, ‘Why are you so angry? there is your saddle safe and sound, you can
ask no more.’ To the peasant I exclaimed, ‘You could not say more if your beast had actually
been killed; take him and walk away, and return thanks to Allah that it is no worse.’ As for
the horse-dealer, I inveighed against him with all the bitterness of a man who had been cheated
of his property:--‘You have a right to talk indeed of having been deceived, when to this moment
you know that you have only paid me one-half of the cost of the horse, and that you wanted
to fob me off with a dying ass for the other half.’

I offered to return him the money; but this he refused: he insisted upon my paying him the
keep of the horse besides: upon which a new quarrel ensued, in which arguments were used on
both sides which convinced neither party, and consequently we immediately adjourned to the
daroga or police magistrate, who, we agreed, should decide the question.

We found him at his post, at the cross streets in the bazaar, surrounded by his officers, who,
with their long sticks, were in readiness to inflict the bastinado on the first offender. I
opened the case, and stated all the circumstances of it; insisting very strongly on the evident
intention to cheat me, which the horse-dealer had exhibited. The horse-dealer answered me,
and showed that as the horse did not belong to him, it being stolen from another, he had no
right to pay for its keep.

The question puzzled the daroga so much, that he declined interfering, and was about ordering
us to the tribunal of the cadi, when a decrepit old man, a bystander, said, ‘Why do you make
so much difficulty about a plain question? when the horse-dealer shall have paid the hajji
the remaining half of the price of the horse, then the hajji shall pay for the keep of the
beast, as long as it was in the horse-dealer’s possession.’

Every one cried Barîk Allah! Barîk Allah! Praise be to God! and right or wrong, they all appeared
so struck by the specious justice of the decision, that the daroga dismissed us, and told us
to depart in peace.

I did not lose a moment in repaying to the horse-dealer the purchase-money of the horse, and
in getting from him a receipt in full: it was only after he had settled with me that he began
to ponder over the merits of the decision, and seemed extremely puzzled to discover why, if
he was entitled to the horse’s keep at all, he was not entitled to it, whether he had paid
me half or the whole of the money? He seemed to think, that he for once had been duped; and
very luckily his rage was averted from me to the daroga, who he very freely accused of being
a puzzle-headed fool, and one who had no more pretension to law than he had to honesty.

CHAPTER XVII

He puts on new clothes, goes to the bath, and appears in a new character.

I now looked upon myself as clear of this unpleasant business, which I had entirely brought
on my own head, and congratulated myself that I had got off at so cheap a rate. I again made
my way to the cloth bazaar, and going to the first shop near the gate of it, I inquired the
price of red cloth, of which it was my ambition to make a barûni, or cloak; because I thought
that it would transfer to me that respect which I always felt for those who wore it. The shopkeeper,
upon looking at me from head to foot, said ‘A barûni indeed! and for whom do you want it, and
who is to pay for it?’

‘For myself, to be sure,’ answered I.

‘And what does such a poor devil as you want with such a coat? Mirzas and Khans only wear them,
and I am sure you are no such personage.’

I was about to answer in great wrath, when a dalal or broker went by, loaded with all sorts
of second-hand clothes, which he was hawking about for sale, and to him I immediately made
application, in spite of the reiterated calls of the shopkeeper, who now too late repented
of having driven me off in so hasty a manner. We retreated to a corner in the gateway of the
adjacent mosque, and there the dalal, putting his load down, spread his merchandise before
me. I was struck by a fine shot silk vest, trimmed in front with gold lace and gold buttons,
of which I asked the price. The dalal extolled its beauty and my taste; swore that it had belonged
to one of the king’s favourite Georgians, who had only worn it twice, and having made me try
it on, walked around and around me, exclaiming all the while, ‘Mashallah, Mashallah!’ Praise
be to God! I was so pleased with this, that I must needs have a shawl for my waist to match,
and he produced an old Cashmerian shawl full of holes and darns, which he assured me had belonged
to one of the ladies in the king’s harem, and which, he said, he would let me have at a reasonable
price. My vanity made me prefer this commodity to a new Kermân shawl, which I might have had
for what I was about to pay for the old worn-out Cashmere, and adjusting it so as to hide the
defects, I wound it about my waist, which only wanted a dagger stuck into it, to make my dress
complete. With this the dalal also supplied me, and when I was thus equipped I could not resist
expressing my satisfaction to the broker, who was not backward in assuring me, that there was
not a handsomer nor better-dressed man in Tehran.

When we came to settle our accounts, the business wore a more serious aspect. The dalal began
by assuring me of his honesty, that he was not like other dalals, who asked a hundred and then
took fifty, and that when he said a thing, I might depend upon its veracity. He then asked
me five tomauns for the coat, fifteen for the shawl, and four for the dagger, making altogether
twenty-four tomauns.

Upon hearing this, my delight subsided, for I had barely twenty tomauns in my pocket, and I
was about stripping myself of my finery, and returning again to my old clothes, when the dalal
stopped me, and said, ‘You may perhaps think that price a little too much, but, by my head
and by your soul, I bought them for that--tell me what you will give?’ I answered, that it
was out of the question dealing with him upon such high terms, but that if he would give them
to me for five tomauns I would be a purchaser. This he rejected with disdain, upon which I
stripped, and returned him his property. When he had collected his things again, and apparently
when all dealings between us were at an end, he said, ‘I feel a friendship for you, and I will
do for you, what I would not do for my brother--you shall have them for ten tomauns.’ I again
refused, and we stood higgling, until we agreed that I should pay him six, and one by way of
a dress for himself. This was no sooner said than done.

He then left me, and I packed up my bargain, with the intention of first going to the bath,
and there equipping myself. On my road, I bought a pair of high-heeled green slippers, a blue
silk shirt, and a pair of crimson silk trousers, and having tied up the whole in my handkerchief,
I proceeded to the bath.

No one took notice of me as I entered, for one of my mean appearance could create no sensation,
and I comforted myself by the reflection, that the case would be changed as soon as I should
put on my new clothes. I deposited my bundle in a corner, where I also undressed, and having
wrapt myself round with a towel, I entered the bath.

Here all ranks were on a level, in appearance at least, and I now flattered myself that my
fine form, my broad chest, and narrow waist, would make me an object of admiration. I called
to one of the dalâks (bathing men) to wait upon me, and to go through the different operations
of rubbing with the hand, and of the friction with the hair bag, and I also ordered him to
shave my head, to get ready the necessary materials for dying my beard, moustaches, and curls,
as well as my hands and the soles of my feet, and also to prepare the depilatory; in short,
I announced my intention of undergoing a complete lustration.

The dalâk, as soon as he began rubbing me, expressed his admiration at my broad chest by his
repeated exclamations; and bearing in mind the influence which new clothes were likely to create,
I behaved like one who had been accustomed to this sort of praise and attention. He said that
I could not have come at a luckier hour, for that he had just operated upon a Khan, who having
received a dress of honour from the Shah, upon the occasion of bringing the first melons from
Ispahan, had been sent to the bath by the astrologers at this particular time, as the most
fortunate for putting on a new dress.

As soon as all was over, the dalâk brought me some dry linen, and conducted me to the spot
where I had left my clothes. With what pleasure I opened my bundle and inspected my finery!
It appeared that I was renovated in proportion as I put on each article of dress. I had never
yet been clothed in silk. I tied on my trousers with the air of a man of fashion, and when
I heard the rustling of my vest, I turned about in exultation to see who might be looking at
me. My shawl was wound about me in the newest style, rather falling in front, and spread out
large behind, and when the dagger glittered in my girdle, I conceived that nothing could exceed
the finish of my whole adjustment. I indented the top of my cap in the true Kajari or royal
style, and placed it on my head considerably on one side. When the bathing man at length brought
me the looking-glass, as a signal for paying the bath, I detained him for the purpose of surveying
myself, arranging my curls to twist up behind the ear, and pulling my moustaches up towards
my eyes. I then paid him handsomely, and leaving my old clothes under his charge, I made my
exit with the strut of a man of consequence.

I took my road towards the poet’s house, in the hope of gaining some intelligence about him.
From the head of the street, I perceived a crowd surrounding the gate, and I was soon informed
that he had just arrived, and had gone through the ceremony of making his entrance over the
roof instead of through the door; for such is the custom when a man who has been thought dead
returns home alive.

I immediately pushed through the crowd, made my way into the room where the poet was seated,
and with every demonstration of great joy, congratulated him upon his safe arrival. He did
not recognize me, and even when I had explained who I was, he could scarcely believe that one
so trim and smart as I then was could be the same dirty ragged ruffian whom he had known before.

The apartment was filled with all sorts of people, some happy at his return, others full of
disappointment. Among the latter, and those who paid him the finest compliments, was Mirza
Fûzûl, the man who had been nominated to succeed him in his situation, and who did not cease
exclaiming, ‘Your place has been empty, and our eyes are enlightened,’ as long as he remained
in the room. At length, a great bustle was heard, the doors were opened, and an officer from
the king was announced, who commanded the poet forthwith to repair to the presence, which he
did in the very clothes, boots, dust and all, in which he had travelled.

The party then broke up, and I left the house in the determination of returning the next day;
but as I was going out of the yard, I met the Nazir, with whom I had had a conversation as
before related. He did not appear to me to be among the happy ones. ‘In the name of Allah,’
said I, ‘you see that my words have proved true: the Khan is alive!’

‘True enough,’ answered he, with a sigh; ‘he is alive; and may his life be a long one! but
God is great!’ and then making two or three more similar exclamations, he left me, apparently
full of care and misery.

I passed the remainder of the day in strolling about, and building castles in the air. I walked
through the bazaars, went to the mosques, and lounged among the idlers, who are always to be
found in great numbers about the gate of the royal palace. Here, the news of the day was the
poet’s return, and the reception which he had met with from the Shah. Some said, that his majesty,
upon hearing of his arrival had ordained that it could not be; that he was dead, and must be
so. Others, that, on the contrary, the king was happy at the intelligence, and had ordered
ten tomauns to be given to the bearer of it. The truth, however, was this; the king had been
disappointed at the poet’s resurrection, because it destroyed the arrangements he had made
with respect to his house and effects, and he was not disposed to give him a good reception;
but Asker who well knew his majesty’s passion for poetry, and particularly of that kind which
sings the royal praises, had long since foreseen the event, and had provided himself with an
impromptu, which he had composed even when he was living an exile among the Turcomans. This
he repeated at the proper moment; and thus the tide of the king’s favour, which was running
full against him, he entirely turned, and made it flow to his advantage. In short, he had his
mouth filled with gold for his pains, was invested with a magnificent dress, and was reinstated
in his situation and his possessions.

I lost no time in again congratulating my adopted patron, and did not miss a single morning
in attending his levee. Finding that he was favourably inclined towards me, I made known to
him my situation, and entreated him either to give me a place in his household, or to recommend
me as a servant to one of his acquaintance. I had found out that the Nazir’s despondency at
his master’s return proceeded from the fear of being detected in certain frauds which he had
committed on his property; and, as I hoped that I might eventually succeed to his situation,
I expressed the greatest zeal for the poet’s interest, and disclosed all that I knew concerning
the delinquency of his servant. However, I did not succeed; for whether he had a clearer insight
into characters than I gave him credit for, or whether the Nazir managed to prove his innocence,
and make me suspected, I know not; but the fact was, that he kept his place, and I continued
to be an attendant at the levees.

At length, one morning Asker called me to him, and said, ‘Hajji, my friend, you know how thankful
I have always expressed myself for your kindness to me when we were prisoners together in the
hands of the Turcomans, and now I will prove my gratitude. I have recommended you strongly
to Mirza Ahmak, the king’s Hakîm Bashi, or chief physician, who is in want of a servant; and
I make no doubt, that if you give him satisfaction, he will teach you his art, and put you
in the way of making your fortune. You have only to present yourself before him, saying that
you come from me, and he will immediately assign you an employment.’

I had no turn for the practice of physic, and recollecting the story which had been related
to me by the dervish, I held the profession in contempt: but my case was desperate; I had spent
my last dinâr, and therefore I had nothing left me but to accept of the doctor’s place. Accordingly,
the next morning I proceeded to his house, which was situated in the neighbourhood of the palace;
and as I entered a dull, neglected court-yard, I there found several sick persons, some squatted
against the wall, others supported by their friends, and others again with bottles in their
hands, waiting the moment when the physician should leave the women’s apartments to transact
business in public. I proceeded to an open window, where those who were not privileged to enter
the room stood, and there I took my station until I should be called in. Within the room were
several persons who came to pay their court to the doctor (for every man who is an officer
of the court has his levee), and from remarking them, I learnt how necessary it was, in order
to advance in life, to make much of everything, even the dog or the cat, if they came in my
way, of him who can have access to the ear of men in power. I made my reflections upon the
miseries I had already undergone, and was calculating how long it would take me to go through
a course of cringing and flattery to be entitled to the same sorts of attention myself, when
I perceived, by the bows of those near me, that the doctor had seated himself at the window,
and that the business of the day had commenced.

The Hakîm was an old man, with an eye sunk deep in his head, high cheek bones, and a scanty
beard. He had a considerable bend in his back, and his usual attitude, when seated, was that
of a projecting chin, his head reclining back between his shoulders, and his hands resting
on his girdle, whilst his elbows formed two triangles on each side of his body. He made short
snappish questions, gave little hums at the answers, and seemed to be thinking of anything
but the subject before him. When he heard the account of the ailments of those who had come
to consult him, and had said a few words to his little circle of parasites, he looked at me,
and after I had told him that I was the person of whom the poet had spoken, he fixed his little
sharp eyes upon me for a second or two, and then desired me to wait, for that he wished to
speak to me in private. Accordingly, he soon after got up, and went out of the room, and I
was called upon to attend him in a small separate court, closely walled on all sides, except
on the one where was situated the khelwet, or private room, in which the doctor was seated.

As soon as I appeared, the doctor invited me into the room, and requested me to be seated;
which I did with all the humility which is the etiquette for an inferior to show towards his
superior for so great an honour. He informed me that the poet had spoken very favourably of
me, and had said that I was a person to be depended upon, particularly on account of my discretion
and prudence; that I had seen a great deal of life; that I was fertile in expedients; and that
if any business in which circumspection and secrecy were necessary was intrusted to me, I should
conduct it with all the ability required. I bowed repeatedly as he spoke, and kept my hands
respectfully before me, covered with the border of my sleeve, whilst I took care that my feet
were also completely hid. He then continued, and said,--‘I have occasion for a person of your
description precisely at this moment, and as I put great confidence in the recommendation of
my friend Asker, it is my intention to make use of your good offices; and if you succeed according
to my expectations, you may rest assured that it will be well for you, and that I shall not
remain unmindful of your services.’

Then requesting me to approach nearer to him, and in a low and confidential tone of voice,
he said, looking over his shoulders as if afraid of being overheard,--‘Hajji, you must know
that an ambassador from the Franks is lately arrived at this court, in whose suite there is
a doctor. This infidel has already acquired considerable reputation here. He treats his patients
in a manner quite new to us, and has arrived with a chest full of medicines, of which we do
not even know the names. He pretends to the knowledge of a great many things of which we have
never yet heard in Persia. He makes no distinction between hot and cold diseases, and hot and
cold remedies, as Galenus and Avicenna have ordained, but gives mercury by way of a cooling
medicine; stabs the belly with a sharp instrument for wind in the stomach;[34] and, what is
worse than all, pretends to do away with the small-pox altogether, by infusing into our nature
a certain extract of cow, a discovery which one of their philosophers has lately made. Now
this will never do, Hajji. The smallpox has always been a comfortable source of revenue to
me; I cannot afford to lose it, because an infidel chooses to come here and treat us like cattle.
We cannot allow him to take the bread out of our mouths. But the reason why I particularly
want your help proceeds from the following cause. The grand vizier was taken ill, two days
ago, of a strange uneasiness, after having eaten more than his usual quantity of raw lettuce
and cucumber, steeped in vinegar and sugar. This came to the Frank ambassador’s ears, who,
in fact, was present at the eating of the lettuce, and he immediately sent his doctor to him,
with a request that he might be permitted to administer relief. The grand vizier and the ambassador,
it seems, had not been upon good terms for some time, because the latter was very urgent that
some demand of a political nature might be conceded to him, which the vizier, out of consideration
for the interests of Persia, was obliged to deny; and, therefore, thinking that this might
be a good opportunity of conciliating the infidel, and of coming to a compromise, he agreed
to accept of the doctor’s services. Had I been apprised of the circumstance in time, I should
easily have managed to put a stop to the proceeding; but the doctor did not lose an instant
in administering his medicine, which, I hear, only consisted of one little white and tasteless
pill. From all accounts, and as ill luck would have it, the effect it has produced is something
quite marvellous. The grand vizier has received such relief that he can talk of nothing else;
he says, ‘that he felt the pill drawing the damp from the very tips of his fingers’; and that
now he has discovered in himself such newness of strength and energy, that he laughs at his
old age, and even talks of making up the complement of wives permitted to him by our blessed
Prophet. But the mischief has not stopped here; the fame of this medicine, and of the Frank
doctor, has gone throughout the court; and the first thing which the king talked of at the
selam (the audience) this morning, was of its miraculous properties. He called upon the grand
vizier to repeat to him all that he had before said upon the subject; and as he talked of the
wonders that it had produced upon his person, a general murmur of applause and admiration was
heard throughout the assembly. His majesty then turned to me, and requested me to explain the
reason why such great effects should proceed from so small a cause, when I was obliged to answer,
stooping as low as I could to hide my confusion, and kissing the earth--“I am your sacrifice:
O king of kings, I have not yet seen the drug which the infidel doctor has given to your majesty’s
servant, the grand vizier; but as soon as I have, I will inform your majesty of what it consists.
In the meanwhile, your humble slave beseeches the Centre of the Universe to recollect that
the principal agent, on this occasion, must be an evil spirit, an enemy to the true faith,
since he is an instrument in the hands of an infidel; of one who calls our holy Prophet a cheat,
and who disowns the all-powerful decrees of predestination.”

‘Having said this, in order to shake his growing reputation, I retired in deep cogitation how
I might get at the secrets of the infidel, and particularly inquire into the nature of his
prescription, which has performed such miracles; and you are come most opportunely to my assistance.
You must immediately become acquainted with him; and I shall leave it to your address to pick
his brain and worm his knowledge out of him; but as I wish to procure a specimen of the very
medicine which he administered to the grand vizier, being obliged to give an account of it
to-morrow to the Shah, you must begin your services to me by eating much of lettuce and raw
cucumbers, and of making yourself as sick to the full as his highness the vizier. You may then
apply to the Frank, who will, doubtless, give you a duplicate of the celebrated pill, which
you will deliver over to me.’

‘But,’ said I, who had rather taken fright at this extraordinary proposal, ‘how shall I present
myself before a man whom I do not know? besides, such marvellous stories are related of the
Europeans, that I should be puzzled in what manner to behave: pray give me some instructions
how to act.’

‘Their manners and customs are totally different to ours, that is true,’ replied Mirza Ahmak,
‘and you may form some idea of them, when I tell you, that instead of shaving their heads,
and letting their beards grow, as we do, they do the very contrary, for not a vestige of hair
is to be seen on their chins, and their hair is as thick on their heads as if they had made
a vow never to cut it off: then they sit on little platforms, whilst we squat on the ground;
they take up their food with claws made of iron, whilst we use our fingers; they are always
walking about, we keep seated; they wear tight clothes, we loose ones; they write from left
to right, we from right to left; they never pray, we five times a day; in short, there is no
end to what might be related of them; but most certain it is, that they are the most filthy
people on the earth, for they hold nothing to be unclean; they eat all sorts of animals, from
a pig to a tortoise, without the least scruple, and that without first cutting their throats;
they will dissect a dead body, without requiring any purification after it, and perform all
the brute functions of their nature, without ever thinking it necessary to go to the hot bath,
or even rubbing themselves with sand after them.’

‘And is it true,’ said I, ‘that they are so irascible, that if perchance their word is doubted,
and they are called liars, they will fight on such an occasion till they die?’

‘That is also said of them,’ answered the doctor; ‘but the case has not happened to me yet;
however, I must warn you of one thing, which is, that if they happen to admire anything you
possess, you must not say to them, as you would to one of us, “It is a present to you, it is
your property,” lest they should take you at your word and keep it, which you know would be
inconvenient, and not what you intended; but you must endeavour as much as possible to speak
what you think, for that is what they like.’

‘But then, if such is the case,’ said I, ‘do not you think that the Frank doctor will find
me out with a lie in my mouth; pretending to be sick when I am well; asking medicine from him
for myself, when I want it for another?’

‘No, no,’ said the Mirza; ‘you are to be sick, really sick, you know, and then it will be no
lie. Go, Hajji, my friend,’ said he, putting his arm round my neck: ‘go, eat your cucumbers
immediately, and let me have the pill by this evening.’ And then coaxing me, and preventing
me from making any further objections to his unexpected request, he gently pushed me out of
the room, and I left him, scarcely knowing whether to laugh or to cry at the new posture which
my affairs had taken. To sicken without any stipulated reward was what I could not consent
to do, so I retraced my steps, with a determination of making a bargain with my patron; but,
when I got to the room, he was no longer there, having apparently retreated into his harem;
and, therefore, I was obliged to proceed on my errand.

I inquired my way to the ambassador’s house, and actually set off with the intention of putting
the doctor’s wishes into execution, and getting, if possible, a writhing disorder on the road;
but, upon more mature reflection, I recollected that a stomach-ache was not a marketable commodity
which might be purchased at a moment’s notice; for although lettuce and cucumber might disagree
with an old grand vizier, yet it was a hundred to one but they would find an easy digestion
in a young person like me. However, I determined to obtain the pill by stratagem, if I could
not procure it in a more direct manner. I considered that if I feigned to be ill, the doctor
would very probably detect me, and turn me out of his house for a cheat, so I preferred the
easier mode of passing myself off for one of the servants of the royal harem, and then making
out some story by which I might attain my end. I accordingly stepped into one of the old clothes’
shops in the bazaar, and hired a cloak for myself, such as the scribes wear; and then substituting
a roll of paper in my girdle instead of a dagger, I flattered myself that I might pass for
something more than a common servant.

I soon found out where the ambassador dwelt. Bearing in mind all that Mirza Ahmak had told
me, I rather approached the door of the doctor’s residence with fear and hesitation. I found
the avenues to it crowded with poor women, bearing infants in their arms, who, I was told,
came to receive the new-fashioned preservative against the smallpox. This, it was supposed
for political reasons, the Franks were anxious to promote; and, as the doctor performed the
operation gratis, he had no lack of patients, particularly of the poorer sort, who could not
approach a Persian doctor without a present, or a good fee in their hand.

On entering, I found a man seated in the middle of the room, near an elevated wooden platform,
upon which were piled boxes, books, and a variety of instruments and utensils, the uses of
which were unknown to me. He was in dress and appearance the most extraordinary looking infidel
I had ever seen. His chin and upper lip were without the vestige of a hair upon them, as like
a eunuch as possible. He kept his head most disrespectfully uncovered, and wore a tight bandage
round his neck, with other contrivances on the sides of his cheeks, as if he were anxious to
conceal some wound or disease. His clothes were fitted so tight to his body, and his outward
coat in particular was cut off at such sharp angles, that it was evident cloth was a scarce
and dear commodity in his country. The lower part of his dress was particularly improper, and
he kept his boots on in his room, without any consideration for the carpet he was treading
upon, which struck me as a custom subversive of all decorum.

I found that he talked our language; for, as soon as he saw me, he asked me how I did, and
then immediately remarked that it was a fine day, which was so self-evident a truth, that I
immediately agreed to it. I then thought it necessary to make him some fine speeches, and flattered
him to the best of my abilities, informing him of the great reputation he had already acquired
in Persia; that Locman[35] was a fool when compared to one of his wisdom; and that as for his
contemporaries, the Persian physicians, they were not fit to handle his pestle for him. To
all this he said nothing. I then told him that the king himself, having heard of the wonderful
effects of his medicine upon the person of his grand vizier, had ordered his historian to insert
the circumstance in the annals of the empire, as one of the most extraordinary events of his
reign,--that a considerable sensation had been produced in his majesty’s seraglio, for many
of the ladies had immediately been taken ill, and were longing to make a trial of his skill,--that
the king’s favourite Georgian slave was, in fact, at this moment in great pain,--that I had
been deputed by the chief eunuch, owing to a special order from his majesty, to procure medicine
similar to that which the first minister had taken--and I concluded my speech by requesting
the doctor immediately to furnish me with some.

He seemed to ponder over what I had told him; and, after reflecting a short time, said that
it was not his custom to administer medicine to his patients without first seeing them, for
by so doing he would probably do more harm than good; but that if he found that the slave was
in want of his aid, he should be very happy to attend her.

I answered to this, that as to seeing the face of the Georgian slave, that was totally out
of the question, for no man ever was allowed that liberty in Persia, excepting her husband.
In cases of extreme necessity, perhaps a doctor might be permitted to feel a woman’s pulse,
but then it must be done when a veil covers the hand.

To which the Frank replied, ‘In order to judge of my patient’s case I must not only feel the
pulse, but see the tongue also.’

‘Looking at the tongue is totally new in Persia,’ said I; ‘and I am sure you could never be
indulged with such a sight in the seraglio, without a special order from the king himself;
a eunuch would rather cut out his own tongue first.’

‘Well, then,’ said the doctor, ‘recollect, that if I deliver my medicine to you, I do so without
taking any responsibility upon myself for its effects; for if it does not cure it may perhaps
kill.’

When I had assured him that no harm or prejudice could possibly accrue to him, he opened a
large chest, which appeared to be full of drugs, and taking there from the smallest quantity
of a certain white powder, he mixed it up, with some bread, into the form of a pill, and putting
it into paper gave it me, with proper directions how it should be administered. Seeing that
he made no mystery of his knowledge, I began to question him upon the nature and properties
of this particular medicine, and upon his practice in general. He answered me without any reserve;
not like our Persian doctors, who only make a parade of fine words, and who adjust every ailment
that comes before them to what they read in their Galen, their Hippocrates, and their Abou
Avicenna.

When I had learned all I could, I left him with great demonstration of friendship and thankfulness,
and immediately returned to Mirza Ahmak, who doubtless was waiting for me with great impatience.
Having divested myself of my borrowed cloak and resumed my own dress, I appeared before him
with a face made up for the occasion, for I wished to make him believe that the lettuce and
cucumbers had done their duty. At every word I pretended to receive a violent twitch, and acted
my part so true to life, that the stern and inflexible nature of Mirza Ahmak himself was moved
into somewhat like pity for me.

‘There! there,’ said I, as I entered his apartment, ‘in the name of Allah take your prize:’
and then pretending to be bent double, I made the most horrid grimaces, and uttered deep groans:
‘there! I have followed your orders, and now throw myself upon your generosity.’ He endeavoured
to take the object of his search from me, but I kept it fast; and whilst I gave him to understand
that I expected prompt reward, I made indications of an intention to swallow it, unless he
actually gave me something in hand. So fearful was he of not being able to answer the king’s
interrogatories concerning the pill, so anxious to get it into his possession, that he actually
pressed a gold piece upon me. No lover could sue his mistress with more earnestness to grant
him a favour than the doctor did me for my pill. I should very probably have continued the
deceit a little longer, and have endeavoured to extract another piece from him; but when I
saw him preparing a dose of his own mixture to ease my pain, I thought it high time to finish,
and pretending all of a sudden to have received relief, I gave up my prize.

When once he had got possession, he looked at it with intense eagerness, and turned it over
and over on his palm, without appearing one whit more advanced in his knowledge than before.
At length, after permitting him fully to exhaust his conjectures, I told him that the Frank
doctor had made no secret in saying that it was composed of jivch, or mercury.

‘Mercury, indeed!’ exclaimed Mirza Ahmak, ‘just as if I did not know that. And so, because
this infidel, this dog of an Isauvi,[36] chooses to poison us with mercury, I am to lose my
reputation, and my prescriptions (such as his father never even saw in a dream) are to be turned
into ridicule. Whoever heard of mercury as a medicine? Mercury is cold, and lettuce and cucumber
are cold also. You would not apply ice to dissolve ice? The ass does not know the first rudiments
of his profession. No, Hajji, this will never do; we must not permit our beards to be laughed
at in this manner.’

He continued to inveigh for a considerable time against his rival; and would, no doubt, have
continued to do so much longer, but he was stopped by a message from the king, who ordered
him to repair forthwith to his presence. In the greatest trepidation he immediately put himself
into his court dress, exchanged his common black lamb’s skin cap for one wound about with a
shawl, huddled on his red cloth stockings, called for his horse, and, taking the pill with
him, went off in great hurry, and full of the greatest apprehension at what might be the result
of the audience.

The doctor’s visit to the king had taken place late in the evening; and as soon as he returned
from it he called for me. I found him apparently in great agitation, and full of anxiety. ‘Hajji,’
said he, when I appeared, ‘come close to me’; and having sent every one else out of the room,
he said in a whisper, ‘this infidel doctor must be disposed of somehow or other. What do you
think has happened? The Shah has consulted him; he had him in private conference for an hour
this morning, without my being apprised of it. His majesty sent for me to tell me its result;
and I perceive that the Frank has already gained great influence. It seems that the king gave
him the history of his complaints, of his debility, of his old asthma, and of his imperfect
digestion, but talked in raptures of the wretch’s sagacity and penetration; for merely by looking
at the tongue and feeling the pulse before the infidel was told what was the state of the case,
he asked whether his majesty did not use the hot baths very frequently;[37] whether, when he
smoked, he did not immediately bring on a fit of coughing; and whether, in his food, he was
not particularly addicted to pickles, sweetmeats, and rice swimming in butter? The king has
given him three days to consider his case, to consult his books, and to gather the opinions
of the Frank sages on subjects so important to the state of Persia, and to compose such a medicine
as will entirely restore and renovate his constitution. The Centre of the Universe then asked
my opinion, and requested me to speak boldly upon the natures and properties of Franks in general,
and of their medicines. 

Wolf channel, which starts at address below NO, greatly reduces water the main channel, and brings
up the great Mompos and Margarita Island, the perfumed garden the lower Magdalena. The navigation
is very difficult for the vapors in the main channel and recognizes there is an urgent need for
channeling work to improve the lot of trade. The very nature seem to indicate the infallible
means if a little slow but nothing expensive, convenient water route. This lush vegetation that
played between the water and silt so vigorously and expeditiously, the large floods periodically
River infallible, and mobility of the sand, favor the application of channeling system Danube, perfectly
similar to Magdalena, where all the work is reduced to establishing fascines barricades or vegetables
than water, successive deposits of silt and action time constant become true channeling walls.
In Colombia, where everything is so vigorous and lack resources to undertake expensive works,
consideration should more closely the work of nature, to imitate in hydrographic surveys.
The natural hydraulic Colombia may be in the best channeling.

The picturesque site of Ribon begins a panorama of unparalleled vegetables,
running in the villages or places of Dona-Juana Sandoval, Margarita
and San-Fernando, complete in Mompos city and its vicinity.

The charm of these landscapes, vegetation that, in those natural scenes and customs, is imponderable.
That is a paradise, is an oasis sumptuous vegetable, perfume and delicious breezes, sweet
and quiet life of supreme beauty, and a Colombian coloration, so national, that makes the traveler's
heart the most profound sense of pleasure.

Let the reader imagine a garden of three leagues in extent, lying like a mantle of green on the
margin of a giant river, and will still have a very inferior to reality.

That way it would in Europe millions of francs or guilders. In Colombia ... no worth nothing:
it is a treasure which no one perceives possession, because their riches are seen everywhere,
almost without farming. Although again and the river margin is seen as fertile land in the same
luxurious vegetation, abundant cattle down from the surrounding plains, rich ways in the willows
and tall grasses, etc., etc., the left bank, but cultivated and populated, preferably called
attention the traveler. The terrain is a narrow and very long cultivated plain across which
almost no land The Sun, according to the foliage is dense forest that covers endless. Everything
is sweetly somber, and the traveler who passes like a vapor on the wings of exhalation, imagine
see the island of Calypso, with its eternal spring, air or a garden of a fairy hand mysterious
is showing behind the magic lens, like a peep elusive and shifting.

What forest was! Here and there usually see a small sugarcane plantation, green bananas or
exhale the perfume of honey bunches coagulated and fell on bare stems
as headbands topaz under a canopy of emerald.

But these plantations scarcely interrupted slightly endless forest of orange, lemon, mango trees
of mamei, sapote, sapodilla, a thousand delicious fruits, on which equal layers, rich, of different
green, filled with fruit, shade and perfume, the masts stand and plumes of the palms, such as candles
and arbolaje a boat on the green waves of a calm bay, scarcely ruffled by the gentle breezes
blow in the afternoon. There, under these flags, the light dims, peace reigns in a garden, clusters
cause floating oranges, the birds sing as in a mansion of love, and nature idealized, it seems
to evaporate in perfumes and colors like a voluptuous delight keep it magnetized and happy
....

In the shadow of these domes of verdure population lives a simple, peaceful and honest, as fertility
appears to be the result of the influence of vegetation .-- Everywhere picturesque houses are whitewashed,
standing behind perspective vaults air caves and trees, or arbors
of mills, laying off its savory smell of honey; and while the women
spin, are embroidered or woven, or made Petaquillas, baskets and funny
colored mats, kids play and jump in the shade capricious groups of
trees, and even a clean floor, or climb like squirrels to get lost
in the foliage of the mango and orange.

Meanwhile, the scene is very curious in the first term of the landscape. The high canyon falls
on the river has carved here and there are plenty of stairs on small ports in the form of snail
or perpendicularly, and the wall of the canyon is are the openings or mouths of many underground
ovens, artfully prepared to cook corn bread called crullers, or that of cassava, which has
the name of cassava. And at the bottom jump, agitated by the waves that produce steam over
many small canoes for Mompos to carry the loads of fruit and maintain
communication between the two sides River.

Edge groups are no less interesting, and by the actions of the boatmen and unique dresses, and
by the noisy hubbub that raise the crew saluted vapor moves quickly at the sight of these peaceful
inhabitants of a secular garden.

* * * * *

Mompos is an interesting city in all directions. His vast crowd always contains port indigenous
craft, and their barricades, their hulking ceiba trees, the contrast of the buildings overlooking
the beach, and its rich groves of fruit trees, give it a very picturesque causes the traveler
to visit the interior.

       Located in the city in a low, sandy ground, without the protection
of mountains that dominate the breeze entirely wanting, its trees
are maintained motionless and heat is so sufocante (40 gr. cent.)
almost stopped breathing.

The population is divided into two areas: the upper one, called Susúa, which is all houses straw,
but maintained with cleanliness and very funny, and the one below, consisting of two long streets
very nice, cut at right angles to a line, and fully formed by high buildings masonry. The first
is inhabited by the working classes, all colors, of which comes within
the waterproof and suffered under vogue Magdalena - people happy,
cheerful, boisterous, customs free, robust and manly, and that despite
its flaws is honored education and loyal, loves the country with enthusiasm
and she fights for bravery, citing the famous Real steel saber de
la Cruz, population of the former province of Ocaña.

Is that race vigorous and proud to have been so many brave, the winners in Tenerife and Barbecues,
at the time of independence, and later as fearsome fighters in the unfortunate Magdalena civil
strife.

The other area is the home for the affluent, people who, after times of strife, are estimable for
his frank and generous nature and hospitality for the traveler. Mompos is the quintessential city
that summarizes the contrast of the Spanish conquest, or civilization with the former Indian
situation. If the above is essentially national or Colombian the bottom is, by its structure,
entirely Spanish. A heavy and great architecture strength, many beautiful churches that are mediocre
monuments, wide streets, straight unpaved, walls painted yellow and red, arched doorways,
columns galleries lavished, huge rooms, high iron shutters on all
windows, furniture colossal and heavy for household interior, beautiful
groves of fruit trees in every yard, and a thousand extremely curious
details, Mompos to give the air of a Spanish-Moorish city, which has
the seal of the Iberian conquest.

But Mompos is not only a charming and picturesque city. It is also a port of deposit or important
scale, which matches the interior commercial spaces, Honda and Medellin, with agricultural exports
and Valle-Dupar Ocana, with trade fairs peoples the lower Cauca and Magdalena, and the cities of
Cartagena, Barranquilla and Santa Marta, which the ramifications of the great river spinning
foreign trade of New Granada at its most significant. Vapors are always Mompos scale, his place
is famous as a producer of liquor, jewelry, careful, smart tools and porous glasses and thin. In
my opinion, maybe after Barranquilla, Mompos is the population of more future in the lower
Magdalena.

* * * * *

February 6 was the last of my journey on board the steamer Bogota, which had to follow his route
up to Barranquilla, harbor five or six leagues distant bay Sabanilla, and receives some of the
commercial movement of Santa Marta, while I had to be separated in Squid and follow signs to
Cartagena, a dirt road, or by the semi-artificial channel called Dam.

Since the sun began to illuminate the landscape of Magdalena Mompos down, it became most notably
the agglomeration of populations on the banks of river.

       Thus, although this has lost much of its majesty for the great decrease
of the water in the channel of Wolf, the banks more interested because
they reveal the existence of society, almost nothing in the way that
mediates between Alderman and Nare.

The vegetation is always uniform, the same sky and plain vast as the desert of the eastern
plains, but the traveler looking consoles loom Here and there the poor houses that stand on
rocky cliffs, and to the right of the river, as the towns of San-Cenon, San-Fernando, Santa Ana
and Pinto, and to the left, as to those of Talaigua and Sambrano.

In Pinto, a port of call in relation to the famous fairs Magangué on Cauca, all passengers were
separated traders were heading to the fair for Candelaria, and half a league below us filled
with admiration the spectacle of the confluence of the two major rivers. Cauca, greatly thickened
with more than half of the waters of Magdalena, flows most beautiful of three parallel channels,
forming a magnificent delta majesty, and the two giants seem to embrace, wrapped in his arms wide
three islands of sumptuous garments, willows and grasses which resemble huge masses of floating
emerald in the middle of an ocean of silver, illuminated by the blazing sun. The show is great
impressive, and Magdalena, from there to the curling sea breezes blow, is already a small sea often
reaches 1.500 meters wide, including its many islands picturesque.

After the traveler, who foresees the appearance of the nearby Atlantic, judging from the scene
infinite is presented, it picks up new impressions. Already looks like the port de la Merced,
where trade is with Carmen, whose agricultural population snuff excellent is giving great importance,
and whose village stands confusedly at the foot of a distant mountains, and you can see the people
of Plato, hidden to the right, miles away between a desolate and dreary forest appears to have
been retostada by the fire of a vertical sun of imponderable torrico, now passed by the foot of
the barren rock on which lies as a debris the miserable people of Tenerife, on the right bank,
whose name and remember the heroism site Warriors of independence now greet each other with deep
sadness the village of Nervití, desolate and almost wild, Heredia,
whose barracks overlooking the canyon of the river, show all the misery
of its inhabitants, or that of Yucal, no less regrettable.

Meanwhile, look east, to a great distance and almost confused by the gray color clouds, the high mountains
of Valle-Dupar and rich and bright overlooking Sierra-Nevada Santamarta coasts, while in the river
are discovered, like white herons skim the waves, caressed by the breeze, the sails of the boats
coming from Barranquilla merchant Squid or in the direction to Mompos, or descending served by rowing.
The sea breeze is so strong there, HOWEVER the considerable distance from shore, the sail is enough
a boat to go up considerably, and the waves of the river making similar proportions to the tranquil
ocean.

The sun was lost behind the faraway mountains of Antioquia that end
near the island of Mompos, and in the dark we arrived at the vast
and sandy Squid port, at 100 meters of the junction giving rise to
the Canal del Dique.

Soon after followed the steam Bogotá his departure, confusing his locomotive whistles with the shouts
of farewell, and I Squid was on a second pilgrimage to undertake very different sort.

* * * * *

Squid is a great future population and commercial agriculture, and for his very important position
of scale, and not without interest in the customs of its inhabitants and its structure physics.
District of very newest creation, its population reaches just a little
more than a thousand souls the streets are very wide, straight, cut
at right angles, and the houses have a look comfort and cleanliness
that contrasts with that of other towns along the Magdalena.

Its people, cheerful and expansive, walk the streets offering food, mounted on donkeys in the
most extravagant. The frame is so insecure that every rider is a tightrope. The rider sits in
the center, cross-legged on the nape of the ass, and this, which is not subject to flange or halter,
is skillfully handled the influx of blows hand gives him the gentleman juggler. The donkey
is thus become a kind Compass dissection street that changes according
to the inclination of the coup or touching it receives.

       If I have to speak frankly say that the donkeys seemed more rational
Squid The boatmen of the village of Alderman.

Squid is in some ways the cruise from all major routes for trade country, since it serves to
scale the inner movement that descends from Honda, Nare, Puerto-national Cesar, and Magangué and Mompos,
receives the commercial movement of Santa Marta and Barranquilla, and facilitates the communication
of Magdalena to Cartagena, and by land via Mahates and Turbaco, and by the Canal del Dique,
which flows directly into the bay of Cartagena.

From the port of Honda to Squid, a journey of about 130 miles, not are therefore only 28 stocks
on the margin of Magdalena (counting two cities) of which 12 belong on the right bank to the
states of Cundinamarca and Magdalena and 13, on the left bank, correspond to the states of Antioquia
and Bolivar. Total inhabitants of these villages, exclusive to Honda, which does not belong to the
lower Magdalena, do not pass the miserable figure of 16,000, of which
more than 7,000 belong to the city of Mompos.

This vast region of astonishing fertility and so happily equipped with easy communications
in its many tributaries rivers, the Magdalena, pipes or natural channels and vast plains, is a lonely
desert, uncultivated, to which man has hardly taken his conquering power, and within which exist
in a distant time a multi-million strong population and imponderable wealth. Thus, crossing
this wonderful region, the traveler is only allowed to pronounce
one word: the future.

Nature reigns there, taking a slave to man. Only time, the mysterious aid of progress, will
help society, changing situation, acquire lasting sovereignty over creation.

Meanwhile, steam navigation, on a schedule established in the waters of the mighty Magdalena,
the new federal institutions - that allow more direct efforts in the vast fertile valley that
river, to give social life to his isolated populations - and indefinite development there may
be inter-tropical agriculture through the expansion consumption in overseas markets, a development
that begins to start, - are elements they do not expect too late now desolate regions provides the traveler
with deep sadness, will be the land of liberal race, energetic and courageous, to reach welfare
through the practice of democracy and industrial activity.

* * * * *

CHAPTER III.

On 7 February at midnight my boat was ready, and left with my family Squid port to lower the
Canal del Dique, preferring rather that via that of land, because if this was shorter, the other
had for me all the interest of national work important for trade, and all the charm of a sailing
extremely picturesque.

A few meters from the port is on the left bank of the Magdalena, mouth channel, open but well
for the natural thrust of the waters by the efforts of the engineers;
but to leave the great river, where the flow of waves opulent does
it all, the first thing seen in the Dock is the old steam torn squid,
the only one who had sailed there and the rubble of a collapsed gate
owing to the weakness of the weak foundation.

       Where man has intervened is because, abandonment, inconsistency is
apparent that who presides over all industrial efforts of Hispano-Colombian.

 Her nose was aquiline, her mouth small, and full of sweet
expression; and in the centre of her chin was a dimple which she kept carefully marked with
a blue puncture. Nothing could equal the beauty of her hair; it was black as jet, and fell
in long tresses down her back. In short, I was wrapped in amazement at her beauty. The sight
of her explained to me many things which I had read in our poets, of cypress forms, tender
fawns, and sugar-eating parrots. It seemed to me that I could gaze at her for ever, and not
be tired; but still I felt a great desire to leap over the wall and touch her. My passion was
increasing, and I was on the point of approaching her, when I heard the name of Zeenab repeated
several times, with great impatience, by a loud shrill voice; upon which my fair one left the
terrace in haste, and I remained riveted to the place where I had first seen her. I continued
there for a long time, in the hope that she might return, but to no purpose. I lent my ear
to every noise, but nothing was to be heard below but the same angry voice, which, by turns,
appeared to attack everything, and everybody, and which could belong to no one but the doctor’s
wife; a lady, who, as report would have it, was none of the mildest of her sex, and who kept
her good man in great subjection.

The day had now entirely closed in, and I was about retiring to my bed in despair, when the
voice was heard again, exclaiming, ‘Zeenab, where are you going to? Why do you not retire to bed?’

I indistinctly heard the answer of my charmer, but soon guessed what it had been, when saw
her appear on the terrace again. My heart beat violently, and I was about to leap over the
wall, which separated us, when I was stopped by seeing her taking up a basket, in which she
had gathered her tobacco, and make a hasty retreat; but just as she was disappearing, she said
to me, in a low tone of voice, ‘Be here to-morrow night.’ These words thrilled through my whole
frame, in a manner that I had never before felt, and I did not cease to repeat them, and ponder
over them, until, through exhaustion, I fell into a feverish doze, and I did not awaken on
the following morning until the beams of the sun shone bright in my face.

‘So,’ said I, when I had well rubbed my eyes: ‘so, now I am in love? Well! we shall see what
will come of it. Who and what she is we shall know to-night, so please it; and if she is anything
which belongs to the doctor, may his house be ruined if I do not teach him how to keep a better
watch over his property. As for marriage, that is out of the question. Who would give a wife
to me; I who have not even enough to buy myself a pair of trousers, much less to defray the
expenses of a wedding? Inshallah, please God, that will take place one of these days, whenever
I shall have got together some money; but now I will make play with love, and let the doctor
pay for it.’

With that intention I forthwith got up and dressed myself; but it was with more care than usual.
I combed my curls a great deal more than ordinary; I studied the tie of my girdle, and put
my cap on one side. Then having rolled up my bed, and carried it into the servants’ hall, I
issued from home, with the intention of bathing, and making my person sweet, preparatory to
my evening’s assignation. I went to the bath, where I passed a great part of my morning in
singing, and spent the remainder of the time, until the hour of meeting, in rambling about
the town without any precise object in view.

At length the day drew towards its close, my impatience had reached its height, and I only
waited for the termination of the shâm, or the evening’s meal, to feign a headache, and to
retire to rest. My ill luck would have it, that the doctor was detained longer than usual in
his attendance upon the Shah, and as the servants dined after him, and ate his leavings, it
was late before I was at liberty. When that moment arrived, I was in a fever of expectation:
the last glimmering of day tinged the western sky with a light shade of red, and the moon was
just rising, when I appeared on the terrace with my bed under my arm. I threw it down and unfolded
it in haste, and then, with a beating heart, flew to the broken wall. I looked over it with
great precaution; but, to my utter disappointment, I saw nothing but the tobacco spread about
in confused heaps, with baskets here and there, as if some work had been left unfinished. I
looked all around, but saw no Zeenab. I coughed once or twice; no answer. The only sound which
reached my ears was the voice of the doctor’s wife, exerting itself upon some one within the
house; although its shrillness pierced even the walls, yet I could not make out what was the
cause of its being so excited, until of a sudden it burst into the open air with increasing
violence.

‘You talk of work to me, you daughter of the devil! Who told you to go to the bath? What business
had you at the tombs? I suppose I am to be your slave, and you are to take your pleasure. Why
is not your work done? You shall neither eat, drink, nor sleep, until it is done, so go to
it immediately; and if you come away until it be finished, wallah! billah! by the prophet,
I will beat you till your nails drop off.’ Upon this I heard some pushing and scuffing, and
immediately perceived my fair one proceeding with apparent reluctance to the spot, which not
a moment before I had despaired of seeing blessed with her presence. Oh what a wonderful thing
is love! thought I to myself: how it sharpens the wits, and how fertile it is in expedients!
I perceived at a glance how ingeniously my charmer had contrived everything for our interview,
and for a continuance of it without the fear of interruption. She saw, but took no notice of
me until the storm below had ceased; and then, when everything had relapsed into silence, she
came towards me, and, as the reader may well suppose, I was at her side in an instant. Ye,
who know what love is, may, perhaps, conceive our raptures, for they are not to be expressed.

I learnt from my fair friend that she was the daughter of a Cûrdish chief, who, with his whole
family, including his flocks and herds, had been made prisoner when she was quite a child;
and that, from circumstances which she promised hereafter to relate to me, she had fallen into
the hands of the doctor, whose slave she now was.

After the first burst of the sentiments which we felt towards each other had subsided, she
gave way to the feelings of anger, which she felt for the treatment that she had just experienced.
‘Ah!’ she exclaimed, ‘did you hear what that woman called me! woman, without faith, without
religion! ’Tis thus she always treats me; she constantly gives me abuse; I am become less than
a dog. Everybody rails at me; no one comes near me; my liver is become water, and my soul is
withered up. Why should I be called a child of the devil? I am a Cûrd; I am a Yezeedi.[40]
’Tis true that we fear the devil, and who does not? but I am no child of his. Oh! that I could
meet her in our mountains: she would then see what a Cûrdish girl can do.’

I endeavoured to console her as well as I could, and persuaded her to smother her resentment
until she could find a good opportunity of revenging herself. She despaired at that ever coming
to pass; because all her actions were so strictly watched, that she could scarcely go from
one room to another without her mistress being aware of it. The fact was, so she informed me,
that the doctor, who was a man of low family, had, by orders of the king, married one of his
majesty’s slaves, who, from some misconduct, had been expelled from the harem. She brought
the doctor no other dowry than an ill-temper, and a great share of pride, which always kept
her in mind of her former influence at court; and she therefore holds her present husband as
cheap as the dust under her feet, and keeps him in a most pitiful state of subjection. He dares
not sit down before her, unless she permits him, which she very seldom does; and she is moreover
so jealous, that there is no slave in her harem who does not excite her suspicions. The doctor,
on the other hand, who is very ambitious, and pleased with his exaltation, is also subject
to the frailties of human nature, and is by no means insensible to the charms of the fair creatures,
his slaves. Zeenab herself, so she informed me, is the peculiar object of his attentions, and
consequently that of the jealousy of his wife, who permits no look, word, or sign to pass unnoticed.
Much intrigue and espionage is carried on in the harem; and when the lady herself goes to the
bath or the mosque, as many precautions are taken about the distribution of the female slaves,
with respect to time, place, and opportunity, as there would be in the arrangement of a wedding.

Having never seen more of the interior of an anderûn than what I recollected as a boy in my
own family, I became surprised, and my curiosity was greatly excited in proportion as the fair
Zeenab proceeded in her narrative of the history of her life in the doctor’s house. ‘We are
five in the harem, besides our mistress,’ said she: ‘there is Shireen, the Georgian slave;
then Nûr Jehan,[41] the Ethiopian slave girl; Fatmeh, the cook; and old Leilah, the duenna.
My situation is that of handmaid to the khanum,[42] so my mistress is called: I attend her
pipe, I hand her her coffee, bring in the meals, go with her to the bath, dress and undress
her, make her clothes, spread, sift, and pound tobacco, and stand before her. Shireen, the
Georgian, is the sandukdar, or housekeeper; she has the care of the clothes of both my master
and mistress, and indeed of the clothes of all the house; she superintends the expenses, lays
in the corn for the house, as well as all the other provisions; she takes charge of all the
porcelain, the silver, and other ware; and, in short, has the care of whatever is either precious
or of consequence in the family. Nûr Jehan, the black slave, acts as ferash, or carpet-spreader:
she does all the dirty work, spreads the carpets, sweeps the rooms, sprinkles the water over
the court yard, helps the cook, carries parcels and messages, and, in short, is at the call
of every one. As for old Leilah, she is a sort of duenna over the young slaves: she is employed
in the out-of-door service, carries on any little affair that the khanum may have with other
harems, and is also supposed to be a spy upon the actions of the doctor. Such as we are, our
days are passed in peevish disputes; whilst, at the same time, some two of us are usually leagued
in strict friendship, to the exclusion of the others. At this present moment I am at open war
with the Georgian, who, some time ago, found that her good luck in life had forsaken her, and
she in consequence contrived to procure a talisman from a dervish. She had no sooner obtained
it, than on the very next day the khanum presented her with a new jacket; this so excited my
jealousy, that I also made interest with the dervish to supply me with a talisman that should
secure me a good husband. On that very same evening I saw you on the terrace. Conceive my happiness!
But this has established a rivality between myself and Shireen, which has ended in hatred,
and we are now mortal enemies: perhaps we may as suddenly be friends again. I am now on the
most intimate terms with Nûr Jehan, and at my persuasion she reports to the khanum every story
unfavorable to my rival. Some rare sweetmeats, with baklava (sweet cake) made in the royal
seraglio, were sent a few days ago from one of the Shah’s ladies, as a present to our mistress;
the rats ate a great part of them, and we gave out that the Georgian was the culprit, for which
she received blows on the feet, which Nûr Jehan administered. I broke my mistress’s favourite
drinking-cup; Shireen incurred the blame, and was obliged to supply another. I know that she
is plotting against me, for she is eternally closeted with Leilah, who is at present the confidant
of our mistress. I take care not to eat or drink anything which has passed through her hands
to me, for fear of poison, and she returns me the same compliment. It is not, that our hatred
amounts to poison yet, but such precautions are constantly in use in all harems. We have as
yet only once come to blows: she excited me to violent anger by spitting and saying, “lahnet
be Sheitan,” curse be on the devil, which you know to the Yezeedies is a gross insult; when
I fell upon her, calling her by every wicked name that I had learnt in Persian, and fastening
upon her hair, of which I pulled out whole tresses by the roots. We were parted by Leilah,
who came in for her share of abuse, and we continued railing at each other until our throats
were quite dried up with rage and exhaustion. Our violence has much abated since this conflict;
but her enmity is undiminished, for she continues to show her spite against me in every manner
she can devise.’

Zeenab continued to entertain me in this manner until the first dawn of the morning, and when
we heard the muezzin[43] call the morning prayers from the mosque, we thought it prudent to
retire; but not until we had made mutual promises of seeing each other as often as prudence
would allow. We agreed, that whenever she had by her stratagems secured an opportunity for
meeting, she should hang her veil upon the bough of a tree in the court, which could be seen
from my terrace; and that if it were not there, I was to conclude that our interview on that
night was impossible.

On the following evening, I ascended the terrace in the hope of seeing the signal of meeting;
but in vain; no veil was visible; and I sat myself down in despair. The tobacco, and all the
apparatus for cleaning it, had disappeared, and all was hushed below. Even the unceasing voice
of the doctor’s wife, which I now began to look upon as the most agreeable sound in nature,
was wanting; and the occasional drag of a slipper, which I guessed might proceed from the crawl
of old Leilah, was the only sign of an inhabitant. I had listened to the various tones of the
muezzins, announcing the evening prayer; as well as to the small drum of the police, ordering
the people to shut their shops, and retire to their homes. The cry of the sentinels on the
watch-towers of the king’s palace was heard at distant intervals; night had completely closed
in upon me, and still the same silence prevailed in the doctor’s harem.

‘What can be the reason of this?’ said I to myself. ‘If they have been to the bath, they cannot
have remained thus late: besides, the baths are open for the women in the mornings only. Some
one must be sick, or there is a marriage, or a birth, or perhaps a burial; or the doctor may
have received the bastinado’; in short, I was killing myself with conjecture, when of a sudden
a great beating at the door took place, and, as it opened, the clatter of slippers was heard,
attended by the mingled sounds of many female voices, amongst which the well-known querulous
tone of the khanum was prominent. Several lanterns passed to and fro, which showed me the forms
of the women, amongst whom, as they threw off their veils, I recognized that of my Zeenab.
I determined to watch, in the hope that I might still be blessed with an interview; and, in
fact, it was not long before she appeared. She stole to me with great precaution, to say that
circumstances would prevent our meeting on this occasion, as she should not fail being missed;
but that, certainly, ere long, she would contrive to secure an interview. In few words, she
informed me that her mistress had been called upon to attend her sister (one of the ladies
in the Shah’s seraglio), who being taken suddenly ill, had expired almost immediately (it was
supposed by poison administered by a rival), and that she had taken all her women with her,
in order to increase the clamour of lamentation which was always made on such occasions; that
they had been there since noon, rending the air with every proper exclamation, until they were
all hoarse; that her mistress had already torn her clothes, an etiquette which she had performed
however with great care, considering that she wore a favourite jacket, having permitted only
one or two seams of it to be ripped open. As the burial would take place the next day, it was
necessary that they should be at their post early in the morning to continue the lamentations--a
service for which she expected to receive a black handkerchief, and to eat sweetmeats. My fair
one then left me, promising that she would do her utmost to secure a meeting on the following
evening, and telling me not to forget the signal.

On getting up the next morning, I was much surprised to see it already made, and to perceive
Zeenab below, beckoning me to go to her. I did not hesitate immediately to descend from the
terrace by the same flight of steps which she used to ascend it, and then of a sudden I found
myself in the very centre of the harem. An involuntary tremor seized me, when I reflected that
I was in a place into which no man with impunity is permitted to enter; but, fortified by the
smiles and the unconstrained manner of my enchantress, I proceeded.

‘Come, Hajji,’ said she, ‘banish all fear; no one is here but Zeenab, and, if our luck is good,
we may have the whole day to ourselves.’

‘By what miracle,’ exclaimed I, ‘have you done this? Where is the Khanum? where are the women?
and, if they are not here, how shall I escape the doctor?’

‘Do not fear,’ she repeated again; ‘I have barred all the doors; and should any one come, you
will have time to escape before I open them: but there is no fear of that; all the women are
gone to the funeral; and as for Mirza Ahmak, my mistress has taken care to dispose of him in
such a manner, now that I am left by myself, that he will not dare to come within a parasang
of his own house. You must know then,’ said she, ‘for I see you are all astonishment, that
our destinies are on the rise, and that it was a lucky hour when we first saw each other. Everything
plays into our hands. My rival, the Georgian, put it into the khanum’s head, that Leilah, who
is a professed weeper at burials, having learned the art, in all its branches since a child,
was a personage absolutely necessary on the present occasion, and that she ought to go in preference
to me, who am a Cûrd, and can know but little of Persian customs: all this, of course, to deprive
me of my black handkerchief, and other advantages. Accordingly, I have been left at home; and
the whole party went off an hour ago to the house of the deceased. I pretended to be very angry,
and opposed Leilah’s taking my place with apparent warmth; but, thank Heaven, here we are,
and so let us make the most of our time.’

Upon which she went into the kitchen to prepare a tray, containing a breakfast for me, whilst
she left me to explore that which is hidden from all bachelors, namely, the interior of the harem.

I first went into the apartments of the khanum herself. It opened upon the garden by an immense
sash-window, composed of stained glass; and in the corner was the accustomed seat of the lady,
marked by a thick felt carpet, folded double, and a large down cushion, covered with cloth
of gold, with two tassels at the extremities, and veiled by a thin outer covering of muslin.
Near this seat was a looking-glass, prettily painted, and a box containing all sorts of curiosities;
the surmé (collyrium) for the eyes, with its small instrument for applying it; some Chinese
rouge; a pair of armlets, containing talismans; a toû zoulfeh, or an ornament to hitch into
the hair, and hang on the forehead; a knife, scissors, and other things. A guitar and a tambourine
lay close at hand. Her bed, rolled up in a distant corner, was enclosed in a large wrapper
of blue and white cloth. Several pictures, without frames, were hung against the walls, and
the shelf which occupied the top of the room was covered with different sorts of glasses, basins,
etc. In a corner were seen several bottles of Shiraz wine, one of which, just stopped with
a flower, appeared to have been used by the good lady that very morning; most likely in order
to keep up her spirits during the melancholy ceremony she was about to attend.

‘So,’ said I to myself, ‘the Prophet is not much heeded in this house. I shall know another
time how to appreciate a sanctified and mortified look. Our doctor, who calls himself a staunch
Mussulman, I see makes up for his large potations of cold water and sherbet abroad, by his
good stock of wine at home.’

By the time I had satisfied my curiosity here, and had inspected the other rooms, which belonged
to the servants, Zeenab had prepared our breakfast, which she placed before us in the khanum’s
room. We sat down next to each other, and reposed upon the very cushion of which I have just
given the description. Nothing could be more delicious than the meal which she had prepared:
there was a dish of rice, white as snow, and near it a plate of roast meat, cut into small
bits, wrapped up in a large flap of bread; then a beautiful Ispahan melon, in long slices;
some pears and apricots; an omelette warmed from a preceding meal; cheese, onions, and leeks;
a basin of sour curds, and two different sorts of sherbet: added to this, we had some delicious
sweetmeats, and a basin full of new honey.

‘How, in the name of your mother,’ exclaimed I, as I pulled up my whiskers, and surveyed the
good things before me, ‘how have you managed to collect all this so soon? This is a breakfast
fit for the Shah.’

‘Oh, as to that,’ she replied, ‘do not trouble yourself, but fall to. My mistress ordered her
breakfast to be prepared over-night, but on second thoughts this morning she determined to
make her meal at the house of the deceased, and has left me, as you see, but little to do.
Come, let us eat and be merry.’

Accordingly, we did honour to the breakfast, and left but little for those who might come after
us. After we had washed our hands, we placed the wine before us, and having each broken the
commandment by taking a cup, we congratulated ourselves upon being two of the happiest of human
beings.

Such was my delight, that taking up the guitar which was near me, and putting aside all apprehension
for the present, and all care for the future, I tuned it to my voice, and sang the following
ode of Hafiz, which I had learnt in my youth, when I used to charm my hearers in the bath:--

What bliss is like to whisp’ring love, Or dalliance in the bowers of spring? Why then delay
my bliss t’improve? Haste, haste, my love, the goblet bring.

Each hour that joy and mirth bestow Call it treasure, count it gain; Fool is the man who seeks
to know His pleasure will it end in pain!

The links which our existence bind Hang not by one weak thread alone; Of man’s distress why
tease the mind? Sufficient ’tis, we know our own.

The double charms of love and wine Alike from one sweet source arise: Are we to blame, shall
we repine, When unconstrain’d the passions rise?

If innocent in heart and mind, I sin unconscious of offence What use, O casuist, shall I find
In absolution’s recompense?

Hermits the flowing spring approve; Poets the sparkling bowl enjoy: And, till he’s judged by
powers above, Hafiz will drink, and sing, and toy.

Zeenab was quite in ecstasy: she had never heard anything so delightful in her life, and forgetting
that both of us were but wretched individuals--she a slave, I the most destitute of beings--we
did and felt as if all that surrounded us was our own, and that the wine and our love would
last for ever.

Having sang several more songs, and emptied several cups of wine, I found that my poetry was
exhausted as well as our bottle.

It was still quite early, and we had much time before us. ‘Zeenab,’ said I, ‘you have long
promised to tell me the history of your life, and now is a good opportunity; we are not likely
to be interrupted for a long while, and, as our meetings at night are very uncertain, an hour
cannot be better filled up than by the recital of your adventures.’ She assented to my proposal
with much good humour, and began as follows.

CHAPTER XXVI

The history of Zeenab, the Cûrdish slave.

I am the daughter of a chief, well known in the Cûrdistan by the name of Okous Aga. Who my
mother was I do not precisely know. I have heard that I am the produce of one of the secret
meetings at Kerrund;[44] but as such mysterious doings are hushed up among the Cûrds, I have
never dared to question anybody concerning them, and cannot, therefore, ascertain whether the
reports about my birth be true or not. It is very certain that I never looked up to anyone
as my mother; but was brought up at hazard among our women, and that my earliest friend was
a foal, that lived as an inmate with us. It was born in the very tent which my father’s wives
occupied; and its dam, of the purest Arabian blood, was treated more like one of the family
than a quadruped: in fact, it received much more attention than any of the wives; it enjoyed
the warmest place in the tent, was beautifully clothed, and in all our journeys was the first
object of our cares. When the mare died, a universal lamentation ensued throughout the encampment.
The foal lived to be my father’s war-horse, and is to this day the pride of the Cûrdistan.
But would to Heaven that we had felt less affection for these animals! then I might still have
been a free woman; for, in truth, the many vicissitudes which we have undergone originated
in the possession of a mare, of which you shall hear more hereafter.

‘You must know that although the Cûrds do not allow that they are subject to any power, yet
our ancestors (and so did my father to a certain time) grazed their flocks and pitched their
tents in that part of the Cûrdistan mountains belonging to Turkey, which are situated in the
government of the Pasha of Bagdad. Whenever that chief had any war on his hands, he frequently
called upon our tribes to afford him supplies of horsemen, who, being celebrated throughout
Asia, were always foremost in the battle. My father, from his strength, his courage, and his
horsemanship, was a great favourite with the Pasha, and in high request on such occasions.
He was a majestic figure on horseback; and when his countenance was shaded by the back part
of his cap thrown over his brow, his look inspired terror. He had killed several men, and was
consequently honoured with the distinction of bearing a tuft of hair on his spear. But it was
when clad in armour that he was most to be admired. I shall never forget the grandeur of his
appearance, when, with his horse curvetting under him, I saw him in the midst of a thousand
cavaliers, all dressed in shining cuirasses, peacock’s feathers streaming from their helmets,
and their spears glittering in the sun, preparing themselves to join the Pasha. From the result
of this expedition we date part of our misfortunes. The Wahabi had advanced into the territory
of Bagdad, and even threatened that city, when the Pasha thought it high time to call the Cûrds
to his assistance. He took the field with a considerable number of troops, and immediately
marched against the enemy. In a night attack my father happened to fall in with and slay the
son of the Arab Sheikh himself, who commanded the Wahabi; and, having despoiled him of his
arms, he led away with him the mare which his antagonist had mounted. He too well knew the
value of such a prize not immediately to take the utmost care of it; and, in order to keep
his good fortune from the knowledge of the Turkish chieftain, who would do everything in his
power to get it from him, he sent the beast to his encampment, with orders that it should be
carefully concealed, and lodged in the tent which his harem occupied. His precautions were
useless, because the feat which he had performed, and the circumstances attending it, were
soon known to every one; but as the Pasha had a great esteem for him, and there being no reason
to suppose that the mare was more than an ordinary one, he made no inquiries about her. However,
not very long after the war had ceased, the Wahabi having been driven back into the desert,
and the Cûrds having retired to their mountains, we were surprised one morning by a visit from
one of the Pasha’s chief officers, viz. the Mirakhor, or master of the horse, who came escorted
by a handsome train of ten men, well mounted and armed. Everybody was immediately on the alert
to do them honour. Their horses were taken to the nearest pasture, and picketed with plenty
of grass before them: the horsemen were led into the men’s tent with much ceremony, where they
were treated with coffee and pipes; and a large cauldron of rice was set on the fire to make
a pilau. Two lambs were immediately killed, and cooked into a savoury dish by the women, who
also baked piles of bread on the occasion. In short, we did all in our power to put into practice
those obligations of hospitality which are binding upon the wandering tribes.

‘As soon as my father was apprised of the approach of his visitors, even when they were first
espied at a distance, it immediately occurred to him what might be their object, and he ordered
his eldest son to mount the mare without a moment’s delay, to take her into a neighbouring
dell until he should hear further from him. Our tents were pitched in a line, on the brink
of a mountain torrent; and it was therefore easy to steal away unperceived in the deep bed
through which it flowed; and the high mountains in our neighbourhood, with the intricacies
of which we were well acquainted, afforded good shelter to us in case of disturbance.

‘I recollect the whole circumstance just as if it were yesterday; for we women could peep into
the place where the men were assembled, and our curiosity led us to listen to what they said.
The mirakhor and two other Turks were seated; the others stood at the entrance of the tent,
resting on their arms. My father placed himself at some distance, on the carpet, with his hands
before him, and his feet tucked under him, looking very humble, but at the same time casting
his eyes very sharply around him.

‘“You are welcome, and you have brought happiness with you,” exclaimed my father.

‘“Happily met,” answered the mirakhor; “it is long since we have seen each other”; and when
they had repeated these and similar sorts of compliments over and over again, they relapsed
into silence; their pipes, which they smoked until the place was darkened with the fume, holding
them in lieu of conversation.

‘“Our master, the pasha,” said the mirakhor, “sends you health and peace; he loves you, and
says that you are one of his best and oldest friends. Mashallah! praise be to God! You are
a good man; all Cûrds are good; their friends are our friends, and their enemies our enemies.”

‘An old Turk, who was standing, the foremost of the attendants, applauded this speech by a
sort of low growl; and then my father, shrugging up his shoulders, and pressing his hands on
his knees, answered: “I am the Pasha’s slave; I am your slave; you do me much honour. Il hem
dillah, thanks to heaven, we eat our bread in peace under the Pasha’s shade, and put our caps
on one side without fear. God give him plenty.”

‘After a short pause: “The business of our coming, Okous Aga,” said the mirakhor, “is this:--The
Wahabi (curses be on their beards!) have sent a deputation to our chief, requiring from him
the mare upon which the son of their sheikh was mounted at the time that he was killed. Although
they say that his blood is on our heads, and that nothing but the pasha’s life, or that of
his son, can ever redeem it; yet that subject they will for the present waive, in order to
regain possession of her. They say, she has the most perfect pedigree of any in Arabia; that
from generation to generation her descent is to be traced to the mare which the Prophet rode
on his flight from Medina; and, in order to regain her, they offer to throw money on the board
until the pasha shall say stop. Now all the world knows that you are the brave he, who overcame
and slew the sheikh’s son, and that yours is the spoil of the mare. My master, after consulting
with the nobles and the chief men of Bagdad, has determined to take the offer of the Wahabi
into consideration; and since it is become a business of government, has sent me to request
you to deliver her up into my hands. This is my errand, and I have said it.”

‘“Wallah! billah! By the pasha’s salt which I have eat, by your soul, by the mother who bore
you, by the stars and the heavens, I swear that all the Wahabi say is false. Where is the mare
they pretend to have lost, and where the miserable jade that fell to my lot? I got a mare,
’tis true, but so lean, so wretched, that I sold her to an Arab the day after the battle. You
may have the bridle and saddle, if you please; but as for the beast, I have her not.”

‘“Allah, Allah!” exclaimed the mirakhor, “this is a business of much consequence. Okous Aga,
you are an upright man, and so am I. Do not laugh at our beards, and send us away without caps
on our heads. If we do not bring back the mare, our faces will be black to all eternity, and
the doors of friendship between you and the pasha will be shut. By my soul, tell me; where
is the beast?”

‘“Friend,” answered my father, “what shall I say? what can I do? The mare is not here--the
Wahabi are liars--and I speak the truth.” Then with a softened tone, he approached the mirakhor,
and spoke to him for a long time in a whisper, with much animation and apparent persuasion;
for, at the end of their conversation, they appeared to be well agreed.

‘The mirakhor then said aloud, “Well, if such is the case, and the beast is not in your possession,
Allah kerim, God is merciful, and there is no combating against fate. We must return to Bagdad.”

‘My father then rose from his seat, and came into the women’s tent, leaving his guests to smoke
their pipes and drink coffee, preparatory to the meal which was making ready for them. He ordered
his wife, who was the depository of his money, to bring him a bag of gold, that was carefully
wrapped in many a piece of old cloth, and deposited in a trunk, which, with his rich horse
furniture, the parade pack-saddle, and other things of value, were placed in a corner of the
tent. He took out twenty Bajoglis (ducats), which he tied into the corner of a handkerchief,
and thrust them into his bosom; and then giving his orders that the victuals should forthwith
be served up, he returned to his guests. Little was said until the hour of eating came, and
the few words that were uttered turned on horses, dogs, and arms. The mirakhor drew from his
girdle a long pistol, mounted in silver, which was shown around to all the company as a real
English pistol. Another man exhibited his scimitar, which was assured to be a black Khorassani
blade of the first water; and my father produced a long straight sword, sharp on both edges,
which he had taken from the son of the Arab Sheikh whom he had slain.

‘The dinner being ready, the round leathern cloth was placed before the mirakhor, upon which
many flaps of bread, just baked, were thrown, and water was handed about for washing the right
hand. A mess of chorba, or soup, was served up in a large wooden dish, and placed in the centre
of the cloth. My father then said aloud, “Bismillah,” in the name of God; and all the party,
consisting of the mirakhor, his ten followers, my father and three of his attendants, settling
themselves round the dish, with their right shoulders advanced forwards, partook of the soup
with wooden spoons. A lamb roasted whole succeeded the mess, which was pulled to pieces in
a short time, each man getting as large a portion of it for himself as he could. The feast
was closed by an immense dish of rice, which was dived into by the hands and fingers of all
present. As fast as they were satisfied, each man got up and washed, saying Shukur Allah, thanks
to God; and Allah bereket versin, may God restore you plenty. The remains were then rolled
up in the leathern cloth, and taken outside the tents, where my father’s shepherds soon made
an end of them.

‘The mirakhor being anxious to sleep at a village in the plain, expressed a wish to depart,
and his suite went to prepare their horses, leaving him and my father in the tent. I, who had
narrowly watched the whole of the proceedings, was determined to see what should take place
between them, and lent an ear to what they said.

‘My father said, “Indeed ten ducats is all I can give--we are poor--where shall I find more?”
To which the mirakhor replied, “It is impossible: you know perfectly what will happen if I
do not receive double that sum: the Pasha, when he finds that we have not brought the mare,
will order me back again to seize you, and will take possession of all your property. I am
indeed ordered to do that now, in case you refuse his request, but shall not touch you, if
you come to my terms, which are twenty gold pieces. So, my friend, decide.” Upon which, my
father took the handkerchief from his bosom, and taking out the money from it, counted twenty
ducats into the mirakhor’s hand, who, when satisfied that they were all good, untied the white
muslin that was wound round his turban, and placing them in the folds of it, twisted it round
his head again. “Now,” said he to my father, “we have ate salt together; we are friends; and
should the Pasha attempt anything, I will interfere. But you must send him a present, or otherwise
it will be impossible to prevent him from molesting you.”

‘“Bashem ustun, upon my head be it!” answered my father. “I possess a famous greyhound, celebrated
throughout the whole of the Cûrdistan, which can seize an antelope at full speed; a creature
the like of which the Shah of Persia’s father never even saw in a dream. Will that do?”

“Perfectly well for one thing; but that is not enough. 

The Dock is based on the margin of the Thames, whose waters feed him constantly and he facilitate
entry and departure of ships at a time when the tides rise. The Dock consists of a vast pool
of masonry, very deep and more or less divided magazines regularly communicate or incommunicado,
according to open or close, by machines, the huge iron gates and wood. These work by setting
between dam and dam the water level inside stalled, with the outer Thames, and a channel width
of masonry, which measures the inlet of the ships, given input or output with greater ease and
in a few minutes.

The maze of ponds or dams penetrates to the heart of the city in the midst of vast docks planes and
tall buildings, and thus there is the strange phenomenon of a floating city composed of vessels of
all sizes literally stuck inside the stone city and brick that is called London. The ships
go in there with three objects, paying moderadísimo right: 1 download Vastis values ​​in warehouses;
2 º careening and put to cover all accidents that may occur in the middle of the Thames, avoiding
pregnant navigation, and 3 searching in the same deposits (stocks) the burden of return they need.

In
all this is that the Docks are always filled with hundreds and even
thousands of ships of all sizes which together offer the most admirable
spectacle.

An infinite network of helmets, arbolajes in endless forest, flags of all nations, etc., etc., extends
throughout the maze of dams, whose appearance is both bleak and picturesque in the extreme.
At around on the docks, it highlights the huge wings of warehouses, cellars provided or underground
for wines and many other articles, and is there deposited all securities that trade in London rotated
by means of the Thames.

And what movement that reigns in that scenario in the industry!

Here, groups of sailors stand on high bridges or the yards of their ships, calling their attention
clothing, dialects and different types, which correspond to all regions and among these groups
traveling thousands and thousands of workers, some working in the loading and unloading and
the leading of the effects, and others engaged in woodwork or on the bottom of ships. There
are stirred into a thousand dealers and brokers simply speculation credit buying or selling,
if not in the examination of the goods, and all is activity, work, constant movement of people in
that Babylon, ships and goods.

The Dock is not only a commercial establishment and created to service navigation: is also a
powerful element of credit. From the moment the goods enter the deposit in the Dock, is valued
by experts, insured and under the responsibility of entrepreneurs of the Dock. The owner of
goods receives a document (warrant) attesting to their property, with a statement of the quantity,
quality, value, etc.., and must pay a right of deposit. With this document you can go to any
bank, unless you want or can not sell the goods, and obtain, forcing it under warranty, all funds
equivalent need for their speculations, without prejudice of being able to alienate the best
price then, being debt to the buyer. It is incalculable the good that such an institution makes to
trade and industry, by multiplying the capital and transactions through credit.

The Docks "East India" are enormous. This is where that famous squad builds peaceful, if you will
excuse the expression, composed of thousands of large vessels, that feed the trade between England
and the regions of Hindustan and China that have been exploited so far by the Indian company.
Even remotely contemplating the huge forest masts of the vessels nomas, may have an idea of ​​the
opulence of that company and the extent of their speculations.

       * * * * *

In front of the Docks of London Underground is the famous bridge called the Tunnel, work a bold and
great French engineer, Brunel, which was built with the purpose of establishing communication
between the two sides of river. As border areas are very active, counting hundreds of thousands
of workers, and could not take a bridge over the Thames without impeding the navigation of large ships,
it occurred to the bridge underpass. Unfortunately has been useless for communication, for local
causes, and after such prodigious efforts and spending in the 3,070,000 pounds sterling work has
been reduced to a matter of curiosity or monument of genius and audacity
of the industrial greatness of England.

The Tunnel is a cavity practiced under the Thames, separated only by a layer of land 15 feet thick.
The vault consists of two parallel galleries of many arches, with a length of 1.300 feet, and descend
perpendicularly to the extremities, the level of the streets of London, through huge spiral staircase.
One of the galleries has been designed to curio shops, haberdashery, peep, etc.., which produce
more curious contrast with the sombre majesty of the dome illuminated by gas. That is curious
and admires, but the traveler who visits such a monument can not explain how a so practical
and farsighted people like English could accept the idea of ​​a company
so absurd under the industrial look as fabulous on the science and
tenacity.

       

* * * * *

About ten miles from London Bridge, on the banks of the Thames, is the small but graceful visited
Greenwich, interesting for several reasons. From the terrace of the pier and adjacent buildings
can enjoy a wonderful view, as there reaches only to see a huge portion
of East London and the Thames overlooking the course in some miles,
but admires the forest of masts in front of it stand out from all
Docks on the Isle of Dogs.

Greenwich has some 8.800 houses room with about 30.500 souls, as has magnificent park under
the old royal palace and several curiosities, with a to London railway, which passes all under
a gag, and the permanent service vapors, the inhabitants of the metropolis have made this small
town one of his walks favorites, as well as Windsor and Richemond.

Greenwich Park is the Saint-Cloud residents of London.

At the bottom of this beautiful park stands the famous astronomical observatory, whose dome is
about 250 feet of elevation above the Thames. The building contains a rich collection of instruments
and astronomy and marine works, and although English is used Meridian often imposed on the
Cathedral of St. Paul, not Greenwich has never lost its scientific
importance.

The monument, which has served the world, was founded by Charles II and completed in 1675.

The vast main building of the famous hospital of invalids of the navy, was in principle a royal
residence palace created by Henry VI .-- Charles II was rebuilt much later, and finally it
became William III of the Royal Navy Hospital in 1705.

The palace has the size and majesty of simplicity, but the architecture is past and cold without
any notable artistic merit on its exterior.

All Hospital consists of several large bodies entirely separated by wide streets, and reign in
all whole and the details of the most admirable order, cleanliness,
comfort and dignity.

There were about 3,000 disabled when I visited the establishment, and was told that besides
these, which are internal, they received many thousands of foreign pension and Hospital.

Carefully visited the chapel, the museum, refectory, kitchens and pantries and three the bedrooms
in the two main buildings, and in all these places I collected the most pleasant impressions.
The chapel, spacious, serious and simple as all temples Protestants, does not contain any picture
or ornament. As there are no men but meet to read the Bible, pray and praise God, not to be
confused with the man under any form idol or rivals surround him, the absence of images and
saints and all luxury ú ornaments, is absolute. Nothing seems so worthy of the religion as agreed
in the exclusive sovereignty the temple to the idea of ​​God and
the Gospel, - so far from the wickedness which sterilized soul, and
the degradation miserable idolatry, paganism, making it fall into
a misshapen, not even have the spontaneity of poetry and Greek and
Roman paganism.

The Museum is somehow disabled the service record of the British Navy - pride and glory of
the old sailors scarred. Everyone in the world has its point special hearing, so it is not surprising
that, while an invalid scholar explained to me yet enthusiasm may just as every day explaining
to all travelers curious, considering as semi-gods to the most historical characters, I cursed inwardly
destructive genius of those glorious filibusters whom called admirals nations when given the task to
go to the seas with their bloody atrocious fighting, not content with bloody governments land.
Say what you want the sea lords, to me will never be anything Nelson a heroic and sublime Ocean
devastating as a great pirate Drake, the Attila and Napoleon of Europe,
slayer of liberty.

Although English is not very itchy strong in the arts or in selected collections of paintings in
public museums, the museum contains some things Hospital good. Fresh there is no lack real
merit, and some paintings (among the many battles naval history for England, or portraits of famous
marine) of indisputable value art. For the rest, the room contains many relics, model ships,
weapons, tools water and all that, interesting to the Navy refers
to the historical facts more remarkable.

The refectory, kitchens and pantries Hospital admired by the order in which all operations are
arranged to check the cleanliness, comfort and economy of the establishment. The kitchens of
all, serving just a few arms perfectly conspicuous by the polish their stoves and utensils, with incomparable
cleaning. The steam and what machines do everything, and there are made meals like they are in a
factory any manufacturing. Everything is regular as required by the mechanical action of the
agitated by the steam iron, and all leads thence to bless the progress
of a science that serves to maternal care to all human needs.

If the disabled are in Greenwich a wonderful view, beautiful walks, his temple, museum, refectory
and common household goods all excellent, no less comfortable and
happy is the particular situation of each bedroom or in the extensive
accommodation.

You can say that everyone has their own home and have their good clothes comfortable and distinctive.

The
bedrooms are wide and extensive galleries located on the upper floors, bright, air pure and free,
and a superb view from the windows. On each side of the gallery is a row of separate bedrooms, each with
its own door on the center of the room, and inhabited only for an invalid, with all their particular
household. Some work spontaneously produce hand curiosities sold to visitors to the city, but all
enjoy the benefits community and isolation at the same time, and are as happy as his physical situation
permits. They, like old and useless, living memories, and if you ever interrupt its peaceful calm
is excited by their own accounts of naval battles.

No wonder that England is strong in the seas, since, as he throws their children to die or live
as outcasts in the wilds of the ocean, offers asylum old age, when tired of killing and scarred
or horribly mutilated, they need stand hit the front for many years
by hurricanes and waterspouts.

Nearby Greenwich dock was anchored the huge giant named Leviathan sea, the most pride and ostentation of
pride more wrong English, as sovereign of the seas.

Had forgotten to provide me with a ticket, so I could not see the monster but outwardly still under
construction inside, and therefore incomplete.

Many descriptions of Leviathan have circulated in the press in the world, and not repeat them
here more especially as I do not want to talk but from what I see. The impression that I was
Giant was the amazement, and admiration for the power industry association and the English, able
to undertake everything and do everything they undertake. Leviathan, not being more than a merchant
ship or transportation, is so huge it took more than five million pesos. Suffice to say, as a basis
for comparison, that looked across the Leviathan as a pigmy a huge three-decker ship of the
first order, anchored there constantly and serves as a hospital for foreign seafarers. Passing
by the foot of Iron Giant (Breathing for seven huge chimneys) going to board one of the regular
steamers Thames, I saw people who were on the last bridge of Leviathan as seen on high eminence of a
cathedral's bell ringing.

One of these vapors from the Thames passes along the Leviathan as a restless ant by an elephant
standing motionless and numb. This is the proportion.

HOWEVER, I fear that this ship is reduced to be at sea so the Tunnel on earth a monument of
strength and perseverance, perhaps useless by excessive grandeur, but always glorious.

If London has very few modern or ancient monuments that deserve attention by treasures of architecture,
has some facilities that are true wonders modern civilization. These occupy a prominent place
scientific gardens. London, the land of mist and gloom, HOWEVER the
city is the splendid classical gardens artificial.

They reveal not only the taste and charming simplicity that mimics nature, but also the wealth and
the universality of relations of England.

It is proverbial the ability of the Dutch horticulture. It is in the midst of sea lagoons who was born
a taste for the studies and refinements of this lovely art, and Holland, no contest, which
has done more to advance this kind of agriculture. France, England, Belgium and Russia, have been
the happiest imitators, and HOWEVER, zoo, botanical gardens of Amsterdam and Antwerp are more
recent than that of Paris, not cede so on merit. If Paris and the two Belgian and Dutch cities I
have mentioned, and Berlin and St. Petersburg, have made progress
both in their natural history museums and botanical, England can boast
of not having yet rival London for its gardens, which are as perfect
as the state of science and travel and art allow.

London's private gardens in the aristocratic houses are numerous and
splendid. And outside of London, in Richemond, Windsor and other scenic
spots are magnificent famous. Do not you remark that they confirm every
word by an oath? What is the use of oaths to men who speak the truth? One man swears by your
soul, and by his own head, by your child, by the Prophet, by his relations and ancestors; another
swears by the Kebleh,[46] by the king, and by his beard; a third by your death, by the salt
he eats, by the death of Imâm Hosein. Do they care for any one of these things? No, they feel
all the time that they lie, and then out comes the oath. Now in our case, is it to be supposed
that we shall be left unmolested, in the quiet possession of this mare, which has brought so
much misfortune already on our heads? The Persians are more wild, if possible, on the subject
of horses than the Turks, and an Arabian mare in their sight is of greater value than diamonds
and rubies. Should the Shah hear of the one we possess, he will instantly send for it, and
what are we to do then? Shall we continue in arms against all the world? No, my friends. You
may think what you please; but, for my part, I look upon your situation as precarious, and
advise you, as a general rule, not to put your trust in Persians, be they who or what they may.”

‘The event proved to be precisely what the old man had predicted, and was the cause of placing
me where you now see me.

‘One morning, about an hour before the dawn of day, we heard an unusual stir among the dogs
of the camp; they did not cease to bark and make a most furious noise. As we were accustomed
to the attacks of wolves, who were kept at bay by our dogs, we did not at first pay attention
to the disturbance; but at length my father and his sons arose, and, taking their guns with
them, went to see what could have happened. They had not proceeded twenty steps before they
saw a horseman, and then a second, and shortly after several more; in short, they discovered
that their tents were surrounded. My father immediately gave the alarm, and instantly all the
camp was in motion. The horsemen rushed on my father, and attempted to seize him; but he shot
the first dead at his feet, and with his sword wounded the second. The report of the gun, and
the noise of the fray, was a signal to the invaders for a general attack, and in a short time
our camp was entered at every corner. Their principal object was evidently the mare; for the
women’s tent was attacked first, and there they instantly seized the object of their search.

‘As the day dawned, we observed that our invaders were Persians, and we also soon discovered
that they were acting from authority. My father had unluckily killed their chief, and that
was a sufficient reason for our being made prisoners. Conceive our situation: it was a scene
of misery that I shall never forget. My father was treated with every indignity before our
eyes; our property was pillaged, and----’

Zeenab was proceeding to relate to me how she became the property of Mirza Ahmak, when a loud
knocking at the gate of the house was heard. We both got up in great alarm. My fair one entreated
me to take my departure by the terrace, while she went to see who it might be. By the voice,
that was ordering the door to be opened, she recognized the doctor himself, and trusting to
her own ingenuity for giving good reasons for the appearance of breakfast and good cheer, which
he would perceive, she forthwith unbarred the gate and admitted him.

From the terrace I could watch all that was going on. The doctor appeared quite delighted to
find Zeenab alone, and made her some speeches so full of tenderness, that there was no mistaking
how his affections were placed. Looking into the window of his wife’s apartment, he perceived
the remains of the breakfast, and every appearance of the room having been occupied. He was
asking some questions concerning what he saw, when in came the khanum herself, followed by
her women. She entered the house so unexpectedly, that she appeared before them ere they could
separate. I shall never forget her look and attitude at this sight.

‘Selam aleikum! peace be unto ye!’ said she, with mock respect, ‘I am your very humble servant.
I hope that the health of both your excellencies is good, and that you have passed your time
agreeably. I have arrived too soon, I fear.’ Then the blood creeping into her face, she very
soon relinquished her raillery, and fell tooth and nail upon the unhappy culprits.

And breakfast too--and in my room. Mashallah! Mashallah! It is understood, then, that I am
become less than a dog; now that in my own house, on my own carpet, on my very pillow, my slaves
give up their hearts to joy. La Allah il Allah! There is but one God! I am all astonishment!
I am fallen from the heavens to the ground!’

Then addressing herself to her husband, she said, ‘As for you, Mirza Ahmak, look at me, and
tell me, by my soul, are you to be counted a man amongst men? A doctor too, the Locman of his
day, a sage, with that monkey’s face, with that goat’s beard, with that humped back, to be
playing the lover, the swain! Curses attend such a beard!’ then putting up her five fingers
to his face, she said, ‘Poof! I spit on such a face. Who am I, then, that you prefer an unclean
slave to me? What have I done, that you should treat me with such indignity? When you had nothing
but your prescriptions and your medicines in the world, I came, and made a man of you. You
are become something, thanks to me! You now stand before a king: men bow the head to you. You
wear a Cashmerian shawl: you are become a person of substance. Say, then, oh, you less than
man! what is the meaning of all this?’

The doctor, during this attack upon him, was swearing abundance of oaths, and making tell thousands
of exclamations, in proof of his innocence. Nothing, however, could stop the volubility of
his wife, or calm her rage. By this time she had worked her passion up to such a pitch, that
oath succeeded oath; and blasphemy blasphemy, in one raging, unceasing torrent. From her husband
she fell on Zeenab, and from Zeenab she returned again to her husband, until she foamed at
the mouth. She was not satisfied with words alone, but seizing the wretched girl by one of
the long tresses which hung down her back, she pulled it till she roared with pain; then, with
the assistance of the other slaves, she was thrown into the reservoir, where they beat and
soused her until both parties were nearly exhausted. Oh, how I burned to fly to her rescue!
My body was become like glowing fire. I could have drunk the blood of the unfeeling wretches.
But what could I do? Had I rushed into the harem, death would have been my lot; for most probably
they would have impaled me on the spot; and what good would that have done to Zeenab? She would
have been even more cruelly treated than before, and the doctor’s wife would not have been
the less jealous. So when the storm had subsided, I quietly stepped down from my hiding-place
on the terrace, and walked into the open country without the town, to consider upon the course
which I ought to pursue. To remain with the doctor was out of the question; and: to expect
to enjoy Zeenab’s company again was folly. My heart bled, when I reflected what might be the
fate of that poor girl; for I had heard horrid stories of the iniquities performed in harems,
and there was no length to which such a demon as the khanum might not go, with one so entirely
in her power.

In my walk I had almost determined to quit the doctor’s house immediately, and abandon Tehran,
such was the desperate view I took of my situation; but my love for Zeenab overcame this resolution;
and in the hope of seeing her again, I continued to drag on a miserable existence as a dependent
on Mirza Ahmak. He had no suspicion that I was his rival, and that I had been the cause of
the late confusion in his harem; but he was aware that some one must have had access to it,
and therefore took such precautions for the future, that I found great difficulty in discovering
how it fared with my love, or what had been the consequences of the anger of the khanum. I
daily watched the door of the anderûn, in the hope of seeing Zeenab in the suite of her mistress
when she went out, but in vain: there was no indication of her, and my imagination made me
apprehend either that she was kept in close confinement, or that she had fallen a victim of
the violence of her enemies in the harem. My impatience had risen to the utmost, when I, one
day, perceived that Nûr Jehan,[47] the black slave, had issued from the house by herself, and
was making her way to the bazaar. I followed her, and trusting to the friendship that she formerly
entertained for the mistress of my heart, I ventured to accost her.

‘Peace be with you, Nûr Jehan!’ said I; ‘where are you going in such haste by yourself?’

‘May your kindness never be less, Aga Hajji[48], answered she; ‘I am bound to the druggist’s
for our Cûrdish slave.’

‘What! Zeenab?’ exclaimed I, in great agitation. ‘What has befallen her? Is she sick?’

‘Ah, poor thing,’ replied the good negro girl, ‘she has been sick and sorry too. You Persians
are a wicked nation. We who are black, and slaves, have twice the heart that you have. You
may talk of your hospitality, and of your kindness to strangers; but was there ever an animal,
not to say a human creature, treated in the way that this poor stranger has been?’

‘What have they done to her? For God’s sake tell me, Nûr Jehan!’ said I; ‘by my soul, tell me!’

Softened by my manner, and by the interest which I took in what she said, she informed me,
that in consequence of the jealousy of her mistress, Zeenab had been confined to a small back
room, whence she was prohibited stirring; that the treatment which she had received had occasioned
a violent fever, which had brought her to the brink of the grave, but that her youth and strength
had enabled her to overcome it: and now that she was quite recovered, her mistress began to
relent, and had permitted her to use the khena and the surmeh,[49] which she was about to procure
from the druggist. But she was sure that this indulgence would never have been granted, if
the report had not been spread, that it was the Shah’s intention to pay Mirza Ahmak a visit;
and as it is his privilege to enter every man’s harem at pleasure, and to inspect his women
unveiled; her mistress, who wanted to make as great a display of slaves and attendants as possible,
had released Zeenab from the confinement of her room, in order that she should wait upon her:
but she was still restricted to the walls of the secret chamber.

I was relieved by this intelligence, and began to turn in my mind how I could manage to obtain
an interview; but such insurmountable obstacles did I foresee, that, fearful of entailing fresh
miseries upon her, I determined to remain quiet for the present, and to follow the poet’s advice--‘to
fold up the carpet of my desires, and not to prowl round and round my inclination.’

In the meanwhile, the day of the Shah’s departure for his usual summer campaign approached;
and, according to custom, he passed the intermediate time in visiting the noblemen of his court,
and thereby reaping for himself and his suite a harvest of presents, which every one who is
distinguished by so great an honour is obliged to make.

Nûr Jehan’s intelligence to me was true: the king had selected Mirza Ahmak as one of those
to whom he intended the honour of a visit; for the doctor had the reputation of being rich,
and he had long been marked as prey fit for the royal grasp. Accordingly, he was informed of
the day when this new and special proof of favour would be conferred upon him; and as a most
distinguishing mark of it, he was told, that it should not be an ordinary visit, but that the
doctor should enjoy the satisfaction of entertaining his majesty: in short, the king would
take his shâm,[50] or dinner, at his house.

The doctor, half elated with the greatness of the distinction, half trembling at the ruin that
awaited his finances, set to work to make all the necessary preparations. The first thing to
be settled was the value and nature of the pah-endaz.[51] This he knew would be talked of throughout
the country; and this was to be the standard of the favour in which he stood with his sovereign.
His vanity was roused on the one hand, and his avarice alarmed on the other. If he exhibited
too much wealth, he would remain a mark for future exactions; and if he made no display, his
rivals in consequence would treat him with contempt. He had not deigned to consult me for along
time, and I had dwindled into a mere hanger-on; but recollecting the success which had attended
my negotiation with the European doctor, he called me again into his councils.

‘Hajji,’ said he, ‘what is to be done in this difficult case? I have received a hint, that
the king expects from me a considerable pah-endaz, and this from the lord high treasurer himself,
whose magnificence on such occasions is the theme of wonder throughout the whole of Persia.
Now, it is impossible that I can rival him. He insisted, that I ought to spread broad cloth
from the entrance of the street to where the king alights from his horse; that there he should
tread upon cloth of gold, until he reached the entrance of the garden; and from thence, the
whole length of the court to his seat, a carpet of Cashmerian shawls was to be extended, each
shawl increasing in value, until the one upon the musnud, or carpet of state, which should
be of an extraordinary price. Now, you know I am not the man to make such display: I am a hakîm,
one of the learned: I make no profession of riches. Besides, ’tis plain that the lord high
treasurer only says this, because he has cloth, brocades, and shawls to dispose of, which he
wishes me to take off his hands. No, it is impossible that I can listen to his extravagant
proposals. What then is to be done?’

I answered, ‘’Tis true that you are a hakîm; but then you are the royal physician; you hold
a situation of great consequence: besides, for the sake of the lady, your wife, you are bound
to do something worthy of such an alliance. The king will be displeased if you do not receive
him in a manner that will show your sense of the confidence he reposes in you.’

‘Yes,’ said the Mirza, ‘and that may all be very true, friend Hajji; still I am but a doctor,
and cannot be supposed to have all these shawls, brocades, and stuffs by me whenever I want them.’

‘But what can you do otherwise?’ replied I; ‘you would not strew the road with jalap, and spread
his majesty’s seat with a blister plaster?’

‘No,’ said he; ‘but we might strew flowers, which, you know, are cheap; and perhaps we might
sacrifice an ox, and break plenty of bottles full of sweetmeats under his horse’s feet.[52]--Would
not that answer?’

‘It is impossible,’ exclaimed I; ‘if you act thus, the Shah, and your enemies, will devise
means to strip you as naked as my hand. Perhaps there is no necessity to do all the lord high
treasurer advises; but you might spread chintz in the street, velvet at the alighting spot,
brocade in the court yard, and shawls in the room; that will not be very expensive.’

‘You do not say ill,’ said the doctor: ‘I might perhaps manage that. We have chintz in the
house, which was intended for the women’s trowsers; that will probably do. A patient gave me
a piece of Ispahan velvet the other day; I can sell my last dress of honour for some brocade;
and two or three of my wife’s shawls will suffice for the room. By the blessing of Ali, that
is settled.’

‘Ah, but the harem,’ exclaimed I; ‘the Shah must go there. You know it brings good luck to
be looked at by the king, and your women must appear well-dressed on the occasion.

‘Oh, as for that,’ said the doctor, ‘they can borrow; they can borrow anything they like from
their friends--jewels, trowsers, jackets, shawls--they can get whatever they want.’

Not so, said my lady the khanum. As soon as this arrangement was mentioned to her, she protested
against it; she called her husband a low born, niggardly carle; one unfit for the honour of
possessing her for a wife; and insisted upon his conducting himself on this occasion in a manner
worthy of the high distinction that was about to be conferred upon him. It was in vain to contend
against her; and therefore the preparations were made upon a scale far exceeding what the doctor
had intended; and every individual of his house appeared to be actuated by only one feeling,
that of making him refund all that money which he so long and so unpitifully had extorted from
others.

On the morning of the day upon which this great event was to happen (a day which had been duly
settled as auspicious by the astrologers) the note of preparation was heard throughout the
whole of Mirza Ahmak’s dwelling. The king’s tent-pitchers had taken possession of the saloon
of audience in which he was to hold his court, where they spread fresh carpets and prepared
the royal musnud,[53] covering it with a magnificent shawl. They threw water over the court
yard, set the fountains playing, and fitted on a new curtain to the front of the building.
The king’s gardeners also came and decked the premises with flowers. On the surface of the
pool of water, immediately facing the spot where his majesty was to be seated, they spread
rose leaves in curious devices. Around the marble basin they placed rows of oranges, and a
general appearance of freshness and cheerfulness was given to the whole scene.

Then the cooks, a numerous and most despotic band, arrived with such accompaniments of pots,
pans, braziers, and boilers, that the doctor, out of all patience, inquired of the head of
the kitchen, ‘what this meant; whether it was intended that he should feed all the city, as
well as the king.’

‘Not quite all’ was his answer; ‘but perhaps you will recollect the words of Saadi:

If from the peasant’s tree, the king an apple craves, Down with it root and branch, exclaim
his ready slaves; And should he, in dainty mood, one single egg require, Lo! thousand spitted
birds revolve before the fire.

They took possession of the kitchen, which did not contain one-quarter of the space required
for their operations, and consequently it was necessary to erect temporary fire-places in the
adjoining court, where the braziers were placed, and in which was boiled the rice that is distributed
on such occasions to all present. Besides the cooks, a body of confectioners established themselves
in one of the apartments, where the sweetmeats, the sherbets, the ices, and the fruits were
prepared; and they called for so many ingredients, that the doctor had nearly expired when
the list was presented to him. In addition to all these, arrived the king’s band of singers
and musicians, and the Lûti Bashi (jester in chief) accompanied by twenty lûtis, each with
a drum hanging over his shoulder.

The time appointed for the visit was after the evening’s prayer, which is made at sunset. At
that hour, when the heat of the day had partly subsided, and the inhabitants of Tehran were
about to enjoy the cool of the evening, the Shah left his palace, and proceeded to the doctor’s
house. The streets had been swept and watered; and as the royal cortége approached, flowers
were strewn on the path. Mirza Ahmak himself had proceeded to the royal presence to announce
that all was ready, and walked close to the king’s stirrup during the cavalcade.

The procession was opened by the heralds, who, with the distinguishing club of office in their
hands, and ornament on the head, proclaimed the king’s approach, and marshalled every one on
the road. The tops of the walls were occupied by women in their white veils, and in the better
houses they were seen to be peeping through the holes made in the screens which surround their
terraces. Then followed a great body of tent-pitchers and carpet-spreaders, with long slender
sticks in their hands, keeping the road clear from intruders. After this, walked a crowd of
well-dressed officers of the stable, bearing rich embroidered saddle housings over their shoulders;
then servants in the gayest attire, with gold pipes in their hands, the king’s shoe bearer,
the king’s ewer and basin bearer, the carrier of his cloak, the comptroller of the opium box,
and a number of other domestics. As this was only a private procession, his majesty was preceded
by no led horses, which usually form so splendid a part of his grand displays. To these succeeded
a train of running footmen, two and two, fantastically dressed, some with gold coins embroidered
on their black velvet coats, others dressed in brocades, and others in silks: they immediately
preceded the Shah in person, who was attended by the chief of the running footmen, a man of
considerable consequence, known by the enamelled handled whip stuck in his girdle. The king
rode a quiet ambling horse, richly caparisoned; but his own dress was plain, and only distinguished
by the beauty of the shawls and other materials of which it was composed. After him, at an
interval of fifty paces, followed three of the king’s sons, then the noble of nobles, the great
master of the ceremonies, the master of the horse, the court poet, and many others, all attended
by their servants: and at length when the whole party were collected together, who were to
partake of Mirza Ahmak’s substance, five hundred would probably be called a moderate number.

The king alighted at the gate, the entrance being too narrow to ride through; and proceeded
up the centre walk of the court to the seat prepared for him in the great saloon. Every one,
except the princes, stood without, and the doctor himself did the duties of a menial.

After his majesty had been seated some little time, the master of ceremonies, accompanied by
the master of the house, walking barefooted, appeared near the reservoir, the latter holding
up breast high a silver salver, in which were spread one hundred tomauns of new coinage. The
master, of ceremonies then exclaimed, in a loud voice, ‘The meanest of your majesty’s slaves
makes a humble representation to the Centre of the Universe, the King of Kings, the Shadow
of God upon earth, that Mirza Ahmak, the king’s chief physician, dares to approach the sacred
dust of your majesty’s feet, and to bring by way of an offering one hundred gold tomauns.’

To which the king answered, ‘You are welcome, Mirza Ahmak. Praise be to God, you are a good
servant. The Shah has a particular share of condescension for you; your face is whitened, your
consequence has increased, Go, give praises to God, that the king has come to your house, and
has accepted your present.’

Upon which the doctor knelt down and kissed the ground.

Then his majesty, turning to his noble of nobles, exclaimed, ‘By the head of the Shah, Mirza
Ahmak is a good man. There is no one like him now in Persia--he is wiser by far than Locman--more
learned than Galen.’

‘Yes, yes,’ answered the noble of nobles; ‘Locman indeed! whose dog was he, or Galen? This
also comes from the happy star of the King of Kings. Such a king Persia before never saw, and
such a doctor for such a king! Men may praise the doctors of Europe and of India, but where
is science to be found, if it be not in Persia?--Who shall dare to claim a superiority, as
long as the land of Persia is enlightened by the presence of its Shah without compare?’

‘That’s all true,’ said the king. ‘Persia is the country which, from the beginning of the world
to the present day, has always been famous for the genius of its inhabitants, and the wisdom
and splendour of its monarchs. From Kaiumars, the first king of the world, to me who am the
present Shah, what list is so perfect, so glorious? India also had her sovereigns, Arabia her
caliphs, Turkey her Khon Khors (lit. blood drinkers), Tartary her khans, and China her emperors;
but as for the Franks, who come into my dominions from God knows where, to buy and sell, and
to bring me tribute of presents,--they, poor infidels! have a parcel of kings, of whose countries
even the names have not reached our ears.’

‘Belli, belli, Yes, yes!’ said the nobleman, ‘I am your sacrifice. Except the English and the
French nations, which by all accounts are something in the world, all others are but little
better than nothing. As for Moscovites, they are not Europeans--they are less than the dogs
of Europe.’

‘Ha! ha! ha! you say true’, answered the king, laughing. ‘They had their Khûrshîd Colah,[54]
their ‘Head of Glory’ as they called her, who for a woman was a wonderful person, ’tis true--and
we all know that when a woman meddles with anything, pena be khoda, it is then time to put
one’s trust in God; but after her, they had a Paul, who was a pure madman; who, to give you
an instance of what his folly was, wanted to march an army to India; just as if the Kizzil
Bashes[55] would ever have allowed it. A Russian puts on a hat, a tight coat, and tight breeches,
shaves his beard, and then calls himself a European. You might just as well tie the wings of
a goose to your back and call yourself an angel.’

‘Wonderful, wonderful,’ exclaimed the head of the nobles; ‘the Shah-in-Shah speaks like an
angel. Show us a king in Europe that would speak like him.’

‘Yes, yes,’ was chorused by all the bystanders.

‘May he live a thousand years,’ said one.

‘May his shadow never be less,’ said another.

‘But it is of their women,’ continued the king, ‘of whom we hear the most extraordinary accounts.
In the first place, they have no anderûn[56] in their houses; men and women all live together;
then the women never wear veils--they show their faces to whoever chooses to look at them,
like those of our wandering tribes. Tell me, Mirza Ahmak, you that are a doctor and a philosopher,
by what extraordinary arrangement of providence does it happen, that we Mussulmans should be
the only people on earth who can depend upon our wives, and who can keep them in subjection.
You,’ said his majesty, smiling ironically, ‘you I hear are blessed above all men in an obedient
and dutiful wife.’

‘Possessed of the kindness and protection of the King of Kings,’ answered the doctor, ‘I am
blessed with everything that can make life happy. I, my wife, my family, are your humble slaves,
and everything we have your property. If your slave possesses any merit, it is none of his;
it all emanates from the asylum of the world: even my failings become virtues, when the king
commands me. “But what lamp can shine in the face of, the sun, or what minaret can be called
high at the foot of the mountain of Alwend?” With respect to what your majesty has been pleased
to say concerning women, it appears to the meanest of your slaves, that there must be a great
affinity between beasts and Europeans, and which accounts for the inferiority of the latter
to Mussulmans. Male and female beasts herd promiscuously together; so do the Europeans. The
female beasts do not hide their faces; neither do the Europeans. They wash not, nor do they
pray five times a day; neither do the Europeans. They live in friendship with swine; so do
the Europeans; for instead of exterminating the unclean beast, as we do, I hear that every
house in Europe has an apartment fitted up for its hog. Then as for their women indeed! What
dog seeing its female in the streets does not go and make himself agreeable? so doubtless does
the European. Wife in those unclean countries must be a word without a meaning, since every
man’s wife is every man’s property.

‘Well said, doctor,’ exclaimed the king; ‘’tis plain, then, that all are beasts but us. Our
holy Prophet (upon whom be blessing and peace!) has told us as much. The infidel will never
cease roasting, whilst the true believer will be eternally seated next to his houri in the
seventh heaven! But we hear, doctor, that your Paradise has begun here on earth, and that you
have got your houris already. Ah! how is that?’

Upon which Mirza Ahmak made a low prostration, and said, ‘Whatever the monarch permits his
slave to possess is the monarch’s. The hour will be fortunate, and Mirza Ahmak’s head will
reach the skies, when the propitious step of the King of Kings shall pass the threshold of
his unworthy anderûn.’

‘We shall see with our own eyes,’ rejoined the king; ‘a look from the king brings good luck.
Go, give notice to your harem that the Shah will visit it; and if there be any one sick, any
one whose desires are unaccomplished, any maiden who sighs for her lover, or any wife who wishes
to get rid of her husband, let them come forward, let them look at the king, and good fortune
will attend them.’

Upon this the poet, who had hitherto remained silent, his mind apparently absorbed in thought,
exclaimed, ‘Whatever the king hath ordained is only an additional proof of his beneficence
and condescension’; and then in very good verse he sung--

The firmament possesses but one sun, and the land of Irâk but one king.

Life, light, joy, and prosperity attend them both wherever they appear.

The doctor may boast of his medicine; but what medicine is equal to a glance from the king’s eye?

What is spikenard? what mumiai? what pahzer?[57] compared even to the twinkle of a royal eyelash!

Oh! Mirza Ahmak, happiest of men, and most blessed of doctors!

Now, indeed, you possess within your walls an antidote to every disorder, a specific against
every evil.

Shut up your Galen, burn your Hippocrates, and put Avicenna in a corner: the father of them
all is here in person.

Who will take cassia when an eye is to be had, or will writhe under a blister when a look will
relieve him?

Oh! Mirza Ahmak, happiest of men, and most blessed of doctors!

Every one present had kept the strictest silence when this was repeating, when the king exclaimed,
‘Aferîn, this is well; you are indeed a poet, and worthy of our reign. Who was Ferdousi when
compared to you? As for Mahmoud, the Ghaznevi, hâk bûd (he was dirt). Go to him,’ said he to
the noble of nobles, ‘go, kiss him on the mouth, and, when that is done, fill it with sugar-candy.
Every pleasure should attend such a mouth, from whence such good things proceed.’

Upon which the noble of nobles, who was endowed with a large and bushy beard, approached the
poet, and inflicted a kiss upon his mouth, which also was protected by an appropriate quantity
of hair; and then from a plate of sugar-candy, which was handed to him, he took as many lumps
as would quite fill his jaws, and inserted them therein with his fingers with all due form.

Though evidently distressed with his felicity, the poet did his utmost to appear at the summit
of all happiness, and grinned with such rare contortions, that involuntary tears flowed from
his eyes as fast as the sugar-candy distilled through his lips.

The king then dismissed his courtiers and attendants, and preparations were made for serving
up the royal dinner.

The only persons, besides servants, admitted into the saloon where the Shah dined, were the
three princes, his sons, who had accompanied him; and they stood at the farthest end, with
their backs against the wall, attired in dresses of ceremony, with swords by their sides. Mirza
Ahmak remained in attendance without. A cloth, of the finest Cashmerian shawl fringed with
gold, was then spread on the carpet before the king, by the chief of the valets, and a gold
ewer and basin were presented for washing hands. The dinner was then brought in trays which,
as a precaution against poison, had been sealed with the signet of the head steward before
they left the kitchen, and were broken open by him again in the presence of the Shah. Here
were displayed all the refinements of cookery. Rice, in various shapes, smoked upon the board;
first the chilau, as white as snow; then the pilau, with a piece of boiled lamb smothered in
the rice; then another pilau, with a baked fowl in it; a fourth coloured with saffron, mixed
up with dried peas; and at length, the king of Persian dishes, the narinj pilau, made with
slips of orange-peel, spices of all sorts, almonds, and sugar: salmon and herring, from the
Caspian Sea, were seen among the dishes; and trout from the river Zengî, near Erivan; then
in china basins and bowls of different sizes were the ragouts, which consisted of hash made
of a fowl boiled to rags, stewed up with rice, sweet herbs, and onions; a stew, in which was
a lamb’s marrow-bone, with some loose flesh about it, and boiled in its own juice; small gourds,
crammed with force-meat, and done in butter; a fowl stewed to rags, with a brown sauce of prunes;
a large omelette, about two inches thick; a cup full of the essence of meat, mixed up with
rags of lamb, almonds, prunes, and tamarinds, which was poured upon the top of the chilau;
a plate of poached eggs, fried in sugar and butter; a dish of badenjáns, slit in the middle
and boiled in grease; a stew of venison; and a great variety of other messes too numerous to
mention. After these came the roasts. A lamb was served up hot from the spit, the tail of which,
like marrow, was curled up over its back. Partridges, and what is looked upon as the rarest
delicacy in Persia, two capk dereh, partridges of the valley, were procured on the occasion.
Pheasants from Mazanderan were there also, as well as some of the choicest bits of the wild
ass and antelope. The display and the abundance of delicacies surprised every one; and they
were piled up in such profusion around the king, that he seemed almost to form a part of the
heap. I do not mention the innumerable little accessories of preserves, pickles, cheese, butter,
onions, celery, salt, pepper, sweets, and sours, which were to be found in different parts
of the tray, for that would be tedious: but the sherbets were worthy of notice, from their
peculiar delicacy: these were contained in immense bowls of the most costly china, and drank
by the help of spoons of the most exquisite workmanship, made of the pear-tree. They consisted
of the common lemonade, made with superior art; of the sekenjebîn, or vinegar, sugar, and water,
so mixed that the sour and the sweet, were as equally balanced as the blessings and miseries
of life; the sherbet of sugar and water, with rose-water to give it a perfume, and sweet seeds
to increase its flavour; and that made of the pomegranate; all highly cooled by lumps of floating
ice.

The king then, doubling himself down with his head reclining towards his food, buried his hand
in the pilaus and other dishes before him, and ate in silence, whilst the princes and the servants
in waiting, in attitudes of respect, remained immovable. And However, as a whole in
the world has its gradations, these rooms, which are those of the aristocracy misery, looks
like paradise compared to the underground sewers that are the basis each of these palaces of
lust in rags and hunger and intemperance!

- Does U. courage to go? - my friend told me cicerone, showing a hole
at the foot of the outer wall of a moldy home.

- Login to where?
- I replied.

- Well ... to hell!

I said with deep emotion .-- Yes, here lives a part of the species
human, civilized Europe - in the heart of London, as the swarm of
worms lives in the middle of a beautiful fruit.

You see, peek through that hole, and then tell me if the New World is not worth much more than
this rotting golden ....

Indeed, had the nerve to go up and see .... A narrow stone staircase
descended gross or door opening, practiced at the foot of the wall
in the back of a cave or wet basement and stinking, no more light
than the very confusing street came through the bars of an iron fence.

The floor was dirt that cloacal scarcely tight and was almost all covered with piles of dirty
straw soaked with moisture. No furniture could be seen in the center and only two corners
highlighted the shadows of some chaff mats as mattresses coils.

Among one of the piles of straw was moving a small object rolling on some rags: a loud cry, made me
see I was a child. Nearby stood on a pile of chaff a old crippled few moments after she crawled on
hands and knees to pick up the charity that my friend threw up the
stairs.

In another corner a man was snoring, with that brutal gasp characteristic of sleep of drunkenness,
lying like a black trunk, and his hand was scratching a dog began to growl at us suspiciously
appear on the top of the stairs. When I stuck my head less foul air of the alley, I felt as if I
had been subjected to the action of a pneumatic machine deadly ....

- Oh! this is awful! exclaimed breathing. No human being may live there ....

- And HOWEVER, I said my companion, U. but has not been shown.

The cave is empty because residents now walk the streets looking
for the subsistence wealthy begging pickpocket theft, the vilest offices,
the treatment of prostitution, or waste, bones and shells that collect
on the banks of the streams or on the doors of markets and grocery
stores.

When they arrive at eight in the evening, a long cord is miserable slowly returning to its dark
alleyways to find the corner of their sewers. Men and women, old and young adults who move from
puberty to old age the body and soul with amazing precocity by the action of vice and deprivation
- all are going, going down the ladder and swarming like insects on a pond putrid to spend
the night, confused, mixed up, half drunk, half idiot, exhausted by fatigue and hungry - and sometimes
mutually hating - unaware of his being, or - notion of God or love of humanity, or resignation,
or remorse, no aspirations, no hope ....

- Hebetados by poverty (continued saying my guide), these beings do not distinguish past of the
present nor the future, and as the raw, only because they understand that there hungry or thirsty,
tired or cold, hard straw or sleep .... The pain is not for them any moral significance, its
spirit is dead, asphyxiated by the filth that surrounds the subject!

And in spite of hunger and physical pain, these beings that crowd there on that moldy straw
by humidity, frequently look filthy pleasures of lust! Hence the sexes are mixed, and among
the 30 or 40 people lying on the bottom of the sewer gloomy things happen that only the impassive
eye of God can look at without shuddering, and have no name in the vocabulary of civilization
....

- But those people who live on the upper floors can live how dreadful hole? - Le I said to my
partner.

- They live where it suits them, he answered, - only that, being less miserable, can pay to stay in
the high parts, but so is its degradation well below of the beggars
in the subway.

In these pieces are high points of the reunion knights of industry subordinates sleep there
shoeshine and lower Saltimbancos amount, the fruit from street vendors of trinkets, street
musicians, and many different kinds of bums that are not literally homeless, there's rags
hide their thieves of some importance and the crooks who speculate in the intrigues of the seductive;
there rest of his long fatigue of the day, after twelve or sixteen hours of work, thousands of those
poor little street-wage workers and newspaper deliverers and the like, and finally, there are
countless home vile prostitutes and prostitutes who swarm through the streets of London, but
which by its ugliness, its age or otherwise, do not belong but to the populace of the despicable.

-
All this vast and heterogeneous crowd stands up in the morning, stiff and wan, and to feel
the noise near the cars on the affluent streets, remember that is in the midst of the hustle
where you can find the handouts and garbage of society, or the easy exploitation of pride,
of the vices or the credulity of those who are happy.

Then the whole mob hangs over London as a cloud of crows, and San-Gil neighborhood is deserted
all day ....

We had gone three yards and streets and some mazes, and my companion, fearing extraviásemos
that we can not find out, I said:

- Let us leave this damned country. What U. has been enough, because everything is equal, when
not worse.

When we went to Trafalgar Square, we felt we really resucitábamos,
or we went out if not a grave, hell of a nightmare throttle.

       * * * * *

Could England be indifferent to the profound distress, manifested as gangrene mainly in the
heart of their biggest commercial and manufacturing cities? No! England is the country of selfishness
and pride, but those same feelings that tarnish given awareness of the danger and force applied
to avert it. This chronic disease and depth of misery and vice, the result of ignorance of the
masses, inequality social conditions and the laws of privilege, could be felt and still feels
very intensity, not only in London but in Liverpool, Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester, Glasgow
and other major population centers and industrial development. The Cangro covered with root fibers
and all the bowels of society .... Thought possible with emollients dissolve and everyone went to
the work of charity and education. Noble error, as to the first part of the work. The misery,
the vice that it generates, and the crime that results vice, are but effects of an organic cause.
If the statement prepared to virtue, is powerless to produce it alone: ​​she needs by supporting
freedom, justice and work. The charity is nothing more than a balm, or cálmalos relieves pain,
but leaves survive the bad.

That is what has happened in England. The cry of despair and agony launched by the crowd exhausted,
corrupt or guilty, awakened to the rich or lucky England in 1847, and that people, in all its
manifestations is large and strong, but always faithful to the traditions and unsympathetic to
radical reforms, built magnificent temples wherever to the charity in all forms anodyne, spilling
mounds for gold to retain opulence itself. Rue England felt the imminent danger of a profound
shock social, and he was ashamed of his disgrace, published by all the travelers who studied
fund the traditional organization of the mighty Albion.

England now spends more than 35 million dollars annually in just the visible care of welfare.
A sum so enormous and so insufficient HOWEVER what is what reveals? If you test the incredible
wealth of the wealthy classes, further reveals the enormity of destitution in which they live
the other classes - ie, the terrible inequality that the influence vicious secular institutions,
it has been shared welfare.

After having probed the abyss of decay is called Saint-Giles and having heard relations more regrettable
about White-Chapel and other haunts of misery in London I wanted to know what the lucky do
to avert the cataclysm that threatens them. The contrast of the buildings is curious. Large
hospitals are near large banks, filled hospice temporary refuge to people close to the stores full
of goods, and primary schools and arts and crafts at a few steps from the huge factories. All
this sets the whole romantic life and death, of opulence and misery, of speculation and charity.
It seems as if the capitalists like to say to the observer: "Those nursing homes that are touched our
banks are safety valves for our treasures, our welfare spending contained in our books as maintenance
costs, - and guardian or nurse each of these nursing homes and hospitals, each preceptor of one of
these schools ragged (Raghad - Schools) is a worker who works indirectly in the service of our speculations.
"

Such is the nature of the charity in London. They spent huge sums on hospices nursing homes,
hospitals and schools, free elementary education and arts and crafts - and These establishments
generally do great honor to England. But that is powerless evil continues and the number of
homeless is increasing steadily, however gold is spent to oppose a barrier. Tell them to those
powerful landowners, to the haughty rulers, and to those who hold in their hands the wealth
and strength, - Tell them of a reform decisively to change the social organization to make way
for regeneration of the masses indigent, or a system of well-directed free emigration to send
to the other points the world arms industry that desperately needed - and I will respond negatively.
Reject the migration of national pride, seeing it as humiliating for the people English, - and
resist radical reform of selfishness and pride of caste or position social, as a condition of
natural laws, like the advent of an absurd equality and solvent.

For conclusion of this chapter, I will say that I took from my quick
observations London a bleak conviction: as the evil of poverty is
deep, radical, immense the remedy must be the same, and as the current
choice for big and flashy to be in However, it is ineffective in substance,
England has only three possible paths leave the present situation:
social reform or complete and without restriction, or the organization
emigration official free downloading of millions of individuals remaining
in soil, benefiting the population of the New World (where the work
of rehabilitating) or a terrible revolution for many years, which
would destroy the wealth of Britain.

* * * * *

CHAPTER III.

* * * * *

       The Thames in London.

       The bridges, navigation and river banks of the great Houses of Parliament
.-- .-- .-- The Westminster Tower of London Docks trade .-- .-- The
Tunnel - Greenwioh, the Military Hospital - The Leviathan on site.

If England holds in all commercial and manufacturing cities spontaneity, greatness and all conditions
of a people positivist, vigorous and free, in any reveals her part
better than the objects accumulated on the shores and waves Thames.

Wonderful parks and gardens demonstrate the universality of relationships and luxury of ostentation,
and the British Museum is testimony to the power that reaches the indefatigable investigation
of the traveler. The massive cathedral of St. Paul is a monument of architecture but the pride
of a great people. The Crystal Palace is proof of its power of appropriation cosmopolitan, and
Westminster Abbey, the Tower of London and the Palace of Parliament, overlooking the Thames, are
rather the testimony of aristocratic pride. Finally, the Exchange National Bank and the monuments of
the squares of London reveal everything of opulence and glory, to worship wealth and great patriotism
in that nation.

All this is great, and to each of these monuments devote a few strokes. But I repeat, where England,
through their metropolis, reveals better their true conditions as
business people, marine and manufacturing, in colossal proportions,
is on the Thames.

Your great docks (docks) with Vastis warehousing; its remarkable bridges lying in various forms
on the opulent river, the wonder of the Tunnel (luxurious uselessness he admires), and their thousands
of steam, merchant and naval ships and coastal boats or fishermen, literally covering the surface
of the river, their large factories, whose very high their chimneys looming black clouds of
smoke and steam from the clouds that wander about waves, his splendid military Greenwich Hospital,
unparalleled in the world, its sea monster iron called Leviathan, and its many shipbuilding
yards and beautiful springs on again and margin - all that gives the appearance Thames universality,
grandeur and stunning the traveler life and forces him to respect the strength of this great
nation he is sitting on a bed of coal and separated from the world for the seas has led to all
regions of their flag, their wealth and daring, and made his capital the economic metropolis
of humanity, the inscrutable Babylon industrial civilization.

Scan quickly through the grandeur of the Thames.

The city of London has the Thames just eleven bridges from Chelsea
Heights to the vicinity of the dikes, which holds the monumental bridge
called London Bridge.

One would think that those eleven fixed routes of communication between
the two major portions City are inadequate for the huge population
and the immense wealth sedentary travelers crossing in London in all
directions, and indeed, those bridges, especially the of London that
is free, they are always so full of people and transport vehicles,
which communications are often almost impossible.

But freedom of the Thames is a pressing need that is opposed to the multiplication bridges,
because that is agitated and fabulously rich river, where London has his life or his heart.
Moreover, the facilities of navigation through the vapor feluccas
and compensate for this drawback, keeping along the river and through
a quadruple flow of passengers that swarm by the thousands and thousands
across the middle of the bridges or under its colossal arches.

Of the eleven bridges of London four I called attention mostly for its novelty: London Bridge, which
links the City with the huge Barmondsey neighborhood, south, - the Southwark, situated a little above,
- the Waterloo, overlooking the Strand, - and the Hungerford, immediately superior. The Vauxhall,
whose service dates from 1816, is a solid and beautiful bridge, but
not draws particular attention, as well as Westminster.

These works are so powerful for its extension and the amount of work has gone into them, The four bridges
nomas London, Waterloo, Southwark and Vauxhall have cost 20 million pesos. The first is a monumental
structure, an admirable audacity, and provides a splendid view over
the Thames and much of the city.

It was rebuilt in 1831, English has 782 feet long and about 80 wide, is all granite, composed
of three huge arches almost horizontal unsurpassed architectural merit.

The Southwark was completed in 1819, is all iron and gigantic mass is divided also in three
arches of which the central space measuring 240 feet. The Waterloo consists of nine arches,
each 120 feet in diameter, is all of stone, dating from 1817, and
cost a million pounds.

That bridge is a monument of architecture modern, has a picturesque beauty, and gender in one
of the best in Europe. For Finally, the Hungerford Bridge is hanging or suspended on two abutments,
one of which Pier serves very witty, down to the middle of the Thames by large stands, and looks
as elegant as singular. As in England the government is an entrepreneur ever of means of communication
or the like, over the bridge is not free, except in London.

The spectacle of the Thames, under the aspect of navigation, is incomparable: that not only imposes,
admired and excited but stunning. As this river is the life of London and yet the world trade, its
waves are not imprisoned but by the two tall rows buildings, so there is no masonry piers
for loading and unloading of goods.

The river is open to everyone and cargo boats from descending on the doors and store windows overlooking
the Thames in untold numbers. As to the passengers entering and leaving them vapors and boats
or feluccas, and reaching the same bank as the tide allows, and through a series of old boats
forming bridge and ending in wooden piers set into the center of river.

The Thames river itself is a very medium flow, especially in the eyes of the traveler just
ride in the New World colossal rivers heavily chained. In London the Thames is the average
width of 250 meters, decreasing fairly towards Chelsea and increases to 400 down the Tunnel.
The average depth is 2 meters, which is greatly diminished when the
tides withdrawn, and reaches up to 7 and a half under the London Bridge
in the highest tide.

Thus, navigation of steamers and large vessels is subject, in general, the ebb and flow of
North Sea, which receives the waves of the Thames.

When the tide rises, is an endless cord oceangoing ships of all nations, going up the river to tow
small steamers to reach the docks of London, these huge stores of wood and stone to keep in
its bosom the treasures of the commercial world. Then the show is to understand the secret of
British greatness and progress of all people - freedom, which agglomerate
on a river just thousands and thousands of ships and steamers, whose
arbolajes and blackened chimneys of the free float in the wind change
the flags that distinguish cosmopolitan seas to all the peoples of
mankind.

With much pleasure I saw on one brig agitated the tricolor flag of my beloved but poor country!
... I greeted her with respect and love, singing at the bottom of my heart a hymn of gratitude
to the founders of the independence of my country! It was one among a thousand flags different,
but one was enough ....

Is incalculable, not happen to a laborious statistics, the number of boats and feluccas all classes
that populate and sail in an incessant tingling waves of the Thames. The reader who has never traveled
imagine a lake whose entire surface hangs a huge phalanx acuátiles birds of all colors and sizes
to swim in the most picturesque confusion, and, regardless of the effect do arbolajes, candles
and smoking chimneys vapors, will have a rough idea of ​​the general appearance of the Thames.

If
London has in its maze of streets swarming with thousands of buses
to service from the crowd, and small cars for rent, on the Thames
is also a permanent duty ships, which call-bus fumes, and a cloud
of gondolas or feluccas for the voyage, amounting to thousands of
floating bridges.

Here and there are docks advanced wood serving station, and at ten minutes to get up or down
a steamer long, thin and light as an eel, that launches in its midst a crowd of passengers, pick
up other, it makes its locomotive whistle and escapes with wonderful dexterity prancing between
the narrow gaps left by boats and ships that line the waves,

Communications are so excessively cheap and regular trips along the
river, way down from Greenwich, is so complete, that a walk along
the Thames meets all desirable conditions for the passenger dealer
or the curious traveler.

In these fast pilgrimages all concerned, to the lowest order, - all the attention, and the visitor
you admire in a succession of surprises and different impressions, it contains the Thames of picturesque
ú magnificent, opulent ú unique from one to the other end of London. It was so I could see,
scarcely passing and outside, many sumptuous or interesting monuments, and I needed time for
a thorough study of London, on my first visit.

Beginning the pilgrimage from the foot of Battersea Bridge, Chelsea above, to finish by a visit
to Greenwich, here is what most caught my attention.

Left on the shore saw the trees stand small park in the bottom of which boasts the famous hospital
in Chelsea, gigantic building and, inside, and how as it is served, about justice as one of
the first hospitals in the world. Under in terms of cleanliness, comfort, extension and order,
no hospitals in Europe that may rival those of England. It seems as if this nation, ostentatious
at all, still would have liked to luxuriously accommodate the disabled and miserable qualifying
for public charity.

A little below the huge Vauxhall Bridge is the Millbank Penitentiary (Mill, mill, - bank, home), witness
great progress in that spirit that animates today to England for
systems and humanitarian acts.

Great Britain, Switzerland, Belgium and Baden are the only European states have been able to
undertake the application to the soil of the prison system of the American Union, in order to
arrive at the complete abolition of the death penalty (the largest infamy of feudal societies
disgrace civilization, cursing God and nature human), and REPLACE to the penalty Wild physical
pain and degradation, the influence of loneliness moderate teaches repentance which purifies
the lost, and work that strengthens your organization and restores
his soul and his name before society and before God.

The Millbank Penitentiary should perhaps his name to the singular form of the building, it has the
image of a horizontal wheel mill (million), consisting of a central body and sexágono which serves
as a hub and six separate bodies each other by touching the center so that the Everything looks
like a star or a wheel of six blades.
 The Shah particularly (who by the by has studied the art of killing
as well as any of you) is frequently expressing his delight, that of all the monarchs which
Persia ever had, he is the best served; and with that feeling he talks of carrying his arms
into the very heart of Georgia. If the Russians once hear that you are going amongst them,’
addressing himself to the chief executioner, ‘they may begin to make their accounts clear in
this world, and prepare for the next.’

‘What are the Russians?’ said the executioner, with half a shrug and half a shiver; ‘they are
dust--they are nothing--the possession of Georgia by the Russians is to Persia what a flea
which has got into my shirt is to me: it teazes me now and then, but if I gave myself the least
trouble, I would hunt it out in a minute. The Russians are nothing.’ Then, as if he were anxious
to waive the subject, he turned to me, and said: ‘Well, I agree to take you into the service,
provided you are as fond of the smell of powder as I am. A nasakchi must have the strength
of a Rustam, the heart of a lion, and the activity of a tiger.’ Then looking at me from head
to foot, he seemed pleased with my appearance, and forthwith ordered me to go to his naib,
or lieutenant, who would equip me for my office, and give me instructions respecting all the
duties I should have to perform.

I found the Naib to be in the midst of preparations for the departure of the Shah, giving his
orders, and receiving the reports of those under his command. As soon as he was informed that
I was the man appointed to succeed the deceased officer, he put me in possession of his horse
and its accoutrements, gave me strict injunctions to take the greatest care of it, and informed
me that I could not be provided with another unless I brought back its tail and the mark peculiar
to the royal horses, which is burnt on its flank. My stipend was fixed at thirty tomauns per
annum, with food for myself and horse. I found myself in dress and arms, except a small hatchet,
which indicated my office and was provided by the government.

But before I proceed further, it is necessary that I make my reader acquainted with the person
and character of Namerd Khan, my new master. He was a tall, square-shouldered, bony man, about
forty-five years of age--young enough to be still called a khûb jûan (a fine youth). The features
of his face were cast in a deep mould, and shaded by black and thick eyebrows, as well as by
a jet black beard and moustachios. His hand was particularly large and muscular; and from the
black hairs that curled out from the crevices of his shirt, it was evident that his fur was
of the thickest quality. Altogether he was of a figure commanding, but coarse, and looked his
office greatly to the advantage of the peace of the city, for the very sight of him was sufficient
to awe the evil-minded. He was the most celebrated khôsh guzerân (sensualist) in Tehran. He
drank wine without compunction, and freely cursed the mollahs, who promised him a seat in the
regions below for holding the injunctions of the Prophet so cheap. His house was the seat of
revelry; the noise of singing and tambours was heard there from night till morning. He kept
men dancers and women dancers; and was the protector of every Lûti,[64] however impudent and
obscene he might be. But with all this, he did not in the least relax in the severities of
his office; and one might frequently hear, amid the sounds of revelry, the cries and groans
of some unfortunate wretch who was writhing under the torture of the bastinado on his feet.
He was an excellent horseman, and very dexterous at the spear exercise; and although there
was everything in his appearance to make one believe that he was a soldier and a man of prowess,
yet in fact he was a most arrant coward. He endeavoured to conceal this defect of his nature
by boasting and big words; and succeeded in persuading those who did not know his real character,
that he was among the modern Persians, what Sâm and Afrasiâb[65] were among the ancient.

His lieutenant, a man of stern aspect, was an active and intelligent officer: he understood
the management of his chief, whom he flattered into a belief, that, besides the Shah and himself,
no one was worthy to be called a man in Persia. I soon discovered that his prevailing passion
was avarice; for when he found that I was to be installed in my office without making him a
present, there was no end to the difficulties which he threw in my way. However, by dint of
making use of that tongue which nature had given me, and persuading him, in his turn, that
he was the cream of lieutenants, and the very best of materials for the future executioner
in chief, he relaxed in his dislike, and even flattered me so much as to say, that, by the
blessing of Allah, the benign and the merciful, he believed that I should not fail to become
in time an ornament to the profession.

I still kept my lodging at the doctor’s house until the period of the Shah’s departure, and
filled up my time in preparing for the journey. The very circumstance of being a nasakchi gave
me consequence in the bazaar, and I found no difficulty in procuring everything I wanted upon
credit. During my stay with the doctor, I had managed to set myself up with a small capital
of necessaries, which I had procured either in presents from patients, or by happy contrivances
of my own. As for instance, I wanted a bed, a quilt, and a pillow: a poor man happening to
die under our charge, I assured his relations, whom I knew to be the most bigoted of Mussulmans,
that his death could be no fault of ours, for no one could doubt the skill with which he had
been treated, but that the bed upon which he lay must be unfortunate; for in the first place,
the quilt was of silk;[66] and in the next, the foot of the bed had not been turned towards
the Kebleh,[67] as it ought to have been: this was enough for the family to discard the bed,
and it became mine.

A looking-glass was necessary to my toilet: a mirza, sick of the jaundice, looked at himself
in one which he possessed, and was horror-struck at his colour. I assured him that it only
proceeded from a defect in the glass, for that in fact he was as fresh as a rose. He threw
it away, and I took it home with me.

No one was stricter than Mirza Ahmak himself in all the exteriors of religion, and scrupulous
to a fault about things forbidden as unclean. I was in want of a pair of yakhdans, or trunks,
and a pair belonging to the doctor, which were lying idle in an unfrequented room, were frequently
the objects of my contemplation. How shall I manage to become master of these? thought I: had
I but half the invention of Dervish Sefer, I should already have been packing up my things
in them. A thought struck me: one of the many curs, which range wild throughout Tehran, had
just pupped under a ruined archway, close to our house. Unseen, I contrived to lodge the whole
litter within one of the trunks, and to make a deposit of old bones in the other. When they
came to be moved, preparatory to the doctor’s journey (for he always accompanies the Shah),
the puppies and their mother set up such a confusion of yells, that the servant who had disturbed
them ran breathless with the information to the doctor, who, followed by his household, including
myself, proceeded to the spot. As soon as the state of the case had been ascertained, many
were struck by the singularity of the circumstance, as an omen portending no good to the doctor’s
house. One said, ‘This comes of marrying the khanum; she will give him a houseful of harem
zadehs.’ Another said, ‘The puppies are yet blind: God grant that we and the doctor may not
become so likewise!’ The doctor himself was only vexed by the loss of his trunks; he pronounced
them to be nejes (unclean) from that moment, and ordered them, puppies, bitch and all, immediately
to be expelled. I was not long in appropriating them; and very soon assumed all the consequence
of a man possessing trunks, which also implied things worthy to be put into them. Little by
little, I scraped together a sufficient quantity of effects to be able to talk big about my
baggage; and when preparations for our departure were making, I held myself entitled to the
privilege of squabbling with the king’s mule-drivers concerning the necessity of a mule for
carrying it.

CHAPTER XXXIII

He accompanies the Shah to his camp, and gets some insight into his profession.

At length the day of departure for Sultanieh was fixed by the astrologers. The Shah left his
palace just half an hour before sunrise, on the 21st Rebbi el evel,[68] and travelled without
drawing bridle, until he reached his palace of Sulimanieh, which is situated on the banks of
the Caraj, at a distance of nine parasangs from Tehran. The different corps composing the army
to be collected at Sultanieh were ordered to meet there at a given time, whilst the Shah’s
escort was to consist only of his body guard, his camel artillery, and a heavy squadron of
cavalry. The great officers of the court, with the viziers, and those employed in the public
offices, departed at about the same time, and thus the city was bereft, almost in one day,
of nearly two-thirds of its population. Everything and everybody were in motion; and a stranger
would have thought that all the inhabitants, like bees hiving, by one common consent had broken
up housekeeping, and were about to settle in some other place. Strings of mules and camels,
laden with beds, carpets, cooking utensils, tents, horse furniture and provisions of all sorts,
were soon making their way through each avenue, raising an impenetrable dust, whilst their
conductors mingled their cries with the various toned bells which decked their beasts.

On the morning of departure, I was stationed at the Casbîn gate to keep order, and to prevent
any impediment to the Shah’s passage. The peasants bringing provisions to the city, who are
in waiting every day previously to opening the gates, were ordered to take another direction.
The road was watered by all the sakas of the town, and every precaution taken to make the royal
exit as propitious as possible. In particular, no old woman was permitted to be seen, lest
the Shah might cast a look upon her, and thus get a stroke of the evil eye.

I found within myself an energy and a vigour in driving the people about, that I never thought
appertained to my character; for I recollected well, when one of the mob, how entirely I abominated
every man in office. I made use of my stick so freely upon the heads and backs of the crowd,
that my brother executioners quite stared, and wondered what demon they had got amongst them.
I was anxious to establish a reputation for courage, which I expected would in time promote
me to a higher situation.

At length the procession began to move forwards. A detachment of camel artillery had proceeded
on the evening before to receive the Shah when he should alight at Sulimanieh; and now was
heard the salute which announced his leaving the palace at Tehran. All was hushed into anxiety
and expectation. The chief executioner himself, mounted upon a superb charger, galloped through
the streets in haste; and horsemen were seen running to and fro, all intent upon the one object
of preparing the road. First came the heralds; then the led horses, magnificently caparisoned
in jewellery, shawls, and cloth of gold; after them the running footmen; then the Shah in person;
the princes succeeded, followed by the viziers; and last of all an immense body of cavalry.

When it is mentioned that every man of any consequence was accompanied by his train of attendants,
most of whom had also their trains; and when the sum total of mirzas, of servants, of pipe-bearers,
of cooks and scullions, of carpet-spreaders, of running-footmen, of grooms and horses, of mule
drivers and camel drivers, and of ten thousand other camp followers is reckoned up, the imagination
may perhaps conceive what was the crowd which passed before me in succession, as I stood at
the Casbîn gate. When the Shah approached, his long beard floating to his girdle, with all
the terrors of despotism concentrated in his person, I could not help feeling an odd sort of
sensation about my neck; and I made my lowest prostration to that power, which by a single
nod might have ordered my head to take leave of my shoulders, even before I could make an objection.

The whole procession having cleared the city gates, I lingered behind to smoke with the guards
who are there stationed; and at that time the women of one of the viziers who were permitted
to accompany him to camp passing by, brought Zeenab once again to my recollection. I sighed
profoundly, when I reflected on the probable miserable fate which awaited her. She had been
sent (so I heard from Nûr Jehan the day before our departure) to a small summer-house belonging
to the Shah, situated at the foot of the high mountains which surround Tehran, where, with
many other of the bazigers, she was to receive her education of dancing, music, and tumbling.
The Shah had ordered that she was to be mistress of these accomplishments previously to his
return in the autumn; when she would be honoured by the permission of exhibiting before him.
As I rode away, I could not help turning my head towards the spot where she was now confined,
and which I could just discern a speck at the foot of the mountain. Perhaps at any other time
I should have left every duty to endeavour to obtain a glimpse of her; but I was called up
to head the procession again, and to be in readiness at Sulimanieh when the king should alight
from his horse.

The day’s march, and the attendance at my post being at an end, I proceeded to the quarters
of the chief executioner, where I found a small tent prepared for me and five other nasakchies,
who were destined to be my companions for the remainder of the journey. I had already made
their acquaintance in the city; but now we were brought into closer contact, for our tent was
not more than six ghez[69] long and four broad, and we were thus thrown almost one upon the
other. I, as the junior, fared of course the worst; but I determined to put the best face possible
upon any present inconveniences, anticipating many future advantages, which a certain confidence
in my own pretty self whispered to me I should not fail to secure.

In addition to the chief executioner’s naib, there was also a sub-lieutenant, who must have
a place in my narrative, because, in fact, it was through him that I ultimately became noticed
by the higher powers. His name was Shîr Ali, in rank a Beg, and a Shirazi by birth. Although
natives of the two rival cities of Persia, yet without any particular previous cause, and by
a combination of those nothings which give rise to most friendships, we became inseparable
companions. He had given me a piece of watermelon one hot day when I was thirsty; I had lighted
his pipe for him on another occasion: he had bled me with his penknife when I had overloaded
my stomach with too much rice; and I had cured his horse of the colic by administering an injection
of tobacco-water: in short, one thing led on to another, until a very close intimacy was established
between us. He was three years older than I, tall, handsome, broad-shouldered, narrow-waisted,
with the prettiest oval beard possible, just long enough to fringe round his chin, and with
two large curls, twisting beautifully behind his ear, like a vine curling over the garden wall.

He had been long enough in the service to acquire all the tricks of his profession; for when
we came to converse upon the subject, it was surprising what a vast field for the exercise
of genius he threw open to my view.

He said, ‘Do not suppose that the salary which the Shah gives his servants is a matter of much
consideration with them: no, the value of their places depends upon the range of extortion
which circumstances may afford, and upon their ingenuity in taking advantage of it. As, for
instance, take our chief: his salary is 1,000 tomauns per annum, which may or may not be regularly
paid; that signifies little to him. He spends at least five or six times that sum; and how
is he to get it, if it flows not from the contributions of those who come under his cognizance?
A khan has incurred the Shah’s displeasure; he is to be beaten and fined: the chief executioner
beats and mulcts in the inverse proportion of the present which the sufferer makes him. A rebel’s
eyes are to be put out; it depends upon what he receives, whether the punishment is done rudely
with a dagger, or neatly with a penknife. He is sent on an expedition at the head of an army;
wherever he goes presents are sent him from the towns and villages on his road to induce him
not to quarter his troops upon them; and he uses his discretion, according to the value of
what he receives, in choosing his halting stations. Most of those in high offices, even the
viziers, make him annual gifts, in case the day of the Shah’s displeasure should come, And
then they would hope to be dealt with gently by him. In short, wherever a stick is to be brandished,
wherever punishment is to be inflicted, there the chief executioner levies his dues; and they
descend in a gradual measure from him to the lowest of his officers. Before I was a naib, and
when I was called upon to lay the bastinado on some wretched culprit, many is the time that
my compassion has been moved by a direct appeal to my purse; and then, instead of beating the
sufferer’s feet, I struck the felek upon which they rested. It was but last year that the principal
secretary of state incurred the wrath of the Shah. He was ordered to receive the bastinado,
and, by way of distinction, a small carpet was spread for him to lie upon: I and another were
the operators, whilst two more held the felek. When we were taking the shawl and cap from his
head, his girdle and outer coat (which became our lawful perquisites), he whispered to us,
low enough not to be heard by the Shah (for this was all done in his presence), “By the mothers
that bore you, do not eat me much! I’ll give you each ten tomauns if you will not strike me.”
His heels were tripped up, his feet placed in the noose, whilst his back reposed on the carpet;
and then we set to work. For our own sakes, we were obliged to start fair, and we laid on until
he roared sufficiently; and then, having ably made him increase his offer until he had bid
up to any price we wished, we gradually ceased beating his feet, and only broke our sticks
over the felek. Much ingenuity was displayed on both sides, in order that the Shah might not
discover that there was any understanding between us. His bidding was interwoven with his groans,
something after this manner:--“Ahi amân! amân! For pity’s sake, by the soul of the Prophet!
twelve tomauns.--By the love of your fathers and mothers! fifteen tomauns.--By the king’s beard!
twenty tomauns.--By all the Imâms! by all the prophets! thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, hundred,
thousand,--anything you want.” When it was over, we soon found that his generosity had diminished
quite as rapidly as it had before increased, and we were satisfied to receive what he first
offered to us, which he was obliged to give, fearing if a similar misfortune again overtook
him, we should then show him no mercy.’

Shîr Ali, holding this sort of language, gave me such an insight into the advantages of my
situation that I could dream of nothing but bastinadoing, and getting money. I went about all
day flourishing a stick over my head, practising upon any object that had the least resemblance
to human feet, and to such perfection did I bring my hand, that I verily believe I could have
hit each toe separately, had I been so ordered. The first impulse of my nature was not cruelty,
that I knew: I was neither fierce nor brave, that I also knew: I therefore marvelled greatly
how of a sudden I had become such an unsainted lion.[70] The fact is, the example of others
always had the strongest influence over my mind and actions; and I now lived in such an atmosphere
of violence and cruelty, I heard of nothing but of slitting noses, cutting off ears, putting
out eyes, blowing up in mortars, chopping men in two, and baking them in ovens, that, in truth,
I am persuaded, with a proper example before me, I could almost have impaled my own father.

The Shah moved slowly towards Sultanieh, and at length, after fourteen days’ march, when a
fortunate hour had been selected for his arrival, he took possession of the summer palace,
which has of late days been erected there for his residence. HOWEVER, the speed of the train does not allow
well appreciate the objects, except in the numerous stations around the cities and villages that
delay on the journey.

In England there is absolute freedom to allow the establishment industrial railway railways
and telegraphs almost without restraint to regulations of the authority, and therefore each
company strives to rival the others. From this comes the remarkable speed of the English locomotives,
which are 35 to 40 miles per hour, while in France do not expire but about 30. The British estimate
in a long time and do not prevent anything economize. Also Of note is the great multiplication
of the telegraph wires that are attached to the railway lines, a situation that lends itself
to greater accuracy and more service extensive telegraphy in England.

The fact that stands out more to the eye of the traveler to cross the English countryside is,
apart the admirable order in the farms, the tact that is used throughout the without wasting a
particle field. Thus, the aristocratic side of the park for only the pleasures countryside, is
the magnificent garden of beautiful vegetables and fruit trees remarkably
well preserved and as clean as the floor of a room, and seated himself,
appears to be nothing but an object of pleasure, it gives their products
at the mercy of a singular care.

While the barren hills of limestone or sand is exploited with artificial forests pine and other
trees, alpine in very considerable extent and to great advantage by rent seeking, while beautifully
beautify all eminences - the plains are populated by herds sleek, robust, carefully educated
races improved, planting boxes hold its varied vegetation, or vigorous plowing English farmer
(always moved by enormous horses) which opens the furrows with fecund
prepare the seed.

Everywhere across the ditches, in a smart network prepared for irrigation fields, the workers
labored assiduously works even in the midst of snow deposits dotted here and there hedges and
whiten the plains under the dark shadow pine and spruce, countless villas and country houses
and picturesque construction capricious, stand out in all directions from the groups of dwarf
pines and gardens and gardens, bridges, roads, small irrigation dams, factories and the pens
are multiplied to infinity, giving the picture the funniest immense contours, and from time
to time is reached to see the lovely group of houses in some small town, dominated by the tall towers
of the churches, Catholic and Protestant, whilst that obscures the view behind the broad back of a hill
covered with pines scattered black in endless dark lanes, or momentary light shines from the
sun some small river of humorous settings.

Walking through fields of England understands the mystery of universal greatness contributes to
this nation, because he sees that people, living like a huge bridge ship floating between two
seas, has understood that its physical isolation imposed by the need to develop simultaneously
all interests. In the presence of British wealth is not know what to say about his character
- whether agricultural, industrial or commercial - because it's all and high grade throughout.
English agriculture has no rival in Europe for its irrigation, their
system of culture, education of offspring, their instruments of work,
excellent fertilizers, soil fertility, the patient industry of the
workers and other circumstances.

But if you scroll through the fields is believed that England is largely agricultural, - after manufacturer
is judged to visit the vast, powerful and innumerable factories fourteen manufacturing cities,
and to learn to London, Liverpool, Bristol, Southampton and others many seaports and river bends
the traveler to recognize that the commercial nature is predominant. After must be convinced that
England is all in the front line except spiritual and artistic genres
as their work are called speculators positive, as if all that is useful
in the world would not produce wealth.

The most important cities of traffic, between Southampton and London, are those of Winchester
and Bishopstoke. The first is of great historic and well considerable fame for its population
and literate society, is the seat of an archbishop of the first order, and to some credit many of
its old buildings is a famous Gothic cathedral architecture is one of the most remarkable
monuments of England and even the whole Europe. The exterior is imposing and majestic in size and the
secular character of its architecture and admirable - and interior
has a thousand beauties of art and relics (although it's Protestant
Cathedral) that are considered valuable.

Bishopstoke is much reduced in all directions, and is a city without special prosaic some in the
material, but has its specialty agriculture and trade that noticeable. It is a large market for
cheese, so valuable that depart from here for the whole country and
very large values ​​abroad in this article that is both livestock
fruit and manufacturing.

The equal area, which is perfectly flat for the traveler, and the multitude of bridges dry
Tunels and pine forests all the way, do not permit registration by far the vast panorama of
London. The traveler feels that going to come, because he sees the gardens, parks, roads and
villas are multiplied in a wonderful, and feels very close, almost from minute to minute,
the whistle of the locomotives that pull trains other near railway lines led to the huge metropolis.
Finally he manages to see a long line of hills, to the right, populated suburbs of London
and the castles and villas; then left to discover the exquisite plain or valley of the Thames
extending to Richemond, and is winding river and among the opulent malls and buildings, to
some miles away, then you cross the suburbs of the city, and when least thinks one is in the heart
of the metropolis monster under the iron roof monumental and glass
covering the landing of the railway station in Bishops Road.

There is something indescribably fantastic, something that recalls the romantic visions or the
extravagant maneuvers of the "Diablo Cojuelo" Lesage, passing on the wings of a wagon above a city
like a giant witch jumping from tower to tower, chimney and fireplace in the block in block.
The railway is built on an artificial floor very high which is a huge bridge over the city, in order
to penetrate to the center, without disrupting traffic of the streets so that the traveler passing,
seen below, deep, crowded houses in endless rows, and the people swarming the streets as dwarfs or
Lilliputians.

Everything contributes, therefore, to produce a complete illusion of air travel and extravagant,
profound impression that, by its novelty, remains etched in the mind for many days.

The idea of ​​London can not be purchased on arrival, for lack of a viewpoint that offers the
big picture. To know what London - that sea of ​​houses, smoking chimneys, of towers and factories,
parks and gardens, cars, trucks and warehouses, giant moles mist splashed by the center slide
the Thames, covered with ships and boats a long reef of rock thousands and thousands of multifarious,
- to understand the greatness of the artificial seawater, again, it should go up to the dome
of St. Paul or the "Colosseum" and sink the gaze, in awe of admiration, between God and man, heaven
and earth, horizon and the smallness of the balcony that serves as a lookout. Then he realizes
that, since has penetrated to that Babylon, the personality has gone to a stunning grandeur, overwhelming,
you spray without mercy! London is a vast composite of zeros, is the paradoxa of millions of nothings,
from zero to all beings, forming the surpassing greatness! London, under this aspect, is the
true image of civilization, progress, humanity in his secular. The particle seems insignificant
and it is in isolation, but the harmony and providential cohesion
of all particles produce the force of Creation and mankind and the
marvelous phenomenon of civilization.

From the moment the strange passenger rail wagon down from his person is free, entirely free,
but your pocket, your laptop fortune is at the discretion of legion so vast, so complicated and skillful
"filibusters unarmed 'defense is that any impossible. Played by a swarm of drivers, and carters
who take possession of all baggage in and of itself to take to its destination, and rally to pasiente-owner
as a pack dogs to round a humble and bewildered deer - the newcomer is resigned to abdicate
their will and given to having more force to squeeze and lungs to provide shouting their services.
The driver and the driver are the kings of the streets of London, as the beggar and the robber
in the ruins of Rome, also, these two classic characters England are 'Carone' of the River Styx of
London: they seize from abroad deprive him of part of the capital's journey and entered the hell
of "hotel" for the work is complete. Frankly, I have not known thieves equal to the drivers
of London (Except the owners of "hotel", whom I do not disappoint in his honorable reputation)
and Worst of all is that those bandits "shillings" to pluck the victim with an insolence unsurpassed.

The
London hotel is conspicuous as sophistry, as it is prepared according
to all rules of fascination to receive money without offering but
almost nothing but appearances or delusions.

Huge, dark buildings, which are like a city under one roof, stairs marble, sumptuous in appearance,
draperies, lamps, mirrors, rugs, beds monumental; bright furniture and all that can fascinate and
excite vanity, - that is what is an English hotel, served by servants who appear to members of Parliament.
Everything is gorgeous and promises a great service for travelers arriving tired and hungry.

But then comes the sad reality to establish a compensation. Food poor and vulgar served with a quiet
able to lose their appetite, completing the digestion between courses
and plate, a coffee obnoxiously preparation, soups foul (which came
to discover secret through a servant) coming out of a general boiler
where leftover shed meals served to others in the "restorer" of the
hotel, difficulties and delays for all; raised that the guest has
to pay in several ways, and auction and a thousand disgruntled story
an "account" scandalous proportions Jewish, led to the grossest abuse
of superiority of the entrepreneur: that is what are the hotels of
London.

In short, what the traveler pays is not what you eat or serve, but what he sees, ie, mirrors,
marbles, rugs, luxurious coats of the footmen and all the pomp train; with no way to avoid it,
because all the hotels are unclean is so, there choice is possible (if not appealed to the boarding
house, where long residence) between hotel-palace, loot and ruin without benefit to the traveler,
or the hotel-Figon, unworthy and repugnant for their filth and vulgarity.

In England everything is extreme, in general, there colossal wealth lives next to the misery
supreme, - the admirable alternative to the unclean. But in terms of hotels, and cafes, stores,
etc., the English know it absolutely lacks the notion of art and almost completely the delicate
taste. Everything there is strong, according to the materialistic idea about just what useful,
and think more on speculation and sumptuous luxury and very fascinating or overt, that in accordance
nice things at the same time consulting the economy, delicacy of taste and comfort. That is
the genius of the English people, and would be useless to rebel against the results derived from
it.

My residence in London was so short that to tell the truth, but could not see the features its general
appearance. London is so huge, so complicated in its structure material, that to cross it
in all directions and search their secret ongoing study is needed a few years. And HOWEVER,
what strange phenomenon is in the nature of this vast metropolis! If to find out all the statistics
of London is essential a long observation, to understand the overall structure sufficient well spent
fifteen days.

Paris is only half of the positive greatness in London, HOWEVER, to estimate full value of the
French capital he needs more time to learn to London perfectly. Why? - The reason is obvious:
London is not quite another thing the metropolis of industry and commerce of the world - that is, a
huge reflection of the great faces of civilization, while Paris is the metropolis of civilization
in all its manifestations - is a complex appearance of many colors. In London everything is reduced
to the movement of wealth material, with rare exceptions.

Paris is not only wealth in action - but also are meeting all the treasures of art, science
and whatever is spiritual and delicate refinement of mankind.

If the great British capital has beautiful gardens and museums, famous temples, palaces and bridges,
magnificent parks, banks and many opulent monuments worthy of attention (Usually new), where the company should
preferably be studied understand their moral status, social and economic, are: the press, the
streets and the Thames. London is where all the evidence reveals, through the noise to deafening
the eyes of the traveler who look and think without prejudice. If public monuments credited the
strength and pride of the English people, the streets of London and
the Thames show jointly deep weaknesses and vices as the qualities
of that society, and press their political and economic life.

But to acquire the whole idea, not just walk the streets of London where large is accumulated
vitality: unlike London has two faces, one that terrifies and saddens, and one that dazzles.
Must see them both almost simultaneously, and compare them without prevention, to understand
the amazing contrasts of the set. Who come out of London after have studied only one of the faces
of the Colossus - Sphinx true humanity - would more erroneous ideas, believing, as part of face that
had seen, that London opulence is all wonderful, all progress and welfare, or - all misery,
filth and degradation supreme ....

Consider, then, to London, beginning with its streets. Do not forget that London has gradually formed
by the reunion of many small surrounding cities, or districts, to the old City of the Thames, privileged
and powerful, which occupies almost the center of the vast current population. Thus, although
the city is one in appearance, there is a deep difference between the center and the suburbs.


‘What news is this?’ exclaimed I: ‘do you know, ye men without shame!’ addressing myself to
those who stood before me, ‘that I am an executioner,--one who can burn your fathers, and can
give you more grief to devour than you have ever yet experienced? What mean ye by bringing
me this pair of frouzy shalwars? That which has passed through many generations of your ignoble
ancestors, do ye now pretend to put off upon me? Fools indeed you must be, to suppose that
I will espouse your interests, and set forth your grievances, merely for the sake of this dirty
rag! Away with it, or you will see what a nasakchi can do!’

Upon this they were about complying with my orders, when Shîr Ali Beg stopped them, and said,
‘Let me look at the trousers. Ah,’ said he, holding them up at the same time between his eyes
and the sun, and examining them with all the care of an old clothes broker, ‘they will do;
they have no defect: be it so, they are my property, and many thanks for them. May your family
prosper!’

Every one looked astonished; no one dared make an objection; and thus I, who had been anticipating
such great advantages, lost even the miserable perquisite which I might have had, and only
gained sufficient experience to know another time how to deal with my countrymen, and, moreover,
how to trust one who called himself my friend.

Two fat lambs, which were tied on our baggage mule, were the only present we brought with us
for our chief. As soon as we reached the camp, we immediately presented ourselves to the naib,
who forthwith carried us before the executioner, who was seated in his tent, in conversation
with one or two of his friends.

‘Well,’ said he to Shîr Ali, ‘what have you done? Have you brought the corn, or the ked khoda,
which?’

‘I beg leave to state for your service,’ said Shîr Ali, ‘neither. The ked khoda and the elders
of Kadj Sawar have sent two lambs to be laid at your feet; and they have convinced us with
our own eyes, that excepting them, not a thing have they left, not even their own souls, so
entirely and completely have they been pillaged: on the contrary, if food be not sent to them,
they will eat up one another.’

‘Do you say so, indeed!’ exclaimed the khan: ‘if they have lambs, they must also have sheep.
By what account do you reckon?’

‘That’s true,’ said Shîr Ali, ‘and everything that you say is equally so; but we were talking
of corn, and not of sheep.’

‘But why did not you follow your orders, and bring the ked khoda and the elders?’ said our
chief. ‘If I had been there, the rogues, I would have roasted them alive. I would have tied
them with the camel tie,[74] until they confessed that they had something. Tell me, why did
you not bring them?’

‘We wished much to bring them,’ said Shîr Ali, looking at me to help him out. ‘Yes, we had
bound them all together, and we wanted very much to bring them: we also beat and abused them.
Hajji Baba knows it all; for Hajji Baba told them if they had not money to give, they would
certainly meet with no mercy. Mercy was a thing totally out of our way; for if they knew anything,
they must be aware that our khan, our lord and master, the Nasakchi Bashi, was a man of such
invincible courage, of a resolution so great, and of bowels so immovable, that if once they
got within his grasp, it was all over with them. Yes, we told them all that, and they almost
sunk into the earth.’

‘What does he say, Hajji Baba?’ said the khan, turning round to me: ‘I have not quite understood
why these men were not brought to me?’

I answered in great humility, ‘Indeed, O khan, I also do not understand. Shîr Ali Beg, who
is your deputy-lieutenant, had the whole business in his hands. I went in his service; I am
nobody.’

Upon this the khan got into a violent rage, and branded us by every odious name of contempt
and reproach that he could think of. ‘It is plain,’ said he to his friends, ‘that these villains
have been playing tricks. Tell me,’ said he to Shîr Ali, ‘by my soul, by the king’s salt, tell
me, how much have you got for yourself? And you, Aga Hajji,’ addressing himself to me, ‘you,
who have scarcely been a month in service, how much have you secured?’

In vain we both protested our innocence; in vain we swore that there was nothing to gain; nobody
would believe us; and the scene ended by our being driven out of the tent in custody of the
naib, who was ordered to confine us until the chiefs of the village should have been actually
brought to the camp, and confronted with us.

When Shîr Ali and I were left to ourselves, he immediately endeavoured to make me a partaker
of the spoil, and offered to give me up half of it.

‘Not so, my friend,’ said I; ‘it is now too late. If you have drank and enjoyed the forbidden
wine, and have got a headache by it, it is no reason that you should endeavour to make me sick
too. I have had a lesson, in which you have acted as master, which will satisfy me for this time.’

He then endeavoured to make me promise to stand by him, when we should be confronted with the
ked khoda, and to swear through thick and thin to everything that he intended to advance; but
I was too much alive to the consequences to make any such promise. He said that if once he
were brought to the felek to receive the bastinado, he knew that he could not survive it; for
so universal a terrorist had he been when operating upon the feet of others, that now he felt
he should be treated without the least mercy; and he therefore swore upon the Korân, that he
would undergo every misery rather than be tied to the stake.

When the time came for being called up again before our chief, Shîr Ali was nowhere to be found.
He had absconded, and when I was interrogated, all that I could say amounted to this,--that
I knew he dreaded the idea of being bastinadoed, and that I supposed he had made off to escape it.

As soon as I appeared before my judge, the men of Kadj Sawar, who were already standing before
him, declared one and all, that I had neither exacted nor received anything from them; but,
on the contrary, that I had urged them to make a considerable present to the khan. They poured
out the whole of their complaints against Shîr Ali, who they declared had put the finishing
stroke to their misery, and had even torn off the new skin that had began to cover their old
wounds.

All this was slowly working for my advantage, and paving the road to my promotion. The story
had got abroad, and was in every one’s mouth. I was looked upon as a paragon of moderation.

‘This comes from having been a doctor,’ says one; ‘wisdom is better than riches.’

‘He knows the doctrine of consequences,’ says another; ‘his feet will never be where his head
should be.’

In short, I had acquired the reputation of being a clever and a cautious fellow, merely owing
to events playing fortunately into my hands; and I lost nothing from being looked upon as a
man whose taleh (luck) was good, and one whose star was fortunate.

The result of this part of my history was, that I was installed in the situation of the fugitive,
and became the sub-lieutenant to the chief executioner of Persia--a character, whatever my
readers may think of it, of no small consequence, as they will hereafter discover.

The Shah was at this time engaged in a war with the Moscovites, who had established themselves
in Georgia, and were threatening the frontier provinces of Persia situated between the rivers
Kûr and Arras. The governor of Erivan, known by the title of serdar or general, and one of
the Shah’s most favourite officers, had long ago opened the campaign by desultory attacks upon
the advanced posts of the enemy, and by laying waste the villages and country in the track
they were likely to keep in advancing towards Persia. An army, under the command of the heir
apparent and governor of the great province of Aderbijân, had also been collected near Tabrîz;
and it was intended that he should immediately proceed to the seat of war, in order if possible
to drive the enemy back to Teflis, and, according to the language of the court, carry its arms
even to the walls of Moscow.

Intelligence was daily expected at the royal camp of Sultanieh, from the serdar, concerning
an attack which he had announced it his intention to make upon the Russian post of Gavmishlû;
and orders were issued for giving a suitable reception to the heads of the enemy, which it
is always the etiquette to send upon announcing a victory, for such no doubt was expected to
be the result of the attack. A chapper, or courier, was at length seen riding towards the camp
in great haste. He was the conductor of five horse-loads of heads, ’tis true, and they were
heaped up with great pomp and parade before the principal entrance of the royal tents; but
it became evident that something had taken place which required a reinforcement; for on the
very next morning our chief, Namerd Khan, was appointed to the command of a body of ten thousand
cavalry, which were ordered to march immediately to the banks of the Arras.

The min bashies, the heads of thousands; the yûz bashies, the heads of hundreds, the on bashies,
the heads of tens; and all the officers commanding the troops, were seen hurrying over the
camp in various directions, attending upon their khans, and receiving their orders. The tent
of Namerd Khan was filled with the chiefs of the expedition, to whom he distributed his directions,
giving them the order of march, and allotting to each division its station in halting at the
villages on the route. My duty was to precede the troops by a day, accompanied by a detachment
of nasakchies, to make arrangements for billeting the men in the villages. This was a duty
requiring activity and exertion; but at the same time accompanied by great advantages, which,
had I chosen to avail myself of, might have increased the weight of my purse. However, the
recent example of Shîr Ali Beg was too strong before my eyes not to repress any desire I might
have of levying contributions, so I determined for the present to keep my hands pure, and to
quench the flame of covetousness by the waters of prudence.

I set off with my detachment, and reached Erivan several days before the troops could arrive.
We here found the serdar, who, after his attack upon Gavmishlû, had retreated, to wait the
reinforcement of the cavalry under our chief. The army under the prince royal had proceeded
to another part of the frontier, with the intention of attacking the fortress of Ganja, of
which the enemy had recently acquired possession, and unable to spare any of his troops, the
serdar had solicited assistance from the Shah.

As soon as Namerd Khan and the serdar had met and consulted, it was determined that spies should
immediately be sent forwards in order to ascertain the position, and the movements of the Russians;
and I was fixed upon to head a detachment of twenty men on the part of the chief executioner,
whilst a similar number was sent by the serdar, who at the same time were to be our guides
through such parts of the country as were unknown to me.

We assembled at the close of day, and began our march just as the muezzins called the evening
prayer. Proceeding at once to the village of Ashtarek, we passed Etchmiazin, the seat of the
Armenian patriarch, on our left. It was scarcely dawn of day when we reached the bridge of
Ashtarek, still obscured by the deepest shade, owing to the very high and rocky banks of the
river, forming, as it were, two abrupt walls on either side. The village itself, situated on
the brink of these banks, was just sufficiently lighted up to be distinguished from the rocks
among which it was built; whilst the ruins of a large structure, of heavy architecture, rose
conspicuous on the darkest side, and gave a character of solemnity and grandeur to the whole
scenery. This, my companions informed me, was the remains of the many Armenian churches so
frequently seen in this part of Persia. The river dashed along through its dark bed, and we
could perceive the foam of its waters as we began to cross the bridge. The rattle of our horses’
hoofs over its pavement had alarmed the village dogs, whose bark we could just distinguish;
the shrill crow of a cock was also heard, and most of our eyes were directed towards the houses,
when one of our men, stopping his horse, exclaimed, ‘Ya, Ali! (oh, Ali!) what is that?’ pointing
with his hand to the church: ‘do not you see, there, something white?’

‘Yes, yes,’ said another, ‘I see it: it’s a ghôl! without doubt it’s a ghôl! This is the true
hour: it is in search of a corpse. I dare say it is devouring one now.’

I also could see that something was there, but it was impossible to make it out.

We halted upon the bridge, looking up with all our eyes, every one being satisfied that it
was a supernatural being. One called upon Ali, another upon Hossein, and a third invoked the
Prophet and the twelve Imâms. None seemed inclined to approach it, but every one suggested
some new mode of exorcism. ‘Untie the string of your trousers,’ said an old Irâki, ‘that’s
the way we treat our ghôls, in the desert near Ispahan, and they depart instantly.’

‘What good will that do?’ answered a delikhan (a hare-brained youth); ‘I’d rather keep the
beast out than let it in.’

In short, what with joking, and what with serious talk, the morning broke sufficiently to convince
us that the apparition must have been an illusion of our senses, for nothing now was to be
seen. However, having passed the bridge, the said delikhan, shivering in his stirrups, and
anxious to gallop his horse, exclaimed, ‘I’ll go and find the ghôl,’ drove his horse up a steep
bank, and made towards the ruined church. We saw him return very speedily, with intelligence,
that what we had taken for a ghôl was a woman, whose white veil had attracted our notice, and
that she, with a man, were apparently hiding themselves among the deep shades of the broken walls.

Full of anxiety for what might throw a light upon the object of my duty, I lost no time in
proceeding to the ruin, in order to ascertain why these people hid themselves so mysteriously,
and ordering five men to follow me, I made the rest halt near the bridge.

We saw no one until turning the sharp angle of a wall we found, seated under an arch, the objects
of our search. A woman, apparently sick, was extended on the ground, whilst a man, leaning
over, supported her head, in an attitude of the greatest solicitude. Enough of daylight now
shone upon them to discover that they were both young. The woman’s face, partially hid by her
veil, notwithstanding its deadly paleness, was surprisingly beautiful; and the youth was the
finest specimen of strength, activity, and manliness that I had ever seen. He was dressed in
the costume of Georgia, a long knife hung over his thigh, and a gun rested against the wall.
Her veil, which was of the purest white, was here and there stained with blood, and torn in
several places. Although I had been living amongst men inured to scenes of misery, utter strangers
to feelings of pity or commiseration, yet in this instance I and my companions could not fail
being much interested at what we saw, and paused with a sort of respect for the grief of these
apparently unfriended strangers, before we ventured to break the silence of our meeting.

‘What are you doing here?’ said I. ‘If you are strangers, and travellers, why do you not go
into the village?’

‘If you have the feelings of a man,’ said the youth, ‘give me help, for the love of God! Should
you be sent to seize us by the serdar, still help me to save this poor creature who is dying.
I have no resistance to offer; but pray save her.’

‘Who are you?’ said I. ‘The serdar has given us no orders concerning you. Where do you come
from? Whither going?’

‘Our story is long and melancholy,’ said the young man: ‘if you will help me to convey this
poor suffering girl where she may be taken care of, I will relate everything that has happened
to us. She may recover with good and kind usage: she is wounded, but I trust not mortally,
and with quiet may recover. Thanks to Heaven, you are not one of the serdar’s officers! I entreat
you to befriend me, and my lamentable tale may perhaps induce you to take us under your protection.’

This appeal to my feelings was unnecessary: the countenance and appearance of the youth had
excited great interest in my breast, and I immediately lent myself to his wishes, telling him
that we would, without delay, convey his sick friend to the village, and then, having heard
his story, settle what to do for him.

She had to this moment said nothing, but gathered her veil round her with great precaution,
now and then uttering low groans, which indicated pain, and venting the apparent misery of
her mind by suppressed sighs. I ordered one of my followers to dismount from his horse; we
placed her upon it, and immediately proceeded to the village, where, having inspected the interior
of several houses, I pitched upon that which afforded the best accommodation, and whose owner
appeared obliging and humane; there we deposited her, giving directions that she should be
nursed with the greatest care. An old woman of the village, who had the reputation of skill
in curing wounds and bruises, was sent for, and she undertook her cure. I learnt from the youth
that he and his companion were Armenians; and as the inhabitants of Ashtarek were of the same
persuasion, they very soon understood each other, and the poor sufferer felt that she could
not have fallen into better hands.

CHAPTER XXXVII

The history of Yûsûf, the Armenian, and his wife Mariam.

It was my intention to have proceeded to the heights of Aberan, where we should have found
a cool region and good pasturage for our horses, before halting for the day; but hearing that
the wandering tribes, whom we had expected to find encamped in a certain spot, and upon whose
tents and provisions I had reckoned, were removed far into the mountains, fearful of the war
which had just broken out, I determined to halt at Ashtarek until the heat of the day should
have subsided. Accordingly, my men were quartered in different parts of the village: some settled
themselves under the arches of the bridge, picketing their horses among the long grass: one
or two took possession of a mill, situated in the bed of the river, whose wheel was turned
by water, made to flow in an elevated channel for the purpose; and I spread my carpet in an
open room, built upon a shelf, on the highest part of the rocky bank, from whence I had a view
of the whole scene, and also could discern any object that might be coming towards us from
the Russian frontier.

Feeling refreshed by two hours’ sound sleep, upon awaking I sent for the Armenian youth; and
whilst the good people of the village served us a light breakfast, of which we were both much
in need, I requested him to relate his adventures, and particularly what had brought him into
the situation in which he had been discovered. Refreshed with rest and food, the morning sun
enlightening the spot we occupied, the manly features of the youth exhibited all their beauty;
and, as he spoke, their animation and earnestness helped wonderfully to convince me that all
he said was the truth. He spoke as follows:--

‘I am an Armenian by birth, and a Christian; my name is Yûsûf. My father is chief of the village
of Gavmishlû, inhabited entirely by Armenians, situated not far from the beautiful river of
Pembaki, and about six agatch from this place. In the middle of a verdant country, full of
the richest pasturage, and enjoying a climate celebrated for coolness and serenity, we are
a healthy and a hardy race; and, notwithstanding the numerous exactions of our governors, were
happy in our poverty. We live so far within the mountains, that we are more distant from the
tyranny usually exercised upon those who abide nearer great towns, the residences of governors;
and, secluded from the world, our habits are simple, and our modes of life patriarchal. I had
an uncle, my father’s brother, a deacon, and an attendant upon the head of our church, the
patriarch at Etchmiazin; and another uncle, by my mother’s side, was the priest of our village:
therefore my family, being well in the church, determined that I should follow the sacred profession.
My father himself, who subsisted by tilling the ground, and by his own labour had cleared away
a considerable tract near the village, having two sons besides me, expected to receive sufficient
help from them in the field, and therefore agreed to spare me for the church. Accordingly,
when about ten years old, I went to Etchmiazin to be educated, where I learned to read, write,
and perform the church service. I derived great pleasure from instruction, and read every book
that came in my way. A very extensive library of Armenian books exists at the convent, of which
I managed now and then to get a few; and although mostly on religious subjects, yet it happened
that I once got a history of Armenia, which riveted all my attention; for I learnt by it that
we once were a nation, having kings, who made themselves respected in the world. Reflecting
upon our degraded state at the present day, and considering who were our governors, I became
full of energy to shake off the yoke, and these feelings turned my thoughts from the sacred
profession to which I was destined. About this time war broke out between Persia and Russia,
and our village lying in the track of the armies marching to the frontiers, I felt that my
family would require every protection possible, and that I should be more usefully employed
with them than in a cloister. Accordingly, but a short time before taking priest’s orders,
I left my friends at Etchmiazin, and returned to my father’s house. I was welcomed by every
one. Already had they felt the horrors of war; for marauding parties of both Persians and Russians
(both equally to be feared) had made their appearance, and molested the peaceable and inoffensive
inhabitants of ours and the neighbouring villages. This frontier warfare, in its general results,
was of no great utility to either of the powers at war, yet to those who inhabited the seat
of it, its consequences were dreadful. We were continually harassed either by the fears of
the invading enemy, or by the exactions and molestations of the troops of our own government.
Our harvests were destroyed, our cattle dispersed, and ourselves in constant danger of being
carried away prisoners. Anxious to preserve our property, and our only resource to keep us
from starvation, we continued to till our fields, but went to work with swords by our sides,
and guns ready loaded slung at our backs; and when a stranger appeared, whoever he might be,
we immediately assembled and made a show of defence. By this means, for several years, we managed,
with great difficulty and perseverance, to get in our harvest, and, by the blessing of Providence,
had enough to subsist upon. But here I must begin some of those particulars which relate to
my individual history.

‘About two years ago, when securing our harvest, I had gone out long before the dawn to reap
the corn of one of our most distant fields, armed and prepared as usual. I perceived a Persian
horseman, bearing a female behind him, and making great speed through a glen that wound nearly
at the foot of a more elevated spot, upon which I was standing. The female evidently had been
placed there against her will, for as soon as she perceived me she uttered loud shrieks, and
extended her arms. I immediately flew down the craggy side of the mountain, and reached the
lowermost part of the glen time enough to intercept the horseman’s road. I called out to him
to stop, and seconded my words by drawing my sword, and putting myself in an attitude to seize
his bridle as he passed. Embarrassed by the burden behind him, he was unable either to use
his sword or the gun slung at his back, so he excited his horse to an increased speed, hoping
thus to ride over me; but I stood my ground, and as I made a cut with my sabre, the horse bounded
from the road with so sudden a start that the frightened woman lost her hold and fell off.
The horseman, free of his incumbrance, would now have used his gun; but, seeing mine already
aimed at him, he thought it most prudent to continue his road, and I saw nothing more of him.

‘I ran to the assistance of the fallen woman, whom by her dress, I discovered to be an Armenian.
She was stunned and severely bruised: her outward veil had already disengaged itself, and in
order to give her air, I immediately pulled away the under veil, which hides the lower part
of the face (common to the Armenians), and, to my extreme surprise, beheld the most beautiful
features that imagination can conceive. The lovely creature whom I supported in my arms was
about fifteen years of age. Oh! I shall never forget the thrill of love, delight, and apprehension,
which I felt at gazing upon her. I hung over her with all the intenseness of a first passion;
a feeling arose in my heart which was new to me, and, forgetting everything but the object
immediately before me, I verily believe that I should have been for ever riveted to that spot
had she not opened her eyes and began to show signs of life. The first words she spoke went
to my very soul; but when she discovered where she was, and in the hands of an utter stranger,
she began to cry and bewail herself in a manner that quite alarmed me. Little by little, however,
she became more composed; and when she found that I was one of her own nation and religion,
that I was, moreover, her deliverer, she began to look upon me with different feelings: my
vanity made me hope that, perhaps, she was not displeased, at the interest she had awakened
in me. One thing, however, she did not cease to deplore, and to upbraid me with,--I had withdrawn
her veil;--there was no forgiveness for me--that indulgence which even a husband scarcely ever
enjoys, that distinguishing emblem of chastity and honour, so sacred in the eyes of an Armenian
woman,--every sense of decency had been disregarded by me, and I stood before her in the criminal
character of one who had seen all her face. In vain I represented, that had I not relieved
her mouth and nose from the pressure of the lower band, she must have suffocated; that her
fall having deprived her of all sensation, had she not inhaled the fresh air, death would have
been the consequence. Nothing would convince her that she was not a lost woman. However, the
following argument had more effect upon her than any other; no one but myself was witness to
her dishonour (if such she must call it); and I swore so fervently by the Holy Cross, and by
St. Gregorio, that it should remain a profound secret in my heart as long as I had one to keep
it in, that she permitted herself at length to be comforted. I then requested her to give me
an account of her late adventure, and to tell me from whom it had been my good fortune to liberate
her.

‘“As for the man,” said she, “all I know of him is, that he is a Persian. I never saw him before,
and know of no object that he could have had in carrying me off, excepting to sell me for a
slave. A few days ago a skirmish took place between a detachment of Persian cavalry and Georgians.
The latter were driven back, and the Persians made some prisoners, whom they carried away in
great triumph to Erivan. Our village had been occupied by the Persian troops some days before
this affray, and I suppose then my ravisher laid his plan to carry me off, and make me pass
for a Georgian prisoner. I had just got up in the morning, and had gone to the village well
with my pitcher to bring home water, when he darted from behind a broken wall, showed his knife,
threatening to kill me if I did not follow him without noise, and made me mount behind him
on his horse. We galloped away just as some other of the village maidens were proceeding to
the well, and my only hope of being saved was from the alarm which I knew they would instantly
spread. We were out of sight in a few minutes, for we rode furiously over hill and dale, and
cut across parts of the country unfrequented by travellers. At length, seeing you on the brow
of the hill, I took courage, and gave vent to my cries, notwithstanding the threats of the
Persian. You know the rest.”

‘She had scarcely finished speaking when we discovered several persons, one on horseback, the
rest on foot, making towards us in great haste, and as they approached and were recognized
by my fair one, it was delightful to watch her emotions.

‘“Oh! there is my father,” exclaimed she, “and my brothers! there is Ovanes, and Agoop, and
Aratoon! and my uncle too!”

‘As they came up, she embraced them all with transports of delight. I was in agonies of apprehension
lest some youth should appear, who might have excited other feelings in her heart; but no,
none but relations were there. They explained to her that the alarm of her seizure had been
spread throughout the village by her young friends; that luckily they had not yet gone to the
fields, and the family horse was at home, upon which her father was instantly mounted. They
had traced the fresh footsteps of her ravisher’s horse as long as he kept the road, had marked
the place where he turned from it, had seen them again in several places, had tracked him through
a corn-field that led up a steep slope, and at length, from a high summit, Ovanes had seen
them descending a glen, which must have been very near the spot where they had now found her.

‘She said all this was true, and again thanked God and St. Gregory for her escape; and, after
some hesitation, in a most embarrassed manner, pointed me out as her deliverer. The attention
of the whole party was then directed to me. “Whose son are you?” said the old man, her father.

‘“I am the son of Coja Petros,” said I, “the chief of the village of Gavmishlû.”

‘“Ah! he is my friend and neighbour,” answered he; “but I do not know you; perhaps you are
the son who was educating at the Three Churches for a priest, and who came to the help of your
family?”

‘I answered in the affirmative, and then he said, “You are welcome. May your house prosper!
You have saved our daughter, and we owe you eternal gratitude. You must come with us and be
our guest. If ever it were necessary to kill a lamb, to eat and be merry, it is now. We, and
all our families, will carry you upon our heads; we will kiss your feet, and smooth your brow,
for having saved our Mariam, and preserved her from dragging out her existence the slave of
the Mussulman.”

‘I then received the congratulations and kind speeches of her brothers and uncle, who all invited
me to their village in so pressing a manner, that, unable to resist, and propelled by my anxiety
to see Mariam, I accepted their offer, and we forthwith proceeded in a body.

‘As we were winding down the side of one of the mountains, Mariam’s village, for such I shall
call it, was pointed out to me, situated among trees, snugly seated in a warm nook, protected
from every wind but the east, which here coming from the Kulzum, or the Caspian Sea, is delightfully
cool and serene. Beyond was the Pembaki river, winding its way through a beautiful valley,
diversified by rich vegetation; and at a greater distance we could just discern the church
of Kara Klisseh, or the Black Monastery, the first station of the Russians on this part of
their frontier, and situated on a dark and precipitous rock, rising conspicuous among the verdure
of the surrounding scenery.

‘When near the village we discovered that all its inhabitants, particularly the women and children,
had been watching our steps down the slope, anxious to know whether Mariam had been retaken;
and when they saw her safe, there was no end to their expressions of joy. The story of her
flight and of her rescue was soon told, and carried from one mouth to another with such rapidity
and with such additional circumstances, that at length it came out that she had been carried
away by a giant, who had an iron head, claws and feet of steel, and scales on his back, mounted
upon a beast that tore up the ground at every bound, and made noises in its rapid course over
the hills like the discharges of artillery. They added to this, that of a sudden an angel,
in the shape of a ploughboy, descended from the top of a high mountain in a cloud, and as he
wielded a sword of fire in his hand, it frightened the horse, threw Mariam to the ground, and
reduced the giant and his steed to ashes: for when she recovered from her fright, they were
no longer to be seen. I was pointed out as the illustrious ploughboy, and immediately the attention
of the whole village was turned towards me; but, unfortunately, when about receiving nearly
divine honours, a youth, whom I had frequently met tending cattle in the mountains, recognized
me, and said, “He is no angel--he is Yûsûf, the son of Coja Petros, of Gavmishlû”; and thus
I was reduced to my mortality once more. However, I was treated with the greatest distinction
by everybody, and Mariam’s relations could not sufficiently testify their gratitude for the
service I had rendered. But, all this time, love was making deep inroads in my heart. I no
longer saw Mariam unveiled, that happy moment of my life had gone by; but it had put the seal
to my future fate. “No,” said I to myself, “nothing shall separate me from that beautiful maid;
our destinies forthwith are one; Heaven has miraculously brought us together, and nothing but
the decrees of Providence shall disunite us, even though to gain her I should be obliged to
adopt the violence of the Persian, and carry her away by force.” We met now and then, Mariam
and I; and although our words were few, yet our eyes said much, and I knew that my passion
was returned. Oh, how I longed to have met and engaged another, aye, twenty more Persians,
to prove my love! but I recollected that I was nothing but a poor Armenian, belonging to a
degraded and despised nation, and that the greatest feat which I could ever expect to perform
would be to keep the wolf from my father’s flocks, or to drive the marauder from our fields.

‘I remained the whole of that eventful day at Geuklû (the name of the village), where the promised
lamb was killed, and a large cauldron of rice boiled. I returned on the following day to my
parents, who had been alarmed at my absence, and who listened to the history of my adventures
with all the earnestness and interest that I could wish.

‘I was so entirely absorbed by my love, that I could think of nothing else; therefore I determined
to inform them of the situation of my affections. “I am of an age now,” said I to them, “to
think and act for myself. Thanks to God, and to you, I have strong arms, and can work for my
bread; I wish to marry, and Providence has prepared the way for me.”

‘I then requested them forthwith to demand Mariam from her parents, in order that I might make
her my wife; and finished by kissing my father’s hand, and embracing my mother.

‘They said in answer, “That marriage was a serious consideration in these difficult times,
and that the family was now too poor to incur the expense of a wedding. It was necessary to
buy clothes, a ring, candles, sweetmeats, a crimson veil, bed and bed-covering, to pay the
singers and musicians, and to make a feast; and where was money to be found to meet all this?”

‘I said, “’Tis true that money is wanted, and that no marriage can take place without it, both
for the honour of our family, and for the purpose of showing my love to my intended; but I
can borrow; I have friends both at Erivan and at the Three Churches; and I think I could borrow
enough from the one and the other to pay the expenses of my wedding; and as for repayment,
I will work so laboriously, and live so frugally, that little by little I shall pay off my
debt. And HOWEVER, no
passengers which turned more than the children of Spanish-Colombia, finishing to assimilate all
that are more prominent in European societies, especially in France. Gifted to be flexible and
quite novelero, if they leave their country intolerant, extreme and somewhat sullen, Parisians
back on all four sides, forgetting, through a metamorphosis complete, the simplicity of their primitive
customs.

While the children of the New World (of which, fortunately, there was no Yankee) is expressed wonder at all
the other groups were equally characteristic of Paraná. The Germans, demonstrating thoughtful
or near a maritime furniture, going for hours to smoke and watch the sky and the ocean with
deep melancholy, as abstracted from the world some dream, or gathered in groups unique to talk quietly and
walk endlessly one to the other end of the housing.

Meanwhile, the French sang or whistled, made much noise as possible, mixing in the corridors
with a special jovial mocking or in moments of boredom were delivered to voluptuous reading
novels and travel relationships, preferring mostly works de Balzac. Frances is the man the world's most
read, not to mention that is the most sings and laughs. All that is art you love, and if he
worships the mistake (pun), is precisely malice because he thought art was formulated. French
is also the king of travelers. If English is unrivaled in their fury to travel, he excels in
French the art of travel. The French know all the circumstances to accommodate and take advantage
of However, it is tolerant par excellence, has a profound spirit of equality that dominates,
and good humor, expansive and elastic, wherever gives first place
and the advantage of control the situation.

The English, on the spot, they made a big contrast. English and proud by nature, cold in his
bearing, material in their tastes, intolerant in the extreme, restricted calculation and prosaic
and positive aspirations, or booked shows throughout society that is strange, or impose upon
others their will, in which case usually comes to the gaiety. Bebe and quiet smoke, never makes
noise (if purebred John Bull), and if you approach others is to give an absolute opinion or
order. Pride is the source of all his virtues, as all its flaws. It is tenacious, loyal and courageous
pride, as intolerant concerns religion and race and dynasty, prodigal, obsequious, gambler, quiet,
drinking and everything else out of pride. The music, dance and song you dislike, like all arts,
and if it comes to giving millions of dollars or pounds for a painting, not by merit do the
painting, but by the vanity of making a strong spending and covet what others have. However,
as a English person is worth much more than the French, and I stick more to the word always
dry the proud but loyal Briton, the elegant but empty phraseology of Frances. The English as a friend,
it is useful, but French is not very nice, because one is positivist
and the other arts.

The Italians of Paraná were few, but they were enough to make me get sympathy towards their
race. In general, the Italian's funny, friend or comic anecdotes, enthusiastic for beauty and
freedom. He loves the arts, but not exactly art, composition or ingenious, but for the beauty
they reproduce or create those. Tosco many times in his manners, bad education that despotism
and superstition have given to the towns of Italy in the last five centuries, the Italian is all
very nice from the outset. Selfless, generous, cheerful, earnest, his fixed idea is freedom
and unity of Italy, and his faith never dies. A skeptic is an Italian phenomenon, because hope is the sheer
force of his life. And because of that faith which is characteristic,
his resignation is admirable to support the expatriation and all setbacks.

Finally

it caught my attention among the passengers a group of seven or eight Spanish from different
provinces that amused me greatly. Among them were such an excellent Galician and humorous occurrences
liked them all, and there were plenty Andalusia, Madrid, a Catalan, a Mayorquin and some habaneros.
If I were to judge all by the qualities Spanish of traveling companions, bad would be my opinion, quite
apart from an old attorney, prefect a province of Puerto-Rico, a character typical of the Spain of
Felipe II, not Spain revolutionary today, who believed in witches and witchcraft, miracles,
apparitions and mysteries Philosopher's Stone, and spoke of SMC with an uplifting meditation
and orthodox.

Other features revealed in all the Spanish race. United and loyal to each other, they made common
cause for anything and everything. Sober not usually lacked a smoking time or smoking, and
became noted for his ardent wherever uproar. The game, under all possible ways, was his only
occupation ever read on the basis, and when the music premium night to hear the hatches digested
food dancing furiously the jack or the cap, or singing the anthem loud chorus of Riego. Boastful
and quarrelsome, disputes momentary interjections were always seasoned red, and ended by Spicy
jokes or anecdotes. Each of his sentence was that indispensable adornment so expressive Spanish
word of vague meaning and can not be copied in any written without shock. This interjection
is national as Spanish, which is equivalent to the more innocent as the most shameless of other languages,
and Spanish with ease before the release around the world, even from the ladies many times, without
thinking that you can be rude.

Almost all of Paraná Spanish were liberal and progressive, which I proved that inclination toward freedom
are widely developed in the peninsula, after independence Colombia. On the other hand, there
is a people as national and Spanish. For him, Spain is the best thing in the world in any sense
and listen to a Spanish beauties decant of his country, one is tempted to believe that it is an
enchanted land of a thousand and one nights or to laugh at the beard of the good Spaniards, in which
case the independence is secure. During Some days the ocean was calm, and his admirable stillness
of no interest. The sea ​​is really beautiful, when tame, but in wonderful contrast to the land.
Away from the coast, at sea, the scene is dull when the tempest stirred waves and produces the
sublime phenomena. Thus, all the interest of navigation was scenes on board, almost always
bizarre. There was something indescribably carnival between these heterogeneous groups, in
which real cartoons highlighted background, and gossip, that navigation is very active and
fruitful, by the forced idleness of all passengers, gave food to the most ingenious inventions
and curious anecdotes.

Needless to say, our French couturier naturalized in California, had found a more extensive field
for his flirtations, and the rivalry of some rogues pretended good humor put it in the most comical
distress. It was an Italian who's dallying, making skillfully conceived hopes of marriage,
then go to tell what happened to worldwide, and laugh at his taste, - and a young English,
who happened to be mocking towards obsequious indications, on behalf of the Anglo-French alliance,
and a smarmy French and Gallant claimed preference for nationality law. But finally realized Dressmaker
mockery, and renouncing the artifices of coquetry was resigned to spend hours reading sentimental
novels, which made her cry sometimes with tenderness, and eating almonds walnuts and hazelnuts,
that to a strong supply every day in the dining room. That woman ate so, so ... I can only
compare their gluttony to the thirst of his fellow brandy dizzy.

Another type female very curious was that of a warm English blood, phenomenal, which did not
give notice of his sixty winters. He had recently sunk in the West Indies and complained of the terrible
episode with a unique freshness. Talking like a parrot, always looking the company of men jumped every
afternoon as a dancer at the opera, becoming invited by the young and dashing over to dance polkas,
Varsovians and crews, and had such furor over the game resented all that we accepted him his
treats. Played all day and until midnight, sometimes whist, now twenty-one, and sometimes to mount
with the Spanish, why not dispense with chess, checkers and other innocent games. That old glasses,
dancing like crazy and playing as a Yankee, seemed to have a bet with time not to give up ....

Between
the compatriots on this joyful Megera were distinguished by their antics a minister Presbyterian,
Anglican and other emerging.

The first, over two feet high, dry cadaverous and full of quirks, was always with a Bible in
Hebrew, giving advice, talking alone, making strange gestures, and frolicking with the children
of some women. Was an excellent doctor, good Christian and humane in the extreme. His obsession
was the abolition of slavery, and saw that the loss of reason, which was only medium and harmless,
had left intact the purity of a noble heart. Disapproved of the game much concerned men danced
with great enthusiasm, was extremely sober, flamboyant in her dress and their movements, and its
good time reading the Psalms with unction and approved much fun such as dancing and singing.

The fledgling Anglican minister who had made his theological studies in Jamaica, was a large skull
of excellent character, generous, expansive and helpful.

But what of jesting! Danced, drank, played, cried, sang and enjoyed loud in every way possible,
rather as a Parisian student life in Germany or sinful, who as a candidate for the Church. One
day I asked if he had a vocation to the priesthood, and why it was manifest so profane, and he said:
"The profession I am going to take is like any other, and have chosen to please my mother nomas.
But as to take the orders have to be circumspect I have fun now to take advantage of recent days
I remain of the gay life of my youth. " Maybe he was right the excellent young. The man has his
time of skull, and always it costs a resolve to leave her job. Is there a being happier in
the world that a student?

Many other curious types could outline, filling the gallery of the
Paraná, but upset if the reader.

A vapor is a mobile Babylon, inside which you can study the world better than anywhere. All
the virtues and weaknesses gather there, and characters of all races are brought into relief and
contrast with singular energy. Is the world miniature, with selfishness, comedies and cartoons,
their concerns, their deceptions and doubts, their good and bad things as well, nowhere can better
understand the human heart there on a log floating in danger, where is this naked soul.

On 25 morning show interrupted a sad comic scenes of passengers.

The doctor of steam, very estimable gentleman, had died in previous lanoche, yellow fever disease
contracted in St. Thomas, where death does every year of bumper harvest travelers. The entire crew
was assembled in the hatch, whilst the majority of passengers slept. The ceremony was solemn
and deeply distressing. On the gateway, at the foot of one of the huge wheels of steam, was the
corpse in his coffin, covered with the British flag in mourning, and from there to the interior is
extended by two double rows of officers and men, listening with awe the psalms and prayers
severe Office of the Dead. The idea of ​​immortality, eternity, infinity, seemed to reveal with
more eloquence and energy that cloudless horizon, the movable surface, immense, tireless, whose
waves mimic the ebb and flow of humanity between life and death and the existence of a universal spirit
that stirs everything and does not die .... ever

And what a lesson! The sailors wept in silence, with an emotion so
deep that sorry.

It was strange to see the tears of those faces hardened and soiled by the sun, wind and rain,
wrinkled by time, the hardships and dangers, and whose ordinary expression was indifference.
Is that the community of work, the constant absence of the homeland, the danger and contemplation of
the infinite, set between the sea a brotherhood heroic to resist all the evidence and survives
even to death.

After the sad distinction and religious ceremonies, the coffin was driven to the waves with a huge
cannon ball that crashed into the abyss .... Magnificent tomb for man is the ocean! Only such
a gap, you get all the tribute of the land, and on which more splendor reveals God's omnipotence
and the grandeur of man is worthy of the remains of the immortal creature whose spirit never dies!

On
26 February, the sea began to shake vigorously, changing the uniform
appearance the scene.

Large schools of sea plants, which seemed floating sheets of various colors came from the
side of Newfoundland, with his long pilgrimage to the regions of Southeast, violently beaten
by the waves. The sea seemed a monstrous lion, shaking his curly hair, a giant fish or rolling
over the abyss to make the sun shine their scales as mountains, or show their deep wrinkles
temporarily obscured.

Then on 28, were in full storm. The hurricane roared chimneys shaking and all the arbolaje, the
rain darkened the sky, the waves came as landslides to wash all the bridge deck and the huge
ship, dropping exhausted their black puffs of smoke jumping between the hollows of the waves like
a raging bull by the blows in all directions receives. Three nights of danger, nights solemn and somber,
all passengers had to anxiety, but coming the day the spirits are soothed and good humor returned.
The night always multiplies the gravity of the printouts, and is the sun with its eternal happiness
which makes the heart beat with hope and pleasure.

On March 7, all passengers greeted with joy early on, the dark band pointed out the proximity
of the Lizard, off the coast of England, which determines the tip Brest French the western
mouth wide English Channel. By a singular chance, The channel was calm as a lake, and its green waters
reflect the sky and transparent magnificent.

Hundreds of brigs and schooners, coal boats and fishing boats crossed in all directions, showing
the rich canopy, and the French pavilion, English or Dutch and single red candle or purely
coastal fishing boat, swift as a seagull scarcely touches the surface of the waves. Picturesque
harbors, beautiful bays in the bottom of which populations were seen, including Falmouth, Plymouth,
Dartmouth and Sidmouth; many glowing lanterns to light of a sun that did not seem to winter
rolling hills, crisscrossed by the plow to receive the seed then, or fields covered with a yellowish
vegetation or gray deposits held distant snow on the rocks or in the folds of the land; romantic
crags and peaks and wonderful ways, standing on the waves in small gulfs of the sea and forming
semicircles at intervals, all that, in contrast to the multitude of country houses built on hills
and inclines, including desiccated trees and blackened by the winter air that seemed skeletons,
had a indefinable charm, preparing my mind for the show entirely new European civilization.

My bride, covered by a crimson veil from head to foot, which flowed over a flat platter placed
on her crown, was mounted on her father’s steed, led on either side by her brothers. It is
the custom for the bridegroom to hold a sash or girdle by his right hand, which is held at
the other end by the bride, on their way to the church, and this we did. All our friends, our
relations, all the youth of the villages, some on foot, some on asses, others on horses, accompanied
the procession, making shouts, and manifesting their joy by all sorts of games and jokes during
the whole course of the march. When at length we had reached a small rising ground overlooking
my village the procession stopped, and every one who had a part to act in the ceremony received
a taper, which was forthwith lighted. The procession then moved on with slow and measured steps,
headed by my uncle, who, assisted by my other uncle from the Three Churches, sang psalms as
they walked forward, amidst all the noise of the surrounding lookers-on. The Russian captain
had had the attention to dress his men up on the occasion, and they marched to the church with
us, adding much to the dignity of the scene.

‘We at length alighted at the door of the church, and, still holding each end of the girdle,
my bride and I walked to the foot of the altar, which, notwithstanding our humble condition,
had been ornamented with more than ordinary brilliancy by flowers, ribbons, and looking-glasses.
My forehead was then placed against Mariam’s in a sort of butting attitude, and the Bible opened
and laid upon our heads, whilst her hand was given into mine. The priest then asked, if we
agreed to take each other for husband and wife; and after we had made an inclination of our
heads as marking our consent, and a suitable proportion of prayers had been read and chanted,
the ceremony was at an end, and notified to all the world by the shouts of the multitude, and
by the redoubled sounds of our drums, flutes, and tambours.

‘Daylight by this time had entirely disappeared, and the weather, which had threatened a storm,
now became very lowering. The sky was darkened, rain fell, and distant thunders were heard.
This circumstance put an end to the entertainment given by my father earlier than it otherwise
would have done; and when our guests had retired, the hour at length arrived which was to make
me the happiest of men.

‘Oh, shall I stop here to recollect all the horrors of that night, or shall I pass on, and
not distress you by relating them? You must conceive my bride lovely as the morning star, innocent
as an angel, and attached to me by the purest love; and you may imagine what I felt at that
moment,--I who had looked upon our union as impossible, and had thought of my awaiting happiness
as a bright spot in my existence, to which I expected never to attain.

‘But in order to give a right impression of the scene which I am about to describe, you must
know that the villages in Georgia, and in our part of Armenia, are built partly under ground,
and thus a stranger finds himself walking on the roof of a house when he thinks that he is
on plain ground, the greatest part of them being lighted by apertures at the top. Such was
the house in which my family lived, and in which my wedding was celebrated. My nuptial chamber
had one of these apertures, which had been closed on the occasion, and was situated with its
door leading at once into the open air.

‘It is the custom among the Armenians for the bridegroom to retire first. His shoes and stockings
are then taken off by his wife; and, before she resigns her veil, has the task of extinguishing
the light. The storm had just broke,--thunders were rolling over our heads,--the lightning
flashed,--torrents of rain were pouring down with fearful noise,--there seemed to be a general
commotion of the elements, when my Mariam, unveiling herself, extinguished the lamp. She had
scarcely laid herself down, when we heard an unusual violent noise at the aperture in the ceiling:
sounds of men’s voices were mingled with the crash of the thunder; trampling of horses was
also distinctly heard; and presently we were alarmed by a heavy noise of something having fallen
in our room and near our bed, accompanied by a glare and a smell of sulphur.

‘“’Tis a thunderbolt, by all that is sacred! Oh heaven protect us!” cried I. “Fly, my soul,
my wife, escape!”

‘She had just time to snatch up her veil, and to get without the door, when an explosion took
place in the very room, so awful, so tremendous, that I immediately thought myself transported
to the regions of the damned. I fell senseless, amidst the wreck of falling stones, plaster;
and furniture. All I can recollect is, that an immense blaze of light was succeeded by an overpowering
sulphureous smell,--then a dead silence.

‘I lay there for some time, unconscious of what was passing; but by degrees came to myself,
and when I found that I could move my limbs, and that nothing about my person was materially
hurt, I began to consider how I had got there. As for my wedding, that appeared to me a dream:
all I heard about me now was the firing of muskets, loud and frequent explosions, cries and
shouts of men,--of men wounded and in pain,--of men attacking and putting others to death,--the
tramplings of horses, the clashing of arms. “What, in the name of Heaven, can all this be?”
said I. I still thought myself transported into another planet, when the shriek of a woman
struck my ear. “It is Mariam! It is she, by all that is sacred! Where, where, shall I seek
her?” I was roused: I disencumbered myself of the weight of rubbish that had fallen upon me,
and, once upon my legs again, I sallied forth in search of her. The scene which presented itself
was more terrible than language can express; for the first object which struck my sight was
a Persian rushing by me, with a drawn sword in one hand, and a human head, dripping with blood,
in another. The blackness of the night was lighted up at rapid intervals by vivid flashes of
lightning, which, quick as the eye could glance, now discovered the hideous tragedy that was
then acting, and now threw it again into darkness, leaving the imagination to fill up the rest.
By one flash, I saw Persians with uplifted swords, attacking defenceless Russians, rushing
from their beds: by another, the poor villagers were discovered flying from their smoking cottages
in utter dismay. Then an immense explosion took place, which shook everything around.[76] The
village cattle, loosened from their confinements, ran about in wild confusion, and mixed themselves
with the horrors of the night: in short, my words fall short of any description that could
be made of this awful scene of devastation; and I must bless the mercy of that Almighty hand
which hath spared me in the destruction that surrounded me.

‘I knew not where to turn myself to seek for my wife. I had heard her shrieks; and the shivering
of despair came over me, when I thought it might have been her death groans which had struck
my ears. I threw myself into the midst of the carnage, and, armed with a firebrand, snatched
from my burning nuptial chamber, I made my way through the combatants, more like a maniac at
the height of his frenzy, than a bridegroom on his wedding-night. Getting into the skirts of
the village again, I thought I heard the shrieks of my beloved. I ran towards the direction,
and a flash of lightning, that glanced over the adjoining hill, showed me two horsemen making
off with a woman, whose white veil was conspicuously seen, mounted behind one of them. Heedless
of everything but my wife, I followed them with the swiftness of a mountain goat; but as the
storm subsided, the lightning flashed no more, and I was left in utter darkness at the top
of the hill, not knowing which path to take, and whether to proceed or not. I was almost naked.
I had been severely bruised. My feet, otherwise accustomed to the naked ground, had become
quite lacerated by the pursuit I had undertaken; and altogether, I was so worn with grief,
so broken-hearted, that I laid myself down on the wet earth in a state of desperation that
was succeeded by a torpor of all my senses. Here I lay until the first rays of the morning
glared in my eyes, and brought me gradually to a sense of my situation.

‘“What has happened?” said I. “Where am I? How came I here? Either the demons and wicked angels
of another world have been at work this night, or else I am most grossly abused. To see that
glorious orb rising in that clear unclouded sky; to mark the soothing serenity of nature, the
morning freshness, the song of the birds, the lowing of yon cattle, and the quiet and seclusion
of my yonder paternal village, I ought to suppose that the images of horror, of indescribable
horror, now floating in my mind, must be those of a diseased imagination. Is it possible that
in this secluded spot, under this lovely sky, in the midst of these bounteous gifts of nature,
I could have seen man murdering his fellow creature, the blazing cottage, the mangled corse,
the bleeding head; and, O cruel, O killing thought, that I should have been bereft of my dear,
my innocent wife?” and then, then only, was I restored to a full possession of every occurrence
that had taken place; and tears which before had refused to flow now came to my assistance,
and relieved my burning temples and my almost suffocating bosom. I got up, and walked slowly
to the village. All was hushed into quiet; a slight smoke was here and there to be seen; stray
cattle were grazing on the outskirts; strangers on horseback seemed to be busily employed in
preparations of some kind or other, and the wretched peasantry were seen huddled together in
groups, scarcely awake from the suddenness of the destruction which had visited them, and uncertain
of the fate which might still be in reserve. As for me, the loss which I had already sustained
made me expect every other attendant misfortune. I had made my mind up to find my relations
dead, to see the total ruin of our house, and to know that I was a solitary outcast on the
face of the world, without a wife, without a home, without parents, without a friend. But no,
imagination had worked up the picture too highly; for one of the first persons I met on entering
our village was my poor mother, who, when she saw me, recollecting all the trouble she had
been at to secure my happiness, fell on my neck, and shed a torrent of tears. When her first
grief had subsided, she told me that my father had suffered much from bruises, and from a blow
received on the head; but that the rest of the family were well; that our house had been considerably
injured, many of our things pillaged; and that my nuptial room, in particular, had been almost
totally destroyed. She informed me that the good Russian captain had been the first to fall
a sacrifice to the attack of the Persians; for almost immediately after the explosion in my
room, he had rushed out to see what had happened, when two Persians seized him, one of whom
at once decapitated him: this was the head that I saw brandished before me, when first I sallied
forth. She then took me to a place of shelter, and put on me what clothes could be found.

‘The Persians, having completed their deeds of horror, had retired from the scene of action,
leaving to our unfortunate villagers the melancholy task of burying the dead bodies of thirty
wretched Russians, who had fallen victims to their treacherous attack, and whose heads they
had carried off with them as trophies.

‘After I had visited my father, and left my home in as comfortable a situation as I could,
under the existing circumstances, I determined instantly to set out in pursuit of my wife.
It was evident that she had been carried away by some of those who had attacked our village,
and that she must have been taken to Erivan, as the nearest market for slaves, for such was
no doubt the purpose for which she had been seized. My sword, pistols, and gun, which had formed
part of the ornamental furniture of my bridal chamber, were found buried in its ruins, and
with these for my protection, and with some pieces of silver in my purse, I bid adieu to Gavmishlû,
making a vow never to return until I had found my Mariam.

‘I travelled with hurried steps, taking the shortest cuts over the mountains to Erivan, and
as I crossed a branch of the high road I met two horsemen, well-mounted and equipped, who stopped
me, and asked whither I was going, and upon what errand.

‘I did not hesitate to tell them my wretched tale, hoping they might give me some hint which
might throw light upon the fate of my wife. This they did indeed, but in a manner so cruel,
that their words awakened the most horrid suspicions, and almost to a certainty convinced me
that my poor innocent, my hitherto unspotted, though wedded wife, had fallen into the power
of a most licentious tyrant.

‘“Is it possible,” said I, when they had related to me the horrid expedients to which their
chief, the serdar (for it was to two of his bodyguard that I was talking), had recourse, for
the accomplishment of his wickedness,--“is it possible that selfishness can be carried to such
an extreme, that vice can have reached to such a pitch in the heart of man? Women, by you Mussulmans,
I know are treated as mere accessories to pleasure; but, after all, they are God’s creatures,
not made for the serdar alone, as he seems to think, but given to us to be our help, our comfort,
and our companions through life.”

‘My hearers only laughed at my sentiments, and tauntingly assured me, that, if I was seeking
one who had got into the serdar’s harem, my labour would be in vain, and that I might just
take the trouble to return whence I came.

‘Little heeding what they said, I hastened my steps, without knowing why or wherefore; but
impelled by a sort of feeling, that it could not be in the wisdom of the Almighty to heap such
a load of misfortune upon a wretched sinner like me, without at length giving some counterbalancing
reward, or some consolation which it is ever in His power to bestow.

‘I was now near the camp at Aberan, where I knew the serdar in person was settled, and, hoping
to hear some favourable intelligence, I made towards it. It was greatly agitated by the arrival
of the detachment of Persians who had attacked our village, and were giving proofs of the success
of their enterprise, by exhibiting the Russian heads which they had brought away, and which
were laid in several heaps before the tent of the chief. One might have supposed that a great
and signal victory had been achieved, such were the rejoicings and boastings that took place
at the sight. The horrid objects were forthwith salted, and sent off in great parade and ceremony
to the Shah of Persia, who never will believe that a victory is gained until he sees these
palpable proofs of it. However, in the midst of all this joy, a courier was seen arriving in
great haste from the Russian frontier, whose intelligence produced a change of scene. He announced
that the Russian army, having heard of the late attack upon their outpost at Gavmishlû, was
now in full march against the serdar, and coming on so rapidly, that he must expect to be attacked
even before night-close. The scene that ensued defies all description. The whole camp was ordered
to be struck, and an immediate retreat was commanded. Tents falling, mules loading, men screaming;
horses, camels, men, cannon, all were in motion at one time; and before two hours had elapsed,
the whole had disappeared, and the army was on its march for Erivan.

‘I had in the meanwhile received no account of my lost Mariam; and it was plain that, if in
the power of the serdar, she was within the walls of his seraglio at Erivan. Thither then I
bent my steps, hoping that in this great confusion something might turn up for my advantage.

‘Upon my arrival there, I posted myself at the bridge over the Zengui, from whence I had a
full survey of that part of the serdar’s palace which contains his women; and as the troops
were crossing it at the same time in constant succession, I was unnoticed, and passed for one
of the camp followers. The building is situated upon the brink of a precipice of dark rock,
at the foot of which flows the Zengui, a clear and rapid stream, foaming through a rocky bed,
the stony projections of which form white eddies, and increase the rush of its waters. A bridge
of three arches is here thrown over it, and forms part of the high road leading to Georgia
and Turkey. The principal saloon of the palace, in a corner of which the serdar is usually
seated, opens with a large casement on the river, and overlooks the rugged scenery. At some
distance on the same surface of building are the windows of the women’s apartments, distinguished
by their lattices, and by other contrivances of jealousy. However, I observed they were not
so well secured, but that objects passing and repassing the bridge might well be seen from
them; and I imagined that if Mariam was a prisoner there, she might perchance make me out as
I stood below. “But if she did, what then?” said I to myself in despair: “seeing me there would
only add to her torture, and to my desperation.” To escape from such a height appeared impossible,
for a fall would be instant death; and excepting a willow tree, which grew out of the rock
immediately under one of the windows, there was nothing to break the descent. However, having
remained in one spot so long in meditation, I feared to be observed; and left my post for the
present, determining to return to it at the close of day, and indeed at every hour when I could
appear without suspicion.

‘I had been watching the windows of the seraglio in this manner for more than a fortnight,
and had not ceased to parade up and down the bridge at least three times every day, when one
evening, as the day was about to close, I saw the lattice of the window over the willow tree
open, and a female looking out of it. I watched her with breathless suspense. She appeared
to recognize me. I extended my hand; she stretched forth hers. “It is she!” said I; “yes, it
must be her! It is my Mariam!” Upon which, without a moment’s hesitation, without thinking
of the consequences, I plunged into the river, and having waded through it, stood at the foot
of the precipice immediately under my beloved wife. She stretched her arms several times towards
me, as if she would have thrown herself out. I almost screamed with apprehension; and yet the
hope of pressing her to my heart made me half regret that she had not done so. We stood there
looking wistfully at each other, fearing to speak, yet longing to do so. At length, she shut
the lattice suddenly, and left me in an attitude and in all the horrors of suspense. I kept
my post for some time without seeing anything more of her, when again suddenly the lattice
opened, and she appeared, but with looks that spoke of intense agitation. I scarcely could
tell what was about to happen, but waited in dreadful anxiety, until I saw her lean forward,
retreat, lean forward again--then more and more, until, by a sudden effort, I beheld her fair
form in the air, falling down the giddy height.[77] My legs refused to perform their office,
my eyes were obscured by a swimming, and I should have probably sunk under the intenseness
of my feelings, when I saw her half suspended, half falling, from a branch of the willow tree.
I bounded up, and in an instant had mounted the tree, and had clasped her senseless in my arms.
I seemed to be impelled by new vigour and strength; to reach the ground, to recross the river,
to fly with my precious burden from the inhabited outskirts into the open country, appeared
but the business of a second. I was perfectly drunk with the thousand feelings which agitated
me; and although I acted like one bereft of his senses, yet everything I did was precisely
that which I ought to have done. Nature guided me: the animal acting only from instinct would
have done like me. I had saved that which was most precious to me in this world.

‘When I had worn out my first efforts of strength, and had felt that my hitherto senseless
burden showed some symptoms of life, I stopped, and placed her quietly on the ground behind
some broken walls. She was terribly bruised, although no bone had been broken. The branches
of the tree, upon which she had alighted, had wounded her deeply in several places, and the
blood had flowed very copiously. But she was alive; she breathed; she opened her eyes, and
at length pronounced my name. I was almost crazy with joy, and embraced her with a fervour
that amounted to madness. When she had reposed herself a little, I snatched her up again, and
proceeded onwards with all the haste imaginable, in the determination to strike at once into
the mountains; but recollecting that I had the river of Ashtarek to cross, and that with her
in my arms it would be impossible to do so except by the bridge, I at once directed my steps
thither.

‘We were reposing at the foot of the bridge, when I heard the footsteps of your horses. Although
nearly exhausted with my previous exertions, I still had strength enough left to clamber up
the bank, and take refuge in the ruined church, where you first discovered us; and there I
watched your motions with the greatest anxiety, concluding that you were a party sent in pursuit
of us by the serdar. Need I say after this, that if you will protect us, and permit us to seek
our home, you will receive the overflowing gratitude of two thankful hearts, and the blessings
of many now wretched people who by our return will be made supremely happy? Whoever you are,
upon whatever errand you may be sent, you cannot have lost the feelings of a man.

The Armenian youth here finished his narrative, and left me in astonishment and admiration
at all he had related. With my permission he then quitted me to visit his wife, and promised
to return immediately with the report of her present state, and how she felt after her repose.

‘He surely cannot have been inventing lies to my face all this time,’ said I when left to myself,
‘for a bleeding woman is here in evidence to corroborate what he has advanced; but then should
I permit him to proceed, and the serdar was to hear that I had done so, what would become of
me? I should certainly lose my place, and perhaps my ears. No; compassion does not suit me;
for if it did, I ought not to remain a nasakchi. I will stick to what the sage Locman, I believe,
once said on this occasion, which runs something to this purpose: “If you are a tiger, be one
altogether; for then the other beasts will know what to trust to: but if you wear a tiger’s
skin, and long ears are discovered to be concealed therein, they will then treat you even worse
than if you walked about in your own true character, an undisguised ass.”’

I kept turning over in my mind whether I should release him or not; and was fluctuating in
great perplexity between the ass and the tiger, when Yûsûf returned. He told me that his Mariam
was considerably refreshed by repose; but, weak from loss of blood, and stiff by the violence
of the contusions which she had received (in particular, one upon her leg, which was of consequence),
it would be impossible for her to move for several days; ‘except indeed we were pursued by
the serdar,’ added he, ‘when I believe nothing but force could hinder us from proceeding.’
He said that not until now had she found strength enough to relate her own adventures from
the time she had left him at Gavmishlû.

It appears that the instant she had darted from the nuptial chamber, only covered by her veil,
she had been seized by a Persian, who, discovering by the glare of the lightning that she was
young and handsome, ran off with her to some distance, and there detained her until, with the
assistance of another, she was mounted on a horse and taken forcibly away; that these two men
carried her straight to the camp at Aberan, and offered her for sale to the serdar; who, having
agreed to take her, ordered her to be conducted to his seraglio at Erivan, and there put into
service; that the horrid plight in which she stood, when exhibited to the serdar, her disfigured
looks, and her weak and drooping state, made her hope that she would remain unnoticed and neglected;
particularly when she heard what was his character, and to what extent he carried his cruelties
on the unfortunate victims of his selfishness. Mariam, alluding to herself, then said, ‘Hoping,
by always talking of myself as a married woman, that I should meet with more respect in the
house of a Mussulman, than if I were otherwise, I never lost an opportunity of putting my husband’s
name forward, and this succeeded, for little or no notice was taken of me, and I was confounded
with the other slaves, and performed the different tasks of servitude which were set me. But,
unfortunately, I did not long keep my own counsel; I confided my story to a Persian woman,
who pretended to be my friend; hoping by that means to soften her heart so much as to induce
her to help me in regaining my freedom; but she proved treacherous; she made a merit of relating
it to the serdar, who immediately forced me to confirm her words with my own lips, and then
the extent of my imprudence became manifest. He announced his intention to avail himself of
my situation, and ordered me to prepare for receiving him. Conceive then what were the horrors
of my position. I turned over in my mind every means of escape, but all avenues to it were
shut. I had never before thought of looking over the precipice upon which the windows of our
prison opened; but now I seriously thought of precipitating myself, rather than submit to the
tyrant. But a few hours after I had had the blessing to discover you on the bridge, I had been
ordered to hold myself in readiness to receive him; and it was then that I had positively determined
in my own mind to throw myself headlong out, either once more to bejoined to you, or to die
in the attempt. When I shut the lattices in haste, several women had just come into the room
to conduct me to the hot bath previously to being dressed; and when I had made some excuse
for delaying it, and had sent them out of the room, it was then that I opened the lattice a
second time, and put my resolution into practice.’

Yûsûf having finished the recital of his and his wife’s adventures, was very anxious to know
what part I would take, and earnestly entreated me to befriend him by my advice and assistance.
The morning was far spent. My men were already mounted, and ready to proceed on our reconnoitring
expedition, and my horse was waiting for me, when a thought struck me, which would settle every
difficulty with regard to the young Armenian and his wife.

I called him to me, and said, ‘After what you have related, it will be impossible to leave
you at liberty. You have, by your own account, run off with a woman from the serdar’s seraglio,
a crime which you perhaps do not know, in a Mussulman country, is punished with death, so sacred
is the harem held in our estimation. If I were to act right, I ought not to lose a moment in
sending you both back to Erivan; but that I will not do, provided you agree to join us in our
present expedition, and to serve us as guide in those parts of the country with which you are
best acquainted.’ I then explained to him the nature of my office, and what was the object
of the expedition.

‘If you are zealous in our cause,’ said I, ‘you will then have performed a service which will
entitle you to reward, and thus enable me to speak in your favour to the serdar and to my chief,
and, Inshallah! please God, to procure your release. In the meanwhile, your wife may remain
here, in all safety, in the hands of the good folks of this village; and by the time we return,
she will, I hope, have been restored to health.’

The youth, upon hearing this language, took my hand and kissed it, agreed to everything I had
said, and having girt on his arms, he was ready to attend us. I permitted him to go to his
wife, to give her an account of this arrangement, and to console her, with proper assurances,
that they would soon be restored to each other. He again thanked me; and, with the agility
of an antelope, had already gained the summit of the first hill before we had even begun to
ascend it.

We proceeded towards the Georgian frontier, shaping our track over unfrequented parts of the
mountains, in which we were very materially assisted by Yûsûf, who appeared to be acquainted
with every landmark, and who knew the directions of places with a precision that quite surprised
us. He did not seem anxious to visit his own village; and, in fact, he assured me, that had
he even permission so to do, he could not, because he felt himself bound by the oath which
he had taken upon last quitting it, not to return, except accompanied by his wife.

The intelligence which had been brought to the serdar of the advance of the Moscovites proved
false, for we found them posted on the banks of the Pembaki river, occupying the village of
Hamamlû, and fortifying themselves in Karaklisseh. We were not far from the former place; and
as we approached it, I became anxious to acquire some precise intelligence concerning the numbers
and the dispositions of the enemy. A thought struck me, as I pondered over the fate of my Armenian
protégé--‘I will either save this youth or lose him,’ thought I, ‘and never was there a better
opportunity than the present. He shall go to Hamamlû: if he brings me the intelligence we want,
nothing can prevent me from procuring both his pardon and his wife for him--if he proves a
traitor, I get rid of him, and demand a reward from the serdar, for restoring his fugitive slave.’

I called him to me, and proposed the undertaking. Quicker than thought, he seized all the different
bearings of the question, and without hesitation accepted of my proposal. He girt himself afresh,
he tucked the skirts of his coats into his girdle, putting his cap on one side, and slinging
his long gun at his back, he darted down the mountain’s side, and we very soon lost him amid
the sloping woods.

‘Ruft ke ruft. He is gone and doubly gone,’ said the young delikhan; ‘we shall never see him
again.’

‘And why should he not return?’ said I. ‘Have we not got a hostage? Armenian though he is,
he will not leave his wife.’

‘Yes,’ said the youth, ‘he is an Armenian; but he is also an Isauvi (a Christian). The Russians
too are Isauvis; and we all know, that when these infidels get together, they will rather die
than return to the sons of Islam. No; were he the chaste Joseph himself, and his wife Zuleikha
in person, I will bet this horse,’ pointing to the beast under him, ‘that we see him no more.’

‘Do not coin false words, my little gentleman!’ said a sturdy old cavalier, whose sunburnt
face was harrowed by a thousand wrinkles, and shaded by a shaggy beard, mustachios, and eyebrows:--‘why,
without any use, do you eat dirt? The horse is the Shah’s, not yours: and do you pretend to
make the bahs (bets) upon it?’

‘The Shah’s property is mine, and mine is my own,’ retorted the youth.

I and my party kept up this sort of desultory talk for a little while before we thought of
settling ourselves, when, seeing a spot where there was much grass, we made for it, and dismounted
from our horses. We dispersed ourselves here and there, each making a temporary establishment
of horse-cloths and cloaks spread upon the ground, whilst our steeds, picketed among the grass,
fed at pleasure. I announced my intention of passing the night here in case Yûsûf did not appear
before its close; and preparatory to this, two of our best marauders set off in quest of a
sheep, fowls, or anything they could get for our evening’s meal. After an hour’s absence, they
returned with a sheep which they had seized from a flock grazing in the neighbourhood of the
river. It was soon killed, and preparations were made for roasting it. Two stakes with hooks
at the top were cut from the forest and stuck into the ground; then a long stick was passed
through the animal in lieu of a spit, and placed on the hooks. A fire having been lighted,
one of our men was stationed near it to turn the animal at intervals; and it was not long before
it was ready for eating. By way of variety, some of the prime bits, with the fat of the tail,
were cut off, spitted upon a ramrod, and thus roasted. The sheep was served up on its stake,
and our party fell upon it with an intense appetite, whilst, by way of distinction, the ramrod
was handed over to me for my share.

By this time the day had entirely closed in, and Yûsûf had not appeared. We then composed ourselves
to sleep, leaving one or two to keep watch and to attend upon the horses. About an hour after
midnight, when the moon was about going down, a distant shout was heard--presently a second,
more distinctly and nearer to us. We were immediately upon the alert, and the shouts being
repeated, we could no longer doubt but that the Armenian was at hand. We then shouted in return,
and not very long after we saw him appear. He was almost exhausted with fatigue, but still
strong enough to be able to relate his adventures since he had left us.

He informed me that having reached Hamamlû, he was recognized by some of the Russian soldiers
who had escaped the attack of the Persians upon his village, and who immediately introduced
him into the fort, and treated him very kindly. He was taken before the commanding officer,
who questioned him narrowly upon the object of his visit; but the ready pretext which he advanced,
of seeking his wife, answered every difficulty; besides which, the ruin of his village, the
destruction of his family property, and the acquaintances which he had on the spot, furnished
him with so much matter of conversation, that no suspicion of his designs could be entertained.
He was then permitted to walk about the fort, and by asking his questions with prudence, and
making his own observations, as enabled to furnish me with the information I required on the
strength and position of the enemy, with some very good conjectures on the nature and probability
of their future operations. He then managed to slip away unperceived before the gates of the
place were closed, and regained the mountains without the smallest impediment.

Having permitted Yûsûf to refresh himself with food and rest, and being now perfectly satisfied
that his story was true, and that all confidence might be placed in his integrity, I ordered
my party to hold themselves in readiness to return to Erivan. He was permitted to ride behind
either of the horsemen when tired with walking, and in this manner, taking the shortest cuts
over the mountains, we regained the village of Ashtarek. Whilst we stopped here to refresh
ourselves and horses, and to gain intelligence of the movements of the serdar and the chief
executioner, I permitted the youth to visit his wife. He returned beaming with joy, for he
had found her almost cured of her bruises, and full of thanks for the kindness and hospitality
with which she had been treated.

The serdar and the chief executioner had moved from Erivan, and were now encamped close to
the residence of the Armenian patriarch; and thither we bent our steps, accompanied by Yûsûf.

The monastery of Etchmiazin, so called in the Armenian tongue, or Utch Klisseh, or the Three
Churches, by the Turks and Persians, is situated in a large and well-cultivated plain, watered
by the Araxes, and several smaller streams. It stands at the foot of the high mountain of Agri
Dagh, which the Christians, and in particular the Armenians, hold in great veneration, because
(so Yûsûf informed me) upon its conspicuous snow-capt summit the ark of Noah rested. The monastery
and church, celebrated throughout Asia for the riches which they contain, are enclosed within
high walls, and secured by strong and massive gates. It is here that the head of the Armenian
church constantly resides, together with a large retinue of bishops, priests, and deacons,
who form the stock which provides clergy for most of the Armenian churches in Asia. The title
by which he is known in Persia is khalifeh or caliph, a designation which, comprising the head
of the civil as well as the religious government, the Mussulmans used formerly to bestow on
the sovereigns who held their sway at Bagdad and elsewhere. By the Christians he is generally
known by the name of patriarch, and his church is an object of pilgrimage for the Armenians,
who flock there at particular seasons in great numbers from different parts of the world.

Hither we bent our steps. We discovered the united camps of the serdar and the chief executioner,
spreading their white tents in an irregular figure all round the monastery; and before we had
reached its walls, we heard that the two chiefs had taken up their abode within it, and were
the guests of the caliph.

‘We’ll burn the fathers of these giaours’ (infidels), said the young delikhan, as he rode up
to me in great joy at this intelligence; ‘and will make up for the fatigues we have undergone,
by drinking abundantly of their wine.’

‘Are you a Mussulman,’ said I, ‘and talk of drinking wine? You yourself will become a giaour.’

‘Oh, as for that,’ answered he, ‘the serdar drinks wine like any Christian, and I do not see
why I should not.’

As we approached the monastery, I called Yûsûf to me, and told him to be in readiness whenever
he should be called for, and be prepared to confirm any oath that I might think it necessary
to take for his interests. He was particularly enjoined, when he came to talk of the services
he had rendered, to deviate from the truth as much as he chose, to set forth every sort of
danger he had or had not incurred, and in particular to score up an account of sums expended,
all for the use and advantage of the serdar and of the Shah’s government. ‘I hope at that rate,’
said I to him, ‘your accounts may be balanced by having your wife restored to you; for which,
after considerable difficulty, you may agree to give a receipt in full of all demands.’

Thus agreed, we passed through the heavy archway which leads into the first court of the monastery.
This we found encumbered by the equipages and servants of the serdar and the chief executioner.
Here and there were strings of horses picketed by ropes and pegs, with their grooms established
in different corners among their saddles and horse furniture; and a corner was taken up by
a set of mules, distinguished by the eternal jingle of their bells, and the no less eternal
wranglings of their drivers.

In the second yard were the horses of the chief servants, who themselves inhabited small rooms
that surrounded two sides of the court.

We alighted at the first court, and I immediately inquired for the quarters of my master, the
chief executioner. It was noon, and I was informed he was then with the serdar, before whom,
in all the boots, dust, and dirt of my travelling dress, I was immediately conducted.

They seemed to have entirely taken possession of the Armenian sanctuary, and to have dispossessed
the caliph of his place and authority; for they had taken up their abode in his very rooms,
whilst the poor priests were skulking about with humble and downcast looks, as if fearful and
ashamed of being the lawful inhabitants of their own possessions. The favourite horses of both
the Persian chiefs were picketed close to the very walls of the church, more care being taken
of their comforts than of the convenience of the Armenians.

My reader is already acquainted with the person and character of the chief executioner; and,
before I proceed further, I must also make him acquainted with the serdar. A man of a more
sinister aspect was never seen. His eyes, which, in the common expression of his countenance,
were like opaque bits of glass, glared terribly whenever he became animated, and almost started
out of their old shrivelled sockets; and when this happened, it was always remarked that a
corresponding smile broke out upon his mouth, which made the Shah’s poet say, that Hassan Khan’s
face was like Agri dagh, the mountain near which he lived. When clouded at the top, and the
sun shone in the plain, a storm was sure to ensue. Time had worn two deep wrinkles down his
cheeks, which were not hid by a scanty beard, notwithstanding all the pains he took to make
it thick; and the same enemy having despoiled him of all his teeth save one, which projected
from his mouth, had produced deep cavities, that made the shaggy hairs, thinly spread over
them, look like burnt stubble on the slopes of a valley. Altogether, it was difficult to say
whether the goat or the tiger was most predominant; but this is most certain, that never was
the human form so nearly allied to that of the brute as in this instance. His character corresponded
to his looks; for no law, human or divine, ever stood in the way of his sensuality; and when
his passions were roused, he put no bounds to his violence and cruelty. But with all this,
he had several qualities, which attached his followers to him. He was liberal and enterprising.
He had much quickness and penetration, and acted so politically towards the Shah and his government,
that he was always treated with the greatest confidence and consideration. He lived in princely
magnificence; was remarkable for his hospitality, and making no mystery of his irregularity
as a Mussulman, was frank and open in his demeanour, affable to his inferiors, and the very
best companion to those who shared in his debaucheries. No bolder drinker of wine existed in
Persia, except perhaps his present companion, the executioner, who, as long as he could indulge
without incurring the Shah’s displeasure, had ratified an eternal treaty of alliance between
his mouth and every skin of wine that came within his reach.

It was before these two worshipful personages that I was introduced, followed by two or three
of my principal attendants. I stood at the end of the compartment until I was spoken to.

‘You are welcome,’ said the chief executioner. ‘Hajji, by my soul, tell me, how many Russians
have you killed? have you brought a head--let me see?’

Here the serdar took him up, and said, ‘What have you done? What Russians are on the frontier?
and when shall we get at them?’

To all of which I answered, after making the usual prefatory speech, ‘Yes, Agas, I have done
all that was in my power to do. It was a lucky hour when we set off, for everything that you
wish to know I can explain; and it is evident that the destinies of the serdar and of my master
are much on the rise, since so insignificant a slave as I can be of use to them.’

‘Good luck is no bad thing, that’s true,’ said the serdar, ‘but we trust a great deal to our
swords, too,’--rolling his eyes about at the same time, and smiling in the face of the chief
executioner.

‘Yes, yes,’ said his companion, ‘swords and gunpowder, spears and pistols--those are our astrologers.
It will always be a fortunate hour that will bring me within slice of an infidel’s neck. As
for me, I am a kizzel bash (a red head), and pretend to nothing else. A good horse, a sharp
sword, a spear in my hand, and a large maidan (an open space) before me, with plenty of Muscovites
in it: that is all I want.’

‘And what do you say to good wine too?’ said the serdar. ‘I think that is as good a thing as
any you have mentioned. We’ll have the caliph in, and make him give Hajji a cup of his best.
But tell us first,’ addressing himself to me, ‘what have you seen and done? where are the Russians
posted? how many of them are there? have they any guns? who commands them? where are their
Cossacks? have you heard anything of the Georgians? where is the Russian commander-in-chief?
what are the Lesgî about? where is the renegade Ismael Khan?--Come, tell us all: and you, Mirza,’
addressing himself to his scribe, ‘write down all he says.’

Upon this I drew myself up, and, putting on a face of wisdom, I made the following speech:--

‘By the soul of the serdar! by the salt of the chief executioner! the Muscovites are nothing.
In comparison to the Persians, they are mere dogs. I, who have seen with my own eyes, can tell
you, that one Persian, with a spear in his hand, would kill ten of those miserable, beardless
creatures.’

‘Ah, you male lion!’ exclaimed my master, apparently delighted with what I said, ‘I always
knew that you would be something. Leave an Ispahani alone: he will always show his good sense.’

‘They are but few Muscovites on the frontier. Five, six, seven, or eight hundred,--perhaps
a thousand or two thousand--but certainly not more than three. They have some ten, twenty,
or thirty guns; and as for the Cossacks, pûtch and, they are nothing. It is very inconvenient
that they are to be found everywhere when least wanted, with those thick spears of theirs,
which look more like the goad of an ox than a warlike weapon, and they kill, ’tis true; but
then, they are mounted upon yabous (jades), which can never come up to our horses, worth thirty,
forty, fifty tomauns each, and which are out of sight before they can even get theirs into
a gallop.’

‘Why do you waste your breath upon the Cossacks and their horses?’ said the chief executioner;
‘you might as well talk of monkeys mounted upon bears. Who commands the infidels?’

‘They call him the deli mayor, or the mad major; and the reason why he is called so, is because
he never will run away. Stories without number are related of him. Among others, that he has
got the pocket Koran of his excellency the serdar in his possession, which he shows to every
one as a great trophy.’

‘Aye, that’s true,’ exclaimed the serdar. ‘These bankrupt dogs surprised me last year, when
encamped not five parasangs hence, and I had only time to save myself, in my shirt and trousers,
on the back of an unsaddled horse. Of course, they pillaged my tent, and among other things
stole my Koran. But I’ll be even with them. I have shown them what I can do at Gavmishlû, and
we still have much more to perform upon their fathers’ graves. How many guns, did you say,
they had?’

‘Four or five, or six,’ said I.

‘I wrote down twenty or thirty just now,’ remarked the Mirza, who was writing at the edge of
the carpet,--‘which of the two is right?’

‘Why do you tell us lies?’ exclaimed the serdar, his eyes becoming more animated as he spoke.
‘If we find that any part of what you say be false, by the head of Ali! you will soon discover
that our beards are not to be laughed at with impunity.’

‘In truth, then,’ said I, ‘this intelligence is not of my own acquiring. The greatness of the
serdar’s, and my Aga’s good fortune, consists in my having fallen upon a means of getting the
most perfect information through a young Armenian, who risked his life for us, upon my making
him promise of recompense in the name of the serdar.’

‘A recompense in my name!’ exclaimed the serdar: ‘who is this Armenian?--and what Armenian
was ever worthy of a recompense?’

Upon this I related the whole of Yûsûf’s history, from the beginning to the end. In pleading
his cause in this public manner, I hoped that the serdar would feel it impossible to resist
the justice of the demand which I made upon him, and that my young protégé would at once be
released from his fears and apprehensions of the chief’s resentment, and restored to the undisputed
possession of his wife.

When I had done speaking, nothing was said, but here and there Allah! Allah! il Allah! (there
is but one God!) in suppressed exclamations from the lips of the Mohammedans present; whilst
the serdar, having rolled his eyes about, and twitched his mouth into various odd shapes, at
length mumbled out, ‘the Armenian has performed wonders’; and then called aloud to his servants
to bring his kaliân or pipe.

Having smoked two or three long whiffs, he said, ‘Where is this Armenian? Order the caliph
also to come before us.’

Upon which Yûsûf was ushered in, with the shoves and thrusts by which a poor man of his nation
is generally introduced before a Persian grandee; and he stood in face of the assembly as fine
a specimen of manly beauty as was ever seen, evidently creating much sensation upon all present
by the intrepidity of his appearance. The serdar, in particular, fixed his eyes upon him with
looks of approbation; and turning round to the executioner in chief, made signs, well known
among Persians, of his great admiration.

The caliph, a heavy, coarse man, of a rosy and jovial appearance, dressed in the black hood
peculiar to the Armenian clergy, appeared soon after, followed by two or three of his priests.
Having stood for a short time before the serdar and his companion, he was invited to sit, which
he did, going through all the ceremonial of complimentary phrases, and covering the feet and
hands in a manner usual on such occasions.

The serdar then, addressing himself to the caliph, said, ‘It is plain that we Mussulmans are
become less than dogs in the land of Irân. The Armenians now break into our harems, steal our
wives and slaves from before our faces, and invite men to defile our fathers’ graves. What
news is this, O caliph? Is this Allah’s work or yours?’

The caliph, attacked in this unexpected manner, looked very much alarmed, and the dew broke
out upon his ample and porous forehead. Experience had taught him that these sorts of attacks
were generally the forerunners of some heavy fine, and he already put himself in a posture
of defence to resist it.

‘What language is this?’ said he in answer. ‘We, whose dogs are we, who should dare even to
think upon the evil of which your highness speaks? We are the Shah’s subjects:--You are our
protector, and the Armenians sit in peace under your shade. What manner of man is this who
has brought these ashes upon our heads?’

‘That is he,’ answered the serdar, pointing to Yûsûf. ‘Say, fellow, have you stolen my slave
or not?’

‘If I am guilty,’ said the youth, ‘of having taken aught from any man, save my own, here am
I, ready to answer for myself with my life. She who threw herself out of your windows into
my arms was my wife before she was your slave. We are both the Shah’s rayats, and it is best
known to yourself if you can enslave them or no. We are Armenians, ’tis true, but we have the
feelings of men. It is well known to all Persia, that our illustrious Shah has never forced
the harem of even the meanest of his subjects; and, secure in that feeling, how could I ever
suppose, most noble serdar, that we should not receive the same protection under your government?
You were certainly deceived when told that she was a Georgian prisoner; and had you known that
she was the wife of your peasantry, you never would have made her your property.’

The caliph, frightened at the language of the youth, stopped him, by loud and angry exclamations;
but the serdar, apparently struck by language so unusual to his ears, instead of appearing
angry, on the contrary, looked delighted (if the looks of such a countenance could ever express
delight); and, staring with astonished eyes upon the youth, seemed to forget even the reason
of his having been brought before him. Of a sudden, as if dispelling his former indignation,
he stopped all further discussion by saying to him, ‘Enough, enough; go, take your wife, and
say no more; and, since you have rendered us a service at Hamamlû, you shall remain my servant,
and wait upon my person. Go, my head valet will instruct you in your duties; and when attired
in clothes suited to your situation, you will return again to our presence. Go, and recollect
that my condescension towards you depends upon your future conduct.’ Upon this Yûsûf, in the
fullness of his heart, ran up to him with great apparent gratitude, fell upon his knees, and
kissed the hem of his garment, not knowing what to say, or what countenance to keep upon such
unlooked-for good fortune.

Every one present seemed astonished: the chief executioner gave a shrug, and indulged in a
deep yawn; the caliph, as if he had been disencumbered of a heavy weight, stretched his limbs,
and the huge drops that were before glittering on his brow now disappeared, and his face again
expanded into good humour. All congratulated the serdar upon his humanity and benevolence,
and compared him to the celebrated Noushirwan. Barikallah and Mashallah was repeated and echoed
from mouth to mouth, and the story of his magnanimity was spread abroad, and formed the talk
of the whole camp. I will not pretend to explain what were the serdar’s real sentiments; but
those who well knew the man were agreed that he could be actuated by no generous motive.

My chief and the serdar having acquired all the information which Yûsûf and I could give them
upon the force and position of the Muscovites, it was determined that an attack should immediately
be made, and the army was ordered to march upon Hamamlû.

Everything was soon in motion; the artillery began its tedious and difficult march through
the mountains; the infantry made their way in the best manner they could, and the cavalry were
seen in unconnected groups all over the plain. I must not omit to say, that before the march
began I received a visit from the Armenian. He was no longer, in appearance, the rude mountaineer
with his rough sheepskin cap, his short Georgian tunic, his sandalled feet, his long knife
hung over his knee, and his gun slung obliquely across his body; but he was now attired in
a long vest of crimson velvet, trimmed with gold lace and gold buttons; a beautiful Cashmerian
shawl was tied gracefully round his waist; his small cap, of Bokhara lamb-skin, was duly indented
at the top, and the two long curls behind his ears were combed out with all proper care. He
had now more the appearance of a woman than a man, so much were his fine limbs hid by his robes;
and as he approached me, he could not help blushing and looking awkward at the metamorphosis.
He thanked me with expressions that indicated much gratitude, and assured me, that so far from
having expected this result to his interview with the serdar, he had, in fact, made up his
mind to the loss of both his wife and life, and therefore had spoken with the boldness of one
determined to die. ‘But,’ said he, ‘notwithstanding this great change in my fortunes, this
new existence of mine will never do. I cannot endure the degradation of being a mere idle appendage
to the state of the serdar; and be not angry if, ere long, I decline the honour of his service.
I will submit to everything as long as my wife is not in a place of safety; but when once I
have secured that, then adieu. Better live a swineherd in the Georgian mountains, naked and
houseless, than in all these silks and velvets, a despised hanger on, be it even in the most
luxurious court of Persia.’

I could not help applauding such sentiments, although I should have been happy had he made
any one else his confidant, conscious that if he did run away I should in some measure be made
answerable for him.

In the meanwhile the army proceeded on its march. As we passed Ashtarek, Yûsûf got permission
to take possession of Mariam, who, now transformed into the wife of one who had the reputation
of being in the good graces of the serdar, travelled with great respectability and consideration
on horseback, and formed one among the numerous camp-followers that are always attached to
a Persian army. The camp was pitched between Gavmishlû and Aberan, where all that was not necessary
for the expedition was ordered to remain until its return. It was settled that the serdar and
the chief executioner, each accompanied by their own men, with two pieces of artillery, should
form the expedition, and towards the close of the evening it set off. So can be said that the complex work of civilizing Colombia is summarized in this
sentence; communicate with the world, throw in the universal movement.

Under the impression of this idea, I felt that my life was going to transform itself to leave the
ground of the country, entrusting to the Order of steam across the vast high sea and descend on Europe's
shores in search of light, movement, intellectual and moral life, treasures art, the wonders of
the industry and everything that makes this wealth of traditions and triumphs of humanity called
European civilization. Who told me so that touch the reality and study carefully, many of my
dreams dissipate, that this old world I would look very inferior to what the books had made me dream;
and comparing to the poor and backward but beautiful Spanish Colombia in opulent and refined Europe,
my spirit, more enlightened, would end by estimating infinitely more to the people of New World,
whom, in spite of inherited defects, democracy has ennobled and advance relative to the time, much
more than aristocratic institutions to European societies.

On 12 February I left the port of Cartagena to take the British steamer Thames, traveling to
St. Thomas. For the first time felt the solemnity of this act of supreme confidence in Providence
man who has thrown on a boat to the vastness of the ocean .... On the continent was all my past,
that whole treasure called the Fatherland; and stirred the deep wave rose the vague shadow
of the future. To give the final Goodbye to New Granada, whose heroism represented Cartagena, had
a feeling in my heart of deep gratitude and brotherhood towards this noble city, and the hope
associated in my spirit to the silent contemplation of a sea whose greatness I had the idea of ​​God,
the Infinite, of Eternity ....

* * * * *

What is the solemn spectacle
of the ocean!

       Ahead of that grandeur, that gap keeps within it the basis of the
continents, the supreme majesty of nature, it is necessary faith,
rise up to God, live with the thought of eternity, filled with the
idea of the infinite, believe in the eternal harmony of Creation,
support the notion of progress sublime undefined, admire the supremacy
of man over the elements!

There, amid the high sea moving grim and relentless, on the back of liquid crystal leads continent
to continent, we must feel deeply admire, adore in silence, to live a godly inspiration, a
poet, singing, and feel in my heart I know not what of heroic, big, according to the apparent
imminence of the danger!

By dint of reading and meditating on something, had come to form, back in the heart of the Andes
the idea of ​​the ocean, it had dreamed all his amazing loneliness, its mystery, its effects wonderful
light, choppy waves and its terrible, threatening its calm, its typhoons and storms, their
vague sighs, his bellowing loud, its thousand optical phenomena of
vegetation hiding or traveling, incredibly diverse population in the
folds of their waves .... Y HOWEVER my fantasies, which were complete
accuracy, I was surprised, overwhelmed of wonder, full of fear and
courage alternatively, as in a different world of Creation, when,
far away from the rocky, deserted beaches of Cartagena, recognized
that the land was in the past, like a shadow, and from that moment
my life and belonged to my love of science and storms disputing the
rule of infinity!

It was four o'clock, and the steamer Thames, snorting like a dragon threatened by monsters the
abyss, plowed the waves with difficulty. The sea was rough, and instead of the surface crystalline
green and Cartagena Bay, did not look at around but a series of hills black water and dull,
stretching to the horizon in a long and strong undulation. They feel a thing for a moment seemed afraid.
I looked at the huge whirlpool, I trembled and it seemed to me that some secret impulse pushed
me over the edge of the ship to rush from the foam of the wake. It was the vertigo of the soul
in his admiration for the infinite and by the supreme power! Then I realized that was not fear
that possessed me. On the contrary, my trust was absolute, and the
idea of ​​death did not come to shake my spirit but under heroic appearance.

Cartagena

was about to disappear. Colombia's coast but was no longer a dark lane, vague, fantastic, and the high
towers of the old and heroic midwife of Colombian independence highlighted scarcely on the horizon,
like clouds or small whitish spots of time evaporating time. At last all lost its shape and color,
height of waves, bulky optics, far covered the list, the prospect is over, and instead of the
land but did not see the face insert and steep the ocean.

At that moment my heart squeezed painfully, a deep sigh I tore my contemplation helmsmen behind
the steam, and I felt a hot tear burned my face .... That was my farewell, my silent invocation
to the motherland. I looked up to heaven, and saw that the British flag floated over my head.
Since that time I was abroad in all parties abroad even in the solitude
of the ocean because a log is driven by steam nationality, and people
have not yet realized that all of Creation is that God has fact humanity
one family!

Then my mind began another rotation. The wide and shining vapor trail made me think in the history
of science and of heroism, and I recalled with awe and veneration for the memory of Basque Gama,
Columbus, Balboa, Magellan, Cortes, Pizarro, of Lapérouse and Cook, whose faith and devotion have
made progress in the career world enduring civilization!

And then what of struggles, sacrifices, centuries of work, from the work of progress generation to generation,
as the heritage of all mankind!

Much has not been necessary for man to establish his rule over creation, chaining the elements
at its plant sovereign and guiding her keel under the inspiration of winning science! The Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, Greeks and Italians, the Portuguese and Spanish, the English and Dutch, have
not had much to do to Fulton and predecessors and successors will
reveal to the world the wonders of steam!

What is man? Weak physical strength, small as a lowly atom in the presence of mountains and
seas; zero before the immeasurable majesty of heaven and worlds that populate it, born with the legacy
of pain as perishable as everything that exists in the physical world - the man has received
a power HOWEVER have no mountains, the ocean, the storms and the
stars: the spirit.

And that one power, which is the breath of God, which is the supreme power, which is more than light
and life, it is the essence creative, immortal and divine, it was enough to break down and analyze
and bring the light guide electricity, enslave the winds, his service to the fire and explosion,
tame the fury of the ocean, searching the secrets of heaven and earth, producing force to infinity
and delete he pleases!

Man is, therefore, operator, man is sovereign, is superior to nature! Why? because it is spirit,
because science is a ray, thinking its lever titanic word irresistible instrument of conquest! Yes,
man is sovereign because it is not slave matter, because it is immortal as a species and thought,
because their fate is progress indefinitely, without further principle that God and no other
purpose than God!

Oh! man is very great, and I would not want anything to convince those who deny the law progress,
those who doubt the supremacy of man, to those who have no faith either in God or the spirit
of humanity - but that would not let them leave their seats powdered,
their chairs decayed by time, and bring them to the middle of the
ocean, where this tiny being and weak field, the armed pygmy rays
of God, called Man, walks calm in the midst of a hectic and terrible
abyss, strong in the possession of a compass a chronometer, a telescope,
and the springs and valves of a machine that makes iron flying a boat
over the waves with the impunity of the seagull.

The night had spread its shadow over the vast high sea, and I meditated still sitting near the
helm of the Thames. Suddenly a cold sweat filled my forehead, making me shiver. I wanted to
get up, and I felt that I lacked the strength, the blood froze in
my veins arteries, a horrible buzz me to lose sight, hearing and sense
of my being; in short, a vertigo seized all my organization.

It was the dizziness, the anger of unforgiving seas to any traveler and defeat even the most
vigorous temperament!

"What! I said then that man is ruler of this abyss, and the only movement HOWEVER, the smell and
sight of this monster is enough liquid to completely overcome and annihilate the sovereign? Could
it be that this meat crust that surrounds the spirit can bring to bear weakness miserable about
being moral, to the point of taking away the thought, memory, the will and all the energy
of the generous instincts? The man is then very small?

" asked me faint. No! I said the soul. Yes! told me the meat!

Then I thought of Rodin, that terrible character of the Wandering Jew, who struggle with the
anger, almost in the agonies of death, and no more power than the will, he exclaimed: "I want
to live, and live because I love him!" I had done since before embarking on purpose to resist
at any cost to motion sickness, with the force of my physical organization:
But succumbed to see this - I said resolutely: "No! no! I want my
soul to dominate with his strength the weakness of my body!

"

Then I started to bathe her face with almost feverish excitement, and sweet oranges to suck
despair. I stood up, I grabbed for the side yards of the rails and left. The view is clouded me,
groping among the sailors, and by a supreme effort of will ... What went through my muscles
and nerves, for my arteries and my brain is indescribable; was a
tremendous inner struggle, overwhelming, that left me almost lifeless.

But fifteen minutes Then I walked free and serene on the aft deck, smoking and laughing, and
then in associate of a friend and compatriot, to skip the cork from a bottle of champagne to
drink for the country, saying inwardly: "Man is the king of the land, because their strength is
the spirit and the scepter will. "

* * * * *

CHAPTER IV.

* * * * *

THE OCEAN.

On February 13 I was very early on the deck of the steamer. The heat of cabin was unbearable
even at night, and I wanted to not only enjoy the cool breeze in
the morning, but go to the sublime spectacle of sunrise.

       What magnificence Scene! what treasures of light and beauty hitherto
unknown for me!

The sun, like a huge urn of fire emerged from the waves, wrapped
in a halo of colors resplendent and elusive to the eye, while mingling
in the sky and ocean, so that the two faces of the horizon, the top
and bottom, forming a alone.

And the sea, under the shadow of the steam was dark as night, east
side shone like a huge mirror, waving their scales in a never-ending
swaying multiplied the effects of light on the tops of the waves,
and half-tints and shadows fugitive the interstices momentary break
open the large moles and sparkling crystal.

The contrast of those wonderful beauties of the illuminated element and agitated, with loneliness
shifting of this desert was awesome. What supreme sadness in the background of so much life Nature!
The sun, wind, waves and blue sky reflected and transparent life while death and desolation
is revealed in this immutability, in that silence, in the relentless swaying of an abyss filled
by the waters of the entire globe! Man is like the ocean, everything here is supported by the
balance between life and death.

After it was necessary to admire observe the composition of that piece of civilization is called
a Vapor. The Thames was one of the oldest cruise company, British and served perfectly as a
point of comparison for judging progress in recent fifteen years
has made steam navigation.

In general the structure of British steamers used to navigate between "South America" ​​and Europe
is heavy but very solid, and if we drop some rare exceptions, we can fairly establish a relationship
between vapors Americans and British. If in point of strength, security and perfection in service
are far superior maneuver the British, the Americans have the advantage cruise the speed,
comfort and even cheapness. The American steamer is to English what the hotel estate to coffee
or restorer. The traveler feels much better under the starry flag
that under the leopard.

Generally the captains of the ships are not very gallant English, and many of its Regular officers
are in their education and manners. Both are very intolerant point to the religious hypocrisy of
the English on Sundays, and it shows that all marine, from first to last, have many superstitions,
perhaps incompatible the habit of danger.

In compensation is seen in all that morality is strong, except in some counters (Pursers), which are
worse than Jews, and the bartenders, who exploit the passenger to his taste. Some are so ... predatory
pursers, not use another word, they charge off until by Sterling. Many passengers are hidden
away in the value of the coin, losing 5, 8 and to 10 percent of the
real value of their doubloons, because the need obliges them to accept
the rate that is speculation capricious on board.

Probably the jugglers call that to their economies.

The British steam cabins lack of comfort and service of domestic is difficult and unpleasant.
Passengers who, by their misfortune, they know well explained English, have to do with pounds
and shillings, in which case they are perfectly understood.



Upon his entrance there, I heard the songs of the women, accompanied by tambourines, guitars,
and little drums, rending the air as they walked in procession before him. Well did I listen
with all my ears to discover Zeenab’s voice; but every endeavour was baffled, and I remained
in a disagreeable state of vibration betwixt hope and fear, until a hasty order was issued
for my old master, Mirza Ahmak, the king’s physician, to appear immediately before the Shah.
Combinations of the mind in all matters of deep interest are formed as quick as thought, and
act like the foretellings of prophecy. When I heard that the hakîm was sent for, a cold thrill
ran through my veins, and I said to myself, ‘Zeenab is lost for ever!’

He came, was soon dismissed, and seeing me at the door of the harem, took me on one side, and
said, ‘Hajji, the Shah is much enraged. You remember the Cûrdish slave, which I presented to
him at the festival of the No Rûz. She has not appeared among the dancing-women, and pretends
to be ill. He loves her, and had set his heart upon seeing her. He has called me to account
for her conduct, as if I could control the caprice of this daughter of the devil; and says,
that if he does not find her in full health and beauty when he reaches the ark (the palace),
which will be on the next best fortunate hour, he will pluck my beard out by the roots. Curse
the unlucky moment which made her my slave; and still more the hour when I first invited the
Shah into my house.’

Upon this he left me, to set off immediately for Tehran, whilst I retired to my tent, to ruminate
over the horrid fate that awaited this unfortunate girl. I endeavoured to rally my spirits
by the hope that perhaps she was actually ill, and that it had been impossible for her to appear
before the king; and then I consoled myself with the idea, that if my fears were well founded,
the doctor’s heart might be softened, and he might screen her from the Shah’s observation,
by giving some evasive reason for her non-appearance. Then, after all, as if braving my feelings,
I repeated to myself the lines of one of our poets, who, like me, had lost his mistress.

‘Is there but one pair of stag eyes, or one cypress waist, or one full-moon face in the world,
that I should so mourn the loss of my cruel one?

‘Why should I burn, why should I cut myself, and sigh out my griefs under the windows of the
deaf-eared charmer?

‘No, let me love where love is cheap; for I am a miser of my feelings.’

Thus I endeavoured to make light of the subject, and to show myself a true Mussulman by my
contempt for womankind. But still, turn where I would, go where I would, the image of Zeenab,
a torn and mangled corpse, was ever before my eyes, and haunted my imagination at all seasons
and at all hours.

At length the fortunate hour for the Shah’s entry was announced, and he entered Tehran amidst
the whole of its population, who had been turned out to greet his arrival. My most pressing
want was to see the hakîm, as if by chance, in order that no suspicion might fall upon me,
in case poor Zeenab was found guilty. On the very evening of our arrival, my wishes (alas!
how fatally!) were accomplished. As I was taken up in giving some orders to a nasakchi, I saw
him come out of the Shah’s private apartment, looking full of care, with one hand stuck in
his girdle, the other in his side, his back more bent than usual, and with his eyes fixed on
the ground. I placed myself in his way, and gave him the salutation of peace, which caused
him to look up.

When he had recognized me, he stopped, saying, ‘You are the very man I was seeking. Come hither;’
and he took me on one side: ‘Here is a strange story afloat,’ said he; ‘this Cûrd has brought
all sorts of ashes on my head. Wallah! by Heaven, the Shah has run clean mad. He talks of making
a general massacre of all that is male, within and without his harem, beginning with his viziers,
and finishing by the eunuchs. He swears by his own head, that he will make me the first example
if I do not find out the culprit.’

‘What culprit? who? what?’ said I, ‘what has happened?’

‘Why, Zeenab,’ answered he, ‘Zeenab.’

‘Oh! I understand,’ said I; ‘Aye! she you used to love so much.’

‘I?’ answered the Hakîm, as if afraid of being himself suspected, ‘I? Astaferallah! Heaven
forbid! Do not say so for pity’s sake, Hajji, for if such a suspicion were once hinted, the
Shah would put his threat into immediate execution. Where did you ever hear that I loved Zeenab?’

‘Many things were reported concerning you at that time,’ said I, ‘and all were astonished that
a man of your wisdom, the Locman of his time, the Galenûs of Persia, should have embarked in
so frail and dangerous a commodity as a Cûrdish maid, one of the undoubted progeny of the devil
himself, whose footsteps could not be otherwise than notoriously unfortunate; who, of herself,
was enough to bring ill luck to a whole empire, much more to a single family like yours.’

‘You say true, Hajji,’ said Mirza Ahmak, as he shook his head from side to side, and struck
his left hand on the pit of his stomach. ‘Ah! marvellous fool was I ever to have been caught
by her black eyes! in fact, they were not eyes, they were spells:--the devil himself looked
out of them, not she, and if he is not in her now, may I be called Gorumsak all the rest of
my days. But, after all, what shall I do?’

‘What can I say?’ answered I. ‘What will the Shah do with her?’

‘Let her go to Jehanum,’ answered the doctor; ‘let her go to her father’s mansion, and a good
journey to her. I am only thinking of my own skin.’

Upon this, looking up tenderly at me, he said, ‘Ah, Hajji! you know how much I have always
loved you: I took you into my house when you were houseless--I placed you in a good situation,
and you have risen in your profession all through me--allow that there is, or that there ought
to be such a thing in the world as gratitude--you have now an opportunity of exercising it:’
then pausing for a while, and playing with the tip of my beard, he said, ‘Have you guessed
what I wished to say?’

‘No,’ said I, ‘it has not yet reached my understanding.’

‘Well, then,’ said he, ‘in two words, own that you are the culprit. A great loss of consideration
would accrue to me, but none to you; you are young, and can bear such a story to be told of you.’

‘Loss of consideration, indeed!’ exclaimed I, ‘what is that when the loss of life will ensue?
Are you mad, oh Hakîm, or do you think me so? Why should I die? why do you wish to have my
blood upon your head? All I can say, if I am questioned on the subject, is, that I do not think
you guilty, because you were ever too much in fear of the khanum, your wife; but I will never
say that I am guilty.’

Whilst in the middle of our conversation, one of the Shah’s eunuchs came up to me, and said
that his chief had been ordered to see that the sub-lieutenant to the chief executioner, with
five men, were in waiting at the foot of the high tower at the entrance of the harem, at the
hour of midnight; and that they were to bring a taboot, or hand-bier, with them, to bear away
a corpse for interment.

All I could say in answer was ‘be cheshm! (by my eyes)’; and lucky was it for me that he quitted
me immediately, that Mirza Ahmak had also left me, and that it was dusk, or else the fear and
anguish which overwhelmed me upon hearing this message must have betrayed me. A cold sweat
broke out all over my body, my eyes swam, my knees knocked under me, and I should perhaps have
fallen into a swoon, if the counter fear of being seen in such a state, in the very centre
of the palace, had not roused me.

‘What,’ said I to myself, ‘is it not enough that I have been the cause of her death, must I
be her executioner too? must I be the grave-digger to my own child? must I be the ill-fated
he who is to stretch her cold limbs in the grave, and send my own life’s blood back again to
its mother earth? That's the world: worship of God and man war ....

San Pablo is about 150 meters inside length from east to west, and something else 80 of width,
from south to north, with a total circumference of more than 680 outside meter and the maximum
height of 121. If a temple so huge I had a place in round provided to its size, would look
remarkably great. But the English are laymen in this tasteful, and not lose the sake of beauty
and majesty of a memorial space that can be used for warehouses and
breweries.

Among the various monuments and sights that I visited during my short
stay in London, do not forget two of a kind historical and artistic
merit attention to, but very minor, such are: the Diorama and the
Gallery of Madame Tussaud.

The Diorama, set in the heart of Leicester Square, is a round building, covered with a glass dome,
and very similar to the main body of the Colosseum, although much less large. Includes an exhibition
of some curious ethnographic objects, and at the same time diorama, panorama and peep .-- There
is delivered every day a very useful lesson in geography for those who need basic notions. What in
the Colosseum presents an overview of London, at the Diorama in a hollow circular provides the
image in relief of the globe, with the exact demarcation of the seas,
continents and islands.

The work is ingenious and very interesting as elemental.

In the bottom of the building are the most curious groups of Indians, blacks, Chinese, Europe,
etc., with their clothes, weapons and a thousand specialties, providing the face box of almost
all nations of the earth, and a host of historical concepts for instruction the mob or of people
of mediocre education. No shortage there are many examples of objects something rare in all
the arts, mechanics, navigation, etc., attracting just the eyes of the curious visitor. That setting
seemed not just a nice museum but a beautiful democratic institute designed to teach the poorer
classes, with ease and cheapness, the elements of geography, science as useful and pleasant
in itself, like a fruitful in a thousand results for industry, commerce, literature and politics.
It would be great fortune-school pastime that was imitated in major
cities of the republics Colombia. It is surrounded
by unappropriated ground, and the principal gate of the harem is close to its base. On the
top of all is a terrace (a spot, ah! never by me to be forgotten!) and it was to this that
our whole attention was now riveted. I had scarcely arrived, when, looking up, we saw three
figures, two men and a female, whose forms were lighted up by an occasional gleam of moonshine,
that shone in a wild and uncertain manner upon them. They seemed to drag their victim between
them with much violence, whilst she was seen in attitudes of supplication, on her knees, with
her hands extended, and in all the agony of the deepest desperation. When they were at the
brink of the tower her shrieks were audible, but so wild, so varied by the blasts of wind that
blew round the building, that they appeared to me like the sounds of laughing madness.

We all kept a dead and breathless silence: even my five ruffians seemed moved--I was transfixed
like a lump of lifeless clay, and if I am asked what my sensations were at the time, I should
be at a loss to describe them,--I was totally inanimate, and still I knew what was going on.
At length, one loud, shrill, and searching scream of the bitterest woe was heard, which was
suddenly lost in an interval of the most frightful silence. A heavy fall, which immediately
succeeded, told us that all was over. I was then roused, and with my head confused, half crazed
and half conscious, I immediately rushed to the spot, where my Zeenab and her burden lay struggling,
a mangled and mutilated corpse. She still breathed, but the convulsions of death were upon
her, and her lips moved as if she would speak, although the blood was fast flowing from her
mouth. I could not catch a word, although she uttered sounds that seemed like words. I thought
she said, ‘My child! my child!’ but perhaps it was an illusion of my brain. I hung over her
in the deepest despair, and having lost all sense of prudence and of self-preservation, I acted
so much up to my own feelings, that if the men around me had had the smallest suspicion of
my real situation, nothing could have saved me from destruction. I even carried my frenzy so
far as to steep my handkerchief in her blood, saying to myself, ‘This, at least, shall never
part from me!’ I came to myself, however, upon hearing the shrill and demon-like voice of one
of her murderers from the tower’s height, crying out--‘Is she dead?’ ‘Aye, as a stone,’ answered
one of my ruffians. ‘Carry her away, then,’ said the voice. ‘To hell yourself,’ in a suppressed
tone, said another ruffian; upon which my men lifted the dead body into the taboot, placed
it upon their shoulders, and walked off with it to the burial-ground without the city, where
they found a grave ready dug to receive it. I walked mechanically after them, absorbed in most
melancholy thoughts, and when we had arrived at the burial-place, I sat myself down on a grave-stone,
scarcely conscious of what was going on. I watched the operations of the nasakchies with a
sort of unmeaning stare; saw them place the dead body in the earth; then shovel the mould over
it; then place two stones, one at the feet and the other at the head. When they had finished,
they came up to me and said ‘that all was done’: to which I answered, ‘Go home; I will follow.’
They left me seated on the grave, and returned to the town.

The night continued dark, and distant thunders still echoed through the mountains. No other
sound was heard, save now and then the infant-like cries of the jackal, that now in packs,
and then by two or three at the time, kept prowling round the mansions of the dead.

The longer I remained near the grave, the less I felt inclined to return to my home, and to
my horrid employment of executioner. I loathed my existence, and longed to be so secluded from
the world, and from all dealings with those of high authority in it, that the only scheme which
I could relish was that of becoming a real dervish, and passing the rest of my days in penitence
and privations. Besides, the fear of having disclosed, both by my words and actions, how much
I was involved in the fate of the deceased, came across my mind, and added to my repugnance
of returning.

Day by this time began to dawn, and impelled, both by a sense of my danger and by my desire
to quit a place which had become odious to me, I determined to proceed on foot to Kinaragird,
the first stage to Ispahan, and then take advantage of the first caravan that should be going
to that city.

‘I will go and seek consolation in retirement, and in the bosom of my family,’ said I to myself;
‘I will see what is become of my parents--perhaps I may reach the paternal roof in time to
receive my father’s dying blessing, and by my presence give him in his old age the happiness
of seeing his long-lost son restored to him. How shall I be able to go through my duties, with
this misfortune about my neck? I have lived long enough in vice, and it is time that I should
make the tobeh, or renounce my wicked ways.’

In short, this horrid event produced such an effect upon my mind, that had I continued in the
sentiments it inspired me with through life, I might well have aspired to be placed at the
head of our most holy dervishes.

Pulling out the handkerchief from my breast, still wet with the blood of the unfortunate Zeenab,
I contemplated it with feelings of the most bitter anguish; then spreading it before me on
her grave, I went through a ceremony to which I had long been unaccustomed,--I said my prayers.
Refreshed by this act, and strengthened in my resolutions of leaving Tehran, I tore myself
away, and stept valiantly onwards towards Ispahan.

Having reached Kinaragird, without seeing the trace of a caravan, and feeling myself sufficiently
strong to proceed on my journey, I pushed on for the caravanserai of the sultan’s reservoir,
where I intended to halt for the night.

As I came in sight of the building, at some distance in the desert, I saw a man putting himself
into strange attitudes, playing antics by himself, and apparently addressing himself to something
on the ground. I approached him, and found that he was talking with great animation to his
cap, which was thrown some yards before him. Going still nearer to him, I discovered a face
that was familiar to me.

‘Who can it be?’ said I to myself: ‘it must be one of my old friends, the dervishes of Meshed.’

In fact, it proved to be the Kessehgou, the story-teller, who was practising a new story by
himself, making his cap act audience. As soon as he saw, he recognized me, and came up to embrace
me with seeming rapture.

‘Ahi, Hajji,’ said he, ‘peace be with you! Where have you been these many years? Your place
has long been empty. My eyes are refreshed by the sight of you.’ Then he repeated himself in
the same strain several times over, until we at length got upon more rational subjects.

He related his adventures since we had last met; which consisted in the detail of long and
painful journeys, and of the various methods which his ingenuity had suggested to him of gaining
his bread. He was now on his return from Constantinople, from whence he had walked, and had
it in contemplation to make his way in the same manner to Delhi, after having passed a summer
at Ispahan, whither he was now proceeding.

Although little inclined to talk, in the melancholy mood in which my mind had been plunged,
still I could not refrain in some measure from catching the exuberance of spirits with which
my companion seemed to overflow, and I also gave him an account of myself since the day I left
Meshed with Dervish Sefer, when I had just recovered from the bastinado on the soles of my feet.

As I proceeded in my narrative, showing him how, step by step, I had advanced in station and
dignity, it was amusing to see with what increased reverence he treated me. At length, when
I came to my promotion to the rank of sub-lieutenant to the chief executioner, I verily believe
that he would have prostrated himself before me, with such extreme respect had experience taught
him to treat gentlemen of that profession. But when he heard the sequel of my story; how for
a woman I had abandoned my high situation and all the prospects of advancement which it held
out to me; I perceived the low estimation to which I fell in his opinion. He exclaimed that
I was not worthy of the kalaât (the dress of distinction), which fortune had cut out, fashioned,
and invested me with. ‘So, because the Shah thinks it fitting to destroy a faithless slave,’
said he, 'in whose guilt you have at most only half the share, you think it necessary to abandon
the excellent station in life to which you had reached, and to begin again the drudgery of
an existence lower and more uncertain than even the one which I enjoy. There each
plant, the huge palm, as the humble violet Japanese living in luxury, with all freshness, beauty,
glitter, perfume and the treasures that give them the sun, breezes and dew in hot or temperate
climates to which they belong. The grand architecture of greenhouses, and the conditions that
each one has, according to the group of plants is home, to give the degree of light, warmth,
freedom, and special soil moisture they need, encourage wonderful growth, nutrition, reproductive,
reproduction and conservation of all species of interest.

Under the warm and fragrant vaults of greenhouses, visitors take in a show charming grandeur and
contrasts. I went through there all the regions of the earth, as to their vegetation, with
only move on to a greenhouse to another. Admired European flora from all over the world, educated
in some way by civilization, embellished with art, as this can embellish nature. Guessed the deserts
of Africa, retostados by keeping the hot sun, vegetation and feverish in her bed calcined sand,
- and attended the sumptuous scenes of forests and mountains of Asia, where everything is lush
and voluptuous, the size, colors, scents, shapes and growth of plants and animals, where all
great and stunning - giving idea of ​​a semi-barbarian world, immense, whose greatness greed
causes people spent and impoverished by the time the West.

But nothing filled both my spirit and my heart like the sight of groups
of plants in Colombia.

There stands the waxy palm do the Andes, who lives hit by hurricanes in the wilderness, such as who
sits in the hot valleys and produces the vegetable ivory, or other materials. The same bush curly,
dark and melancholy of the heights inhabited by lichens, the tree Aromatic and gentle slopes and
plains of the middle, or the great vine and the plant monstrous dwarf leaf, which grows in damp
and dark thickets of forests in burning the edges of large rivers. I thought living in Colombia,
breathing its air force, contemplate the splendid sky, warm with fire, or get up on its mountain
ranges steep, devour their delicious fruit and get drunk with the perfume of that world of light,
natural power and majesty that he had left the other side of the ocean.

In the presence of these marvels of science, art and trade and travel,
and agitated by such deep impressions, duplicated felt my faith in
infinite progress and strengthened my belief in the commonwealth of
all peoples in the immense work of civilization.

Why this class of plants from around the globe in prodigious variety? What does this assembly
Universal vegetables, perfumes, colors, unique shapes, families of vegetation from all regions?
Is it only in the service of science and industry that the traveler naturalist takes one to
the other pole the nuances living mantle that covers nature bosom of the earth? No! Each family and
each species, each group represented just Flora unity, harmony, progressive life and fertility of
creation, occurring in the service of humanity, according to the destination's climate gives to each
of the objects that intelligence human can use.

This centralization or reunion of all plants, assembly sublime cosmopolitan image is unit in civilization,
the great commonwealth of rights and interests that mission links to all races, nations and generations
listed in the motion humanity.

The people are like plants: looks alone, the characteristic features loom, the contrasts are
strong, the apparent antagonism is sensitive, but considered in the
greenhouses, a great group that meets without confusing, appears patently
the supreme harmony that refers to all and gives them the perfection
of beauty and grandeur.

The zoo has a triple interest in the distribution of art, beauty plant and animal movement that
reveals the lives of countless families within the power or the service
of man.

The turnout of visitors is always considerable, and groups moving and varied that it results
in increasing the interest of the scene. I do not intend a complete description of this park,
which is impossible for it has barely cross it for several hours. Thus, one will indicate something
more fixed my attention.


He said that all were going to the capital, with the exception of himself and his friend, who,
both dervishes, were just arrived from Constantinople; but that he had met one answering to
the person he had described, one who seemed oppressed with care and worn with grief, wandering
about in a sort of chance manner through the wilds of the desert. He added many more particulars
which corresponded so entirely to my appearance and history that the horseman could not doubt
for a moment but that this was the person he was in search of, and rode off in great haste
according to the directions of the dervish, who, as may be imagined, purposely led him wrong.

When he had been gone some time the dervish took me on one side, and said, ‘If you want to
secure yourself from this man, you must instantly depart; for when he finds his search fruitless,
and is tired of wandering about the desert, he will certainly return here, and then what can
hinder your being discovered?’

‘I will do anything rather than be discovered by him,’ said I: ‘he is evidently sent to seize
me. I can expect no mercy from such a ruffian, particularly as I have not enough money to offer
him, for I know his price. Where can I go?’

The dervish reflected a while, and said, ‘You must go to Kom: you will reach it before morning,
and as soon as you arrive there, lose not a moment in getting within the precincts of the sanctuary
of the tomb of Fatimeh. You will then, and not till then, be safe, even from the Shah’s power.
Should you be caught without its walls, there is no hope for you. You will be seized; and then
may Allah take you into his holy keeping!’

‘But when I am there,’ said I, ‘what shall I do? how shall I live?’

‘Leave that to me,’ said the dervish; ‘I shall soon overtake you, and as I know the place and
many of the people in it, Inshallah, please God, you will not fare so ill as you may imagine.
I myself was once obliged to do the same thing, for having been the means of procuring poison
for one of the Shah’s women, who used it to destroy a rival. Orders were sent to seize me,
and I managed to reach the bust (the refuge seat) at Shahabdul Azîm just five minutes before
the executioner who was to have apprehended me. I never fared better in my life: for I did
nothing; I was supported by the charity of those who came to say their prayers at the shrine
of the saint: and the women, who constantly travelled thus far to pray and take their pleasure,
always contrived to comfort me in my confinement. The only evil you have to fear is an order
from the Shah, that no one on pain of death shall give you food: if so, you will be starved
into a surrender, and then the Prophet be your protector! But your case is not one of sufficient
consequence to make you fear this. The Shah cannot care so much for one slave, when he has
a hundred others to fill her place. After all, men do not die so easily as we Persians imagine.
Recollect what the Sheikh says, “Clouds and wind, the moon, the sun, the firmament (and he
might have added dervishes), all are busied, that thou, O man, mayest obtain thy bread: only
eat it not in neglect.”’

‘I am not the man,’ said I, ‘who will forget your kindness. Provincial and municipal councils work independently
and make an elephant in the municipal system. The Government Executive always contained or
controlled and driven by the Chambers and opinion, played with sincerity the constitutional system
and displayed in any case respect for the law, freedom and the national will. Every day the
ideas are gaining ground in Belgium in the sense of freedom, the emancipation of all legitimate
efforts and the expansion of democratic institutions. Thus, it is expected that the Belgian nation shall
continue as a happy example, as a practical school liberalism, and not the latest upgrade its institutions
leading to their ultimate consequences natural application of the principles that have served as a starting
point. I had scarcely reached the outskirts of the town of Kom before I perceived
the horseman at some distance behind, making the best of his way in search of me; and therefore
I looked neither right nor left until the massive chain that hangs across the principal gateway
of the sanctuary was placed between myself and my pursuer. I then exclaimed, ‘Ilhamd’illah!
Praises to Allah! O Mahomed! O Ali!’ and kissing the threshold of the tomb I said my prayers
with all the fervency of one who having escaped a tempest has got safe into port.

I had scarcely time to look about me before I perceived the nasakchi coming towards me. He
accosted me with a cold salutation of peace, and then said, ‘that he had a royal order to conduct
me into the Shah’s presence wherever I might be found.’

I told him that, with all reverence for his firman, it was my intention to avail myself of
the acknowledged privilege of every true believer, to seek refuge at the shrine of the saint,
and that, of course, he could not violate it by dragging me from it. ‘Besides, this is the
favourite saint of the King of Kings,’ said I, ‘and he respects this shrine more than any other.’

‘What shall I do then, Hajji?’ said he. ‘You know this is not written in the order. If I go
back without you, perhaps the Shah may cut off my ears instead of yours.’

‘Inshallah! please God,’ said I.

‘Please God, do you say?’ said he in a fury: ‘am I come all this way that men should call me
ass? I am not a man if I do not make you return with me.’ And forthwith we began to wrangle
to such a degree that several of the priests, attached to the endowment, came from their rooms
to inquire into the cause of the disturbance.

‘Here is one,’ exclaimed I, ‘who presumes to violate the sanctuary. I have taken refuge in
it, and he talks of forcing me away! You, that are men of God,’ addressing myself to the mollahs,
‘speak, and say whether you will allow this?’

They all took my part. ‘This is unheard of,’ said they, ‘in Persia. If you dare to take one
from the bust, you will not only have the vengeance of the saint on your head, but the whole
corps of the Ullemah will be upon you; and be you protected by the King of Kings, or the king
of demons, nothing can screen you from their fury.’

The nasakchi remained quite uncertain what to do, and at length, softening his tone, he endeavoured
to make a virtue of necessity, and began to negotiate with me upon what he might get if he
went away without further molesting me. I did not deny the right he had of being paid for his
trouble, for it is precisely what I should have expected myself had I been in his place; but
I made him recollect how little I was able to requite him; for he knew as well as I all the
circumstances of my flight, and that I had brought nothing away with me from Tehran.

He suggested that I might give him what effects I had left behind me; to which I did not in
the least agree, but recommended him to go whence he came, and to leave the afflicted to their
miseries.

The fact is, as I afterwards found out, the rogue had already taken possession of my property,
which consisted of clothes, trunks, bedding, horse-furniture, pipes, etc., having himself been
the cause of denouncing me to the Shah. He had watched the effect which the murderous death
of the unhappy Cûrd had produced upon me, and immediately had laid his plan for my destruction,
and for stepping into my situation.

Finding that he could not exert the power which had been vested in him, and that his firman
was so much waste paper, as long as I continued to hold fast to my refuge-place, he thought
it best to return to Tehran; but in so doing he delivered his powers into the hands of the
governor of the town, with strict injunctions to keep watch over my actions, and in case I
stirred from the sanctuary, to seize and send me a prisoner to the seat of government.

I had scarcely got rid of the nasakchi, when I heard the voice of my friend the dervish, who
was announcing his arrival in the holy city, by all the different invocations of the Almighty
and his attributes, which are frequently made by true believers.

Very soon after, I was delighted to see him coming towards me, and to hear him express his
satisfaction that I had reached my resting-place before my pursuer had had time to come up with me.

He proposed to keep me company for a short time, and we took possession of one of the cells
situated in the square court forming part of the buildings in the centre of which the tomb
is placed. I had by good luck brought away my ready money, consisting of twenty tomauns in
gold, besides some silver; and we expended some of this in articles of the first necessity,
such as a mat to cover the bare floor of our room, and an earthen jug for our water.

But before we had got any further in our domestic arrangements, the dervish accosted me in
the following manner: ‘I must be informed of one thing before we proceed. Do you ever say your
prayers? do you keep your fasts? do you make your ablutions regularly? or do you continue to
live in that fit state for eternal perdition which we were wont to do at Meshed?’

‘Why do you speak thus to me?’ said I. ‘What can it be to you whether I pray or not?’

‘It is not much to me,’ answered the dervish, ‘but it is a great deal to yourself. This Kom
is a place that, excepting on the subject of religion, and settling who are worthy of salvation
and who to be damned, no one opens his lips. Every man you meet is either a descendant of the
Prophet or a man of the law. All wear long and mortified faces, and seem to look upon that
man as an appointed subject for the eternal fires, who happens to have a rosy cheek and a laughing
eye. Therefore, as soon as I approach the place, I always change the atmosphere of my countenance
from fair to haze, and from haze to downright clouds and darkness, according as circumstances
may require. My knees, which scarcely ever touch the praying carpet, now perform their functions
five good times per day; and I, who in any other place never consult any Kebleh[78] but that
of my own pleasure and inclinations, now know the direction of the true one, as well as I know
the way to my mouth.’

‘All this is very well,’ said I; ‘but what may be the use of it? I am a Mussulman, ’tis true,
but to such a pitch as this--no never.

‘The use?’ answered the dervish. ‘The use is this; that it will save you from being starved
or stoned to death. These priests will hearken to no medium,--either you are a true believer
or you are not. If they were to have the least suspicion that you doubted any of the articles
of the faith,--that you did not look upon the Koran as a living miracle, and did not read it
with becoming reverence, whether you understand or not,--they would soon show you what power
they possess. 

The description of the site is useless, the rooms are like any other, and their distribution depends
only on the classification of historical objects. A magnificent lighting, concert certain luxury permanent
artistic decoration, which matches with huge mirrors to enlarge illusion - such are the accessories
that enhance the merit of the gallery, divided into four parties. Unfortunately, the divisions
are not arranged to historical times, rigorously, leading to some anachronisms. All the gallery,
except for some artifacts and known mechanisms, is composed of statues, perfectly natural,
or busts or heads, all made of white wax, imitating the faces admirable perfection, attitudes,
speech and all that has been characteristic in each of the many characters represented there.

Artistic
perfection of the busts and figures is such that the visitor feels at times tempted to bow respectfully
to those wax figures or engage in conversation with them.

For example, going from one room to another, sitting on the threshold an old man reading with
attention, without looking at anyone as it is impossible not to tread on and squeeze it in passing
because the gap is very narrow, the old man raises his head and looks with surprise visitors
discourteous. This can not but (and it happened to me) to apologize and ask forgiveness. The
old reader does not respond, go to your head down and continues reading. Then comes one to know
that your man is wax, and that its muscular movement is due to a mechanism.

The dresses, all in accordance with the time and uses of each character,
increase the illusion powerfully.

Those figures seem troubled by an undercurrent of nervous electricity; their eyes are vivid
and eloquent expressive smiles, his attitude entirely mimics vitality. It seems as if thought those
brains warmed wax and encourage gestures, and the visitor is struck so that at times believed
that the voice is going to come from the lips of those almost convulsive artistic beings who
have the warmth, encouragement, fascinapion light and the physical and moral life.

In the gallery, so soon you see the characters in homogeneous groups
as isolated to certain distances.

Among the many isolated characters, sometimes historical, sometimes contemporaries, distinguished
primarily by their interest or by the artistic merit of the figures: - Gutenberg, meditating
on his invention, - Shakspeare, bleak and mocking at the same time, - Peter the Great in suit as
a carpenter in Holland - Newton, devising their admirable system of the physical world - Voltaire
fox with his countenance, his smile, and his view of an apostle, - Rousseau, thoughtful and sweet as
the idea of ​​redemption that he ruled: - Walter Scott, with his calm attitude, as smiling
poetry that inspired his great genius, - Byron, dark and throwing fire from his eye something
like the light beam or as the revelations of a terrible poem. On the other hand are figures
of a special character: Nana-Sahib here in great pomp and smoking his pipe filled of jewels,
seated at Eastern style, where O'Connell, in the speaker's attitude, but here Abd-el-Kader, an
Arab with his sword to defend the independence of his people beyond ú Manin one of the martyrs
of liberty who have personified a cause.

The groups are even more interesting for the game and contrast of the faces and attitudes, and
historical facts that they embody. On one hand, the Girondins, condemned to death, - Charlotte
Corday killed Marat, or a group of Bobespierre, Danton and other Jacobins - in Elsewhere, Milton, surrounded
by his daughters, dictating his admirable "Paradise Lost," in center of a room, Napoleon with
all the sovereigns and ministers of his time leading imperial in another room of the monarchs, chaired
by Victoria and Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte. In one corner are: Isabel the Catholic, Fernando,
her husband, and the immortal Colomb, in another site, teaching his doctrine Luther, Calvin
or demonstrating the fairness of free inquiry.

The first three rooms are literally full of historical and contemporary figures, belonging to
all genres of celebrity. Science and poetry, the plotter and the philosophy, fine arts and eloquence
and politics, war and religion, the great virtues and great crimes and the heroic sacrifices -
all are represented there, to give a general idea of ​​the evolution of humanity in his career
progress and light. All the great glories are gathered in Congress to express the unity of spirit
human in its myriad manifestations, and highlight historical cosmopolitanism civilization and
the enduring contrast between power and freedom, intelligence and strength.

But if Tussaud Gallery is in the main a beautiful school of history, sculpture and even physiology
- at the same time as a museum of curiosities, - the last of its rooms, lounge horrible (The chamber
of horrors) is of extreme interest and a shady character that impresses deeply. Not find many lessons
in this terrible crime camera and the spirit of atonement attentive observer, that seeks the
revelations of physical science as the most solid of the doctrines of social science! The hall
of horrors school could be called practice of phrenology, for such is its true significance.

The
famous infernal machine, designed to annihilate Napoleon (the great
political incorrigible); the ax beheaded Mary Stuart, which ran to
Charles I, the guillotine that beheaded Louis XVI, as to the Girondins,
the Jacobins and to Charlotte Corday, and all instruments used to
perpetrate the most notorious murders, there are perfectly emulated.

The collection of heads of the most famous bandits or criminals is as varied as perfect Dummy for
the accuracy, revealing gesture, gaze, thought, instinct and feelings of each individual, -
played with absolute fidelity all the bumps, profiles and specialties of each head and each human
face that has figured in the annals crime. Finally, at one end of the room, dark and fearful as
the gore, is the revolutionary scaffold (raised by a feverish and harassed people for a thousand
enemies Relentless) on whose boards lay the trunk of Louis XVI, about noble priest accompanied
him in the solemn hour, while the executioner (representative of tyranny) was displayed, as a mockery
of its target counter, showing to the crowd delirious head bloody king condemned to expiate their
weaknesses and cruel crimes and vices his predecessors in the secular work of oppression ....

What you learn in this gallery of death and iniquity? Oh! learn a lot! ... Since then, evoking
historical memories, is understood all the futility of force bloodshed, as a political, social or personal.
The same instrument Death is for the monarch or a tyrant who invented it, and for the oppressed
subject, for the generous martyr, to the wicked. The knife, ax or the club, established between
the most opposite extremes of egregious equal cowardly and murderous
violence .... The instrument created by Republican Guillotin (as an
asset on) ate the same Republicans .... The killing, under whatever
form, is terrible logic in the atonement.

Destroys ax one or many heads, never an idea, a principle or social interest. Just as the individual
prepares a punishment at the time of committing a crime - the governments and peoples till future
with the same ax sacrifices that they use to kill in the name of the law ....

What is the use of violence and revenge, if not destroy the evil when they weigh about this or
which head? You're welcome. British ax beheaded Mary Stuart and Charles I, not destroy Catholic fanaticism
or represented by one, the spirit of oppression embodied in the another. Here's the story proving
the futility of such violence or popular royal. The blade that beheaded them legitimacy in the
person of Louis XVI, beheaded no tyranny France, since, under various names and forms and the
shade of other governments, some oppressive power, with or without the aid of the legitimacy of
date, has weighed on the French nation.

Phrenological study that lends itself to the Chamber of Horrors is very interesting as an assistant
the prolific science of criminal legislation. Seeing all those faces nasty, no One can but feel
the emotion that accompanies nervous fear and terror. What collection skulls! I was watching,
and classified (without knowing their biographies, and their names even) as murderers, thieves,
lustful heinous traitors, etc., and then, seeing the news catalog biography, was a confirmation
of my assumptions instinctive.

The shape of the face, the structure of the forehead, eye, nose, mouth, big lines bony angles, extrusions,
the same skin color and even the nature of hair, containing a thousand revelations of man's
character. The invalidity or depression of the bodies plants that correspond to the feelings of exaggeration
that reveal amazing instincts, in the back of the skull, and the strange shapes and dark profiles
from the face and forehead, signs of how intelligence works in the bandit - all deeply impresses
the observer of that horrible gallery.

I was wondering if the science of phrenology is not the science of despair, fatality, since
it checks the infallible relation of each body with a power of intelligence instinct and feeling.
"But no, - told me to think a little: that noble science mechanics of the brain, revealing
the permanent laws governing man not convicted to accept a cruel fatalism. Instead, she teaches
the game, the intimate relationship, the balance and compensation of the organs, and shows that
education, modifying, depressing or increasing their development,
can infallibly correct the natural defects of that mystery organization,
which has such infinite combinations.

"

And once it acquires the force of doctrine experimentation naturally wonders a: why governments
have believed that the rigor, the terrible penalty is the sure remedy to correct the crime? Unfortunate
error, the result of the barbarism of societies! If man is educable and perfectible, why butcher, instead
of improving their condition, purify, and destroy as many of the incentives that encourage
crime? Bendigo physiology and phrenology, - nobles and daring science that reveals the mysteries of
the structure of humans, are preparing the world to live in an era
of justice, philosophical foresight and piety - giving to those scenes
of blood, terror and revenge, which are the history of man in transit
laborious barbarism to civilization!

* * * * *

A seventeen miles from London, near the village of Sydenham, is the new Palace glass in the center of
an area of ​​300 acres, and on a hill overlooking the picturesque all landscape that stretches
towards the Thames and in the direction of London, and in Greenwich, and in opposite directions. A
special train has been assigned to the service, and transit from London-Bridge station to the
palace itself is made with extreme comfort In less than half an hour.

       

The picture extends to the exit of London to the south-east, is at least as interesting as the
south-west, by way of Southampton. Everywhere in the first few minutes, London appears as a huge factory
factory, under the train in which the traveler sees objects move at lightning speed. Railway lines
intersect, related and complicated in all directions, the trains are multiplied, leading to
passenger thousands and in incessant movement, changes of perspective are infinite, offering
more varied pictures.

It feels a kind of vertigo appear suddenly see and hide the moment between clouds of mist and
smoke, or behind some hills covered with villas, small villas a series that seems endless.
In brief London and its suburbs and surrounding villages out of sight at the base, while its
high towers and belching smokestacks towering are shown as suspended in the air on a vast foundation
of fog. The innumerable factories are long gone, and the movement of people and the melancholy
monotony and prosaic urban buildings happen on a whim, the variety,
freshness and joy smiling all that is the countryside in England,
beautiful even before the green of the Spring has made us forget all
the sadness of winter.

Already looks like a phantasmagoria the mole romantic aristocratic castle, and the cheerful facade
of fifth gorgeous framed in gardens, forests and small greenhouses; now cultivated field with
admirable care, crisscrossed by irrigation canals more or less significant or small sailing;
now the meadow jumping and beautiful horses whinny the English, or bleating in the very white crowd
and full-bodied sheep, so soon a tunnel elegant in their shapes and shadows which make strange
contrast to the previous scene, and then, on leaving the artificial cave, a vast park pine and
other trees of permanent vegetation, whose dark greens tossed in the breeze make ghosts appear
from afar over vast interlocking dance halls carpeted with snow and under a huge dome of mist.

Seeing
in perspective the Crystal Palace, he would take a palace or a temple chinoiserie fairy in the
midst of rubble antediluvian thousand beauties of modern Flora, as a point alliance between
the primitive and the contemporary world. Lagos artificial inclines covered with green moss and
fine grass, hills covered with groves capricious viewpoints and glass pavilions of many colors,
rising from clean gardens high plumage water thrown by a hundred mouths of bronze, circular ponds in
glamorous game; and there in the lakes, or at the foot of the hills, huge iguanadones and other antediluvian
animals, boldly imitated in metal or stone - that is the vast, moody set that serves as box to
the enormous relief and bright palace stands at the top of the big hill as a haunted mansion,
air, and multicolor transparent, built during the night a legion of fairies, the beam of the moon,
and full of perfumes and treasures, to shine after to sunlight, when
the mist clears, with all the splendor of a magnificent wonder.

'll Try not to make a description, or even faster in this wonderful monument of greatness cosmopolitan
British and progress of modern civilization. To gain a complete picture Crystal Palace, we must study
it very carefully and thoroughly for at least two weeks without ceasing. And my purpose is
only to express my views, any reflection criticism would be a rip or a pedantic lie, but having
spent about six hours look just the most interesting and beautiful of the beautiful monument. Later,
pursuant to a detained resident in England, I can passably describrir what is now only given
me mentioned.

The exterior of the palace is a set of grandeur, originality, and artistic whim noble Majesty
at the same time, fascinating, suggesting the Asian civilization.

Could thought that the palace, their shapes, details, colors, unique architecture and the huge stands
that serve as the basis of their facades complex represents the alliance East, voluptuous and colossal,
with the West, refined and artistic, or that is intended to reveal the cosmopolitanism of the
exterior light, arts, industry and wealth, history and magnificence, as contained in the prodigious
combination of objects inside.

The single crystal palace, which sits on a beautiful hill, took, not counting their stands Outside,
they are huge and majestic effect, an area of ​​at least 80.000 meters
square.

The building, although linked, presents the appearance of three palaces, its colossal facades.
Everything depends on huge iron columns, and cover all senses is joined by an immense glass
metal frame. Although the towers, domes and minarets have great elevation, the mass of the monument,
on its ground floor is little more or less than 40 meters.

The building comprises three floors of tables, including the ground level, where it is, a considerable
variety of machines and samples of all kinds, which were presented
at the London Exhibition of 1851, the Company acquired business to
establish Palace in a museum exhibition industrial, artistic and scientific.

The examination of objects agglomerated in the ground-floor rooms Vastis require careful study,
for some weeks. Under the direction of an intelligent man, the visitor can get a great deal of
very varied skills, just made to explain the origin of each machine or device, its object, the
key to its construction and its functioning.

When climbing the great staircase leading to first floor, the impression that one has experienced
while a lot of deep and vague: deep, because you feel enraptured,
full a kind of delightful surprise of infinite admiration for so many
wonders, and vague, because no one knows what to admire more, if the
inexhaustible treasures of nature, or the wonders made by man, as
wise, engineer, artist, traveler, archaeologist, historian, etc. Is
there a picture as complex and vast, so lovely and amazing visitors
do not know where to begin or which objects to the preference.

I repeat, do not pretend to describe, because no medium-scope or even watch half of art treasures
and curiosities in the Crystal Palace meet. If the only palace is a marvel of architecture, mechanical
and eclectic originality, each objects inside is wonderful in its kind as well. The atmosphere there
is breathed is full of perfumes, because the interior of the palace is like a huge air yard where
turns in admirable contrast shrubs, flowers, palms, lianas, ferns, fruit trees and all that is curious
ú most beautiful flora in the world.

Asia, the America, all regions of the globe, there have their representatives in the most exquisite
art, vegetation, etc., and each visitor can be sure to find a corner of country, with the
same temperature as the same water and can cause a complete illusion.

To go upstairs nomas encountered a very impressive contrast, is a side the great skeleton of
a tree of North America - and the other a gallery marble statues and busts, and heads are isolated
images of the most eminent thinkers and contemporary artists, mainly
French.

The tree to which I refer, as one crust vertically is armed with all the proportions that had
the trunk in their forest of the New World, is the representative of the force lush, wild and
amazing that distinguishes American nature. The trunk has the appearance of a tower without
moldings, and is so huge that it only would the entire hull of a brig. More than two hundred
people fit in the concavity of the trunk, from base to top. That's America in all its productions.

The
gallery of statues, busts and heads are lovely. It seems as if Europe intelligent France in particular,
it beats there in those faces of gypsum, with its reflections bouncing of light that comes
from the transparent roof, do not know what the light beam and heat Waving the brain inspired
by Lamartine and Victor Hugo, of Guizot and Louis Blanc, Quinet and Michelet, George Sand and
Alexandre Cumae, and many other eminent thinkers or writers.

Many of those busts are evocations of the past, because they are images of Voltaire and Rousseau,
Mirebeau and Danton, and Chénier Vergniaud of Chateaubriand, Byron, Walter Scott, Lamennais,
Eugene Sue, Balzac, and many other geniuses who belong to the history of politics, philosophy or literature.

With
regard to art rooms, the Crystal Palace has wonderful things. Not only maintains a vast portion
of curiosities that make rival the best museums Europe, with regard to antiques and art, but is
on the walls and ceilings in their classrooms, as in the floors, wonderfully faithful imitation
of the most precious models of Egyptian art, Greek, indigo, Roman, Moorish, Gothic and Renaissance,
which have met so far.


He frequented it in preference to that if a Mussulman, because he could here drink wine with
impunity. From long practice he knew precisely where the provision of fresh meat was kept,
and as he entered the shop, casting his eye furtively round, he threw the head in a dark corner,
behind one of the large sides of a sheep that was to be used for the kabobs if the day. No
one saw him perform this feat; for the morning was still sufficiently obscure to screen him.
He lighted his pipe at Yanaki's charcoal fire, and as a pretext for his visit, ordered a dish
of meat to be sent to him for breakfast; a treat to which he thought himself fully entitled
after his morning's adventure.

Yanaki, meanwhile, having cleaned his platters, put his skewers in order, lit his fires, made
his sherbets, and swept out his shop, went to the larder for some meat for the shaver's breakfast.
Yanaki was a true Greek:--cunning, cautious, deceitful; cringing to his superiors, tyrannical
towards his inferiors; detesting with a mortal hatred his proud masters, the Osmanlies, yet
fawning, flattering, and abject whenever any of them, however low in life, deigned to take
notice of him. Turning over his stock, he looked about for some old bits that might serve the
present purpose, muttering to himself that any carrion was good enough for a Turk's stomach.
He surveyed his half sheep from top to bottom; felt it, and said, "No, this will keep"; but
as he turned up its fat tail, the eye of the dead man's head caught his eye, and made him start,
and step back some paces. "As ye love your eyes," exclaimed he, "who is there?" Receiving no
answer, he looked again, and again; then nearer, then, thrusting his hand among sheep's heads
and trotters, old remnants of meat, and the like, he pulled out the head--the horrid head--which
he held extended at arm's length, as if he were afraid it would do him mischief. "Anathemas
attend your beard!" exclaimed Yanaki, as soon as he discovered, by the tuft of hair on the
top, that it had belonged to a Mussulman, "Och! if I had but every one of your heads in this
manner, ye cursed race of Omar! I would make kabobs of them, and every cur in Constantinople
should get fat for nothing. May ye all come to this end! May the vultures feed on your carcasses!
and may every Greek have the good fortune which has befallen me this day, of having one of
your worthless skulls for his football!" Upon which, in his rage, he threw it down and kicked
it from him; but recollecting himself he said, "But, after all, what shall I do with it? If
it is seen here, I am lost for ever: nobody will believe but what I have killed a Turk."

All of a sudden he cried out, in a sort of malicious ecstasy, "'Tis well I remembered,--the
Jew! the Jew!--a properer place for such a head was never thought or heard of; and there you
shall go, thou vile remnant of a Mahomedan!"

Upon which he seized it, and hiding it under his coat, ran with it down the street to where
the dead body of a Jew lay extended, with its head placed immediately between its legs.

In Turkey, you must know, when a Mahomedan is beheaded, his head is placed under his arm, by
way of an honourable distinction from the Christian or Jew, who, when a similar misfortune
befalls them, have theirs inserted between their legs, as close to the seat of dishonour as
possible.

It was in that situation then that Yanaki placed the Turk's head, putting it as near, cheek
by jowl, with the Jew's, as the hurry of the case would allow. He had been able to effect this
without being seen, because the day was still but little advanced, and no one stirring; and
he returned to his shop, full of exultation at having been able to discharge his feelings of
hatred against his oppressors, by placing one of their heads on the spot in nature, which,
according to his estimation, was the most teeming with opprobrium.

The unfortunate sufferer on this occasion had been accused of stealing and putting to death
a Mahomedan child (a ceremony in their religion, which they have been known to practice both
in Turkey and Persia), and which created such an extraordinary tumult among the mob of Constantinople,
that, in order to appease it, he had been decapitated. His execution had taken place purposely
before the door of a wealthy Greek, and the body was ordered to remain there three days before
it was permitted to be carried away for interment. The expectation that the Greek would be
induced to pay down a handsome sum, in order that this nuisance might be removed from his door,
and save him from the ill luck which such an object is generally supposed to bring, made the
officer entrusted with the execution prefer this spot to every other. But, careless of the
consequences, the Greek shut up the windows of his house, determined to deprive his oppressors
of their expected perquisite; and so the dead Jew remained exposed his full time. Few excepting
those of the true faith ventured to approach the spot, fearful that the Mohamedan authorities
would, in their wanton propensities to heap insults upon the Giaours, oblige some one of them
to carry the carcass to the place of burial; and thus the horrid and disgusting object was
left abandoned to itself, and this had given an opportunity to the kabobchi, Yanaki, to dispose
of the head in the manner above related, unseen and unmolested. But when, as the day advanced,
and as the stir of the streets became more active, this additional head was discovered, the
crowd, which gathered about it, became immense. It was immediately rumoured that a miracle
had been performed; for a dead Jew was to be seen with two heads. The extraordinary intelligence
flew from mouth to mouth, until the whole city was in an uproar, and all were running to see
the miracle. The Sanhedrim immediately pronounced that something extraordinary was about to
happen to their persecuted race. Rabbins were to be seen running to and fro, and their whole
community was now poured around the dead body, in expectation that he would perhaps arise,
put on his heads, and deliver them from the grip of their oppressors.

But as ill luck would have it for them, a Janissary, who had mixed in the crowd and had taken
a close survey of the supernumerary head, exclaimed in a mixture of doubt and amazement, "Allah,
Allah, il Allah! these are no infidel's heads. One is the head of our lord and master, the
Aga of the Janissaries." Upon which, seeing more of his companions, he called them to him and
making known his discovery, they became violent with rage, and set off to communicate the intelligence
to their Orta.

The news spread like wildfire throughout the whole of the corps of the Janissaries, and a most
alarming tumult was immediately excited: for it seems that it was unknown in the capital that
their chief, to whom they were devotedly attached, and one of their own selection, had been
put to death.

"What!" said they, "is it not enough to deal thus treacherously with us, and deprive us of
a chief to whom we are attached; but we must be treated with the greatest contempt that it
is possible for men to receive? What! the head of our most noble Aga of the Janissaries to
be placed upon the most ignoble part of a Jew! what are we come to? We alone are not insulted;
the whole of Islam is insulted, degraded, debased! No: this is unheard-of insolence, a stain
never to be wiped off, without the extermination of the whole race! And what dog has done this
deed? How did the head get there? Is it that dog of a Vizier's work, or has the Reis Effendi
and those traitors of Frank ambassadors been at work? Wallah, Billah, Tallah! by the holy Caaba,
by the beard of Osman, and by the sword of Omar, we will be revenged!"

We must leave the tumult to rage for a short time; we must request the reader to imagine a
scene, in which the Jews are flying in all directions, hiding themselves with great precaution
against enraged Turks, who with expressions like those just mentioned in their mouths, are
to be seen walking about in groups, armed to their teeth with pistols and scimitars, and vowing
vengeance upon everything which came in their way. He must imagine a city of narrow streets
and low houses, thronged with a numerous population, dresses the most various in shape and
the most lively in colours, all anxious, all talking, all agog as if something extraordinary
was to happen; in the midst of whom I will leave him, to take a look into the interior of the
sultan's seraglio, and to inquire in what his eminency himself had been engaged since we last
noticed him.

On the very same night of the tailor's attendance, the sultan had given a secret order for
taking off the head of the Aga of the Janissaries (the fomenter of all the disturbances which
had lately taken place among his corps, and consequently their idol); and so anxious was he
about its execution, that he had ordered it to be brought to him the moment it was off. The
man entrusted with the execution, upon entering the room where he had been directed to bring
the head, seeing some one seated, naturally took him for the sultan, and, without daring to
look up, immediately placed the burden at his feet, with the prostrations which we have ready
described as having been performed before the tailor. The sultan, who not a minute before had
taken away the bundle containing the dervish's dress, had done so in the intention of deceiving
his slave Mansouri himself; so anxious was he of being unknown in his new disguise even to
him; and intended to have substituted another in its stead; but not calculating either upon
the reception of the head, or upon Mansouri's immediate return to the tailor, he was himself
completely puzzled how to act when he found the tailor was gone, led off by his slave. To have
sent after them would have disconcerted his schemes, and therefore he felt himself obliged
to wait Mansouri's return, before he could get an explanation of what had happened; for he
knew that they would not have gone away without the dress, and that dress he had then in his
possession. In the meanwhile, anxious and impatient to know what had become of the expected
head, he sent for the officer who was entrusted with the execution; and the astonishment of
both may be imagined when an explanation took place.

"By my beard!" exclaimed the sultan, having thought awhile within himself; "by my beard, the
tailor must have got the head!"

His impatience for Mansouri's return then became extreme. In vain he fretted, fumed, and cried
"Allah! Allah!" It did not make the slave retum a minute the sooner, who, good man, would have
gone quietly to rest had he not been called upon to appear before the sultan.

As soon as he was within hearing, he called out, "Ahi! Mansouri, run immediately to the tailor--he
has got the head of the Aga of the Janissaries instead of the dervish's dress--run, fetch it
without loss of time, or something unfortunate will happen!" He then explained how this untoward
event had occurred. Mansouri now, in his turn, felt himself greatly embarrassed; for he only
knew the road to the tailor's stall, but was totally unacquainted with his dwelling-house.
However, rather than excite his master's anxiety in a higher degree, he set off in quest of
the tailor, and went straight to his stall, in the hopes of hearing from the neighbours where
his house was. It was too early in the day for the opening of the Bezesten, and except a coffee-house
that had just prepared for the reception of customers, where he applied and could gain no intelligence,
he found himself completely at a standstill. By the greatest good luck, he recollected Babadul
had told him that he was the muezzin to the little mosque in the fish-market, and thither he
immediately bent his steps. The azan, or morning invitation to prayers, was now chanting forth
from all the minarets, and he expected that he might catch the purloiner of his head in the
very act of inviting the faithful to prayers.

As he approached the spot, he heard an old broken and tremulous voice, which he imagined might
be Babadul's, breaking the stillness of the morning by all the energy of its lungs; and he
was not mistaken, for as he stood under the minaret, he perceived the old man walking round
the gallery which encircles it, with his hand applied to the back of his ear, and with his
mouth wide open, pouring out his whole throat in the execution of his office. As soon as the
tailor saw Mansouri making signs to him, the profession of faith stuck in his throat; and between
the fright of being brought to account for the head, and the words which he had to pronounce,
it is said that he made so strange a jumble, that some of the stricter Mussulmans, his neighbours,
who were paying attention to the call, professed themselves quite scandalized at his performance.
He descended with all haste, and locking the door after him which leads up the winding staircase,
he met Mansouri in the street. He did not wait to be questioned respecting the fate of the
horrid object, but at once attacked the slave concerning the trick, as he called it, which
had been put upon him.

"Are you a man," said he, "to treat a poor Emir like me in the manner you have done, as if
my house was a charnel-house? I suppose you will ask me the price of blood next!"

"Friend," said Mansouri, "what are you talking about? do not you see that it has been a mistake?"

"A mistake, indeed!" cried the tailor, "a mistake done on purpose to bring a poor man into
trouble. One man laughs at my stupid beard, and makes me believe that I am to make a suit of
clothes for him--another takes away the pattern--and a third substitutes a dead man's head
for it. Allah! Allah! I have got into the hands of a pretty nest of rogues, a set of ill-begotten
knaves!"

Upon which Mansouri placed his hand upon the tailor's mouth, and said, "Say no more, say no
more; you are getting deeper into the dirt. Do you know whom you are abusing."

"I know not, nor care not," answered Babadul; "all I know is that whoever gives me a dead man's
head for a suit of clothes can only be an infidel dog."

"Do you call God's viceregent upon earth, you old demi-stitching, demi-praying fool, an infidel
dog?" exclaimed Mansouri in a rage, which entirely made him forget the precaution he had hitherto
maintained concerning his employer. "Are your vile lips to defile the name of him who is the
Alem penah, the refuge of the world? What dirt are you eating, what ashes are you heaping on
your head? Come, no more words; tell me where the dead man's head is, or I will take yours
of in his stead."

Upon hearing this, the tailor stood with his mouth wide open, as if the doors of his understanding
had just been unlocked.

"Aman, aman, Mercy, mercy, O Aga!" cried Babadul to Mansouri, "I was ignorant of what I was
saying. Who would have thought it? Ass, fool, dolt, that I am, not to have known better. Bismillah!
in the name or the Prophet, pray come to my house; your steps will be fortunate, and your slave's
head will touch the stars."

"I am in a hurry, a great hurry," said Mansouri. "Where is the head, the head of the Aga of
the Janissaries?"

When the tailor heard whose head it had been, and recollected what he and his wife had done
with it, his knees knocked under him with fear, and he began to exude from every pore.

"Where is it, indeed?" said he. "Oh! what has come upon us! Oh! what cursed kismet (fate) is this?"

"Where is it?" exclaimed the slave, again and again, "where is it? speak quick!"

The poor tailor was completely puzzled what to say, and kept floundering from one answer to
another until he was quite entangled as in a net.

"Have you burnt it?"

"No."

"Have you thrown it away?"

"No."

"Then in the name of the Prophet what have you done with it? Have you ate it."

"No."

"Is it lying in your house?"

"No."

"Is it hiding at any other person's house?"

"No."

Then at last quite out of patience, the slave Mansouri took Babadul by his beard, and shaking
his head for him, exclaimed with a roar, "Then tell me, you old dotard! what is it doing?"

"It is baking," answered the tailor, half choked: "I have said it."

"Baking! did you say?" exclaimed the slave, in the greatest amazement; "what did you bake it
for? Are you going to eat it?"

"True, I said: what would you have more?" answered Babadul, "it is now baking." And then he
gave a full account of what he and his wife had done in the sad dilemma in which they had been
placed.

"Show me the way to the baker's," said Mansouri; "at least, we will get it in its singed state,
if we can get it in no other. Whoever thought of baking the head of the Aga of the Janissaries?
Allah il allah!"

They then proceeded to the baker Hassan's, who was now about taking his bread from his oven.
As soon as he became acquainted with their errand, he did not hesitate in telling all the circumstances
attending the transmission of the head from the pipkin to the barber's bracket; happy to have
had an opportunity of exculpating himself of what might possibly have been brought up against
him as a crime.

The three (Mansouri, the tailor, and the baker) then proceeded to the barber's, and inquired
from him what he had done with the head of his earliest customer.

Kior Ali, after some hesitation, made great assurances that he looked upon this horrid object
as a donation from Eblis himself, and consequently that he had thought himself justified in
transferring it over to the Giaour Yanaki, who, he made no doubt, had already made his brother-infidels
partake of it in the shape of kabobs. Full of wonder and amazement, invoking the Prophet at
each step, and uncertain as to the result of such unheard-of adventures, they then added the
barber to their party, and proceeded to Yanaki's cook-shop.

The Greek, confounded at seeing so many of the true believers enter his house, had a sort of
feeling that their business was not of roast meat, but that they were in search of meat of
a less savoury nature. As soon as the question had been put to him concerning the head, he
stoutly denied having seen it, or knowing anything at all concerning it.

The barber showed the spot where he had placed it, and swore it upon the Koran.

Mansouri had undertaken the investigation of the point in question, when they discovered symptoms
of the extraordinary agitation that prevailed in the city in consequence of the discovery which
had been made of the double-headed Jew, and of the subsequent discovery that had produced such
great sensation among the whole corps of Janissaries.

Mansouri, followed by the tailor, the baker, and the barber, then proceeded to the spot where
the dead Israelite was prostrate; and there, to their astonishment, they each recognized their
morning visitor--the head so long sought after.

Yanaki, the Greek, in the meanwhile, conscious of what was likely to befall him, without loss
of time gathered what money he had ready at hand, and fled the city.

"Where is the Greek?" said Mansouri, turning round to look for him in the supposition that
he had joined his party; "we must all go before the sultan."

"I dare say he is run off," said the barber. "I am not so blind but I can see that he it is
who gifted the Jew with his additional head."

Mansouri now would have carried off the head; but surrounded as it was by a band of enraged
and armed soldiers, who vowed vengeance upon him who had deprived them of their chief, he thought
it most prudent to withdraw. Leading with him his three witnesses, he at once proceeded to
the presence of his master.

When Mansouri had informed the sultan of all that had happened, where he had found the head
of the Aga of the Janissaries, how it had got there, and of the tumult it had raised, the reader
may better imagine than I can describe the state of the monarch's mind. To tell the story with
all its particulars he felt would be derogatory to his dignity, for it was sure to cover him
with ridicule; but at the same time to let the matter rest as it now stood was impossible,
because the tumult would increase until there would be no means of quelling it, and the affair
might terminate by depriving him of his crown, together with his life.

He remained in a state of indecision for some time, twisting up the ends of his mustachios,
and muttering Allah! Allah! in low ejaculations, until at length he ordered the prime vizier
and the mûfti to his presence.

Alarmed by the abruptness of the summons, these two great dignitaries arrived at the imperial
gate in no enviable state of mind; but when the sultan had informed them of the tumult then
raging in the capital, they resumed their usual tranquillity.

After some deliberation it was resolved, that the tailor, the baker, the barber, and the kabobchi
should appear before the tribunal of the mûfti, accused of having entered into a conspiracy
against the Aga of the Janissaries, and stealing his head, for the purposes of baking, shaving,
and roasting it, and that they should be condemned to pay the price of his blood; but as the
kabobchi had been the immediate cause of the tumult by treating the head with such gross and
unheard-of insult, and as he was a Greek and an infidel, it was further resolved that the Mûfti
should issue a fetwah, authorizing his head to be cut off: and placed on the same odious spot
where he had exposed that of the Aga of the Janissaries.

It was then agreed between the sultan and his grand vizier, that in order to appease the Janissaries
a new Aga should be appointed who was agreeable to them, and that the deceased should be buried
with becoming distinction. All this (except killing the Greek, who had fled) was done, and
tranquillity again restored to the city. But it must further be added to the honour of the
sultan, that he not only paid every expense which the tailor, the baker, and the barber were
condemned to incur, but also gave them each a handsome reward for the difficulties into which
they had so unfortunately been thrown.

I have much curtailed the story, particularly where Mansouri proceeds to relate to the sultan
the fate of the head, because, had I given it with all the details the dervish did, it would
have been over long. Indeed I have confined myself as much as possible to the outline; for
to have swelled the narrative with the innumerable digressions of my companion a whole volume
would not have contained it. The art of a story-teller (and it is that which marks a man of
genius) is to make his tale interminable, and still to interest his audience. So the dervish
assured me; and added, that with the materials of the one which I have attempted to repeat,
he would bind himself to keep talking for a whole moon, and still have something to say.

CHAPTER XLVI

He becomes a saint, and associates with the most celebrated divine in Persia.

At length Mirza Abdul Cossim himself, having heard much of my sanctity, took an opportunity,
when visiting the shrine of the saint, to send for me. This was an event which I contemplated
with apprehension; for how could I possibly conceal my ignorance from one who would certainly
put my pretensions of knowledge to the test?--an ignorance so profound, that I could scarcely
give an account of what were the first principles of the Mohamedan faith.

I, therefore, began to take myself to task upon what I did know. ‘Let me see,’ said I, ‘I know,
lst, that all those who do not believe in Mahomed, and in Ali his lieutenant, are infidels
and heretics, and are worthy of death. 2ndly, I also know that all men will go to Jehanum (hell),
excepting the true believers; and I further believe that it is right to curse Omar.--I am certain
that all the Turks will go to Jehanum,--that all Christians and Jews are nejis (unclean), and
will go to Jehanum,--that it is not lawful to drink wine or eat pork,--that it is necessary
to say prayers five times a day, and to make the ablution before each prayer, causing the water
to run from the elbow to the fingers, not contrariwise, like the heretical Turks.’

I was proceeding to sum up the stock of my religious knowledge, when the dervish came into
the room; and I made no scruple of relating to him my distress and its cause.

‘Have you lived so long in the world,’ said be, ‘and not yet discovered that nothing is to
be accomplished without impudence? The stories which Dervish Sefer, his companion, and I related
to you at Meshed, have they made so little impression upon you?’

‘The effect of those stories upon my mind,’ said I, ‘produced such a bastinado upon the soles
of my feet, by way of a moral, that I request you to be well assured I shall neither forget
you nor them as long as I live: the fêlek is a great help to the memory. And now, according
to your own account, instead of the bastinado, I am likely to get stoned, should I be found
wanting; a ceremony which, if it be the same to you, I had rather dispense with. Say then,
O dervish, what shall I do?’

‘You are not that Hajji Baba which I always took you to be,’ said the dervish, ‘if you have
not the ingenuity to deceive the mûshtehed. Keep to your silence, and your sighs, and your
shrugs, and your downcast looks, and who is there that will discover you to be an ass? No,
even I could not.’

‘Well,’ said I, ‘be it so: Allah kerim! God is great!--but it is being in very ill luck to
be invited to an entertainment to eat one’s own filth.’

Upon which I set forward with my most mortified and downcast looks to visit the mûshtehed,
and, thanks to my misfortunes, I truly believe that no man in the whole city could boast of
so doleful a cast of countenance as I could. However, as I slowly paced the ground, I recollected
one of the tales recited by our great moralist Saadi, in his chapter upon the Morals of Dervishes,
which applied so perfectly to my own case, that I own it cheered me greatly, and gave me a
degree of courage to encounter the scrutiny of the mûshtehed which otherwise I never could
have acquired. It is as follows:--

‘A devout personage was once asked, what he thought of the character of a certain holy man,
of whom others had spoken with slight and disrespect? He answered, “In his exterior I can perceive
no fault, and of what is concealed within him I am ignorant. He who weareth an exterior of
religion, doubt not his goodness and piety, if you are ignorant of the recesses of his heart.
What hath the mohtesib to do with the inside of the house?”’

I then recollected some sentences from the same chapter, which would apply admirably in case
I were called upon to show my learning and humility at the same time; for I promised to say
to the holy man, should he offer me an opportunity, ‘Do unto me that which is worthy of thee,
treat me not according to my desert. Whether you slay or whether you pardon, my head and face
are on thy threshold. It is not for a servant to direct; whatsoever thou commandest I shall
perform.’

The mûshtehed had just finished his midday prayer, and was completing the last act of it by
turning his head first over the right shoulder then over the left, when I entered the open
apartment where he was seated. It was lined with his disciples, on each side and at the top,
all of whom looked upon him with the reverence and respect due to a master. Here he held his
lectures. A mollah, with whom I was acquainted, mentioned who I was, and forthwith I was invited
to take my place on the carpet, which I did, after having with great humility kissed the hem
of the holy man’s cloak. ‘You are welcome,’ said he; ‘we have heard a great deal concerning
you, Hajji, and inshallah, your steps will be fortunate. Sit up higher!’

I made all sorts of remonstrances against sitting higher up in the room (for I had taken the
lowest place); and when I had crept up to the spot to which he had pointed with his finger,
I carefully nestled my feet closely under me, covering both them and my hands with my coat.

‘We have heard,’ said he, ‘that you are a chosen slave of the Most High; one whose words and
whose acts are the same; not wearing a beard of two colours, like those who are Mussulmans
in outward appearance, but who are kafirs in their hearts.’

‘May your propitious condescension never be less!’ said I: ‘your servant is the most abject
of the least of those who rub their forehead on the threshold of the gate of Almighty splendour.’

Here ensued a pause and dead silence, when we each appeared absorbed in deep meditation. The
mûshtehed then breaking the silence, said to me:--

‘Is it true, O Hajji! that your talleh, your destiny, has turned its face upon you, and that
you have come hither to seek refuge? We and the world have long bid adieu to each other; so
my questions are not to satisfy curiosity, but to inform me whether I can be of use to you.
Our holy Prophet (upon whom be blessings and peace!) sayeth, “Let our faithful followers help
each other: those who see, let them lead the blind; those who prosper, let them help those
who are in adversity.”’

Upon this I took courage, spoke my sentences from Saadi, as already recited, and told my tale
in such a modified manner, that my auditors, I verily believe, began to look upon me as very
little short of a martyr.

‘If it is so,’ said the mûshtehed, ‘perhaps the day is not far off, when I may be the instrument,
in the hands of God, to see justice done you. The Shah is to visit the tomb before this month
is expired, and as he looks upon me with the eyes of approbation, be assured that I will not
be deficient in endeavouring to procure your release.’

‘What can such a sinner as I say to one of your high sanctity? I will pray for you; the dust
of your path shall be collyrium for my eyes. Whatever you will do for me will be the effect
of your goodness.’

‘It is plain that you are one of us,’ said the mûshtehed, apparently well satisfied at the
almost divine honours which I paid him. ‘True Mussulmans always recognize each other in the
same manner, as I have heard to be the case among a sect of the Franks, called Faramoosh [81]
who by a word, a look, or a touch, will discover one another even among thousands.’

‘Allah ho akbar! God is great’; and ‘La Allah il Allah! there is but one God’ was echoed by
the company, in admiration of the mûshtehed’s knowledge; and then he continued to address me
thus:--

‘There is an ajem with you, who calls himself a dervish. Is he an acquaintance of yours? He
says that he and you are hem dum, of one breath. Is it so?’

‘Che arz bekunum? what supplication can I make?’ said I, not knowing precisely whether to acknowledge
my friend or not.

‘Yes, he is a fakîr, a poor man, to whom I have given a path near me. He has done me some little
service, and I am mindful of him.’

‘You must be mindful of yourself,’ said an old mollah, who sat next to me. ‘Whatever is thief,
whatever is knave, you will be sure to find it among these ajems.’

‘Yes,’ said the mûshtehed, as he rested both his hands upon his girdle, whilst his disciples
(who knew this to be his favourite attitude when about to make a speech) settled their faces
into looks of attention--‘yes, these, and all who call themselves dervishes, be they the followers
of Nûr Ali Shahi, be they Zahabîas, be they Nakshbendies, or be they of that accursed race
of Uweisîes; all are kafirs or heretics--all are worthy of death. The one promulgate, that
the fastings of the Ramazan, our ablutions, the forms and number of our daily prayers, are
all unnecessary to salvation; and that the heart is the test of piety, and not the ceremonies
of the body. The other acknowledge the Koran, ’tis true; but they reject everything else: the
sayings of the Prophet, opinions of saints, etc. are odious to them; and they show their religious
zeal by shouting out the blessed name of Allah, until they foam at the mouth, like so many
roaring lions; and this they are pleased to call religion. Another set pretend to superior
piety, by disfiguring the outward man, making vows, and performing acts of penance, that partake
more of the tricks of mountebanks than of the servants of the Almighty. The fourth, the most
heretical of all, would make us believe that they live in eternal communion with supernatural
powers; and whilst they put on a patched and threadbare garment, affect to despise the goods
of this world, and keep themselves warm by metaphysical meditations, which neither they nor
any one else understand. No distinction of clean or unclean (may they enjoy the eternal grills!)
stands in their way; lawful and unlawful is all one to them; they eat and drink whatever they
choose, and even the Giaours, the infidels, are undefiled in their sight. And these call themselves
Sûfies; these are your wise men; these are your lights of the world! Curses on their beard!’
To which all the company answered ‘ameen,’ or amen. Curses on their fathers and mothers! Curses
on their children! Curses on their relations! Curses on Sheikh Attar! Curses on Jelâledîn Rûmi!’[82]
After each curse the whole assembly echoed ‘Ameen!’

When he had concluded, all the company, whilst they expressed their admiration at his doctrine,
looked at me to see if I was not struck with amazement. I was not backward in making the necessary
exclamations, and acted my part so true to the life, that the impression in my favour was universal.

The mûshtehed, warmed by his own words, continued to harangue against the Sûfies with such
vehemence, that I believe had there been one at hand, they would have risen in a body and put
him to death. I hugged myself in the success which had accompanied my attempt to appear a good
Mussulman, and now began to think that I was one in right earnest.

‘If what I do,’ said I, ‘constitutes a religious man, and is to acquire me the world’s consideration,
nothing is more easy. Why then should I toil through life, a slave to some tyrant, exposed
to every vicissitude, uncertain of my existence beyond the present moment, and a prey to a
thousand and one evils?’

I left the mûshtehed, and returned to my cell, determined to persevere in my pious dispositions.
When I met my companion again, I told him all that had happened, and everything that had been
said about him and dervishes in general; and advised him, considering the temper in which I
had left the assembly, to make the best of his way out of a place in which every man’s mind
and hand were turned against him. ‘If they catch you, they stone you, friend!’ said I; ‘upon
that make your mind easy.’

‘May the stones alight on their own heads!’ exclaimed the dervish: ‘a set of blood-thirsty
heathens! What sort of religion can theirs be which makes them seek the life of an inoffensive
man? I come here, having no one thing to do with either Sûni or Shiah, Sûfi or Mohamedan: on
the contrary, out of compliment to them, I go through all the mummery of five washings and
five prayings per day, and still that will not satisfy them; however, I will be even with them.
I will go; I will leave their vile hypocritical town; and neither will I wash nor pray until
necessity obliges me to pass through it again.’

I must own that I was not sorry when I heard the dervish make this resolution. I saw him with
pleasure gird on his broad leathern belt, from which was suspended great bunches of beads,
and stick his long spoon in it. I helped to fasten his deer-skin to his back; and when he had
taken up the iron weapon, which he carried on his shoulder, in one hand, whilst his other bore
his calabash suspended with three chains, we bade each other adieu with great apparent cordiality.

Leaving me to the full possession of my cell, he sallied forth with all the lightness and gaiety
of heart of one who had the world at his command, instead of the world before him, with nothing
but his two feet and his ingenuity to carry him through it.

My mind now dwelt upon the promise which the mûshtehed had made of procuring my pardon and
release from the Shah, when he came to visit the sanctuary at Kom; and it occurred to me, that
to secure the favour of so powerful an advocate, I ought to make him a present, without which
nothing is ever accomplished in Persia. But of what it was to be composed was the next consideration.
The money left in my purse was all that I had to subsist upon until I should acquire a new
livelihood; and, little as it was, I had kept it safely buried in an unfrequented corner near
my cell.

I fixed upon a praying-carpet, as the best present for one who is always upon his knees, and
had laid my plan for getting some brought to me from the bazaar to look at.

‘Every time the good man prays,’ said I, ‘he will think of me; and as one is apt to make good
resolutions in such moments, perhaps he will be put in mind of his promises to endeavour to
release me.’

I forthwith resorted to my secret corner for my purse, in the determination of sacrificing
one of my remaining tomauns to this purpose. But here let me stop, and let me request the reader
to recollect himself, and reflect upon his feelings after the most severe disappointment which
it may have been his lot to sustain, and let me tell him, that it was nothing to my grief,
to my rage, to my exasperation, when I found my purse was gone.

My soul came into my mouth; and without a moment’s hesitation I exclaimed, ‘O thou bankrupt
dog! thou unsainted dervish! You have brought me safe into harbour, ’tis true; but you have
left me without an anchor. May your life be a bitter one, and may your daily bread be the bread
of grief! And so, after all, Hajji Baba has become a beggar!’

I then took to making the most sorrowful moanings and lamentations; for the fear of starvation
now stared me in the face notwithstanding the charity of the people of Kom; and as despair
is a malady which increases the more the mind dwells upon its misfortune, I seemed to take
delight in reverting to all the horrors which I had lately witnessed in the death of Zeenab;
then I dwelt upon my confinement, then upon my loss, and at length wound myself up to look
upon my situation as so desperate, that if I had had poison by me, I should certainly have
swallowed it.

At this moment passed by my cell the old mollah, who, during my visit to the mûshtehed, had
warned me against putting too much confidence in the dervish. I told him of my misfortune,
and raised such doleful wailings, that his heart was touched.

‘You spoke but too well, O mollah!’ said I, ‘when you warned me against the dervish. My money
is gone, and I am left behind. I am a stranger; and he who called himself my friend has proved
my bitterest enemy! Curses on such a friend! Oh! whither shall I turn for assistance?’

‘Do not grieve, my son,’ said the mollah; ‘we know that there is a God, and if it be his will
to try you with misfortune, why do you repine? Your money is gone,--gone it is, and gone let
it be; but your skin is left,--and what do you want more? A skin is no bad thing, after all!’

‘What words are these?’ said I: ‘I know that a skin is no bad thing; but will it get back my
money from the dervish?’

I then requested the old man to state my misfortune to the mûshtehed, and, moreover, my impossibility
of showing him that respect by a present, which was due to him, and which it had been my intention
to make.

He left me with promises of setting my case in its proper light before the holy man; and, to
my great joy, on the very same day the news of the approaching arrival of the Shah was brought
to Kom by the chief of the tent-pitchers, who came to make the necessary preparations for his
accommodation.

The large open saloon in the sanctuary in which the king prays was spread with fine carpets,
the court was swept and watered, the fountain in the centre of the reservoir was made to play,
and the avenues to the tomb were put into order. A deputation, consisting of all the priests,
was collected, to go before him, and meet him on his entry; and nothing of ceremony was omitted
which was due to the honour and dignity of the Shadow of the Almighty upon earth.

I now became exceedingly anxious about my future fate; for it was long since I had heard from
Tehran, and I was ignorant of the measure of the Shah’s resentment against me. Looking upon
the dark side of things, my imagination led me to think that nothing short of my head would
satisfy him; but then, cheering myself with a more pleasing prospect, I endeavoured to believe
that I was too insignificant a personage that my death should be of any consequence, and built
all my hopes upon the intercession of the mûshtehed.

The chief tent-pitcher had formerly been my friend, and among his assistants I recognized many
of my acquaintance. I soon made myself known to them; and they did not, for a wonder, draw
back from recognizing me, although one of our greatest sages hath said, ‘that a man in adversity
is shunned like a piece of base money, which nobody will take; and which, if perchance it has
been received, is passed off to another as soon as possible.’

The newcomers gave me all the intelligence of what had happened at court since I had left it;
and although I professed to have renounced the world, and to have become a recluse, a sitter
in a corner, as it is called, yet still I found that I had an ear for what was passing in it.
They informed me that the chief executioner had returned from his campaign against the Russians,
and had brought the Shah a present of two Georgian slaves, a male and a female, besides other
rarities, in order the better to persuade him of his great feats and generalship. The present
had been accepted, and his face was to be whitened by a dress of honour, provided he made the
tobeh, oath of penance, restraining himself from the use of wine for the future. I also learnt,
notwithstanding it was known how deeply I was implicated in Zeenab’s guilt, that my former
master, the hakîm, had still been obliged to make a large present to the Shah, besides having
had half his beard pulled out by the roots, for the loss which his majesty had incurred by
her death, and for his disappointment at not finding her ready to dance and sing before him
on his return from Sultanieh. The king’s wrath for the loss of the Cûrdish slave had in great
measure subsided, owing to the chief executioner’s gift of the Georgian one, who was described
as being the finest person of the sort who had been exhibited at the slave-market since the
days of the celebrated Taous, or Peacock; and was, in short, the pearl of the shell of beauty,
the marrow of the spine of perfection. She had a face like the full moon, eyes of the circumference
of the chief tent-pitcher’s forefinger and thumb, a waist that he could span, and a form tall
and majestic as the full-grown cypress. And they moreover assured me, that the Shah’s anger
against me would very easily cede to a present of a few tomauns.

Here again my anathemas against the dervish broke forth; ‘and but for him,’ said I, ‘I might
have appeared not empty-handed.’ However, I was delighted to hear that my case was not so desperate
as I had imagined; and, seated on the carpet of hope, smoking the pipe of expectation, I determined
to await my fate with that comfortable feeling of predestination which has been so wisely dispensed
by the holy Prophet for the peace and quiet of all true believers.

The King of Kings arrived the next day, and alighted at his tents, which were pitched without
the town. I will not waste the reader’s time in describing all the ceremonies of his reception,
which, by his desire, were curtailed as much as possible, inasmuch as his object in visiting
the tomb of Fatimeh was not to reap worldly distinctions, but to humble himself before God
and men, in the hope of obtaining better and higher reward.

His policy has always been to keep in good odour with the priesthood of his country; for he
knew that their influence, which is considerable over the minds of the people, was the only
bar between him and unlimited power. He therefore courted Mirza Abdul Cossim, the mûshtehed
of Kom, by paying him a visit on foot, and by permitting him to be seated before him, an honour
seldom conferred on one of the laity. He also went about the town on foot, during the whole
time of his stay there, giving largely to the poor, and particularly consecrating rich and
valuable gifts at the shrine of the saint. The king himself, and all those who composed his
train, thought it proper to suit their looks to the fashion of the place; and I was delighted
to find that I was not singular in my woe-smitten face and my mortified gait. I recollected
to have heard, when I was about the court, that the Shah, in point of fact, was a Sûfi at heart,
although very rigid in the outward practices of religion; and it was refreshing to me to perceive,
among the great officers in his train, one of the secretaries of state, a notorious sinner
of that persuasion, who was now obliged to fold up his principles in the napkin of oblivion,
and clothe himself in the garments of the true faith.

On the morning of the Shah’s visit to the tomb for the purpose of saying his prayers, I was
on the alert, in the hopes of being remarked by the mûshtehed, who would thus be reminded of
his promises to me.

About an hour before the prayer of midday, the Shah, on foot, escorted by an immense concourse
of attendants, priests, and of the people, entered the precincts of the sanctuary. He was dressed
in a dark suit, the sombre colours of which were adapted to the solemn looks of his face, and
he held in his hand a long enamelled stick, curiously inlaid at the pommel. He had put by all
ornament, wearing none of his customary jewellery, not even his dagger, which on other occasions
he is never without. The only article of great value was his rosary, composed of large pearls
(the produce of his fishery at Bahrein), of the most beautiful water and symmetry, and this
he kept constantly in his hand.

The mûshtehed walked two or three steps behind him on the left hand, respectfully answered
the interrogatories which the king was pleased to make, and lent a profound attention to all
his observations.

When the procession came near me (for it passed close to my cell), I seized an opportunity,
when no officer was at hand, to run forward, throw myself on my knees, make the prostration
with my face to the ground, and exclaim, ‘Refuge in the King of Kings, the asylum of the world!
In the name of the blessed Fatimeh, mercy!’

‘Who is this?’ exclaimed the king to the mûshtehed, ‘Is he one of yours?’

‘He has taken the bust (the sanctuary),’ answered the mirza, ‘and he claims the accustomed
pardon of the Shadow of the Almighty to all unfortunate refugees whenever he visits the tomb.
He and we all are your sacrifice; and whatever the Shah ordains, so let it be.’

‘But who and what are you?’ said the Shah to me; ‘why have you taken refuge here?’

‘May I be our sacrifice!’ said I. ‘Your slave was the sub-deputy executioner to the Centre
of the Universe, Hajji Baba by name; and my enemies have made me appear criminal in the eyes
of the Shah, whilst I am innocent.’

‘Yaftéh îm, we have understood,’ rejoined the king, after a minute’s pause. ‘So you are that
Hajji Baba? Mûbarek, much good may it do you. Whether it was one dog or another that did the
deed, whether the hakîm or the sub-deputy, it comes to the same thing,--the end of it has been
that the king’s goods have burnt. That is plain enough, is it not, Mirza Abdul Cossim?’ said
he, addressing himself to the mûshtehed.

‘Yes, by the sacred head of the king,’ answered the holy man; ‘generally in all such cases
between man and woman, they, and they alone, can speak to the truth.’

‘But what does our holy religion say in such cases?’ observed the king: ‘the Shah has lost
a slave--there is a price of blood for the meanest of human beings--even a Frank or a Muscovite
have their price, and why should we expend our goods gratis, for the amusement of either our
chief physician or our sub-deputy executioner?’

‘There is a price upon each of God’s creatures, and blood must not be spilt without its fine;
but there is also an injunction of forgiveness and lenity towards one’s fellow creatures,’
said the mûshtehed, ‘which our holy Prophet (upon whom be eternal blessings!) has more particularly
addressed to those invested with authority, and which, O king, cannot be better applied than
in this instance. Let the Shah forgive this unfortunate sinner, and he will reap greater reward
in Heaven than if he had killed twenty Muscovites, or impaled the father of all Europeans,
or even if he had stoned a Sûfi.’

‘Be it so,’ said the Shah; and turning to me, he said with a loud voice, ‘Murakhas, you are
dismissed; and recollect it is owing to the intercession of this man of God,’ putting his hand
at the same time upon the shoulder of the mûshtehed, ‘that you are free, and that you are permitted
to enjoy the light of the sun. Bero!

I did not require to be twice ordered to depart; and, without once looking behind me, I left
Kom and its priests, and bent my steps towards Ispahan and my family. I had a few reals in
my pocket, with which I could buy food on the road; and, as for resting-places, the country
was well supplied with caravanserais, in which I could always find a corner to lay my head.
Young as I was, I began to be disgusted with the world; and perhaps had I remained long enough
at Kom, and in the mood in which I had reached it, I might have devoted the rest of my life
to following the lectures of Mirza Abdul Cossim, and acquired worldly consideration by my taciturnity,
by my austerity, and strict adherence to Mahomedan discipline. But fate had woven another destiny
for me. The maidan (the race-course) of life was still open to me, and the courser of my existence
had not yet exhausted half of the bounds and curvets with which he was wont to keep me in constant
exercise. I felt that I deserved the misfortunes with which I had been afflicted, owing to
my total neglect of my parents.

‘I have been a wicked son,’ said I. ‘When I was a man in authority, and was puffed up with
pride at my own importance, I then forgot the poor barber at Ispahan; and it is only now, when
adversity spreads my path, that I recollect the authors of my being.’ A saying of my school-master,
which he frequently quoted with great emphasis in Arabic, came to my mind. ‘An old friend,’
used he to say, ‘is not to be bought, even if you had the treasures of Hatem to offer for one.
Remember then, O youth, that thy first, and therefore thy oldest friends are thy father and
thy mother.’

‘They shall still find that they have a son,’ said I, feeling a great rush of tenderness flow
into my heart, as I repeated the words; ‘and, please God, if I reach my home, they shall no
longer have to reproach me with want of proper respect.’ A still soft voice, however, whispered
to me that I should be too late; and I remembered the prognostics of my mind, when, filled
with grief for the loss of Zeenab, I left Tehran full of virtuous intentions and resolutions.

When I could first distinguish the peak in the mountain of the Colah Cazi, which marks the
situation of Ispahan, my heart bounded within me; and at every step I anxiously considered
in what state I should find my family. Would my old schoolmaster be alive? Should I find our
neighbour the baqal (or chandler), at whose shop I used to spend in sweetmeats all the copper
money that I could purloin from my father, when I shaved for him, would he be still in existence?
And my old friend the capiji, the door-keeper of the caravanserai, he whom I frightened so
much at the attack of the Turcomans, is the door of his life still open, or has it been closed
upon him forever?

In this manner did I muse by the wayside, until the tops of the minarets of Ispahan actually
came in view; when, enraptured with the sight, and full of gratitude for having been preserved
thus far in my pilgrimage, I stopped and said my prayers; and then taking up one stone, which
I placed upon another as a memorial, I made the following vow: ‘O Ali, if thou wilt grant to
thy humblest and most abject of slaves the pleasure of reaching my home in safety, I will,
on arrival, kill a sheep, and make a pilau for my friends and family.’

Traversing the outskirts of the city with a beating heart, every spot was restored to my memory,
and I threaded my way through the long vaulted bazaars and intricate streets without missing
a single turn, until I found myself standing opposite both my father’s shop and the well-known
gate of the caravanserai.

The door of the former was closed, and nothing was stirring around it that indicated business.
I paused a long time before I ventured to proceed, for I looked upon this first aspect of things
as portentous of evil; but recollecting myself, I remembered that it was the Sheb-i-Jumah,
the Friday eve, and that probably my father, in his old age, had grown to be too scrupulous
a Mussulman to work during those hours which true believers ought to keep holy.

However, the caravanserai was open, and presented the same scene to my eyes which it had done
ever since I had known it. Bales of goods heaped up in lots, intermixed with mules, camels,
and their drivers. Groups of men in various costumes, some seated, some in close conversation,
others gazing carelessly about, and others again coming and going in haste, with faces full
of care and calculation. I looked about for the friend of my boy-hood the capiji, and almost
began to fear that he too had closed his door, when I perceived his well-known figure crawling
quietly along with his earthen water-pipe, seeking his bit of charcoal wherewith to light it.

His head had sunk considerably between his shoulders, and reclined more upon his breast since
last I had seen him; and the additional bend in his knees showed that the passing years had
kept a steady reckoning with him.

‘It is old Ali Mohamed,’ said I, as I stepped up towards him. ‘I should know that crooked nose
of his from a thousand, so often have I clipped the whisker that grows under it.’

When I accosted him with the usual salutation of peace, he kept on trimming his pipe, without
even looking up, so much accustomed was he to be spoken to by strangers; but when I said, ‘Do
not you recognize me, Ali Mohamed?’ he turned up his old bloodshot eye at me, and pronounced
‘Friend! a caravanserai is a picture of the world; men come in and go out of it, and no account
is taken of them. How am I then to know you? Ali Mohamed is grown old, and his memory is gone by.’

‘But you will surely recollect Hajji Baba--little Hajji, who used to shave your head, and trim
your beard and mustachios!’

‘There is but one God!’ exclaimed the door-keeper in great amazement. ‘Are you indeed Hajji?--Ah!
my son, your place has long been empty--are you come at last? Well, then, praise be to Ali,
that old Kerbelai Hassan will have his eyes closed by his only child, ere he dies.’

‘How!’ said I, ‘tell me where is my father? Why is the shop shut? What do you say about death?’

‘Yes, Hajji, the old barber has shaved his last. Lose not a moment in going to his house, and
you may stand a chance to be in time to receive his blessing ere he leaves this world. Please
God, I shall soon follow him, for all is vanity. I have opened and shut the gates of this caravanserai
for fifty years, and find that all pleasure is departed from me. My keys retain their polish,
whilst I wear out with rust.’

I did not stop to hear the end of the old man’s speech, but immediately made all speed to my
father’s house.

As I approached the well-remembered spot, I saw two mollahs loitering near the low and narrow
entrance.

‘Ha!’ thought I, ‘ye are birds of ill-omen; wherever the work of death is going on, there ye
are sure to be.’

Entering, without accosting them, I walked at once into the principal room, which I found completely
filled with people, surrounding an old man, who was stretched out upon a bed spread upon the
floor, and whom I recognized to be my father.

No one knew me, and, as it is a common custom for strangers who have nothing to do with the
dying to walk in unasked, I was not noticed. On one side sat the doctor, and on the other an
old man, who was kneeling near the bed-head, and in him I recognized my former schoolmaster.
He was administering comfort to his dying friend, and his words were something to this purpose:
‘Do not be downcast: please God you still have many days to spend on earth. You may still live
to see your son; Hajji Baba may yet be near at hand. But yet it is a proper and a fortunate
act to make your will, and to appoint your heir. If such be your wish, appoint any one here
present your heir.’

‘Ah,’ sighed out my father, ‘Hajji has abandoned us--I shall never see him more--He has become
too much of a personage to think of his poor parents--He is not worthy that I should make him
my heir.’ These words produced an immediate effect; I could no longer restrain my desire to
make myself known, and I exclaimed, ‘Hajji is here!--Hajji is come to receive your blessing--I
am your son--do not reject him!’

Upon which I knelt down by the bedside, and taking up the dying man’s hand, I kissed it, and
added loud sobs and lamentations, to demonstrate my filial affection.

The sensation which I produced upon all present was very great. I saw looks of disappointment
in some, of incredulity in others, and of astonishment in all.

My father’s eyes, that were almost closed, brightened up for one short interval as he endeavoured
to make out my features, and clasping his trembling hands together, exclaimed, ‘Il hem dillah!
Praise be to God, I have seen my son, I have got an heir!’ Then addressing me, he said, ‘Have
you done well, O my son, to leave me for so many years? Why did you not come before?’

He would have gone on, but the exertion and the agitation produced by such an event were too
much for his strength, and he sunk down inanimate on his pillow. The night we were surprised by panting, soaked sweat,
but joyful and triumphant after two hours of effort, and little time to the song melancholy
of all sailors, wounding the echo of the woods, gave us a new impression. At ten o'clock at night
the bridge had a unique aspect vapor. Each bed was covered with an awning to defend everyone from
the terrible mosquitoes or mosquitoes, and appearance was like a general hospital, a camp or
a floating graveyard. The Irish, that after working as a Samson had had the foresight to drink like
a bomb, he slept near me, and snored with the terrible majesty of the Andean storm. Meanwhile, the
owl Lone nearby beach with his singing mournful answer the distant roar of the jaguar wandering
between the harshness of the jungle.

The third day of sailing should be more fruitful in scenes of all kinds. The first object Curious
was a large debris on a deserted beach, was the report of the vapor mass Magdalena (The first of
the third period when the river has been navigated by steamers), whose helmet was lying abandoned
as useless. Seeing the corpse of iron and wood, compared with the vapors present we understand and
admire the perseverance with which, in spite of many setbacks, the spirit Progress marches on,
struggling to conquer nature and ending times. Much above had seen the remains of the splendid
steam Manzanares, flown in 1854; and other parts of the river you can see the Honda, Henry
Wells and the Squid, killed also in early trials. After steam navigation has been regularized, the
river is crossed by eight or ten beautiful vapors in the bottom, and you just set a small in
the upper Magdalena. Progress triumph.

As for contrast, two hours later we find the beautiful Patron vapor, which rose quickly, happily
waving their passengers and crew. Then a real row panorama of villages on the banks of the
river, was presented at the hearing, surrounded vaster landscape and charming, without alteration
to the beautiful port city of Mompos.

The plain was immense and all shining objects by the light of a blazing sun in the middle of
heaven most pure and transparent. To the west the mountains stood out as one of Simití blue ribbon,
thrusting their peaks between the white clouds, while the east, to huge distance, air is drawn
as colored peaks palaces vague and confusing branch of the Eastern Cordillera which separates
the regions of Ocaña northern New Granada. Vi Badillo's people first, miserable and almost all
the banks of the lower Magdalena; after the village of Las-Pailas regrettable, where the sun eats
and snakes abound as ants, but the neighbor down the warehouse district of Port-national, the site
most ardent around the Magdalena, and finally, to complete the picture of the day, the town
of Regidor, where we expect a singular scene of national customs and extreme contrasts Romantic.

And
in the middle .... What beauties to attract attention, setting the
colorful local!

At each step so gorgeous islands, so quaint, but the heat and pests did think of Mediterranean
islands, long lines of willows, along the beaches of the river and the gentle slopes of the
islands; pipes dark, dark, leaving mysteriously in the jungle and bringing your water without
current gaps distant where dwell fever, wild beasts and poisonous snakes and huge in the shade of
a vegetation lush, untamed beaches reverberant, studded with alligators sleeping under the wing
of a wind burned, on whose banks are piled Herons prettiest colors, or roam Grullon careless chasing
fish, and European arenas whose burners are sometimes given their terrible fighting the jaguar,
the tyrant of the jungle, and the monstrous dragon of Colombian rivers. Incredibly numerous
flocks of parrots of all kinds with its rough go thundering outcry, which seems to echo the voice
of the wild, and through a unique vegetation forming the bottom of the huge box, sliding the steam,
releasing from time to time their whistles sharp and prolonged economic impact which forests
and produces an indefinable feeling of fear and admiration at the same time.

In this way the river Lebrija, similar to Sogamoso flows into the right bank, after having crossed a wide
region of the state of Santander.

Flow can be calculated that water to the four main tributaries of the North (Carare Opon, Sogarnoso
and Lebrija) give the Magdalena River is equivalent to that collected from throughout the state
of Cundinamarca. Thus, after receiving these quotas, top national ports, the Magdalena is in
some points up to 800 meters wide, without having thickened still waters or Cesari Cesar and
Cauca.

In Port-national and Ruler characteristic tables seemed exceedingly
curious.

The first of these places is the port where the tour match between the lower Magdalena and Northern
States of the Republic, and is also the point where the people of Ocaña export their production of
coffee, sugar, snuff, soles, coots (vegetable ivory), gold, sticks Dye, anise and some other
consumer goods inside and outside. When vapors reach the cellar of Port-national, to take correspondence
and shipments of fruits, villagers, which is within the forest at the edge of a creek tributary
Magdalena, down in procession, offering the most interesting and lively painting. Everyone brings
some trifle to sell to passengers - canned food, fruit, cigarettes, etc., - and guys that
come out of curiosity, as they fall in the harvest, shouting happily as wild parrots.

What extravagant figures and details in the semi-African mob invaded us! - Ten or twelve women,
and zambazas Zambito, or old scorched, all cheerful with loose sandal
of shoes, a scarf tied scandalous pictures at the head in the form
of cap or turban, and a thin nightgown and snubbed, coarse muslin
or chintz, with the funny earring of gold or tumbaga in the ear, made
all the stairs irruption of steam, followed by twenty boys and guys
went, plump and tanned by the tropical heat.

In short dispersed classrooms and sleeping quarters, driven by curiosity, and went to sit in
the middle of the ladies and gentlemen on board to engage in conversation with a charming familiarity.
In they all noticed the beautiful braids of black hair and abundant, sometimes crisp, lip thick
and voluptuous, open and vibrant nose, black eye and fiery brown color dark, agitated voice,
loud, free as the wind blow, the hearty laughter and spicy walking provocative, filled with a
touch of coquetry, and the simple nature, hospitable and full of warmth.

All these people seemed to form a strong race, with excellent instincts and be able an estimable
and progressive people to just give the momentum of education, industry and good institutions.
And the crowd of vendors scattered on the slopes of the port to the shade of some trees, was
no less friendly and curious. This, sitting between a barricade of melons, like a chinoiserie
figure, and drew his gallant invitations; that, as a mobile desk, wearing on her head a huge
trough or basket twigs, where they danced to every movement ocañera
sugar muffins, packs of succulent ariquipe, bundles of fragrant cigars
and corn bread, and the more here or beyond strutted with a tower
of papelon abisperos, cassava cake and other many treats that are
the gift of minor passengers and sailors.

Beyond a wayward fashion, tall and agile body, threw him chicoleos of champagne to a girl
looking a bit sinful, receiving in exchange a Coscorron by way of entertainment. Here the pattern
old boat, with pretensions to character, he gave his airs in the middle of the mob, supported
in an oar or paddle, and stroking the width Earring Earring of his right ear, while a sailor of steam,
as belonging to the aristocracy of sailors relieved it his haughty look fashionable protection
for a commoner, saying the move: Jé! you here, Peiro?

After the steam released his long whistle, our Irish said it was now time Solemn life (To drink
and drink! or not to be, - That is the question!) The cups are filled, the port was out of sight,
and its hard to hide the sun we went to moor fire at the foot of the high cliff in the village
of Regidor, where he was to infinitely beautiful scenery combined the most typical custom
box that could be found.

* * * * *

The village consists of about 25 to 30 miserable huts, scattered randomly
over the a flat sandy plain surrounded by towering forests and the
entire area of ​​the village poor multitude of coconut palms floating
in the wind make their feathers ruffled.

At eight of the night the sound of drums and flutes tapered pipes or peculiar to the boatmen and
their semi-wild families, struck our ears announce to a fiery session currulao.

The dance is typical currulao summarizing the vogue and his family, revealing all the energy brutal
black and the mulatto of the northern coast of New Granada.

       So, everyone wanted to contemplate the scene, except the ladies,
whose eyes were not suitable for this extravagant dance, jump to the
ground in all direction to the village square.

The show could not be more singular. There was a wide space, perfectly clean, surrounded barracks,
dry fish barbecues, tall coconut trees and various shrubs. In the center there was a bonfire
fueled with dry palms, around which the wheel shaking dancers, and
other spectators, dancers to turn much more numerous, closed to eight
m from the great circle.

There he mingled men and women, old and young, and a point of that second round was the huge
orchestra. Difficult, very difficult would be the description of those rough faces and uniforms,
those figures seemed shadows or ghosts of a delusion, when they moved, or bare trunks of a forest
engulfed in flames, blackened and rough, if they remained immobile.

The reddish light the fire, spreading over a dark background, increased romance the scene, because
the nearby forest appeared like a huge cave and the shadows of the dancers, musicians and spectators,
and the masts and the tops of coconut trees projected in perspective in a unique way.

Eight couples are dancing to the beat of loud, monotonous, incessant, the gaita (small high
pitched flute with only seven holes) and the drum, conical instrument, similar to a sugar loaf,
very narrow, which produces a deep sound like the echo of a Hill and played with the hands to
force continuous rolls.

The ratchet (chonta cane, corrugated transversely, and whose noise is produced by rubbing a
small compass to thin bone); iron triangle, which is known, and the pooch or alfandoque (cylindrical,
hollow reed, within which stirred many seeds that the shaking of the artist, produce a thud and
sharp as a cascade of boiling), very rarely mixed the concert.

These instruments were rather luxury, because currulao purebred but does not recognize bagpipes,
tabor and curruspa.

The eight couples, formed as a squad in column, were turning to the fire, holding one hand, man and
woman, bareheaded, each carrying two burning candles in the other hand, and following all the
beat with their feet, arms and whole body movements a pleasure, a lubricity cynical description
of which I do not even want. Y those tireless people, their faces impassive, indifferent to
everything, danced and gave twists and turns of the mechanical wheel uniformity machine. It was an
eternal circle, a movement without variation, as the fall of the river, as the swirling hot
fire Sandy or fixing a point in the middle of a forest fire or in
the middle of a beach hit by the hurricane.

The tireless persistence of the dancers corresponded to that of the musicians; and in spite of apparently
so hot emotions, no cry, no lyrical accent, not a single spoken word broke the silence high strangeness
of the scene.

Such is the usual resistance or the tenacity with which these people is given to "currulao" that
some sometimes lasting up to two hours playing or dancing, without resting for a minute.

That dance is a unique paradoxa: the stillness in movement. The lack enthusiasm, and instead of
all poetry, all art, all fresh emotion, deep, new, surprising, is not the whole scene but the meat
mechanical instinct, the dominating power of habit matter, but never the heart and soul of the
savages of civilization. None of them enjoys dancing, because dance
is a necessary as any other occupation.

Of monotony is the bizarre spectacle.

Although none is filed, from time to time a man or a woman leaves the circle of spectators, I removed
the candles to one of the dancers, unceremoniously replaced him, and leaving the job is to be
placed in the great wheel, impassive as a log, without revealing fatigue, or pleasure, or sorrow,
or jealousy, no love, no emotion whatsoever. The change is made as if to rebuild a wall a stone
were removed to put another in its place. Life for these people is not a job spiritual, social,
or a pilgrimage, not even a chain of physical pleasures and pains:
is simply a vegetation, a purely mechanical way.

Born under a blazing sun in a moist soil, vast and lonely, and with a lush nature gives it all
with profusion and in vain, and that by exaggerating the development physical bodies, weakening
their functions and degrades the moral side - the vogue, descending Africa, and son of crossbreeding
debased by tyranny, does not have nearly the humanity, but the outer shape and the needs and primitive
forces.

If the Indian pure the alti-Andean plains is in spite of their ignorance, sweet and humble,
and cunning is moral strength, if the plains of the pampas Granada, raised in solitude and in
the middle of hazards, but surrounded by an infinite horizon, despite their barbarism is a being
eminently heroic, poetic instincts, Gallant, singer, boastful spirit, gullible and generous
- the Magdalena in vogue is but a brute who speaks very bad language, always shameless carnal,
insolent, thief and coward.
 As soon as he saw me he dismissed his scholars,
saying, my footsteps were fortunate, and that others, as well as himself, should partake of
the pleasure I was sure to dispense wherever I went.

‘Ahi, âkhon,’ said I, ‘do not laugh at my beard. My good fortune has entirely forsaken me;
and even now, when I had hoped that my destiny, in depriving me of my father, had made up the
loss by giving me wealth, I am likely to be disappointed, and to turn out a greater beggar
than ever.’

‘Allah kerim, God is merciful,’ said the schoolmaster; and, lifting up his eyes to heaven,
whilst he placed his hands on his knees, with their palms uppermost, he exclaimed, ‘O Allah,
whatever is, thou art it.’ Then addressing himself to me, he said, ‘Yes, my son, such is the
world, and such will it ever be, as long as man shuts not up his heart from all human desires.
Want nothing, seek nothing, and nothing will seek you.’

‘How long have you been a Sûfi’ said I, ‘that you talk after this manner? I can speak on that
subject also, since my evil star led me to Kom, but now I am engrossed with other matters.’
I then informed him of the object of my visit, and requested him to tell me what he knew of
my father’s concerns. Upon this question he coughed, and, making up a face of great wisdom,
went through a long string of oaths and professions, and finished by repeating what I had heard
from my mother; namely, that he believed my father to have died possessed of no (nagd) ready
cash (for that, after all, was the immediate object of my search); and what his other property
was, he reminded me that I knew as well as himself.

I remained mute for some time with disappointment, and then expressed my surprise in strong
terms. My father, I was aware, was too good a Mussulman to have lent out his money upon interest,
for I recollected a circumstance, when I was quite a youth, which proved it. Osman Aga, my
first master, wanting to borrow a sum from him, for which he offered an enormous interest,
my father put his conscience into the hands of a rigid mollah, who told him that the precepts
of the Koran entirely forbade it. Whether since that time he had relaxed his principles, I
could not say; but I was assured that he always set his face against the unlawful practice
of taking interest, and that he died, as he had lived, a perfect model of a true believer.

I left the mosque in no very agreeable mood, and took my way to the spot where I had made my
first appearance in life, namely, my father’s shop, turning over in my mind as I went what
steps I should take to secure a future livelihood. To remain at Ispahan was out of the question--the
place and the inhabitants were odious to me; therefore, it was only left me to dispose of everything
that was now my own, and to return to the capital, which, after all, I knew to be the best
market for an adventurer like myself. However, I could not relinquish the thought that my father
had died possessed of some ready money, and suspicions would haunt my mind, in spite of me,
that foul play was going on somewhere or other. I was at a loss to whom to address myself,
unknown as I was in the city, and I was thinking of making my case known to the cadi, when,
approaching the gate of the caravanserai, I was accosted by the old capiji. ‘Peace be unto
you, Aga!’ said he; ‘may you live many years, and may your abundance increase! My eyes are
enlightened by seeing you.’

‘Are your spirits so well wound up, Ali Mohamed,’ said I in return, ‘that you choose to treat
me thus? As for the abundance you talk of, ’tis abundance of grief, for I have none other that
I know of. Och!’ said I, sighing, ‘my liver has become water, and my soul has withered up.’

‘What news is this?’ said the old man. ‘Your father (peace be unto him!) is just dead--you
are his heir--you are young, and, Mashallah! you are handsome--your wit is not deficient:--what
do you want more?’

‘I am his heir, ’tis true; but what of that? what advantage can accrue to me, when I only get
an old mud-built house, with some worn-out carpets, some pots and pans and decayed furniture,
and yonder shop with a brass basin and a dozen of razors? Let me spit upon such an inheritance.’

‘But where is your money, your ready cash, Hajji? Your father (God be with him!) had the reputation
of being as great a niggard of his money as he was liberal of his soap. Everybody knows that
he amassed much, and never passed a day without adding to his store.’

‘That may be true,’ said I; ‘but what advantage will that be to me, since I cannot find where
it was deposited? My mother says that he had none--the âkhon repeats the same--I am no conjuror
to discover the truth. I had it in my mind to go to the cadi.’

‘To the cadi?’ said Ali Mohamed. ‘Heaven forbid! Go not to him--you might as well knock at
the gate of this caravanserai, when I am absent, as try to get justice from him, without a
heavy fee. No, he sells it by the miscal, at a heavy price, and very light weight does he give
after all. He does not turn over one leaf of the Koran, until his fingers have been well plated
with gold, and if those who have appropriated your father’s sacks are to be your opponents,
do not you think that they will drain them into the cadi’s lap, rather than he should pronounce
in your favour?’

‘What, then, is to be done?’ said I. ‘Perhaps the diviners might give me some help.’

‘There will be no harm in that,’ answered the doorkeeper. ‘I have known them make great discoveries
during my service in this caravanserai. Merchants have frequently lost their money, and found
it again through their means. It was only in the attack of the Turcomans, when much property
was stolen, that they were completely at their wits’ end. Ah! that was a strange event. It
brought much misery on my head; for some were wicked enough to say that I was their accomplice,
and, what is more extraordinary, that you were amongst them, Hajji!--for it was on account
of your name, which the dog’s son made use of to induce me to open the gate, that the whole
mischief was produced.’

Lucky was it for me, that old Ali Mohamed was very dull of sight, or else he would have remarked
strange alterations in my features when he made these observations.

The next morning, soon after the first prayers, a little man came into my room, whom I soon
discovered to be the diviner. He was a humpback, with an immense head, with eyes so wonderfully
brilliant, and a countenance so intelligent, that I felt he could look through and through
me at one glance. He wore a dervish’s cap, from under which flowed a profusion of jet black
hair, which, added to a thick bush of a beard, gave an imposing expression to his features.
His eyes, which by a quick action of his eyelid (whether real or affected, I know not) twinkled
like stars, made the monster, who was not taller than a good bludgeon, look like a little demon.

He began by questioning me very narrowly; made me relate every circumstance of my life--particularly
since my return to Ispahan--inquired who were my father’s greatest apparent friends and associates,
and what my own suspicions led me to conclude. In short, he searched into every particular,
with the same scrutiny that a doctor would in tracing and unravelling an intricate disorder.

When he had well pondered over every thing that I had unfolded, he then required to be shown
the premises, which my father principally inhabited. My mother having gone that morning to
the bath, I was enabled, unknown to her, to take him into her apartments, where he requested
me to leave him to himself, in order that he might obtain a knowledge of the localities necessary
to the discoveries which he hoped to make. He remained there a full quarter of an hour, and
when he came out requested me to collect those who were in my father’s intimacy, and in the
habit of much frequenting the house, and that he would return, they being assembled, and begin
his operations.

Without saying a word to my mother about the diviner, I requested her to invite her most intimate
friends for the following morning, it being my intention to give them a breakfast; and I myself
begged the attendance of the âkhon, the capiji, my father’s nephew by his first wife, and a
brother of my mother, with others who had free entrance into the house.

They came punctually; and when they had partaken of such fare as I could place before them,
they were informed of the predicament in which I stood, and that I had requested their attendance
to be witnesses to the endeavours of the diviner to discover where my father was wont to keep
his money, of the existence of which, somewhere or other, nobody who knew him could doubt.
I looked into each man’s face as I made this speech, hoping to remark some expression which
might throw a light upon my suspicions, but everybody seemed ready to help my investigation,
and maintained the most unequivocal innocence of countenance.

At length the dervish, Teez Negah (for that was the name of the conjuror), was introduced,
accompanied by an attendant who carried something wrapped up in a handkerchief. Having ordered
the women in the andenûn to keep themselves veiled, because they would probably soon be visited
by men, I requested the dervish to begin his operations.

He first looked at every one present with great earnestness, but more particularly fixed his
basilisk eyes upon the âkhon, who evidently could not stand the scrutiny, but exclaimed ‘Allah
il Allah!’--there is but one God--stroked down his face and beard, and blew first over one
shoulder and then over the other, by way of keeping off the evil spirit. Some merriment was
raised at his expense; but he did not appear to be in a humour to meet any one’s jokes.

After this, the dervish called to his attendant, who from the handkerchief drew forth a brass
cup, of a plain surface, but written all over with quotations from the Koran, having reference
to the crime of stealing, and defrauding the orphan of his lawful property. He was a man of
few words, and simply saying, ‘In the name of Allah, the All-wise, and All-seeing,’ he placed
the cup on the floor, treating it with much reverence, both in touch and in manner.

He then said to the lookers-on, ‘Inshallah, it will lead us at once to the spot where the money
of the deceased Kerbelai Hassan (may God show him mercy!) is or was deposited.’

We all looked at each other, some with expressions of incredulity, others with unfeigned belief,
when he bent himself towards the cup, and with little shoves and pats of his hand he impelled
it forwards, exclaiming all the time, ‘See, see, the road it takes. Nothing can stop it. It
will go, in spite of me. Mashallah, Mashallah!’

We followed him, until he reached the door of the harem, where we knocked for admittance. After
some negotiation it was opened, and there we found a crowd of women (many of whom had only
loosely thrown on their veils) waiting with much impatience to witness the feats which this
wonderful cup was to perform.

‘Make way,’ said the diviner to the women who stood in his path, as he took his direction towards
a corner of the court, upon which the windows of the room opened--‘Make way; nothing can stop
my guide.’

A woman, whom I recognized to be my mother, stopped his progress several times, until he was
obliged to admonish her, with some bitterness, to keep clear of him.

‘Do not you see,’ said he, ‘we are on the Lord’s business? Justice will be done, in spite of
the wickedness of man.’

At length he reached a distant corner, where it was plain that the earth had been recently
disturbed, and there he stopped.

‘Bismillah, in the name of Allah,’ said he, ‘let all present stand around me, and mark what
I do.’ He dug into the ground with his dagger, clawed the soil away with his hands, and discovered
a place in which were the remains of an earthen vessel, and the marks near it of there having
been another.

‘Here,’ said he, ‘here the money was, but is no more.’ Then taking up his cup, he appeared
to caress it, and make much of it, calling it his little uncle and his little soul.

Every one stared. All cried out, ‘ajaib, wonderful’; and the little humpback was looked upon
as a supernatural being.

The capiji, who was accustomed to such discoveries, was the only one who had the readiness
to say, ‘But where is the thief? You have shown us where the game lay, but we want you to catch
it for us:--the thief and the money, or the money without the thief--that is what we want.’

‘Softly, my friend,’ said the dervish to the capiji, ‘don’t jump so soon from the crime to
the criminal, We have a medicine for every disorder, although it may take some time to work.’

He then cast his eyes upon the company present, twinkling them all the while in quick flashes,
and said, ‘I am sure every one here will be happy to be clear of suspicion, and will agree
to what I shall propose. The operation is simple, and soon over.’

‘Elbetteh, certainly’: ‘Belli, yes’: ‘Een che harf est? what word is this?’ was heard to issue
from every mouth, and I requested the dervish to proceed.

He called again to his servant, who produced a small bag, whilst he again took the cup under
his charge.

‘This bag,’ said the diviner, ‘contains some old rice. I will put a small handful of it into
each person’s mouth, which they will forthwith chew. Let those who cannot break it, beware,
for Eblis is near at hand.’

Upon this, placing us in a row, he filled each person’s mouth with rice, and all immediately
began to masticate. Being the complainant, of course I was exempt from the ordeal; and my mother,
who chose to make common cause with me, also stood out of the ranks. The quick-sighted dervish
would not allow of this, but made her undergo the trial with the rest, saying, ‘The property
we seek is not yours, but your son’s. Had he been your husband, it would be another thing.’
She agreed to his request, though with bad grace, and then all the jaws were set to wagging,
some looking upon it as a good joke, others thinking it a hard trial to the nerves. As fast
as each person had ground his mouthful, he called to the dervish, and showed the contents of
his mouth.

All had now proved their innocence excepting the âkhon and my mother. The former, whose face
exhibited the picture of an affected cheerfulness with great nervous apprehension, kept mumbling
his rice, and turning it over between his jaws, until he cried out in a querulous tone, ‘Why
do you give me this stuff to chew? I am old, and have no teeth:--it is impossible for me to
reduce the grain’; and then he spat it out. My mother, too, complained of her want of power
to break the hard rice, and did the same thing. A silence ensued, which made us all look with
more attention than usual upon them, and it was only broken by a time-server of my mother,
an old woman, who cried out, ‘What child’s play is this? Who has ever heard of a son treating
his mother with this disrespect, and his old schoolmaster, too? Shame, shame!--let us go--he
is probably the thief himself.’

Upon this the dervish said, ‘Are we fools and asses, to be dealt with in this manner? Either
there was money in that corner, or there was not--either there are thieves in the world, or
there are not. This man and this woman,’ pointing to the âkhon and my mother, ‘have not done
that which all the rest have done. Perhaps they say the truth, they are old, and cannot break
the hard grain. Nobody says that they stole the money--they themselves know that best,’ said
he, looking at them through and through; ‘but the famous diviner, Hezarfun, he who was truly
called the bosom friend to the Great Bear, and the confidant of the planet Saturn,--he who
could tell all that a man has ever thought, thinks, or will think,--he hath said that the trial
by rice, among cowards was the best of all tests of a man’s honesty. Now, my friends, from
all I have remarked, none of you are slayers of lions, and fear is easily produced among you.
However, if you doubt my skill in this instance, I will propose a still easier trial,--one
which commits nobody, which works like a charm upon the mind, and makes the thief come forward
of his own accord, to ease his conscience and purse of its ill-gotten wealth, at one and the
same time. I propose the Hâk reezî, or the heaping up earth. Here in this corner I will make
a mound, and will pray so fervently this very night, that, by the blessing of Allah, the Hajji,’
pointing to me, ‘Will find his money buried in it to-morrow at this hour. Whoever is curious,
let them be present, and if something be not discovered, I will give him a miscal of hair from
my beard.’

He then set to work, and heaped up earth in a corner, whilst the lookers on loitered about,
discussing what they had just seen; some examining me and the dervish as children of the evil
spirit, whilst others again began to think as much of my mother and the schoolmaster. The company
then dispersed, most of them promising to return the following morning, at the appointed time,
to witness the search into the heap of earth.

I must own that I began now to look upon the restoration of my property as hopeless. The diviner’s
skill had certainly discovered that money had been buried in my father’s house, and he had
succeeded in raising ugly suspicions in my mind against two persons whom I felt it to be a
sin to suspect; but I doubted whether he could do more.

However, he appeared again on the following morning, accompanied by the capiji, and by several
of those who had been present at the former scene. The âkhon, however, did not appear, and
my mother was also absent, upon pretext of being obliged to visit a sick friend. We proceeded
in a body to the mound, and the dervish having made a holy invocation, he approached it with
a sort of mysterious respect.

‘Now we shall see,’ said he, ‘whether the Gins and the Peris have been at work this night’;
and exclaiming ‘Bismillah! he dug into the earth with his dagger.

Having thrown off some of the soil, a large stone appeared, and having disengaged that, to
the astonishment of all, and to my extreme delight, a canvas bag well filled was discovered.

‘Oh my soul! oh my heart!’ exclaimed the humpback, as he seized upon the bag, ‘you see that
the Dervish Teez Negah is not a man to lose a hair of his beard. There, there,’ said he, putting
it into my hand, ‘there is your property: go, and give thanks that you have fallen into my
hands, and do not forget my hak sai, or my commission.’

Everybody crowded round me, whilst I broke open the wax that was affixed to the mouth of the
bag, upon which I recognized the impression of my father’s seal; and eagerness was marked on
all their faces as I untied the twine with which it was fastened. My countenance dropped woefully
when I found that it only contained silver, for I had made up my mind to see gold. Five hundred
reals[85] was the sum of which I became the possessor; out of which I counted fifty, and presented
them to the ingenious discoverer of them. ‘There,’ said I, ‘may your house prosper! If I were
rich I would give you more: and although this is evidently but a small part of what my father
(God be with him!) must have accumulated, still again I say, may your house prosper, and many
sincere thanks to you.’

The dervish was satisfied with my treatment of him, and took his leave, and I was soon after
left by the rest of the company--the capiji alone remaining. ‘Famous business we have made
of it this morning,’ said he. ‘Did I not say that these diviners performed wonders?’

‘Yes,’ said I, ‘yes, it is wonderful, for I never thought his operations would have come to
anything.’

Impelled by a spirit of cupidity, now that I had seen money glistening before me, I began to
complain that I had received so little, and again expressed to Ali Mohamed my wish of bringing
the case before the cadi; ‘for,’ said I, ‘if I am entitled to these five hundred reals, I am
entitled to all my father left; and you will acknowledge that this must be but a very small
part of his savings.’

‘Friend,’ said he, ‘listen to the words of an old man. Keep what you have got, and be content.
In going before the cadi, the first thing you will have to do will be to give of your certain,
to get at that most cursed of all property, the uncertain. Be assured that after having drained
you of your four hundred and fifty reals, and having got five hundred from your opponents,
you will have the satisfaction to hear him tell you both to “go in peace, and do not trouble
the city with your disputes.” Have you not lived long enough in the world to have learnt this
common saying--“Every one’s teeth are blunted by acids, except the cadi’s, which are by sweets”?

‘The cadi who takes five cucumbers as a bribe, will admit any evidence for ten beds of melons.’

After some deliberation, I determined to take the advice of the capiji; for it was plain that
if I intended to prosecute any one, it could only be my mother and the âkhon; and to do that,
I should raise such a host of enemies, and give rise to such unheard-of scandal, that perhaps
I should only get stoned by the populace for my pains.

‘I will dispose of everything I have at Ispahan,’ said I to my adviser, ‘and, having done that,
will leave it never to return, unless under better circumstances. It shall never see me more,’
exclaimed I, in a vapouring fit, ‘unless I come as one having authority.’

Little did I think, when I made this vain speech, how diligently my good stars were at work
to realize what it had expressed.

The capiji applauded my intention; the more so, as he took some little interest that my resolutions
should be put into practice; for he had a son, a barber, whom he wished to set up in business;
and what could be more desirable, in every respect, than to see him installed in the shop in
which my poor father had flourished so successfully, close to his post at the caravanserai?

He made proposals that I should dispose of the shop and all its furniture to him, which I agreed
to do, upon the evaluation of some well-known brother of the strap, and thus I was relieved
of one of my remaining cares.

As for my father’s house and furniture, notwithstanding my feelings at the recent conduct of
my mother, I determined, by way of acquiring a good name (of which I was very much in want),
to leave her in full possession of them, reserving to myself the temesoûts, or deeds, which
constituted me its lawful owner.

All being settled and agreed upon, I immediately proceeded to work. I received five hundred
piastres from the capiji for my shop; for he also had been a great accumulator of his savings,
and everybody allowed that money was never laid out to better advantage, since the shop was
sure to enjoy a great run of business, owing to its excellent situation. I therefore became
worth in all about one hundred and ten tomauns in gold, a coin into which I changed my silver,
for the greater facility which it gave me of carrying it about my person. Part of this I laid
out in clothes, and part in the purchase of a mule with its necessary furniture. I gave the
preference to a mule, because, after mature deliberation, I had determined to abandon the character
of a sahib shemshir, or a man of the sword, in which, for the most part, I had hitherto appeared
in life, and adopt that of a sahib calem, or a man of the pen, for which, after my misfortunes,
and the trial which I had in some measure made of it at Kom, I now felt a great predilection.

‘It will not suit me, now, to be bestriding a horse,’ said I to myself, ‘armed, as I used to
be, at all points, with sword by my side, pistols in my girdle, and a carbine at my back. I
will neither deeply indent my cap, and place it on one side, as before, with my long curls
dangling behind my ears, but wind a shawl round it, which will give me a new character; and,
moreover, clip the curls, which will inform the world that I have renounced it and its vanities.
Instead of pistols, I will stick a roll of papers in my girdle; and, in lieu of a cartouche-box,
sling a Koran across my person. Besides, I will neither walk on the tips of my toes, nor twist
about my body, nor screw up my waist, nor throw my shoulders forward, nor swing my hands to
and fro before me, nor in short take upon myself any of the airs of a kasheng, of a beau, in
which I indulged when sub-deputy to the chief executioner. No; I will, for the future, walk
with my back bent, my head slouching, my eyes looking on the ground, my hands stuck either
in front of my girdle, or hanging perpendicular down my sides, and my feet shall drag one after
the other, without the smallest indication of a strut. Looking one’s character is all in all;
for if, perchance, I happen to say a foolish thing, it will be counted as wisdom, when it comes
from a mortified looking face, and a head bound round with a mollah’s shawl, particularly when
it is accompanied with a deep sigh, and an exclamation of Allah ho Akbar! or Allah, Allah il
Allah! and if, perchance, I am brought face to face with a man of real learning, and am called
upon to sustain my character, I have only to look wise, shut my lips, and strictly keep my
own counsel. Besides, I can read; and, with the practice that I intend to adopt, it will not
be long before I shall be able to write a good hand;--that alone, by enabling me to make a
copy of the Koran, will entitle me to the respect of the world.’

With reflections such as these I passed my time until it was necessary to decide whither I
should bend my steps. Everything told me that I ought to make the most of the good impression
which I had left behind me, on the minds of the mûshtehed of Kom and his disciples, for he
was the most likely person to help me in my new career: he might recommend me to some mollah
of his acquaintance, who would take me as his scribe or his attendant, and teach me the way
that I should go. Besides, I left him so abruptly when through his means I had been released
from my confinement in the sanctuary, that I felt I had a debt of gratitude still to pay. ‘I
will take him a present,’ said I; ‘he shall not say that I am unmindful of his goodness.’ Accordingly
I turned over in my thoughts what I ought to present, when I again determined upon a praying-carpet,
which I forthwith purchased; reflecting, at the same time, that it would make a comfortable
seat, when duly folded, on the top of my mule’s pad.

I had now nearly finished all that I had to do, previous to my departure. I was equipped ready
for my journey, and I flattered myself that my outward appearance was that of a rigid mollah.
I did not take upon myself the title of one, but rather left that to circumstances; but, in
the meanwhile, the epithet of Hajji, which had been given to me as a pet name when I was a
child, now came very opportunely to my assistance, to aid me to sustain my new character.

One duty I still had to accomplish, and that was to pay the expenses of my father’s funeral.
I do own that, cheated as I had been of my lawful patrimony, I felt it hard that such an expense
should fall upon me; and several times had planned a departure from Ispahan unknown to anybody,
in order that the burden might fall upon the âkhon and my mother, to whom I had intended the
honour of payment; but my better feelings got the mastery, and reflecting that by acting thus
I should render myself fully entitled to the odious epithet peder sukhtéh[86] (one whose father
is burnt) without further combat, I went round to each of the attendants, namely, mollahs,
mourners, and washers of the dead, and paid them their dues.

I took leave of my mother without much regret, and she did not increase the tenderness of our
parting by any great expression of sorrow. She had her plans, I had mine; and, considering
how we stood circumstanced, the less we ran in each other’s way the better. I mounted my mule
at break of day, and, ere the sun had past its meridian, was already considerably advanced
on my road to Kom. I loitered but little on my journey, notwithstanding the pleasures which
a halt at Kashan might have afforded me, and on the ninth day I once again saw the gilded cupola
of the tomb of Fatimeh.

Alighting at a small caravanserai in the town, I saw my mule well provided, and then, with
my present to the mûshtehed under my arm, I proceeded to his house. His door was open to every
one, for he made no parade of servants to keep the stranger in awe, as may be seen at the houses
of the great in Persia; and, leaving my carpet at the door with my shoes, I entered the room,
in one corner of which I found the good man seated.

He immediately recognized me, and, giving me a welcome reception, he desired me to seat myself,
which I did, with all proper respect, at the very edge of the felt carpet.

He asked me to relate the history of my adventures since I left Kom, for he professed himself
interested in my fate; and, having made him all the necessary acknowledgments for procuring
my release from the sanctuary, I related all that had befallen me. I also told him what a calling
I felt within me to devote myself to a holy life, and entreated his help to procure me some
situation in which I might show my zeal for the interests of the true faith.

He reflected for a moment, and said, ‘that very morning he had received a letter from one of
the principal men of the law of Tehran, the Mollah Nadân, who was much in want of one who would
act as half scribe and half servant; one, in short, who might be of good materials for a future
mollah, and whom he would instruct in all that was necessary in that vocation.’

My heart leaped within me when I heard this, for it was precisely the place that my imagination
had created. ‘Leave it to me,’ thought I, ‘to become a whole mollah, when once I have been
made half a one.’

Without hesitation I entreated the mûshtehed to continue his good offices in my behalf, which
he promised to do; and forthwith addressed a small note, with his own hand, to the Mollah Nadân.
This he sealed, and, having duly fashioned it in its proper shape with his scissors, rolled
it up and delivered it to me; saying, ‘Proceed to Tehran immediately; no doubt you will find
the place vacant, and the mollah willing to appoint you to fill it.’

I was so happy that I kissed the good man’s hand and the hem of his garment, making him thousands
of acknowledgments for his goodness.

‘I have one more favour to ask of my master,’ said I, ‘which is, that he will deign to accept
a small peish-kesh, a present from his humble slave; it is a praying-carpet, and, should he
honour him so far as to use it, he hopes that now and then he will not forget the donor in
his prayers.’

‘May your house prosper, Hajji,’ said he very graciously, ‘and I am thankful to you for remembering
me, not that there was the least occasion for this present. Be a good Mussulman, wage war against
the infidels, and stone the Sûfis,--that is the only return I ask; and be assured that, by
so doing, you will always find a place in my memory.’

I then presented my gift, with which he seemed much pleased; and, having received my dismissal,
I returned to my caravanserai, in the determination of pursuing my road to the capital as fast
as I could. I did not even give myself time to call upon my other friends at Rom, or even to
take a look at my former unhappy cell in the sanctuary; but, saddling my mule, I pushed on
to the caravanserai of the Pûl-i-dallâk that very night.

I reached Tehran in the evening, and, in order not to see the spot in which the unfortunate
Zeenab was buried, I made a deviation from my straight road, and entered by the Casbin gate.
I was happy to remark that I was not recognized by the guards, who, when I was in office, were
accustomed to show themselves on the alert at my approach. But indeed it was not surprising
that the active, bustling, imperious nasakchi should not be known under the garb of the would-be
humble and insignificant priest; so for the present I felt secure in my disguise, and I boldly
took my way through the bazaars and the most public places of the city, where formerly nothing
but my face was to be seen; and happy was I to find that no one recollected me. I inquired
my way to the house of the Mollah Nadân, which was speedily pointed out, for he was a well-known
character; but, on second thoughts, I deemed it more prudent and convenient to put up at a
small caravanserai, situated near the house of my new master, than to present myself, late
in the day as it then was, to him, upon whom it was my interest, by my looks and appearance,
to produce the best possible impression.

Having taken good care of my mule, I slept soundly after the fatigues of the journey; and the
next morning I repaired to the bath, where, having given a fresh tinge to my beard, and plentifully
used the khena to my hands and feet, I flattered myself that in appearance I was precisely
the sort of person likely to meet with success.

The mollah’s house was situated between the royal mosque and the quarters of the camel artillerymen,
and near to the entrance of the bazaar, which, leading by the gate of the said mosque, opens
at its other extremity immediately on the ditch of the Shah’s palace. It had a mean front;
although, having once passed through the gate, the small courtyard which immediately succeeded
was clean, and well watered; and the room which looked into it, though only whitewashed, had
a set of carpets, which did not indicate wealth, but still spoke the absence of poverty.

In this room was seated a wan and sickly-looking priest, whom I took to be the master of the
house; but I was mistaken--he was in his anderûn, and I was told that he would shortly make
his appearance.

In order to make known my pretensions to being something more than a servant, I sat down, and
entered into conversation with the priest, who, from what I could pick from him, was a dependent
upon the mollah. He, in his turn, endeavoured to discover what my business could be; but he
did not so well succeed, although the strange and mysterious questions which he put drew forth
my astonishment.

‘You are evidently newly arrived in Tehran?’ said he.

‘Yes, at your service,’ said I.

‘You intend probably to make some stay?’ added he.

‘That is not quite certain,’ said I.

Then, after a pause, he said, ‘It is dull living alone, even for a week, and Tehran is a city
full of enjoyment. If there is any service that I can perform, I will do it--upon my eyes, be it.’

‘May your kindness never be less! My business is with the Mollah Nadân.’

‘There is no difference between him and me,’ said he. ‘I can facilitate any business you may
have; and, praise be to Allah, you will be served to your heart’s content. We have at our disposal
of all sorts and all prices.’

‘I am not a merchant,’ said I.

‘There is no necessity to be a merchant,’ said he; ‘it is enough that you are a man and a stranger.
You will find, be it for a year, a month, a week, a day, or even an hour, that you will pass
your time agreeably; upon my head be it.’

I became more and more puzzled at his meaning, and was on the point of asking him to enlighten
my understanding, when the Mollah Nadân, in person, entered the room.

He was a tall handsome man, about forty years of age, with a jet-black beard, glossy with fresh
dye, and with fine brilliant eyes, painted with the powder of antimony. He wore on his head
an immense turban of white muslin, whilst a hirkeh, or Arab cloak, with broad stripes of white
and brown alternately, was thrown over his shoulders. Although his athletic person was better
suited to the profession of arms than to that of the law, yet his countenance had none of the
frankness of the soldier, but on the contrary bespoke cunning and design, while at the same
time it announced good-humour.

I got up at his approach, and immediately presented my note from the mûshtehed, whilst I did
not venture again to sit. Having unrolled it, he looked at me and then at it, as if to divine
what could be my business; but as soon as he had deciphered the seal, his face expanded into
a bright smile, and he requested me to be seated.

‘You are welcome,’ said he; and then he asked me a series of questions concerning the health
of the holy man, which I freely answered, as if intimately acquainted with him.. He read the
note with great attention, but said not a word of its contents. He then began to make apologies
for not having a kalian (a pipe) to offer me, ‘for,’ said he, ‘I am not a smoker of tobacco.
We, who rigidly uphold the true faith, reject all such luxuries, and mortify our senses. Our
Holy Prophet (upon whom be blessings and peace!) has forbidden to his followers whatever intoxicates;
and although tobacco be almost universally used throughout Persia as well as Turkey, yet it
is known sometimes to obscure the understanding, and therefore I abstain from it.’

He continued to talk about himself, his fasts, his penance, and his self-mortification, until
I began to think that I should pass my time but so-so in his house, nor enjoy the delights
the priest had just before promised me; but when I compared his healthy and rubicund face,
his portly and well-fed body, to the regimen which he professed to keep, I consoled myself
by the hope that he allowed great latitude in his interpretation of the law; and perhaps that
I should find, like the house which he inhabited, which had its public and private apartments,
that his own exterior was fitted up for the purposes of the world, whilst his interior was
devoted to himself and his enjoyments.

When left to ourselves (for the priest soon after quitted the room), mollah Nadân, taking the
mûshtehed’s note from his breast, said, that he should be happy to receive me in his service
upon so good a recommendation; and having questioned me upon my qualifications, I gave such
answers, that he expressed himself satisfied.

‘I have long been seeking a person of your character,’ said he, ‘but hitherto without success.
He, who has just left us, has assisted me in my several duties; but he is too much of a napak
(an intriguer) for my purpose. I want one who will look upon my interests as his own, who will
eat his bit of bread with me and be satisfied, without taking a larger share than his due.’

In answer to this, I informed the mollah that although I had already seen much of the world,
yet he would find in me a faithful servant, and one ready to imbibe his principles; for (as
I had already explained to the mûshtehed) my mind was made up to leading a new life, and endeavouring
under his direction to become the mirror of a true Mussulman.

‘In that,’ said the mollah, ‘esteem yourself as the most fortunate of men; for I am looked
up to as the pattern of the followers of the blessed Mahomed. In short, I may be called a living
Koran. None pray more regularly than I. No one goes to the bath more scrupulously, nor abstains
more rigidly from everything that is counted unclean. You will find neither silk in my dress,
nor gold on my fingers. My ablutions are esteemed the most complete of any man’s in the capital,
and the mode of my abstersion the most in use. I neither smoke nor drink wine before men; neither
do I play at chess, at gengifeh (cards), or any game which, as the law ordains, abstracts the
mind from holy meditation. I am esteemed the model of fasters; and during the Ramazan give
no quarter to the many hungry fellows who come to me under various pretexts, to beg a remission
of the strictness of the law. “No,” do say to them, “die rather than eat, or drink, or smoke.
Do like me, who, rather than abate one tittle of the sacred ordinance, would manage to exist
from Jumah to Jumah (Friday) without polluting my lips with unlawful food.”’

Although I did not applaud his tenacity about fasting, yet I did not fail to approve all he
said, and threw in my exclamations so well in time, that I perceived he became almost as much
pleased with me as he appeared to be with himself.

‘From the same devotedness to religion,’ continued he, ‘I have ever abstained from taking to
myself a wife, and in that respect I may be looked upon as exceeding even the perfection of
our Holy Prophet; who (blessings attend his beard!) had wives and women slaves, more even than
Sûleiman ibn Daoud himself. But although I do not myself marry, yet I assist others in doing
so; and it is in that particular branch of my duty in which I intend more especially to employ
you.’

‘By my eyes,’ said I, ‘you must command me; for hitherto I am ignorant as the Turk in the fields.’

‘You must know then,’ said he, ‘that, to the scandal of religion, to the destruction of the
law, the commerce of cowlies, or courtezans, had acquired such ascendancy in this city, that
wives began to be esteemed as useless. Men’s houses were ruined, and the ordinances of the
Prophet disregarded. The Shah, who is a pious prince, and respects the Ullemah, and who holds
the ceremony of marriage sacred, complained to the head of the law, the mollah bashi, of this
subversion of all morality in his capital, and, with a reprimand for his remissness, ordered
him to provide a remedy for the evil. The mollah bashi (between you and me, be it said) is
in every degree an ass,--one who knows as much of religion and its duties, as of Frangistân
and its kings. But I--I, who am the mollah Nadân,--I suggested a scheme in which the convenience
of the public and the ordinances of the law are so well combined, that both may be suited without
hindrance to either. You know it is lawful among us to marry for as long or as short a time
as may be convenient; and in that case the woman is called mûtî.

“Why then,” said I to the chief priest, “why not have a sufficient number of such like wives
in store, for those who know not where to seek for a companion? The thing is easy to be done,
and Nadân the man to do it.”

‘The mollah bashi, who, though the cream of blockheads in all other cases, is very quick-sighted
when his interest is concerned, caught at my idea, for he foresaw a great harvest of gain for
himself. Already facing the ocean traveler with petite, plump, chubby, with black cloth jacket,
open neck width flannel shirt, the hat patent leather round as carelessly over one ear, black
tie and floating monumental boots full of nails, playing like horse shoes. Since the road
passes as a landslide, trampling all over the world to huge, rude, insolent and smelling of beer
as a cask, castle street transporting luggage and stuff, with a strength and agility that seem
borrowed the horse to the locomotive Norman. Ora rubs us the steward, smiling with malice because
it shows us the Calypso suspended arm who has recorded all shillings, hidden away in the voyage, and
because instead of the humble napkin, that white and prosaic livery of floating high, it boasts
a blue coat of white or yellow buttons, the cap of the ocean and the narrow domestic tie the dandy.
Finally, the guardian of the customs, with their air of someone important or keeper of the door,
throw on the newly come a watchful eye or protection as an understanding you have in your
hand the keys of the doors.

The second part of the city, separated from the port, then appears
quaint, cheerful and pleasant the elegance of their homes, inns and
palaces, the beauty of its malls, the exquisite toilet macadamized
its wide streets, grace the gardens, the smoke from their tall chimneys,
their roofs of snow-covered roofs, its rich and innumerable stores,
the romantic Gothic towers of the temples, and the incessant movement
of pedestrians, vendors of baubles, beautiful ladies and Loreto, cars,
carts, of Baratero, boys screaming, and he can do the animation in
a commercial city.

Southampton is a town renowned, and this depends on much of its beauty materials and character
of its population. This is forty to fifty thousand inhabitants, that the movement exterior increases
more or less accidentally. The city has a theater, which is regularly closed, - and no journalism,
it has only a piece Weekly. His real journalism is in London, owing to the active movement of
the telegraph and railroads, and what makes the British theater does
not have many fans.

The French love the theater, coffee and the newspaper - the English horse racing, the stock market
and stock. And in a city so essentially commercial and Southampton, where they cross day by day
thousands and thousands Traveler happen quickly, naturally shows no importance. Hence the relentless
locomotive whistle, when leaving or arriving in the large station that centralizes many railways
in prodigious activity, the many parts Telegraph electrical wires vibrating at all hours,
the resulting speculation to the transatlantic business, and stunning movement of large freight
wagons crossing in all directions, you do understand the traveler in England there is almost no
time to live, let alone to have fun.

In this country, trade, speculation, practical life, spirits serious reflective, icily calculating,
time is the most valuable capital, and to get interest or make it produce as everyone walks
by rail, despite the cold of the characters. Every word comes out as, priced by the lips, for
economy, every man is a locomotive, an express train, each share is an estimate, the human being
is the number made flesh and blood - the arithmetic thinking or acting. In England you live so
hastily, that the entire nation is a circus horse races or a huge
railway.

There is no time to feel the heart, because the pocket is everything. Being English businessman
is no way to be moral is just one arithmetic operation, made by a head a pair of arms, one leg,
etc.

Southampton is a beautiful city.

No monuments, it is almost new, but has several Norman Gothic style churches somewhat curious.
Its mayor is reduced to real bridges dry very strong, many railway lines, large and splendid eateries,
beautiful villas around, some very well-maintained public buildings,
and a generally elegant construction of houses.

The streets are generally quite spacious, many of them cut at right angles, and almost all the
ground macadamized. Do not miss beautiful walks, well kept large squares and numerous markets.

The affluent neighborhood, where they have their grand and luxurious stores trade, is the side
West, comprising mainly the magnificent High Street, Oxford, in which countless stores in session
as the civilization of Europe and the world can trade produce.

In the center are the workshops or factories and middle-class rooms on the south, near of the
great railroad station and telegraph, and custom, are the famous
hotels for travelers, and in the eastern district workers live, they
cross the sutler ants and farmers, ending the city to the north and
east by a series of estates, orchards and vegetable gardens that look
even more picturesque in the days rigorous winter ice.

Going faster city neighborhoods can penetrate in various churches and tour adjacent cemeteries.
Upon entering a church Anglican, empty, dark, unadorned any kind, without pictures or fiction,
it feels (first time) a vivid impression. They lack all poetry: that is not the realm of the senses,
but of reason.

It includes that the Protestant church is not worldly or party place of entertainment, but gathering
solemn, that God is not there the actor wickedly reduced human forms to appear in a theater
full of colors, draperies and paint pictures, but an invisible power and supreme worshiped with
infinite respect, and so big, so unspeakably beautiful that can not be represented, because there
is nothing in the world like it, except the soul of man, mysterious particle an inscrutable power.

I
have never believed in what is called sophistically the fate of the races, but for me, are
institutions, not the blood (or climates where both grade) which form character moral of the
people. I confirmed this opinion to visit for the first time in my life in Southampton, a Protestant
church. No country was more fierce until middle age, which of England, none more turbulent and unfriendly
to civilization.

And HOWEVER, today is cool, thoughtful, civil, peaceful, humane, moral and highly progressive.
Who has operated this miracle? - The protantestismo and public freedoms secured in the two revolutions
seventeenth century .-- If they have given the people the civil life and morality in the awareness
law, Protestantism founded in England during the reign of reason, of free inquiry, of deep reverence,
without the trappings of superstition and modern idolatry.

There is no subject in England as respectable as the tombs, a cemetery is there positively the
temple of death, which enjoys absolute immunity. Abroad quo ignores this is greatly admired, to
go to Southampton or another English town, to see the cemeteries side of the church, separated from
the street only by a gate with free tickets, and boasting its simple
and severe monuments between ivy and small cypress trees, this dislike
in any way.

Many of these monuments with inscriptions in Latin ordinarily (that language of the dead - men,
centuries or empires) are reduced to cut stones, placed standing as landmarks. No doubt that
this system of outdoor mausoleums, within cities, is injurious to health, and England are already
working to suppress them. But there is for I do not know what the philosophy of epigrammatic solemnly
in the union of life and death. The crowd, as they walk down the street in front of a cemetery,
includes the tomb every day is the end of the miserable passions of a life that virtue exalts,
and strengthens its Pilgrimage to the mundane consciousness with the thought that something
mysterious that guess behind the slab.

Let us pass from death to life. England is the land of beautiful women, admirably beautiful but
not beautiful, - that is, exquisitely patterned shell statues, with hair golden, crisp and abundant,
blue eyes or brown, morbid forms, pink skin and pure, lovely arms, and a whole body of Venus,
except that if the feet, which belong antediluvian fossil gender or because they are mammoth.
But these women as full beauty, are, in general, that life in their
eyes, that fire in the smile, the poetic revealing expression of soul
and feeling, which constitute beauty.

Do not confuse never the pretty, graceful, the beautiful, the beautiful and the beautiful in
a vulgar and common name, because each is a special type that corresponds to different conditions.

But
if England is the land of the beautiful, and London contains hundreds of thousands of such misleading
tale (true sophistry, because it does not correspond to moral physical seduction), - the cities
like Southampton and Liverpool are the outposts of that admirable army wonderful faces. As there
have so many foreigners, rich American, Spanish gallant and elegant French, from one to another
world, the devil (by itself or will not cast fault) - the devil does not sleep and is very proactive
and hospitable, had the talent inspiring many of his most beautiful crazy parochial enthusiasm for
the sea breezes of Southampton.

Unhappy the alien who has no strength to resist the seduction of those sirens dangerous, and
believes in the treasures of the sea port love!

I know the true story of an excellent Spanish-Colombian single bachelor, who used to see the faces
of his parish olive Indians, came to desaburrirse in Europe. Nomas to get to Southampton,
the proper descendant of Colombia, who never had so fat, we found parallel. Started falling
in love with every female he saw, because all seemed ladies of rank, of course wearing hats of velvet,
silk robes and stylish footwear, apparel that Spanish-Colombia represent only the ladies of
good society.

But then after repairing their ladies was selling fruit or trinkets, or wore distinctive of domesticity,
and lost their first illusions, in association with a few handfuls of pounds British representatives
of the old ounces unpacked.

Yet the continued fascination, and our bachelor seemed confined to Southampton, looking around
in a daze and with clear eyes and no sight. One day he saw a beautiful mermaid pass in a luxury car,
and then descend on the pavement of the street. Met, and the English under the avocado guessed the
existence of a Colombian gold mine, threw a those looks are being knocked round like balls of the
gaucho of Buenos Aires, and he magnetized. The rest went like all
love stories.

This is back to give two months our New World bachelor admonished, in a lucid moment, that you
were just a Background around 150 pounds, no relationship to save him the trouble. It was necessary
resignation. He made his package, he fled to the siren and sailed for Colombia, with pleasure
Europe have met .... He had the persuasion that the world after Southampton is just this side
of the Atlantic. Blessed!

In Southampton I witnessed a hilarious episode, which scarcely give summary. In the hotel they
stayed in that city with my family for four days, there was a very young lady linda, named
Fanny, and was staying a young colleague of mine of navigation. The law of attraction took effect
and my partner (we call H) fell in love with Miss Fanny. This was not insensitive, and conceded
some innocent flirting, own ten and six years.

H no more thought to continue to London or Paris, and every moment to ingenious developments
to achieve moments of conversation alone with the girl, like himself, by dint of Spanish, the called,
one day I went to the house, I saw Miss Fanny on a balcony and stopped to say hello and there
will be times when very pidgin English. I went, and going through a broker gave with H, which
came out of a common room, rubbing his hands and happy.

- What do we have? I said.

- Fanny That girl just gave me the most delicious kiss the world!

- The devil!

I replied, if I just view it on the balcony ....

- It is impossible, because I go to speak alone with her in the hall
opposite.

I did not advance the discussion of prudence, but I was convinced that the assertion H was nothing
more than a escutcheons boastful lover lie. The next day haul very funny we cleared up the
mystery. Miss Fanny had a twin sister, as well as in all, that neither my wife with the penetration
of a woman had been apart. As Spanish teenager did not know a jack (or an h) of English, his
language was that of smiles and signs, flowers and elegant trifles gifts, etc., etc., and had been
able to sustain, without knowing it and not understand what Fanny and Caroline, a do-entry
amorcejos Double, not without wonder sometimes how quickly Fanny entered through a door and
came shortly after the contrary, bilocuidad phenomenon is understood
to know that had in the house two or a Fanny Fannys duplicate.

I ask my Spanish justice noted that the point of understanding the game that a rare chance you
kept talking, he went to take his ticket for the train to London, Determined to avoid a love
for duplicata they could be so bad after the beginning so laughable.

I advise my readers very respectfully avoided in all cases the love catering, as dangerous as
the circle friendships,

On March 12 I took the express train leaving for London at half past eleven. What impression
so strong the feeling I experienced when first drawn, with the speed of the hurricane, iron
for that animal, animated by the spirit of man and whistling like
a giant angry serpent, called the locomotive!

The soul is fascinated by that power that makes delirious, to dream with their eyes covered by
mysterious regions the fog light of science, and attend to the endless wonderful generation
of progress.

Forests, villas, castles, aristocratic, rustic huts, hills, plains, streams, the crops, livestock
and people, go ahead fantastic visions of the traveler as boxes or
fabulous legends, - and the illusion is so sometimes powerful, according
to the beauty of the landscape, instantly found and lost, that comes
to doubt himself and felt to be convinced that this is not a dream,
but a gigantic and sublime reality of the wonders of civilization. He said,
that after the first feelings of misery at his captivity had gone by, his time passed more
agreeably than he had expected; for he had nothing to do but to sit with the camels, whose
nature being of the same calm and philosophic cast as his own, suited his quiet and sedentary
habits. His food was indifferent, but then he had excellent water; and the only privation which
he seemed to regret was tobacco,--a want which long previous habit rendered infinitely painful.
Years had run on in this manner, and he had made up his mind to pass the remainder of his life
with the camels, when his destiny took another turn, and he once more had the cheering hope
of being restored to liberty. One, who gave himself out for a prophet, appeared among the Turcomans.
According to the custom of such personages, he established his influence by pretending to work
two or three miracles, and which were received as such by that credulous people. His word became
a law. The most celebrated and experienced marauders freely laid their spoils at his feet,
and willingly listed under his banner, in whatever enterprise he chose to propose. Osman Aga
presented himself before him, asserted his privileges of a Sûni, and, moreover, of being an
emir, and at length succeeded in making the impostor procure his liberty without ransom, which
he did, in order to advance the glory of the true faith. Once free, he lost no time in proceeding
to Meshed, where, to his great good fortune, he met merchants from Bagdad, one of whom being
nearly connected to him by marriage, advanced him a small sum of money to trade with. He received
encouraging accounts of the state of the Turkish markets for the produce of Bokhara, and thither
he proceeded to make his purchases on the spot. Owing to his long residence among the Turcomans,
he had acquired much useful knowledge concerning their manners and customs--particularly on
the subject of buying and selling--and this enabled him to trade, with much success, between
Bokhara and Persia, until he had gained a sufficient sum to enable his return to his country
with advantage. He was now on the road to Constantinople, with several mules laden with the
merchandise of Bokhara, Samarcand, and the east of Persia; and having disposed of it there,
it was then his intention to return to his native city, Bagdad. He expressed, however, his
intention to remain at Tehran until the spring caravan should assemble, in order to enjoy some
of the pleasures of an imperial residence, after having lived so long among savages, as he
called the Turcomans, and he inquired from me how he might most agreeably pass his time.

My fair charges immediately came into my mind; and recollecting of old that he was a great
advocate for the marriage state, I proposed a wife to him without loss of time.

Certainly, thought I, nothing was ever more strongly pronounced than the doctrine of predestination
has been in this instance. Here, one of my masters arrives from regions beyond the rising of
the sun, to espouse the widow of another of my masters, who dies just at the very nick of time
to produce the meeting, which I, who come from the countries of the south, step in to promote.

The hakîm’s widow was the fattest of the three, and therefore I made no scruple in proposing
her to Osman, who at once acceded to my offer. Softening down the little asperities of her
temper, making much of her two eyebrows in one, and giving a general description of her person,
suited to the Ottoman taste, I succeeded in giving a very favorable opinion to the bridegroom
of his intended.

I then proceeded to inform the mollah Nadân of my success, who appeared to listen with delight
to the adventures of this couple, which I related to him with scrupulous detail. He directed
me how to proceed, and informed me, in order to make the marriage lawful, that a vakeel, or
trustee, must appear on the part of the woman, and another on that of the man. That the woman’s
vakeel having beforehand agreed upon the terms of the marriage, proceeded to ask the following
question of the man’s vakeel, in the Arabic tongue.

‘Have you agreed to give your soul to me upon such and such conditions?’ to which the other
answers, ‘I have agreed’; and then the parties are held to be lawfully joined together. Nadân
himself proposed to officiate on the part of the hakîm’s widow, and I on the part of Osman;
and it was left to my ingenuity to obtain as large a fee as possible for ourselves, on this
happy occasion. 

Almost thought this relationship omit some details concerning the first of the monuments overlooking
the Thames - Westminster Abbey - despite its importance, because I proposed but not describe
what I've seen. I had no time to go all the interior of the cathedral of the glories of Britain,
which is the reverse of the Tower of London. The The exterior is of incalculable magnificence,
considered the facade and towers, as the body of the building is very simple. The church dates
from the beginning of the eleventh century, and is it takes place the coronation of the monarchs
of Great Britain.

As I said before, Westminster is the Pantheon of the great figures of England in the science,
literature, rhetoric, government, war, navy, poetry, fine arts and everything that can open
the way to immortality. However, Westminster has asylum notables of dubious spelling, many of
whom have paid rather than passport deserved to rest in some of the glorious tombs of the venerable
cathedral of the dead and kings, full of statues, busts and magnificent
works of sculpture.

One of the most notable of these works is the great tomb of Edward IV, sculptures curd magnificent,
and has a unique way by the fall round towers. Are very interesting also the tombs of Edward
the Confessor, Anglo-Saxon king - Henry III and Henry V, - stubborn as the unfortunate Mary Stuart,
and Elizabeth, his niece, his rival and executioner - James I of England - Charles II, son of a monarch
beheaded by ruling of his people - and Jorje II, which magnified
his country supported the talents of Walpole and the first Pitt. Besides, more than once, a certain fifty ducats that had formerly
belonged to Osman, and which I had appropriated to my own use, came into my mind, and made
me fear that it also might have a place in his: ‘and if,’ said I, ‘he gets displeased and angry,
who knows what ashes may not fall upon my head!’

However, they were married; and I believe most truly that he did not succeed in getting one
glimpse of his intended until I had pronounced the awful words, ‘I agree’; when in his impatience
he partly pulled her veil on one side, and I need not say that he was far from fainting with
delight.

As soon as he was well satisfied that his charmer was not a Zuleikha, he called me to him,
and said, ‘Hajji, I thought that youth, at least, she would have possessed; but she is more
wrinkled than any camel. How is this?’

I got out of the scrape as well as I was able, by assuring him that she had once been the flower
of the royal harem, and reminded him that nothing had so much to do with marriage as destiny.

‘Ah! that destiny’, said he, ‘is an answer for everything; but be its effects what it may,
it can no more make an old hag a young woman, than it can make one and one three.’

Sorely did I fear that he would return his bargain upon our hands; but when he found that it
was impossible to expect anything better in a mutî, a class of females, who generally were
the refuse of womankind,--old widows, and deserted wives; and who, rather than live under the
opprobrium that single life entails in our Mahomedan countries, would put up with anything
that came under the denomination of husband, he agreed to take her to his home. I expected,
like a hungry hawk, who, the instant he is unhooded, pounces upon his prey, that Osman as soon
as he had got a sight of his charmer, would have carried her off with impatience; but I was
disappointed. He walked leisurely on to his room in the caravanserai, and told her that she
might follow him whenever it suited her convenience.

Upon a closer acquaintance with my master, the mollah Nadân, I found that, besides his being
the most covetous of men, he was also the most ambitious; and that his great and principal
object was to become the chief priest of Tehran. To that he turned all his thoughts, and left
nothing untried which might bring him into notice, either as a zealous practiser of the ordinances
of his religion, or a persecutor of those who might be its enemies. He was the leader in prayer
at the principal mosque; he lectured at the royal medresseh, or college; and whenever he could,
he encouraged litigants to appeal to him for the settlement of their disputes. On every occasion,
particularly at the festival of the No Rouz, when the whole corps of mollahs are drawn up in
array before the king, to pray for his prosperity, he always managed to make himself conspicuous
by the over-abundance of adulation which he exhibited, and by making his sonorous voice predominate
over that of others.

By such means, he had acquired considerable celebrity among the people, although those who
knew him better held him in no great estimation. An opportunity soon occurred which abundantly
proved this, and which, as I will now narrate, gave an entire new turn to my fortunes.

The winter had passed over our heads, and spring was already far advanced, when reports reached
the capital, that in the southern provinces of the kingdom, particularly in Lar and Fars, there
had been such a total want of rain that serious apprehensions of a famine were entertained.
As the year rolled on, the same apprehensions prevailed in the more northern provinces; and
a drought, such as before was never known, gave rise to the most dismal forebodings. The Shah
ordered prayers to be put up at all the mosques in the city for rain, and the mollah bashi
was very active in enforcing the order.

My master Nadân had there too good an opportunity of manifesting his religious zeal, and of
making himself conspicuous by his exertions, not to take advantage of it; and he lost not a
moment in giving himself all the stir in his power. Conscious of the influence he had obtained
over the populace, he went a step farther than his rival the chief priest, and invited an immense
crowd of the lower orders to follow him to a large open space without the city, where he took
the lead in prayer.

The drought still continuing, the Shah ordered all ranks of people to attend him, and join
in the supplications which he had first commenced. He accounted this so great a triumph, that
his zeal now knew no bounds. He caused all sects, Christians, Jews, and Guebres, as well as
Mussulmans, to put up their prayers: still the heavens were inexorable; no rain came, the despair
increased, and Nadân redoubled his zeal.

At length, one morning when the weather was more than usually sultry, he addressed a mob which
he had purposely gathered round his house, in words something to this purpose:--

‘Is there nothing more to be done, O men of Tehran! to avert this misfortune which awaits the
land of Irâk? ’Tis plain that the heavens have declared against us, and that this city contains
some, whose vices and crimes must bring the Almighty vengeance upon us. Who can they be but
the kâfirs, the infidels, those transgressors of our law, those wretches, who defile the purity
of our walls by openly drinking wine, that liquor forbidden by the holy Prophet (upon whom
be blessing and peace!) and by making our streets the scene of their vices? Let us go; follow
me to where these odious wine-bibbers live; let us break their jars, and at least destroy one
of the causes of the displeasure of Allah against us.’

Upon this a general stir ensued; and fanaticism, such as I never thought could be excited in
the breasts of men, broke out in the most angry expressions, which were only the forerunners
of the violence that soon after ensued. Nadân, putting himself at the head of the crowd, haranguing
as he pressed onwards, and followed by me--who had become as outrageous a fanatic as the rest--led
us to the Armenian quarter of the city.

The peaceable Christians, seeing this body of enraged Mohamedans making for their houses, knew
not what to do. Some barricaded their doors, others fled, and others again stood transfixed,
like men impaled. But they did not long remain in doubt of our intentions; for first they were
assailed with volleys of stones, and then with such shouts of execration and abuse, that they
expected nothing less than a general massacre to ensue.

The mollah entered the houses of the principal Armenians, followed by the most violent of the
mob, and began an active search for wine. He made no distinction between the women’s apartments
and the public ones, but broke open every door; and when at length he had found the jars in
which the liquor was contained, I leave the reader to imagine what was the havoc which ensued.
They were broken into a thousand pieces; the wine flowed in every direction; and the poor owners
could do nothing but look on and wring their hands.

By the time that this ceremony had been performed in every house, the fury of the mob had risen
to the utmost, and from the houses they proceeded to the church, which being forced open, they
demolished everything within--books, crucifixes, ornaments, furniture--nothing was spared;
and as there would not be wanting abundance of rogues on such occasions, it was soon discovered
that whatever valuables the despoiled had possessed were carried away.

The ruin was now complete; and nothing more was left to the fury of the mob but the unfortunate
sufferers themselves, who perhaps would next have been attacked, had not a king’s ferash appeared,
accompanied by one of the principal Armenians, and their presence produced an almost instantaneous
return to reason.

Apprehensive of the consequences of their conduct, all Nadân’s followers made a precipitate
retreat, leaving that revered personage and myself to face the king’s officer. I presume our
feelings will not be much envied when we heard him inform us, that the King of Kings demanded
our immediate presence. The mollah looked at me, and I at him; and, perhaps, two bearded men
never looked more like raw fools than we did at that moment. He endeavoured to temporize, and
requested our conductor to accompany him to his house, in order that he might put on his red
cloth stockings.

‘There will be no occasion for red cloth stockings,’ said the ferash, dryly.

This produced a universal tremor in the mollah, and I must own that it communicated itself
to me in no agreeable manner. ‘But what have I done, in the name of the Prophet?’ exclaimed
he:--‘the enemies of our faith must be overthrown. Is it not so?’ said he to the ferash.

‘You will see,’ returned the impenetrable man of blows.

We at length reached the palace, and at the entrance found the grand vizier, seated with the
mollah bashi, in the chief executioner’s apartment.

As we stood at the window, the grand vizier said to the mollah Nadân, ‘In the name of Ali,
what is this that we hear? Have your wits forsaken you? Do you forget that there is a king
in Tehran?’

Then the mollah bashi exclaimed, ‘And who am I, that you should presume to take the lead against
the infidels?’

‘Conduct them before the king,’ exclaimed the executioner, as he arose and took his staff of
office in hand. ‘Do not keep the Centre of the Universe waiting.’

More dead than alive, we were paraded through the avenues of the palace, and then stepped through
the small low door, which introduced us into the enclosed garden, where we found the king seated
in an upper room.

As we approached, I perceived the august monarch twisting his mustachios, which is always esteemed
a sign of wrath. I cast a glance at Nadân, and I saw him streaming from every pore. We took
our shoes off, as soon as we had come within sight of him, and advanced to the brink of the
marble basin of water. The party who stood before the king consisted of the mollah bashi, the
chief executioner, the Armenian, Nadân, and myself.

The chief executioner then placed his staff of office on the ground, and making a low prostration,
said, with all the prefatory form of words usual in addressing the Shah, ‘This is the mollah
Nadân, and this his servant,’ pointing to me.

‘Say, mollah,’ said the king, addressing himself to my master in a very composed tone of voice,
‘how long is it since you have undertaken to ruin my subjects? Who gave you the power? Have
you become a prophet? or do you perhaps condescend to make yourself the king? Say, fellow,
what dirt is this that you have been eating?’

The culprit, who on every other occasion never wanted words, here lost all power of utterance.
He stammered out a few incoherent sentences about infidels, wine, and the want of rain, and
then remained immovable.

‘What does he say?’ said the king to the mollah bashi. ‘I have not learnt from whom he claims
his authority.’

‘May I be your sacrifice,’ said the chief priest; ‘he says, that he acted for the benefit of
your majesty’s subjects who wanted rain, which they could not get so long as the infidels drank
wine in Tehran.’

‘So you destroy part of my subjects to benefit the remainder! By the king’s beard,’ said the
king to Nadân, ‘tell me, do I stand for nothing in my own capital? Are a parcel of poor dogs
of infidels to be ruined under my nose, without my being asked a question whether it be my
will or not that they should be so? Speak, man; what dream have you been dreaming? Your brain
has dried up.’ Then raising his voice, he said, ‘After all, we are something in our dominions,
and the kâfirs, though such they be, shall know it. Here, ferashes’ (calling his officers to
him), ‘here, tear this wretch’s turban from his head and his cloak from his back; pluck the
beard from his chin; tie his hands behind him, place him on an ass with his face to the tail,
parade him through the streets, and then thrust him neck and shoulders out of the city, and
let his hopeful disciple (pointing to me) accompany him.’

Happy was I not to have been recognized for the lover of the unfortunate Zeenab. My fate was
paradise compared to that of my master; for never was order more completely executed than that
which had passed the Shah’s lips.

Nadân’s beard was ripped from his chin with as much ease by the ferashes as if they were plucking
a fowl; and then, with abundance of blows to hasten our steps, they seized upon the first ass
which they met, and mounted the priest, the once proud and ambitious priest, upon it, and paced
him slowly through the streets. I walked mournfully behind, having had my mollah’s shawl torn
from my head, and my hirkeh (cloak) from my back.

When we had reached one of the gates Nadân was dismounted, and with scarcely a rag to our backs,
we were turned out into the open country; and it is worthy of remark, that no sooner had we
left the city than rain began to pour in torrents, as if the heavens had been waiting to witness
the disgrace of two of Persia’s greatest rogues, and to give the mollah Nadân the lie in favour
of the poor, injured, and ruined Armenians.

‘So,’ said I to my companion, as soon as we were left to ourselves, ‘so I am indebted to you
for this piece of happiness. If I had thought that this adventure was to have been the result
of the mûshtehed’s recommendation, you would never have seen Hajji Baba in this trim. What
could it signify to you whether rain fell or no, or whether the Armenians got drunk or remained
sober? This is what we have got by your officiousness.’

The mollah was in too pitiable a condition for me to continue upbraiding him any longer. We
walked in silence by the side of each other in the saddest manner possible, until we reached
the first village on our road. Here we made a halt, in order to deliberate upon what we should
do. My unfortunate companion was expelled the city, therefore it was impossible for him to
show himself in it until the storm had blown over; but as we were both very anxious to know
what had become of our respective properties--he of his house and effects, I of my clothes,
my money, and mule,--it was determined that I should return and gain the necessary intelligence.

I entered Tehran in the evening, and, making myself as little recognizable as possible, I slunk
through the streets to the mollah’s house. At the first glimpse I discovered that we were entirely
ruined; for it was in possession of a swarm of harpies who made free property of everything
that fell under their hands. One of the first persons whom I met coming from it was the very
ferash who had been sent by the Shah to conduct us to his presence; and he was mounted on my
mule, with a bundle in his lap before him, doubtless containing my wardrobe, or that of the mollah.

So borne down was I by this sight, and so fearful of being discovered, that I hurried away
from the spot; and, scarcely knowing whither I was bending my steps, I strolled into a bath,
situated not far from the house of our enemy the chief priest. I went in, undressed myself,
and it being almost dark, I was scarcely perceived by the bathing attendants. Going from the
first heated room into the hottest of all, I there took my station in a dark recess, unseen
by any one, and gave free course to my thoughts. I considered to what I could now possibly
turn my hands for a livelihood: for fortune seemed to have abandoned me for ever, and it appeared
that I was marked out for the stricken deer, as the choice game of misfortune.

‘I no sooner fall in love,’ said I, musing, ‘than the king himself becomes my rival, slays
my mistress, and degrades me from my employment. I am the lawful heir to a man of undoubted
wealth: he lives just long enough to acknowledge me; and although everybody tells me that I
ought to be rich, yet I have the mortification to see myself cheated before my face, and I
turn out a greater beggar than ever. The most devout and powerful man of the law in Persia
takes a fancy to me, and secures to me what I expect will be a happy retreat for life: my master
in an evil hour prays for the blessings of heaven to be poured upon us, instead of which we
are visited with its vengeance, driven as exiles from the city, and lose all our property.’
Never did man count up such a sum of miseries as I did when seated in the corner of the bath.
The world seemed for ever gone from me, and I wished for nothing better than to die in the
very spot in which I had nestled myself.

The bath had now been almost entirely abandoned by the bathers, when of a sudden a stir ensued,
and I perceived a man walk in, with a certain degree of parade, whom, through the glimmering
of light that was still left, I recognized to be the mollah bashi in person. Neither he nor
his attendants perceived me; and as soon as he was left to himself (for so he thought) he immediately
got into the reservoir of hot water, or the hazneh (the treasury), as it is called in the baths
of Persia.

Here I heard him for some time splashing about and puffing with all his might; a sort of playfulness
which struck me as remarkable for so grave and sedate a character; and then a most unusual
floundering, attended with a gurgling of the throat, struck my ear.

I conceived that he might be practising some extraordinary bodily exercise, and curiosity impelled
me to rise gently from my corner, and with all the precaution possible, to steal softly on
the tips of my toes to the aperture of the reservoir, and look in.

To my horror, I perceived the head of the law at his last gasp, apparently without a struggle
left in him. It was evident that he had been seized with a fit, and had been drowned before
he could call for help.

All the terrible consequences of this unfortunate event stared me full in the face. ‘What can
now hinder me,’ said I, ‘from being taken up as his murderer? Everybody knew how ill-disposed
against him was my master, the mollah Nadân, and I shall be called the vile instrument of his
enmity.’

Whilst making these reflections, standing upon the step that leads into the reservoir, the
mollah bashi’s servant, followed by a bathing attendant, came in, with the warm linen that
is used on leaving the bath; and seeing a man apparently coming out of the water, naturally
took me for the deceased, and without any words proceeded to rub me down and to put on the
bathing linen. 

And what a contrast that makes the gold carriages of those bankers millionaires and those noble
affluent, with hideous and ridiculous rags of thousands and thousands of beggars! Each come to
bear his greatness, and to shine the light of the sun or of the many sparks of gas lit streets,
convinced that the mob admires them as demigods. His pride makes them look like animals to their
peers around the carriage, hungry, exhausted fatigue, degraded by all the vices and then trampled
on the high street by envied horses pulling the chariot. Deception miserable pride! That crowd
wan and enhambrecida see the mighty move with a sense of deep hatred that contrasts poison.
Each one of those poor outcasts of society says despite bleak: "Many of these men have a hundred,
two hundred, five hundred pounds or more income per day, or at least twenty, - while I can barely
get when I better go, three, four or six pence to keep up with filth .... What one of these gentlemen
spent on a just their magnificent horses would be enough to ensure the subsistence of my family
.... Lord dogs that are more respectable and happy than me, and the mistress of the banker
spends on their gloves every week much more than my wife, who is honored, earning his labors a full
year ....»

Who knows how many curses accompany the indigent miserable sighs and
thinks, while the noble Lord meditates on the project of a hunt or
on the seduction of a young, selfish or the banker will calculate
the benefits of your game bag!

The night is far more suitable to receive the blow of view of the
streets of London at its most crowded.

Sunlight is almost always sad and dull, and only the reflection of illumination that produces
delicious gas figures stand in full force and are in all truth the contrasts of light, shadow
and chiaroscuro. It is then that Oxford and Regent Street, the Strand, and all major arteries
have their splendid movement physiognomy cops. Please note that London has nearly three million
people - that the influx of travelers from all parts of the world is immense - that during the whole
night the indigent and working out in the streets to seek alms, or distractions - that Car circulation
is 13,000 per hour, on average, not counting the thousands buses and trucks, which together amount
to the city to the enormous figure of 80,000 vehicles wheel - and last night favors the transactions
of all kinds and scenes of gallantry which leads to prostitution - and include all the complication
of the box immense offered to the eye.

The stores and shops, beautifully lit by gas in the interior and exterior, hold the infinite variety
of the values ​​they hold, in terms of samples nomas, displayed on
the walls and between bright windows, represent significant capital
or wealth.

Gold, silver, copper, steel and all metals in a thousand ways, shine wherever tempting mole for
the mob, - while the diamonds, all precious stones known and imitation crystals embedded in a jewelry
store of inexhaustible variety, multiply the reflections of the lighting, giving the streets do not know
what aspect of phantasmagoria magical or miraculous as the tales of the Thousand and One Nights.
All that the industry can produce, what art and styling refinement are able to feed the passion
of estate, and how much you may want to meet every need and every whim, is there behind the
glass, enhanced by the reproduction of light and bustle a world that ferments constantly, looking, buying,
coveting, selling, shaking in all directions.

The traveler who is not accustomed to such scenes, which comes from the wilds of the New World
and brings ideas and memories that Babylon entirely exotic trade, create attend representation
to a fantastic dream or contemplate life at through the lens of a peep show, a collection of
drawings extravagant chinoiserie figures or delirium caused by of
an invisible artist and feverish.

Blessed are those who, bringing his heart and ready made spirit to all the surprises and the
careful study of all the wonders and phenomena civilization, has the strength to withstand,
without being dazzled, to the fascination that all the unknown and the great souls have on
impressionable and easy!

Nowhere is this more extreme luxury in London, or are exaggerated with more extravagance fashions
and all kinds of inventions. They generally lack the true elegance - that is the simplicity
and the delicate taste - and even how people insinuate middle class
and the masses is a fund of rudeness and insolence of rude not know
what and rough-repellent and produces disgust.

They lack the polish and grace that captivates, and are always the result of social education
and shows that inspire to the crowd a taste for art and seductive spontaneity of ways. As in
London everything is cold and severe, if not dirty, public buildings, the people have not
been done fine and nice. And as individual freedom is not linked to social equality, but the
pride of the aristocracy has established a deep valley between the classes, all world, proud
and unsociable with his personality, he thinks he has a right to be sharp and regular in behavior,
not caring of the effect of their way to insinuate. There is considered time lost the second is
spent on health or to pronounce a short and pleasant. The interest dominates each and every word
has its price.

In this connection I recall an incident that impressed me. One night, padding round Regent Street,
I came across a beautiful and richly dressed woman, who looked at me in passing casually. After
taking two or three steps dropped a handkerchief olan, and I with Colombian consideration my concerns
towards the ladies, taking it for that, I lifted handkerchief and
taking off his hat to greet with respect, he presented his perfumed
cambric.

The answer was give me a squeeze in the hand, very significant, and enshrine his arm mine without
saying a word. Filled with admiration, looked with astonishment, turning away, to make certainly
understand that was mistaken, but without opening his lips returned to me a squeeze can bruise
the arm, then realized I was next to an unworthy Loretta and I turned my back with contempt.
Later I learned that these beautiful and luxurious courtesans crossing to thousands through the streets
of London, used fireworks as always the handkerchief to his impudent provocation.

All these women are like statues, judging by its exterior. Wonderfully beautiful, cold calculators,
without any grace in his attitude, ornate silk ruffles and chains (fruit of degradation),
and always with the keen eye to overseas guess that passes in front blatant demonstrations to lure
these women are more ignominy of London, thousand times more despicable than the thief or the
drunken beggar whom tread to pass.

Happy the traveler who, knowing estimate their own dignity and all the holiness and spiritualism
love, disdain to these women, - goods that are sold publicly to the highest bidder, without think
of the hospital that time waits for misery, ugliness and remorse!

One of the hallmarks of England is the tendency towards ostentation aristocratic manifested in
all classes, and especially who believe! the beggars and people more miserable. In England,
particularly in London, the poor lack awareness of their position. If there is a condition requiring
greater dignity or self esteem same to bear is that of poverty.

The homeless should wear on the outside logic of his indigence, which is their dignity. But that does
not happen in London, the classic land livery and ostentation. The beggar was dressed as the
lord, the Count's coat or baronet, the banker or the minister, with the difference that these
dresses are bright, clean and beautiful, while on the members of the worker or the homeless
enhambrecido begging for alms and deeds are filthy rags.

I have seen countless fruit on the streets with hats and scarves aristocratic ladies, - the shoeshine
covered with tinsel and embroidery, and jump-pipes and chimny-sweepers (strips chimneys) wearing
coats and hats in his first spell of active duty covered to millionaires and lords of Parliament.
Why these ignoble and ridiculous costumes that make the public stage
a carnival?

The aristocratic spirit and vanity explain them. The footman inherits the rich dresses of the master,
and used, - the merchant buys rags the groom when they are old, - the cobbler and the clean-boot
taken from the junkman, and patched, and finally, when they begin to braid rags dispose of
old and unclean come to where the beggar or the jump-pipes, in exchange for a few pennies. Such
is the succession social class in London! They descend from the highest to the lowest, but in all
steps of the scale are missing the pride, vanity and the spirit of ostentation and imitation.

It's
amazing how far the fecund inventiveness of the vagabonds, the knights of industry, large
and small, and the lazy and indigent, to create small manipulations and crafts of exploitation
of the idle, in infinite variety. Whole volumes could be written only to explain the best known of
these small industries that occupy those who want to live in vagrancy, degraded in the streets
with exercises that are the disgrace of society because they have to be rational and less than
gross.

Among these industries is one that has real value, but that laughter causes the original extravagance:
the man-notice. As England is the land of the ads and signs in highest degree, is not considered
them quite circular in newspapers and on cartulones corners, and as there individuals, brooms
and even worse condition, men-notices. Notice the man is of two kinds: speaker or squalling, and
bulk, the first job that no longer has to walk through the streets giving dreadful cries, which
seem honking of a goose, if not bellowing of a calf, with an event known to the industrial
age either, with the address of the employer or interested in the matter. The second is a silent warning:
the poor devil is stuck between a huge lantern paper or white fabric, illuminated at night,
during the four faces is written lyrics monumental the announcement of an enterprise, items for
sale or any other object; and the carrier's liability is vagabond street corner or around London, at
all silence frame showing her eloquent, and sometimes soliendo, given by way of speaking, crash
their bluff against the noses of some intern distracted. The man-day notice wins by three four
to six pence, when it suits you go!

If in general many of the streets Saltimbancos not inspire nothing but contempt for their shamelessness
in stolen, and if the thousand and thousand vagabonds Barbary organ bearing his impertinence up
to despair, between the many kinds of street artists and one that poor tends to inspire sympathy
for the traveler - the musicians. Truth is that many times the musician of street or plaza is nothing
but a lazy and vulgar scraper violin or harp without grace or unattractive, but from time
to time is given to bands of true artists nomads who love and deserve
applause and favor.

In one of my nocturnal excursions in London I found myself about seven or eight Italian musicians
giving a public concert in a corner of the big Regent Street. The troops had popularity, because
it consisted of Italians banned from Milan, Venice, Rome and Naples, honest family men, and
that lack of resources for their livelihoods had been organized Philharmonic company might not burden
any one, and live honestly.

As in Italy everyone knows something of music, and the entire town is an artist, easily formed
with Italian outlawed a band chosen.

I believe that music never had impressed me as much as that night. The eight artists delightfully
played by rating, standing in the violin and flute, and I could taste the Cavatina and partitions
admirable Norma, Il Trovatore, La Traviata and the anthem of Italy. Those harmonies - the memories
that made me recall Colombia - those faces manly curly black beard,
full of melancholy and outlaw artist, - the effect of lighting on
the large group of spectators, and especially the deep emotion that
the concert made me think of the unfortunate and noble Italian, whose
children were suffering slavery, the jail or the proscription, without
losing hope of freedom and independence: all contribute to make it
my soul an indefinable sense of spite I have never forgotten that.

After putting my humble mite in the cap of one of the artists outlaws, I left heartbroken,
feeling he had in my ear as vague echo of the past airs of the Italian national anthem, and
proud to be born within the democratic order offer from the bottom of my heart a vote of fraternity
brothers to the oppressed.

When he returned thoughtfully in the direction of Hyde Park, passing between the groups encouraged
the opulent streets of Oxford, told me sadly: "What is all this greatness dazzling if she is
the witness of a deeper malaise in the form of the most cruel and painful inequalities? Is
this civilization? Is this progress, or is rather the decline? "This society is not in imminent
danger of complete decomposition? Is this colossus called England is not undermined by his base?
"Finding no easy solution to such problems and comparing to London with the poor people of Colombia
told me then: "No! civilization is the refinement of good and evil, is not the exuberance of
wonders, inventions and discoveries!

Civilization is justice, is the partnership agreement with nature is the harmony of human events
with the eternal and divine right, is equity in distribution the good - divine heritage - not bad, it's
an accident of error! This heroic and hospitable people of Colombia is not a barbaric society
like the lucky qualify in Europe since there are no starving, equal advances day by day, the
heart is generous, the notion of justice is more general and does not need to look miserable
subsistence infamous delivered to offices that degrade the soul, poison the heart and are lowered
humanity to the level of gross !...»


Having received the one hundred tomauns, I safely deposited them in my breast; and then, apparently
taking the road back to the city, I left the village with a heart much lighter than I had brought.
But as soon as I was fairly out of sight I turned my horse’s bridle in the contrary direction,
and clapping the stirrups into his flanks galloped on without stopping, until the foam fairly
ran down his sides.

I determined to proceed direct to Kermanshah, there sell horse, saddle, and bridle, and then
make my way to Bagdad, where I should be safe from all danger of molestation.

Having proceeded some five parasangs on my road I saw a strange figure walking before me at
a good pace, singing with all his throat. He was lightly dressed, having only a skull-cap on
his head, his face bound round with a piece of linen, a pair of slippers on his feet, and nothing
to indicate that he was a wayfaring man. As I drew near I thought that I had seen his form
before; he was tall and well-shaped, with broad shoulders, and a narrow waist. I should immediately
have taken him for the mollah Nadân but for his singing; for it never struck me as possible
that one of his grave character and manners could ever lower himself by so ignoble an act.
But little by little I saw so much of him, although he had not yet discovered me, that I could
not be mistaken; it was the mollah himself.

I stopped my horse to deliberate whether I should notice or make myself known to him. To pass
him would be the height of cruelty, but to recognize him would of necessity burden me with
an inconvenient companion. But then, should he discern who I was, and find that I had shunned
him, he would very probably denounce me as a thief on the very first occasion; and if I escaped
him now I should have the fear ever after of knowing him to be my enemy.

We were both approaching a village where we must pass the night, therefore there was no retreating
on my part; for it was necessary to see that proper care was taken of my horse, considering
the long journey it had to travel, and to push him on farther was impossible.

I took a middle line. Should he recognize me I would speak to him; if not, I would pass him
unheeded. I urged my horse on, and as I approached he turned round and surveyed me from head
to foot, but apparently without making me out.

‘O Aga, for pity’s sake,’ exclaimed he, ‘have compassion on an unfortunate man, who has no
other refuge in this world than God and you!’

I could not resist such an appeal to my feelings, and, keeping silence for some little while
by way of hearing what more he would say, I at length burst into an immoderate fit of laughter.
My laughter seemed to be as much out of season as his singing, for he was extremely puzzled
what to make of me: but when I began to speak, all doubts were removed, and he ran up to me
with a sort of joy and ecstasy that bordered upon madness.

‘Ay, Hajji; my soul, my uncle, light of my eyes!’ said he, as he kissed my knee. ‘From what
heaven have you dropped? What means this finery, this horse, this gold, these trappings? Do
you deal with the Gins and the Dives or has fortune fallen in love, and adopted you its heir?’

I continued laughing, so amused was I at these sallies, and he went on, saying: ‘How comes
it that you have so soon turned your mule into this fine horse? And my property, what is become
of it? Have you not even saved my ass, for I am sorely tired of going on foot? Tell me, tell
me all: by the beard of the Prophet, tell me all.’

I soon found that had I refused to give him a full account of my adventures, he would suspect
me of having got possession of his property, and turned it into the finery which had just drawn
forth his admiration; so I promised faithfully to relate everything, but I entreated him at
the same time to prepare a large quantity of credulity, for what I had to say was so marvellous
that he would very probably conceive it was my intention to impose upon him.

We then proceeded to the village, where we took up our quarters at the mehman khaneh, or strangers’
house, a convenience generally to be found in every hamlet throughout Persia, and there established
ourselves for the night.

A person of my appearance could not long remain unnoticed, and I was duly waited upon by the
ked khoda, who supplied us with a good supper; and during the time required for its preparation
I related my adventures to my companion. Their singularity was in no manner thrown away upon
him; and he seemed to die away with delight when he found that all my present prosperity was
at the cost of his old enemy the mollah bashi. As we sat communicating to each other in the
full confidence of our hearts (for the miserable are ever greatly relieved by talking of themselves),
I discovered that never before had I acquired an insight into the real character of my associate.

‘There must have been an assumed importance in you,’ said I to him, ‘as long as I was in your
service; for how could one really proud be so amiable as you appear now?’

‘Ah, Hajji!’ said he, ‘adversity is a great alterative. My life has been one eternal up and
down. I have often compared it to those whirligigs set up by louts in our market-places on
the No Rouz, which keep one dangling between heaven and earth. Unfortunately, I am one of those
who has never adopted the maxim of “spread not your carpet in a wet place.”’

‘Tell me,’ said I, ‘the history of your adventures. We cannot better pass our time, and I hope
that you know me well enough now not to refuse me your confidence.’

‘You will hear nothing in my history but what is common to many Persians, who one day are princes
and the next beggars; but since you are curious to know, I will relate it with pleasure’; and
he began in the following words:--

‘I am a native of Hamadan. My father was a mollah of such eminence that he was ambitious of
becoming the mûshtehed of Persia; but his controversies upon particular points of faith unfortunately
carried him so far that a party was created against him, which deprived him of the elevation
he sought. His most prominent quality was the hatred he bore to the Osmanlies, and to Sûnis
in general. One of our ancestors is said to have first introduced into Persia a more universal
hatred against them than ever before existed, by a simple innovation in the education of the
Shiah children, by which means their very first ideas were trained to be inimical to the race
of Omar. I mean,’ said the mollah, ‘that which you no doubt very well remember: when a little
boy in schooltime is pressed upon certain occasions to ask his master’s leave to retire, the
form of words in which he is enjoined to make his request is “Lahnet beh Omar! curse be upon
Omar!” I dare say you have through life, as I have, never omitted to unite the name of Omar
with everything that is unclean, and at least once a day to repeat the curse which you were
taught at school.’

I fully assented to this, and then he proceeded with his story.

‘My father’s hatred for the sectaries of Omar extended itself to all sorts of infidels. Jews,
Christians, fire-worshippers, and worshippers of images, all came within the scope of his execration;
and what at first he had practised from motives of ambition, at length became the ruling principle
of his nature. His family, and I among the number, were brought up in his tenets, and imbibed
all his violent prejudices; and so much did we hang together by them that we formed as it were
a distinct sect,--the terror of infidels, and the most zealous upholders of the Shiah faith.

‘After this you will not be surprised at the part I lately took in the destruction of the Armenian
wine-jars at Tehran. But that is not the only scrape my zeal has led me into. Very early in
life, when still a student at Hamadan, I was involved in a terrible disturbance, of which I
was the principal promoter.

‘An ambassador from the Pasha of Bagdad, with his suite, was quietly taking his road through
our city, having sojourned there two or three days on his way to the court of the Shah, when
burning to put into practice my father’s lessons, I collected a band of young fanatics like
myself, and, making them an appropriate address, I so excited their passions that we resolved
to perform some feat worthy of our principles. We determined to attack our Turkish guests,
inform them of the curses we denounced against Omar, and invite them to become adherents to
the doctrine of Ali. Heedless, and, perhaps, ignorant of what is due to the character of elchi,
or ambassador, we only saw in Suleiman Effendi an enemy to the Shiahs, and one calling himself
a Sûni. One day, as he was setting forth from his house to visit the governor of Hamadan, we
gathered ourselves into a body and greeted him by loud cries of “Curses be upon Omar!” This
enraged his domestics, who retorted the insult by blows. Showers of stones ensued from our
party, and this led to a general fray, in which the Pasha’s representative had his turban knocked
from his head, his beard spit upon, and his clothes nearly torn from his back.

‘Such an outrage of course could not be overlooked. The ambassador was furious; he threatened
to send off couriers to the Shah, and was even on the point of returning to his own master
when the governor, frightened at the consequences if his wrath was not appeased, promised that
he should have all satisfaction, and that the ringleaders of the disturbance should immediately
be delivered up to him.

‘Trusting to my father’s consequence in the city, and full of vapouring pride at what we had
achieved, I at first made light of the vows of vengeance which the Turks breathed against us;
but the governor, who only contemplated the loss of his place if the news of this event reached
Tehran; and caring little whether Ali was the true successor to the Prophet, or whether Osman,
Omar, and Abubekr were usurpers or not, he at once ordered me to be seized, as well as two
others of my companions, and forthwith we were placed at the disposal of the enraged Osmanlies.

‘I shall never forget the contending emotions of my mind when brought face to face before these
objects of my hatred. I did not at all relish the sound beating which they had it in contemplation
to inflict upon me; and, at the same time, I groaned under the necessity of keeping to myself
that stream of abuse which was ready to flow against them upon the smallest provocation.

‘They seemed, however, quite ready to return all our hatred with interest, and did not lose
this opportunity of letting us know its full extent. They were not generous enough to let us
off, but ordered the administration of the bastinado with a degree of religious zest that I
thought could never have existed in any breast except my own. To be short, our feet were beat
into a jelly, and our only consolation during the operation was the opportunity afforded us
of giving vent to our pent-up rage. The Turk, however, was revenged, and we were set free.

‘This adventure cooled my zeal for many years; although, in the pursuit of the distinctions
which my father sought, I continued to addict myself to controversy. When about twenty-five
years old, and my beard had acquired a respectable consistency, I went to Ispahan in order
to improve myself by associating with our celebrated doctors, and to make my own abilities
known by the part which I might take in their disputations. I succeeded to the utmost of my
wishes, and acquired considerable reputation. I only wanted an opportunity of distinguishing
myself, and that was soon afforded me by the following circumstance.

‘In the time of our famous Shah Seffi; who was himself half a heretic, the Franks (a sect of
the Christians) had considerable establishments at Ispahan for the purposes of commerce, and
were much patronized and encouraged by him. He allowed them free exercise of their religion,--permitted
them to build churches, to import priests, and, to the scandal of the true faith, even allowed
them the use of bells to call them to prayer. These Franks have a supreme head of their church--a
sort of caliph, whom they call Papa--part of whose duty, like that of our own blessed Prophet,
is to propagate his religion throughout the world. Under different pretexts, convents of his
dervishes were established, some in Ispahan itself, and some in Julfa among the Armenians.
Most of these have been abandoned, and the buildings fallen into decay; but one whose object
more particularly was the propagation of the Christian faith still existed, and to its destruction
my endeavours and those of some of our most zealous mollahs were directed, notwithstanding
the opposite views of the government, who are anxious to encourage the Christians to settle
in Persia, owing to the riches which they introduce by their trade.

‘This convent was served by two dervishes, one of whom was in himself a calamity!--one who
understood the world,--a man of deep design,--and of a wit so sharp that the shaitan in person
was not fit to be his father. He was tall, thin, and strong. His eyes were like live charcoal,
and his voice like a high wind. He never lost an opportunity of entering into argument with
our most learned men upon points of religion, and would boldly assert, with the heart of a
lion, that our holy Prophet, “the chief of created beings, the sealed intercessor, Mohammed
Mustapha”, (upon whom be eternal blessings!) was a cheat and an impostor. In short, he embarked
in the sea of controversy, as if he had Noah for a pilot; and, not content with words, he even
wrote a book, in which he pretended to prove the truth of his mad assertions. This book was
unfortunately attempted to be answered by one of our divines, who did not recollect that it
is folly to play with fire, unless there be plenty of water at hand to extinguish it. His book
said anything but what it ought, and tended more to throw ridicule upon Islamism than to uphold
its glory and perfection. Ispahan was full of this subject when I arrived there; and, being
anxious to bring myself forwards, I proposed that an invitation should be made to the Frank
dervish to meet the mollahs of the city in person, on an appointed day, in the Medresseh Jedeed,
when they would argue every point of their respective faiths, and when they would either make
the dervish turn Mohammedan, by producing conviction in his mind, or they would become Christians,
if his arguments prevailed. To this he immediately assented; but we determined beforehand,
amongst ourselves, that such a thorn in the side of our Ullemah should no longer exist in Persia,
and that the overwhelming truth of our belief should not be left to the chances of vain words
and uplifted voices, but show itself in the zeal and numbers of its adherents. Accordingly
every turbaned head, and every beard that wagged, were secretly invited to appear on the appointed
day; and never was attendance more complete,--never did the children of Islam make such a show
of their irresistible force, as they did on that memorable occasion.

‘The Medresseh was already filled; for, besides the mollahs, a great crowd, all anxious to
witness the triumph of the true faith, had taken possession of the courts. Head over head and
turban over turban were piled upon each other, in thick array, along the walls and in the utmost
corners of the hall, when the Frank dervish, alone, unsupported, and unfriended, appeared before
us. He looked around in dismay, and appeared appalled by our numbers. Two or three of the principal
mollahs, who were to carry on the controversy, were seated in front of their body, and I was
close at hand. We had prepared questions which were to be proposed to him, and according to
the answers he gave so were we to act. He appeared to be provided with no other weapon of defence
save his tongue; and he sat down opposite to us, evidently much alarmed at the hostility which
he remarked on the countenances of all present.

‘Without giving him any time for reflection, we immediately began:--

‘“Do you believe,” said one, “that the God in heaven put himself into a human form?” “Do you,”
said another, “acknowledge that God is composed of three persons, and still is only one?” “Are
you convinced,” said a third, “that what you call the Holy Ghost came down from heaven in the
body of a dove?”

‘These questions were put so quickly that he knew not which way to turn, until, collecting
within himself all the powers of his voice, he exclaimed, “If your intention is to kill me,
be it so; but what good will that do your argument? If your intention be to argue, attacking
me in this manner by numbers and personal violence will prove that you can only oppose passion
to argument; and show the world, that by me you have been overcome.”

‘Seeing that we were likely to fare ill, and observing that his words were producing an effect
in his favour, I was the first to exclaim to the surrounding mob, and to the assembly present:
“O Mussulmans! Mussulmans! come to our help,--our religion is attacked,--the infidel is trying
to subvert our faith,--vengeance! help!”

‘These words produced an immediate effect, and a thousand voices were lifted up against him.
“Seize him!” said some; “kill him!” said others. The mob was agitated to and fro, like the
waves of the sea; when the dervish, seeing himself in danger, made an attempt to escape, which
was seconded by one of the mollahs, whose compassion was moved towards him. He threw his own
cloak over the infidel’s shoulders, and just as violent hands were about to be laid upon him,
he pushed vigorously through the crowd, and succeeded in reaching the house of an Armenian
in safety.

‘We, the mollahs, being disappointed of our prey, proceeded in a body to the house of the governor
of the city, followed by an immense crowd of the people. A great fermentation had been excited,
and we promoted it all in our power.

‘The govemor himself was a strict and pious Mussulman, and we expected that he would without
hesitation join in the cry we had raised. We accused the Frank dervish of preaching false doctrine,
with a view to subvert our religion.

‘“This fellow,” said we, “calls our Prophet cheat; and talks abomination. We demand that he
be delivered over to us.”

‘The governor was perplexed how to act; for he knew how dangerous it was to interfere in matters
in which the subjects of Europe were concerned; and he was far from seconding our disposition
to violence.

‘“Why invite the dervish to an argument,” said he, “if you will not hear what he has to say?
If you have no arguments to oppose to his, violence only makes your cause worse, and you do
more harm than good to our religion. But if on the other hand your arguments are better than
his, and he can bring no answer to them, then indeed he is a kafir, an infidel; and according
to our law is worthy of death.”

‘Finding ourselves balked again, we departed breathing vengeance; and I verily believe, had
we met the dervish at that moment, he would have been tom into a thousand pieces. He was so
well aware of this, we soon heard that he had left the city in secret; and so far our endeavours
were successful, for it was long before he ventured again to show himself.

‘I had put myself so much forward on this occasion, and had shown my zeal in so many different
ways, that I had become a prominent character. But hitherto I had got nothing by it. The capital
I felt, after all, was the place where I ought to endeavour to gain some permanent and lucrative
situation; and to that I turned my views. To gain this end, I took myself to Kom, with a view
of ingratiating myself with the mûshtehed, whose recommendation I knew would do me more good
than ten years of prayer and fasting. I succeeded perfectly; for with the character I had acquired
of being the scourge of infidels, I was received by him with great favour, and he was delighted
to acknowledge me for one of his most diligent disciples. I soon took up his cause against
the Sûfies with all the ardour that he could wish; and it was not long before I ventured to
solicit his recommendation to the body of the Ullemah at Tehran, and to the principal men in
office at court. He professed to be sorry to part with me, but acceded to my request; and I
was soon after counted one of the holy fraternity at the seat of empire.

‘I confess to you, although I enjoy as good an opinion of myself as most men, that I was much
less successful in making my way at court than I had expected. My competitors for advancement
were numerous, and more versed in the ways of the world than I. Like them, I was obliged to
begin by paying a most assiduous attention to men in office. Having once gained the privilege
of being seated in the mejlis (assembly) of the head of the law, who was in fact my chief,
I little by little became noticed by the grand vizier, the lord high treasurer, the secretary
of state, the chief executioner, and others. I was constantly to be seen at their uprisings,
and at their evening meetings; but after all, I was nothing but a poor mollah, and I longed
for some opportunity of distinguishing myself from the common herd. But the transformation of the substance exists:
I guarantee you I know the secret of things. Because land is as follows: collect here a rotten
man and restored him there in all its forms, and plant vigor. Well may be that he, useless as
Mandarin in the Empire of the Sun, will be useful in another land as odorant or savory cabbage
rose. Matar, my son, is almost universal needs balance. Remove excess in part to meet in another failure.
Penetrate well in these solid philosophies. A poor seamstress in London is anxious to see flourish
in a pot filled window black earth, a flower give comfort to those disinherited, but in the
provision of beings, unfortunately, at that time, the substance that there should be pink, this
is a man State ... Then comes the knife and wounded pimp the statesman, the download will stab
the intestines, is buried: the material begins to become disorganized, mixed to the vast evolution
of atoms, and the superfluous man in office will be glad, in the form of a flower a blonde seamstress.
The murderer is a philanthropist. Let me summarize, Teodoro; the death of that Mandarin old
idiot, bring your pocket several million pesetas! You from this moment to kick the public power:
meditate on the intensity of this taste! And of course will be quoted in the newspapers, what greater
glory can expect a human being! And all that to just grab the bell and make "ding-Tin." I
am not a barbarian: I understand the reluctance a nag in his murder of a fellow, blood shamefully
dirty fists shirt, and is always repulsive agony of a human body. But in this case, none of those
stupid shows ... It's like a servant who calls ... And there are twenty or twenty-five million
pesetas, not remember, but I have noted in my notes. No doubt me, Theodore. I am a gentleman,
I tried it, when waging war against a tyrant in the first insurrection of justice, I saw precipitated
from the heights. Your imagination can not conceive ... A terrible fall, my dear friend! Big
trouble.

What comforts me is that the "Other" is also very crestfallen, because,
my friend, when a Jehovah is against him to Lucifer, remove this obstacle
by sending an army against the rebel of Archangels, but when the enemy
is the man armed with a pen and a notebook duck white paper, is lost
... In short, they are twenty million pesetas.

Come on, Theodore, there have the bell, be a man!

Knight street mourned.

I know very well what needs to be himself a Christian.

If this character had led me to summit of a mountain in Palestine,
a full moon, and from there, showing cities races and empires asleep,
I would have said grimly: "Kill the Mandarin, and everything see in
valleys and hills will be yours', I would have replied, following
an illustrious example, with hand up to the starry vastness.

"My kingdom is not of this world!"

I know well my authors. But there were twenty million pesetas, offered to light a candle sperm,
at the crossing of the Conception, on a subject of top hat, leaning on an umbrella.

So do not hesitate. And with a firm hand bell ringing. Was perhaps an illusion, but it seemed
a bell mouth as wide as the sky, rang in the darkness, across the universe with are fearful
that certainly would awaken sleeping suns and planets pot-bellied.

The strange man put his finger to the eyelid, and wiping a tear from
his eye clouded gleaming exclaimed:

- Poor Ti-Chin-Fu!

- Did he
die?

- He was in his garden, quietly, putting together, to throw
into the air, a parrot paper Mandarin honest pastime of retired when
he was surprised that "ding-letin 'of the bell.

Now lies on the banks of a murmuring stream, yellow silk dress, dead on the grass green, with the belly
in the air, and cold hands parrot has its role, which seems so dead
like him.

Tomorrow is the funeral.

That the wisdom of Confucius, inspiring, help to migrate your soul!

And the good fellow, getting up, took off his hat respectfully, and went out with umbrella under
the arm.

Then, feeling close the door, I seemed to wake from a nightmare.

I jumped into the corridor. A cheery voice spoke with Mrs. Marques, and the gate of the ladder
remained closed subtly.

- Who has just come out now, Mrs. Augusta?
- Asked sweaty.

- Kidskin going to the office ...

I returned to
my room all lay quiet, identical real.

The folio was still open Page fearful. I went back to read it, and now seemed old-fashioned prose
moralist tired every word had gone off like a coal.

I slept and dreamed that I was far beyond Beijing, on the borders
of Tartary, in the kiosk a convent of Lamas, maximum hearing wise
and gentle aroma that flowed like a fine area, from the lips of a
living Buddha.

II

A month passed.

I, meanwhile, continued, daily routine and thought putting my beautiful
cursive at government service, and admiring, Sundays, the skill with
which the splendid Dona Augusta Lieutenant cleaned Conceiro dandruff.

Thing was clear to me that night, asleep, reading about the folio,
had dreamed of a "Temptation on the Mount" in family forms.

Instinctively, however, I was worrying about China. Telegrams read newspapers always looking
for things that referred to the Celestial Empire, but nothing happened then in the region of
the yellow races ... The "Agence Havas' only telegraphed on the Herzegovina, Bosnia, Bulgaria
and other curiosities the barbarian.

Little by little I forgot my spooky episode, and at the same time as gradually my spirit calmed,
he returned to the old ambitions who lived: an appointment Director General, within loving Lola,
bisteks more tender than those of Mrs. Augusta.

But such gifts seemed so inaccessible, so beyond reality, as themselves million in Mandarin.
And the dreary desert of life, was going beyond the slow caravan of my melancholy.

One Sunday in August, morning, dozing in bed, in shirt sleeves, with cigar off between the
lips when the door opened softly and half-opened eyelids sleepy, bow saw a bald spot next to me respectfully.
And then a voice whispered disturbed:

- Mr. Theodore?

"Mr. Theodore, the Ministry of the Interior?

I got up slowly on my bed, and I said yawning:

- I, sir!

The man bent his back, as to the King Bobo bowing courtiers. It was small and fat: venerable
gold spectacles shone in his good-natured face, which seemed personification of the Order.

All
trembling, stammered embarrassed:

- I bring news to your honor!

News of considerable importance.

My name is Silvestre ... Juliano and C. Silvestre th ... A servant helpful your excellency ... They
arrived in the mail Southampton ... We are Traigand Correspondents, and C. First of Hong Kong.

Sofocóse
bald man, flailing his big hands nervously in an envelope filled
with a wax seal, black, continued:

- Your Excellency must be prevented.

We were not ... The embarrassment is natural ... What we hope is that we retain their confidence.
Your Excellency is in this land a flower of virtue, goodness mirror.

Here are the first checks on Bhering and Brothers of London ... Letters to thirty days on Rothschild.

At
this name, resonant as gold itself, I jumped out of bed quickly.

- What is it, sir - I cried.

And he shouted again, waving the envelope, flat on the tip of the
boots, said:

- A hundred and twenty million pesetas on London, Paris,
Hamburg and Amsterdam, in letters for you!

To their credit, most excellent! For homes in Hong Kong, Shang-hai
and Guangzhou Mandarin legacy of Ti-Chin-Fu!

I felt the world tremble under my feet and closed my eyes for a moment.

But suddenly, I realized I was from that moment as an incarnation of the supernatural, receiving
her my strength and their attributes. I could not consider as a man, cut with explanations
human. To avoid interrupting the line hieratic of my indifference, I refrained from going to cry
of joy, as I asked the soul, on the broad bosom of the widow of Marques.

From now on would hold the passivity of a god or a devil, I naturally fit and Silvestre told º C. Juliano
and these words:

- Okay. The Mandarin! Mandarin me that behaved like a gentleman. I
know what question. It's a family affair.

Let there roles. Good morning, Silvestre, Juliano and C. No.

And retreated, walking backwards, with the body leaning respectfully.

Then I opened wide the window and sticking his head, breathed the warm air, as a deer tired.

Then
I looked down toward the street, where the bourgeoisie out of church swarmed between two rows
of carriages. My eyes fell, unconscious, now in the jewelry of women, now in the bright metal of the
harness. And suddenly the idea of ​​my greatness, filled me satisfaction. All those coaches could
be mine! None of the women he saw, would no longer offer her naked breast, the slightest indication
of a whimsical desire.

All those men in frock coats and black gloves would bow before me as to a Christ, a Muhammad
or a Buddha, if I throw on them a few checks of my hundred and twenty million ESP major banks
in Europe.

I leaned on the railing and laughed watching this ephemeral agitation subordinate to humanity considered
free and strong, while upstairs in the bedroom of a fourth floor,
I his hand in a sealed envelope, the beginning of his weakness and
slavery.

So satisfactions House, gifts of love, pride of power, everything, everything I enjoyed imagination,
in an instant and in a single gulp. But then I was a huge invading satiety the soul, and feeling
the world at my feet, yawned like a sick lion.

What finally served me so many millions, but to bring me day by day,
the bleak statement of human vileness?

And, shock of so much gold was disappearing before my eyes like smoke, moral beauty of the Universe!
I was seized with an immense sadness mystique. I fell on a chair, and the face, hands, wept copiously.

Soon
the widow of Marquis opened the door, all dressed in black silk.

- We are waiting to eat!

I left my bitterness to respond sharply:

- I do not eat.

- More
will be!

At that time rockets exploding in the distance.

I remembered it was Sunday, the day of bulls suddenly a vision flashed,
flashing, pulling delightfully, was seen run from a box after a meal
with champagne, and at night as a divine orgy and supreme initiation!

I ran to the table.

I filled up my portfolio of bills on London. I went down to the street with the fury of a
vulture that cleaves the air in search of prey.

He spent a carriage empty. She stopped crying

- The bulls!

- There are ten real, my love!

       

He reached into the wallet full of millions and took the coins he had: 75 cents ...

The driver slammed the rump of the horse and continued grumbling. I stammered:

- I have lyrics ... Here they are! I have drafts on London, in Hamburg ...

- Do not serve ...

Seventy-five cents!

... And run, dinner lord, Andalusian naked, the whole dream expired
as a soap bubble inside my soul.

I hated humanity.

Another carriage crowded with happy people, I was nearly run over.

Crestfallen, loaded with millions of Rothschild, I returned to my room floor. I apologized
to Mrs. Augusta, accepting humbly deign to serve food, and spent
the first night wealth, yawning over the bed alone, while outside,
the cheerful Conceiro, the mean lieutenant with twenty dollars monthly
salary, laughing with the viola a cheerful "fado".

* * * * *

The next morning while I shaved, I pondered the source of my wealth. Was obviously supernatural and
suspicious.

But as my rationalism prevented me attribute these unexpected treasures to the generosity of
God or the Devil, purely scholastic fictions, like the fragments of positivism constituted the bottom
of my philosophy, I allowed the anger of "root causes, of the essential
origins, "I suddenly decided to accept the phenomenon and use it liberally.

Therefore, ran hastily to the London Brasilian Bank.

"

They threw the trellis a check on the 'Bank of England', a thousand
pounds, screaming this delicious word:

- In gold!

A clerk told me gently:

- Maybe you were more comfortable in notes ...

Answered dryly:

- In gold!

I filled my pockets and took a street car. I was extremely overweight, was in mouth taste of
gold and a gold powder dry on the skin of the hands, the walls of the houses seemed to glow
as long sheets of gold, and into my brain rolled a sea of waves gold.

Left to the oscillation of the springs, bouncing like a bad ordre insurance dropped street
on a bitter look of my eyes filled with bitterness. Finally, pulling the hat on the neck, leg stretching,
drinking belly, yawned tremendously.

I shot a long time for the city, enjoy bestialized a Nabob.

Suddenly, a sharp appetite to spend, to dispel gold, came to fill my chest like a gale that swells
a candle.

- To, animal! - Shouted to the driver.

The car stopped. I looked around with half-closed eyes, looking for an expensive object to buy:
jewel of queen or awareness statesman saw nothing, and then walked hurriedly at a tobacconist.

- Cigars! PTA! Ten real!

- How many? - Slavishly asked the tobacconist.

- Everyone! - Responded brutally.

At the door, a poor mourning, with the child crouched in the breast, I reached out transparent.

Not
finding a single piece of copper between my pockets full of gold,
rejected with impatience and with his hat over his eyes, I went through
the crowd.

It was then that I saw, ahead, the powerful figure of the Director General, immediately I found
myself with the back curved and completed his hat in his hand. It was the habit of dependence;
my millions still had not given me the verticality of the spine.

At home the gold spreads on the bed and I wallow in the long, groaning softly.

The next tower gave the three, and the sun went down taking with it my first day of opulence.
So, battleship pounds, ran for fun!

Ah, what a day! Ate in a room in Hotel Central, lonely and selfish, with the table covered bottle of
Bordeaux, Burgundy, Champagne, Rhine, spirits of all religious communities ... As if to quench
the thirst after thirty years! Then, staggering, entered a brothel. What a night! The dawn
clearing behind the blinds and I was leaning on a couch, exhausted and naked, feeling the body
and soul fade, dissolve in that warm environment where they wandered a mild odor of rice powder,
females and punch.

When I returned to the crossing of the Conception, the windows of my room were closed, and expired
sailing with pale gleams in its brass candlestick.

Then, upon reaching to bed, I saw a horrible thing, stretched across the quilt, lay the figure
of Mandarin dead, yellow silk dress, with loose ponytail, and her hands, as dead also paper had
a parrot.

I opened the window desperately. Everything is gone and only found myself on my bed, an old overcoat.

III

So
began my life as a millionaire.

Hurriedly left the house of the widow of Marques that since he knew he was rich, I was serving
me differently herself, silk suit on Sundays, rice pudding and other dishes like that. I bought
a Loreto palace, the magnificence of my house, are well known for indiscreet photogravures
published by "The French Enlightenment." He became famous throughout Europe my bed an exuberant
and barbaric taste, covered with plates of wrought gold, and curtains of a rare black brocade,
where wave, embroidered in pearls, erotic verse of Catullus, a pendant lamp inside spilled milk
and loving clarity of a summer cloud.

My first few months were spent
loving wealth, loving with the sincere passion of a novice. He had
seen, like a novel page, watering their carnations on the balcony,
was called Candida, was petite and blonde, lived in a house covered
with vines and reminded me by grace and airy at his waist, all that
art has created more thin and fragile: Mimi, Virginia, Julieta ...
Every night, in mystical ecstasy fell at his feet color of jasper
and in the morning, saying goodbye, leaving in her lap, a few hundred
bucks pesetas. At first, she refused to flush, but then kept them
in his drawer, affectionately known your guardian angel.

One day
when I walk quietly on the thick carpet Syria, went into her boudoir,
she was writing, very thoughtful, with a finger in the air. Seeing
me, pale and trembling, hid the paper bore his monogram in red ink.
I, in a fit of insane jealousy, I grabbed. It was the letter the letter,
which since ancient times, women always writes, began by the indispensable
"idolized me", and was a police lieutenant.

Tore the love of my chest
like a poisonous plant and distrusted forever angels blond kept looking
in the reflection of blue sky traversed.

From the top of my gold,
I threw about innocence, modesty, and other idealizations dire the
evil laugh of Mephistopheles and coolly organized an animal existence,
great and cynical.

At noon, I walked into my stack of pink marble,
which gave the water spilled perfume an opaque shade of milk, then
pages blond, soft hands, gave me friction with the who holds a ceremonial
worship, and wrapped in a "robe de chambre" East Indian silk, crossed
the gallery watching my "Fortunys 'and my' Curots" between two silent
lines of footmen, went into the kitchen, where he served in dishes
of Sevres blue and gold, smoked the most succulent dishes. The rest
of the morning was spent in a "boudoir" in which the furniture was
fine porcelain, Dresden, and the profusion of flowers made him a veritable
garden of Armida; there, reclining on cushions of silk pearl, savoring
the "Daily News", while beautiful women, dressed in Japanese, cooling
the air, waving feather fans.

In the afternoon, went for a walk walk
to the Bridge of Souls: it was heavier when the day. The abject crowd
stood to watch the Nabob bored yawns.

Sometimes I felt the nostalgia
of my time as an employee. Entered the house, and locked in library,
where the thought of humanity lay forgotten and bound in Moroccan
picked up a duck pen and stayed for hours writing about the role of
the office of State these phrases from another time:

"Hon. and HE.
Sir: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency ..-- I have the honor
to inform VI "

Early evening, a servant, to advertise the food, would
echo through the corridors, horn in silver, gothic fashion, a solemn
harmony. I then got up and entered the majestic dining alone. A crowd
of lackeys, silk livery black, served in a silence of shadows that
glide, rarest viands and wines more expensive than jewelry. All the
table glowed with flowers, lights, windows and reflections gold, and,
twining among the pyramids of fruit, mixed in the smoke of the dishes
was faulty in the air an unspeakable tedium.

‘It is evident you are a stranger,’ said the conductor, who appeared to be as loquacious and
mother-witted as those of his profession generally are, ‘or otherwise you would have been better
informed. We are carrying rare things to Kerbelah!’

‘Yes,’ said I, ‘I am a stranger; I come from afar, and am like one decended from the mountains.
In God’s name, what are you carrying to Kerbelah?’

‘What!’ answered he, ‘have you heard nothing of the extraordinary death of the mollah bashi
of Tehran; how he died in the bath; and how his ghost was seen on horseback, and then in his
harem; and how it afterwards ran off with one of the chief executioner’s best horses? Where
have you been living all this while?’ added he, shaking both his hands before him as he spoke,
and shrugging up his shoulders.

Alarmed at what he had said, I pretended ignorance; and requested him to satisfy my curiosity
concerning the story in question, which he did in a manner that, but for my being so deeply
implicated in it, would have afforded me much amusement.

‘You must know then,’ said the muleteer, ‘that what I am about to relate is true, because I
was on the spot in person, at the time it happened.

‘The chief priest having gone to the bath at the close of day, just after the evening prayer,
returned to his house surrounded by his servants, and retired to bed for the night in the khelwet
of his women’s apartments.

‘You need not be told that most of the public baths in Persia are open to the women the first
thing in the morning, to a certain hour in the day, and are then appropriated to the men. The
wife of the mollah bashi, attended by her servants and slaves, the morning after her husband
had bathed, at the earliest sound of the cow horn, proceeded to the same bath, and she and
her suite were the first party who entered it on that day. Out of respect to their mistress,
none of her attendants ventured to get into the reservoir of hot water before her. The cupola
of the bath was but very dimly lighted by the dawn; and the chief priest’s wife was almost
in utter darkness when she entered the water. Guess at her horror, when scarcely having proceeded
two steps, her extended hand fell upon a large mass of floating flesh.

‘Her first impulse was to utter an amazing shriek; her second to tumble headlong out as if
she had been pursued, and straight to faint away.

‘The consternation which she produced amongst her women may easily be conceived. One after
the other, with the lamp in their hand, they looked in, shrieked, and then ran back, not one
among them having yet discovered what was the object of their terror.

‘At length the old duenna taking courage, looked boldly into the reservoir, and to her surprise
she there found a dead man. More screams and cries ensued, which having brought the chief priest’s
wife to her senses, caused her to join the inspecting party. Little could be recognized of
a floating corpse inflated with water, presenting various odd surfaces to the eye, and giving
but little clue to discovery. At length the head and face appeared to view; and, as soon as
the old duenna had applied her lamp to it, one and all cried out, “O Ali! it is the mollah
bashi; it is the mollah bashi!”

‘The wife again fell into a trance; the slaves made their cries; in short, there was that stir
amongst them, that one would have thought they had heard the “blast of consternation from the
trumpets of the resurrection.”

‘But amidst all the wailing, which by this time had attracted every woman in the building,
one of the slaves cried out, “But it cannot be our Aga, for I saw him return from the bath,
I made his bed, and I am sure he was soon asleep. It is impossible he can be in bed and asleep,
and in the bath, drowned, at one and the same time. It must be somebody else.”

‘This observation threw them all into greater consternation than ever, because they immediately
felt that what the slave had seen must have been her master’s ghost. “See,” said the wife,--who
had again come to life,--pointing to the face of the corpse, “I am sure this was my husband;
there is the scratch I gave him but yesterday.” “And there,” said one of her servants, “that
is the place in his beard from which you plucked a handful of hairs.”

‘These tender recollections threw the poor widow into a violent flood of tears, which were
only stopped by her slaves assuring her that the mollah bashi was still alive. “How else could
he have taken the lamp from my hand?” said the slave--“how could he have shut the door? how
dismissed me? how snored?” So persuaded was she of the truth of what she said, that she forthwith
dressed herself, and volunteered to go to her master’s bed-room, where no doubt she would find
him asleep.

‘“But if he is there,” said one of the women, “then what can this be?” (pointing to the corpse.)

‘“Why, this must be his ghost,” said another; “for surely no man can possess two bodies,--one
in which he lives, and the other by way of a change.”

‘“No,” said a third in a waggish tone, “that would be quite new. He might then make the same
use of them as he would of a town and country house.”

‘All this time (many additional bathers having poured in) whilst those who were indifferent
were speculating after this fashion, the chief priest’s women were uttering loud and piercing
shrieks, particularly when the slave returned and informed them that no mollah bashi had she
found, and that he had left no trace behind except the print of his body in the bed.

‘The story had now got abroad, the bath was surrounded by a crowd, who pressed to gain admittance;
and ere the women had had time to dress themselves, the place was full of men. Such a scene
of confusion as then ensued had never before been witnessed in a public bath at Tehran. What
with the wailing and lamentations of the women of the chief priest--what with the noise and
cries of those who inveighed against the intrusion of the men--the clamour was excessive.

‘At length the friends and relations of the deceased appeared, and, with them, the washers
of the dead, who immediately bore the corpse to the place of ablution, where it was embalmed,
and prepared for its journey to Kerbelah, for thither it was judged expedient to send it for
burial.

‘His widow at once avowed her intention of accompanying the body; and my mules,’ added my informant,
‘were hired on the occasion. The tent you see yonder is occupied by her and her slaves; and
there,’ pointing to the packages, ‘lies the carcass of her husband. The accompanying dead bodies
are the remains of those who, both at Tehran and on our road hither, died about the time that
this event took place, and are now sent to Kerbelah to be buried in the suite and under the
protection of one who at the day of resurrection, it is hoped, may lend them a helping hand
into paradise.’

Here the conductor stopped, whilst I, who had been struck by the latter part of his speech,
became almost mute from fear. I felt that having endeavoured to escape danger, I had fallen
into its very mouth. Were I to be recognized by the chief priest’s servants, some of whom I
had known intimately, their knowledge of my person would lead to my discovery.

‘But what happened after the corpse was carried out of the bath?’ said I, anxious to know whether
the clothes which I had left in one of its corners had been noticed.

‘By the head of Ali!’ said the man, ‘I do not very well recollect. This I know, that many stories
were in circulation; and every person had a different one. Some said that the chief priest,
after being drowned, was seen in his anderûn and went to bed. Others that he appeared the next
morning at the chief executioner’s, and rode away with one of his best horses. The chief executioner
himself shows a note of his, sealed with his seal, giving him permission to drink wine. In
short, so many and so contradictory were the reports, that no one knew what to believe. All
were puzzled to find out how he managed to get alive out of the bath (for that is attested
by his servants, and by the master of the bath), and still remain in the reservoir. Difficulties
continued to increase as fast as people argued, until a discovery took place which threw a
marvellous light upon the subject. Some clothes were found in a dark corner of the bath. They
were torn and in bad case; but without much difficulty they were known to have belonged to
one Hajji Baba, a drivelling priest, and an attendant upon that famous breeder of disturbance,
the mollah Nadân, the open and avowed enemy of the head of the law. Then everybody exclaimed,
“Hajji Baba is the murderer! without doubt he is the murderer of the holy man, he must pay
the price of blood!” and all the city was in full search for Hajji Baba. Many said, that Nadân
was the culprit; in short, messengers have been sent all over the country to seize them both,
and carry them dead or alive to Tehran. I only wish that my fate may be sufficiently on the
ascent, to throw either of them into my hands; such a prize would be worth my whole mule-hire
to Kerbelah.’

I leave every one to guess my feelings upon hearing this language; I who was never famous for
facing difficulties with courage, and who would always rather as a preliminary to safety make
use of the swiftness of my heels, in preference to adopting any other measure. But here to
retreat was more dangerous than to proceed; for in a very short time I should be in the territory
of another government, until when I promised faithfully to wrap myself up in the folds of my
own counsel; and to continue my road with all the wariness of one who is surrounded by imminent
danger.

The caravan pursued its march early the next morning, and I took my station among the muleteers
and the hangers on (many of whom are always at hand), in order to screen myself from notice.
The litter with the chief priest’s widow, and her attendants, preceded the line of march, the
camels with the bodies followed, and the remainder of the caravan, consisting principally of
loaded mules, spread itself in a long straggling line over the road.

I envied every fellow who had a more ruffian-like face, or a more ragged coat than my own;
so fearful was I of being thought good-looking enough to be noticed. More particularly I dreaded
the approach of the widow’s servants, for although I was dying to know if any of them were
of my acquaintance, yet I carefully turned my head on one side, as soon as there was the smallest
likelihood of their looking towards me.

The first day’s march had passed over in safety; and I laid my head on a projecting part of
the baggage, where I slept sound through the night. I was equally fortunate on the second day,
and with so much confidence did this success inspire me, that I began to be ambitious of associating
with something better than a common mule-driver.

I had opened a conversation with one, who I was informed was an Armenian bishop; and had already
made him understand how thankful he ought to be for being thus noticed by a true believer,
when one of the much dreaded attendants rode by us, and in him I recognized the man who had
endeavoured to palm off a mûtî upon me, upon my first introduction to the mollah Nadân. My
heart leapt into my mouth at the sight of him. The chief priest’s ghost, had it appeared, could
not have frightened me more. I turned my head quickly on one side, but he passed on without
heeding me; so for this time I was let off only with the fright; but I resolved to return to
my humble station again, and forthwith left the bishop to his own meditations.

On the following day we were to pass through the defiles infested by the Cûrdish banditti,
when every one would be too much taken up with his own safety to think of me. Once having passed
them, we should no longer be in the Persian territory, and I might then claim protection of
the Turks, in case I were discovered and seized.

On that eventful day, a day well remembered in the annals of my adventurous life, the caravan
wore a military appearance. All those who possessed anything in the form of a weapon brought
it forth and made a display. The whole scene put me in mind of a similar one which I have recorded
in the first pages of my history; when, in company with Osman Aga, we encountered an attack
from the Turcomans. The same symptoms of fear showed themselves on this occasion as on that;
and I am honest enough to own that time had not strengthened my nerves, nor given me any right
to the title of lion-eater.

The whole caravan marched in compact order, marshalled by a chaoush and by the conductor, who,
with the servants of the chief priest’s wife, formed a sort of vanguard to the main body. I,
who had my own safety to consult for more reasons than one, huddled myself among the crowd,
and enjoyed the idea that I was encumbered with no other property than the money in my girdle.

We were proceeding in silence; nothing was heard save the bells of the caravan, and I was deep
in thought in what manner I might dispose of my ninety-five tomauns, on our arrival at Bagdad;
when, turning up my eyes, I perceived the conductor and a well-equipped Persian riding towards me.

The conductor pointed with his hand to me, and said to his companions, ‘hem een est, this is
even he!’

‘By the beard of Ali!’ thought I, ‘my good fortune has turned its back upon me.’

I looked at the conductor’s companion, whom I instantly discovered to be the very Abdul Kerim,
from whom I had extracted the one hundred tomauns, at the village of Seidabad, by means of
the letter which I had written in the name of the deceased chief priest.

I was about giving myself up for lost, when the conductor relieved me a little, by saying,
‘You are the last man who joined our caravan: perhaps you can tell us upon what part of the
frontier Kelb Ali Khan, the robber, is said to be at present.’

I answered him in a great state of perturbation; but kept my eyes fixed upon Abdul all the
while, who also began to stare at me with those penetrating eyes of his, which almost turned
my heart inside out. He continued looking at me like one in doubt, whilst I endeavoured to
skulk away; but at length appearing to recollect himself, he exclaimed, ‘I have it, I have
it! it is the very man; he it was who laughed at my beard and stole the hundred tomauns.’ Then
addressing himself to the bystanders, he said, ‘If you want a thief, there is one. Seize him
in the name of the Prophet!’

I began to expostulate, and to deny the accusation, and probably should have succeeded to convince
those who surrounded us that I was wrongly accused, when, to my consternation, the promoter
of matrimony came up, at once recognized me, and called me by my name. Then my whole history
came to light. I was denounced as the murderer of the chief priest, and this event produced
so general a bustle throughout the caravan, that fear of the robbers was for a while suspended,
and every one came to gaze upon me.

I was seized, my hands were pinioned behind my back, I was about being dragged before the chief
priest’s widow to be exhibited, when my good planet came to my help and showed its ascendant.
Of a sudden a great cry was heard at a distance, and to my delight I beheld a body of cavaliers
rushing down the slope of an adjacent hill. These were the very Cûrds so much dreaded. The
consternation was universal, the whole caravan was thrown into confusion, and resistance was
unavailing when both heart and hand were wanting. Those who were mounted ran away; the muleteers,
anxious for the safety of their cattle, cut the ropes of their loads, which fell and were left
spread on the plain to the mercy of the marauders. The camels were also disencumbered of their
burdens, and coffins were to be seen in all parts of the road. I remarked that the one containing
the chief priest had fallen into a rivulet, as if fate was not tired of drowning him. In short,
the rout was universal and complete.

I soon was left to myself, and easily found means to disengage my bonds. I perceived that the
Cûrds had directed their attention principally to the litter and its attendants, where they
naturally expected to find prisoners of consequence; and it rejoiced me to observe, that those
whom but a few minutes before I had looked upon as destined to be the perpetrators of my ruin,
and very possibly of my death, were now themselves thrown into a dilemma nearly equally disastrous
with the one from which I was now relieved.

In vain the widow’s attendants threatened, swore, and bade defiance; nothing would soften their
wild and barbarous assailants, who, under some lawless pretext of fees to be paid, began a
regular pillage of such parts of the caravan as had not fled their attack. I again had an opportunity
of ascertaining that my good star was prevailing; for now, whilst those who possessed any article
of dress which might give respectability to their appearance became the object of the robbers’
attention, I and my solitary mule had the satisfaction to find ourselves so totally unworthy
of notice, that we proceeded without molestation on the original object of our journey. I owned
no corpse--I was not called upon to pay duty upon a dead relation--I was free as air; and as
soon as I once found myself released from the thousand miseries which had arisen all around
me, and which, as if by magic, had been as quickly dispelled, I went on my way, exclaiming,
Barikallah, ai talleh mun!

Leaving the mollah bashi’s widow, her slaves, and attendants in the hands of the Cûrds, I made
the best of my way to my destination; and caring little to hold converse with any one, after
what had so recently taken place, I shaped my course in such a manner as not to attract observation.

Many stragglers, flying from the Cûrds, were to be seen on the road; but as they all, more
or less, had interest in the fate of the caravan, they did not proceed far, but hovered about
the scene of action, in the hopes of reclaiming either their friends or their property. I alone
seemed to be totally independent, and by the time I had travelled two or three parasangs from
the danger, I had the road to myself. Everything that had befallen me was turned over and over
again in my mind, and I came to this conclusion, that powerfully protected as I seemed to be
by fate, I might again turn my steps towards the paths of ambition, and hope that my last failure
in the pursuits of advancement was to be made up by realizing a speedy and ample fortune.

‘Ninety-five tomauns in my girdle, and all the world before me,’ said I, ‘is no insignificant
prospect. And if Nadân be but blown from a mortar, and the chief priest’s widow detained and
ruined by the Cûrds, I do not see why I may not put my cap on one side as well as the best
man in Persia.’

At length the walls and turrets of Bagdad appeared in view, and I entered the city a total
stranger, and ignorant of its localities. Caravanserais I knew that I should find at every
turn, and indifferent whither I bent my steps, or where I alighted, I let my mule take the
road it liked best. Well acquainted with every street, the animal took me to a large caravanserai,
where it no doubt had long been accustomed to resort, and there stopping, gave several loud
grunts as it entered the porch, in the expectation of meeting its companions of the caravan.
Although disappointed, yet I was more fortunate (if fortunate I could call myself), in seeing
some of my countrymen in the square, and I soon found out that this was their usual rendezvous.

My person, I flattered myself, could attract no notice, go where I might: but I was sorry to
find it otherwise. Upon alighting I was assailed by a thousand questions--the caravan was hourly
expected, the merchants were eager for the reception of their goods, and I might possibly give
them some intelligence respecting it. I made such answers as were necessary for the occasion;
but resolved within myself very soon to quit so inquisitive a society, and bury myself in obscurity.
I accordingly left my mule to its fate, reflecting that its owner would very soon arrive and
take possession of it, and straightway settled myself in another part of the city.

As a first step towards preserving my incognito, I exchanged my dusty and weather-beaten sheep’s-skin
cap for a head-dress of the country, namely, a long red cloth bag, which fell down in a flap
behind, and fastened to my head with a parti-coloured silk. I also bought a second-hand beniche,
or cloak, usually worn by the Turks, which, going over my Persian garments, gave me the general
appearance of an Osmanli; and finished my adjustment by a pair of bright crimson leather slippers.

Having done this, it came into my head that much good might accrue if I made myself known to
the family of my first master, Osman Aga, for through them I might make acquaintance in the
city, and promote my views in trade.

I accordingly sallied forth, and took my road through the principal bazaars and bezestens,
in order to make inquiries, and particularly stopped where lambskins were sold, for I well
recollected that they were his favourite article of trade. I also recollected many particulars
concerning Bagdad, which he used to take pleasure in relating during our journeys, and I fancied
that I could almost find my way to his very door without inquiry.

However, my trouble was soon at an end, for in putting my head into the shop of one of the
principal Bokhara merchants, and inquiring if any news had reached Bagdad of one Osman Aga,
I heard a well-known voice, in answer, say, ‘Who wants me? In the name of the Prophet, I am he!’

Guess at my joy and surprise--it was the old man himself. I was almost as much astonished to
see him at Bagdad, as I had before been to meet him at Tehran, and his surprise was equal to
mine. I related as much of my history as I thought it necessary for him to know, and he told
me his in return, which in two words was as follows.

He had left Tehran in the determination of proceeding to Constantinople, there to dispose of
his merchandise, but hearing that great danger of being robbed existed on the road between
Erivan and Arz Roum, he had deemed it a safer plan to visit Bagdad; and here he was, restored
to his native city after an absence of many years. He had found his son grown up to man’s estate,
who, having gone through all the ceremony of mourning for his loss, had duly taken possession
of his patrimony, which, according to the law, he had shared in the prescribed portions between
his mother and sister. But as soon as his father was restored to him, he made no wry faces,
but, like a good Mussulman, put into practice that precept of the Koran which ordaineth man
to show kindness to his parents--but not to say unto them ‘Fie upon you!’ The old man added,
that he had found his wife alive, and that his daughter was old enough to be married.

But having thus disburthened himself of this short history of his adventures, he turned round
upon me in a sharper manner than he had even done before, and said, ‘But Hajji, my friend,
in the name of the blessed Mohammed, what could have possessed you to join me to that female
Satan at Tehran, by way of making me pass my time agreeably? By the salt which we have so often
eat together, the few days that I passed in her company were filled with more misery than was
the whole time I spent among the Turcomans! Was it right to treat an old friend thus?’

I assured him that I had no object in view but his happiness, taking it for granted that she,
who had been the favourite of the monarch of Persia, must, even in her later days, have had
charms more than enough for one who had passed some of the best years of his life with camels.

‘Camels!’ exclaimed Osman, ‘camels, indeed! they are angels compared to this fury. Would to
Heaven that you had married me to a camel instead, for it, at least, poor animal, would have
sat quiet, with calm and thoughtful gravity, and let me have my own way; whereas your dragon,
she, the viper, she passed her whole time in telling me how vastly honoured I was in having
taken to wife one who had led the Shah by the beard, and enforced each word with either a slap
or a scratch. Amân! Amân!’ said the old man, rubbing his hand on his cheek, ‘I think I feel
them now.’

He at length ceded to my assurances that I had no other object in view than his happiness,
and then very kindly asked me to take up my abode at his house during my stay at Bagdad, to
which, of course, I acceded with all manner of pleasure.

This conversation had taken place in the back room of the Bokhara merchant’s shop, during which
the old man had treated me to five paras’ worth of coffee, brought from a neighbouring coffee-house;
and when it was over, he proposed going to his son’s shop, situated in the same bazaar, some
few doors farther on. His son’s name was Suleiman. Having set himself up in the cloth trade
during his father’s long absence, he had acquired an easy livelihood, and passed the greatest
part of the day (except when necessary to go to his prayers) seated in the little platform
in the front of his shop, surrounded by his merchandise, neatly arranged on shelves fixed in
the wall. He was a fat, squat little man, very like his father; and when he was informed that
I was Hajji Baba, he said that I was welcome, and taking the pipe which he was smoking from
his own mouth, he immediately transferred it to mine.

These preliminaries of mutual good-will being established, I enjoyed the prospect of an easy
and quiet sojourn at Bagdad, in the company of these good people; but in order to show that
I did not intend wholly to be a dependant upon them, I made it known that I was possessed of
ninety-five tomauns, and asked their opinion upon the mode of laying them out to the best advantage
in trade. I gave them to understand that, tired of the buffetings of an adventurer’s life,
it was my intention for the future to devote my time to securing an independence by my own
industry. Many had acquired wealth from beginnings much smaller than mine, said I; to which
they both agreed: and, as we anticipated the fortune that I was to make, Osman Aga gravely
let off the only bit of Persian poetry which he had picked up during his travels--‘Drop by
drop water distilleth from the rock, till at length it becometh a sea.’

Upon this conclusion we, that is, the father and I, proceeded to his house, which was situated
at a convenient distance from the bazaars.

Osman Aga’s house was situated in a narrow lane, leading out of the street which leads into
one of the principal bazaars. Immediately in front of the door was a heap of rubbish, upon
which a litter of kittens had just been thrown, making an essay of their young voices as we
passed; and a little farther, on a similar mound, a colony of puppies had been planted, guarded
by a mangy mother, which, by their united cries, left us nothing to desire in the way of discord.
Between these was situated the gate of Osman Aga’s house, into which we entered. It was a small
building, consisting of some crazy rooms, which neither indicated riches nor cleanliness. As
I had no baggage belonging to me, except a small carpet, my removal here from the caravanserai
was soon accomplished, and I took up my future abode in a corner of mine host’s principal room,
where he also spread his bed and slept.

By way of celebrating my arrival, he treated me with roasted lamb, and an abundant dish of
rice, to which were added dates, cheese, and onions. The dishes were cooked in the harem, by
the hands of his wife and daughter, aided by a female slave, the only domestic in the establishment.
Neither of these had I yet seen, for it was dusk when we reached the house; nor, from good
manners, did I ask more about them than Osman was inclined to tell me.

Besides myself and his son, the old man had invited a brother dealer in lambskins to the entertainment,
with whom he had formed a close intimacy during his travels in Bokhara. The conversation turned
exclusively upon commerce, about which I was so ignorant, that I took very little share in
it, although, considering that it was my intention to enter it myself, I was very happy to
open my ears to all that was said.

They entered deeply into the subject and discussed the relative merits or each article of trade.
To hear them talk, one might have inferred that the end of the world was at hand, because it
was rumoured that the price of their favourite commodity had fallen at Constantinople. They
dissuaded me from embarking my capital in that article, but recommended in preference that
I should invest it in pipe-sticks, which, they remarked, were subject to no decay, and for
which there was a constant demand in the market of Constantinople.

The entertainment being over, and the guests having parted, I ruminated deeply upon what I
had heard, and forthwith turned the whole weight of my thoughts to pipe-sticks. There, in a
corner, I sat all day calculating what number of pipes I might acquire for my tomauns, and
what would be my profit when sold at Constantinople; and when my imagination was heated by
the hopes of the ultimate fortune that might be realized, I gave myself up to the most extravagant
expectations. The plan of the merchant, whom Saadi relates he met in the island of Kish, was
trifling when compared to the one which I formed. ‘With the produce of my pipe-sticks,’ said
I, ‘I will buy figs at Smyrna, which I will take to Europe, and having made great profit by
them there, my money shall then he invested in skull-caps, which I will carry to Grand Cairo;
these being sold in detail, for ready cash, I will carefully pack my money in sacks, and proceed
to Ethiopia, where I will purchase slaves, each of whom I will sell for great profit at Moccha,
and thence I will make the pilgrimage to the tomb of the Prophet. From Moccha I will transport
coffee to Persia, which will fetch an amazing price; and then I will repose in my native city,
until I can purchase a high situation at court, which may in time lead me to become the grand
vizier to the King of Kings.

Having thus disposed of the future in my favour, I set myself actively to work in laying in
my merchandise. According to the most approved method, I made a bargain with a wood-cutter,
who was to proceed to the mountains of Lour and Bakhtiari, where he would find forests of the
wild cherry-tree, from which he would make his selections, according to the sizes with which
I should furnish him. He was then to return to Bagdad, where the sticks would be bored, and
made up into appropriate parcels for the markets of Turkey.

All this was duly executed; but during the time that I was waiting for the return of the wood-cutter,
I was attacked by a disorder, from which few residents, as well as strangers at Bagdad are
exempt, which terminating by a large pimple, as it dries up, leaves an indelible mark on the
skin. To my great mortification, it broke out upon the middle of my right cheek, immediately
upon the confines of the beard, and there left its baleful print, destroying some of the most
favourite of my hairs, and making that appear a broken and irregular waste, which before might
be likened to a highly cultivated slope.

I bore this calamity as well as I was able, although I could not help frequently quarrelling
with fate, for having chosen so conspicuous a spot to place that which might have been so conveniently
settled anywhere else.

‘So be it,’ said I, heaving a sigh at the same time; ‘the wise man said true when he remarked,
“if every stone was left to choose what it would be, most probably it would be a diamond;”
and if every man might choose whereabouts he would have his pimple, there would be no ugly
faces in Bagdad.’

However, by way of consolation, I recollected the Osman Aga’s face was the mirror of deformity,
although his pimple had budded elsewhere. He, instead of condoling with me on my misfortune,
rather seemed to enjoy it.

‘Hajji,’ said he to me, ‘if you are not afflicted with any greater calamity than this in life,
look upon it as a blessing: although one side of your face be deformed, still the other is
perfect. The turquoise is the perfection of colour on one side, but is black and dirty on the
other; still it is a turquoise, and a precious stone.’

‘Ah,’ said I to myself, ‘the ugly man cannot endure the sight of the handsome, no more than
the vicious can the virtuous: in the same manner as curs of the market howl at a hunting dog,
but dare not approach him.’

Notwithstanding the deformity of my cheek, I found, as I continued to be an inmate in the house
of my old master, that I had made no small impression upon the heart of his daughter, the fair
Dilaram, who, by a thousand little arts, did not fail to make me acquainted with the state
of her affections. Her mother and she were both experienced in the mode of curing the Bagdad
disorder, and they undertook to superintend mine. My pimple and Dilaram’s love appear to have
risen at about the same time; their progress was mutual, and by the time that the former had
risen to its full height, the latter had become quite inconvenient.

I, ’tis true, had not caught the infection; for my charmer was the very image of her father,
whose face and that of an old camel’s were so entirely identified in my mind, that I never
could lose that ugly association of ideas when I gazed upon her. It was, therefore, a considerable
relief to me when the season for travelling approached, and when the caravan for Constantinople
was about to assemble. My pipe-sticks were collected and packed into their proper bundles,
my accounts with my creditors regularly discharged, my wardrobe complete, and I was all delight
when it was announced, that at the very next favourable conjunction of the planets the caravan
was to take its departure. But as for poor Dilaram, she hovered about my cheek with looks of
despair; and as fast as the swelling subsided, she appeared to lose the only tie which kept
her united to this world and its vanities.

It was a fine spring morning when the caravan took its departure from the Constantinople gate
of the city. Mounted on the top of one of my loads, with my bed tied on the pad by way of a
soft seat, and my bags surrounding me, I contemplated the scene with pleasure, listened to
the bells of the mules as I would to music, and surveyed myself as a merchant of no small consequence.

My more immediate companions were Osman Aga, and his associate in lambskins (he of whom I have
already made honourable mention at the entertainment), and one or two other Bagdad merchants;
but besides, there were many of my own countrymen, natives of different cities of Persia, all
bound upon purposes of trade to Constantinople, and with whom I was more or less acquainted.
My adventure with the chief priest of Tehran had in great measure blown over; and indeed the
dress I had adopted, with the scar on my cheek, made me look so entirely like a native of Bagdad,
that I retained little in my appearance to remind the world that I was in fact a Persian.

I will not tire the reader with a recital of our adventures through Turkey, which consisted
of the usual fear of robbers, squabbles with muleteers, and frays at caravanserais. It will
be sufficient to say, that we reached our destination in safety; but I cannot omit the expression
of my first emotions upon seeing Constantinople.

I, a Persian, and an Ispahani, had ever been accustomed to hold my native city as the first
in the world: never had it crossed my mind that any other could, in the smallest degree, enter
into competition with it, and when the capital of Roum was described to me as finer, I always
laughed the describer to scorn. But what was my astonishment, and I may add mortification,
on beholding, for the first time, this magnificent city! I had always looked upon the royal
mosque, in the great square at Ispahan, as the most superb building in the world; but here
were a hundred finer, each surpassing the other in beauty and in splendour. Nothing did I ever
conceive could equal the extent of my native place; but here my eyes became tired with wandering
over the numerous hills and creeks thickly covered with buildings, which seemed to bid defiance
to calculation. If Ispahan was half the world, this indeed was the whole. And then this gem
of cities possesses this great advantage over Ispahan, that it is situated on the borders of
a beautiful succession of waters, instead of being surrounded by arid and craggy mountains;
and in addition to its own extent and beauty, enjoys the advantage of being reflected in one
never-failing mirror, ever at hand to multiply them. But where should I stop, if I attempted
to describe the numerous moving objects which attracted my attention? Thousands of boats, of
all forms and sizes, skimmed along in every direction, whilst the larger vessels, whose masts
looked like forests, more numerous than those of Mazanderan, lined the shores of the intricate
and widely extended harbour.

‘O, this is a paradise,’ said I to those around me; ‘and may I never leave it!’ But when I
recollected in whose hands it was, possessed by a race of the most accursed of heretics, whose
beards were not fit to be brooms to our dust-holes, then I thought myself too condescending
in allowing them to possess me amongst them. One consolation, however, I did not fail to derive
from reflection, which was, that if they were allowed the possession of so choice a spot for
their use in this world, they would doubly feel the horror of that which was doubtless preparing
for them in the next.

After undergoing the necessary forms and examinations at the customhouse, I and my companions
took boat at Scutari, crossed over to Constantinople, and established ourselves and merchandise
in a large caravanserai, the resort of Persian traders, situated in a very central part of
the city, near the principal bazaars. I felt myself a slender personage indeed, when I considered
that I was only one among the crowd of the immense population that was continually floating
through the great thoroughfares. And when I saw the riches displayed in the shops, the magnificence
of dress of almost every inhabitant, and the constant succession of great lords and agas, riding
about on the finest and most richly caparisoned horses, I could not help exclaiming, in a secret
whisper to myself, ‘Where is Constantinople and her splendours, and where Persia and her poverty?’

I, in conjunction with old Osman, hired a room in the caravanserai, in which we deposited our
merchandise. During the daytime I displayed my pipe-sticks in goodly rows on a platform; and
as my assortments were good, I began my sales with great vigour, and reaped considerable profit.
In proportion as I found money returning to my purse, so did I launch out into luxuries which
I little heeded before. I increased the beauty and conveniences of my dress; I bought a handsome
amber-headed chibouk; I girded my waist with a lively-coloured shawl; my tobacco pouch was
made of silk, covered with spangles; my slippers were of bright yellow, and I treated myself
to a glittering dagger. Temptations to expense surrounded me everywhere, and I began to think
that there was something worth living for in this world. So numerous were the places in which
I might exhibit my person in public, that I could not refrain from visiting the most frequented
coffee-houses, where, mounted on a high bench, with soft cushions to recline upon, I smoked
my pipe and sipped my coffee like one of the highest degree.

Implicated as I had been in disagreeable adventures in Persia, I was mistrustful of my own
countrymen, and rather shunned them, whilst I sought the acquaintance of the Turks. But they,
my countrymen, who are always so inquisitive, and who feel themselves slighted upon the least
inattention--they discovered who and what I was, and eyed me with no great feelings of approbation.
However, I endeavoured to live upon good terms with them; and as long as we did not enter into
competition in matters of trade, they left me unmolested.

In places of public resort I gave myself out for a rich Bagdad merchant; and now my scar, which
I had before esteemed a great misfortune, was conveniently conspicuous to attest the truth
of my assertions. Nothing, I found, was so easy as to deceive the Turks by outward appearance. Ie, completed and ironed
a whole. Because the gentleman should be aware that my shop does not leave room without all budgerigars
and ringo ranges. Tell the gentleman that the poor tailor has not other than its reputation,
as you saw, for over ten years, to the grandeur of Havana, and no one could say justice Francisco
de Paula Uribe and Robirosa ...

- Ah! Uribe Maestro! Uribe Maestro! again interrupted the young man more impatiently. He who
does not know you that you buy. Give the word and return with his reputation and few Sometimes,
if any, provided accuracy. Let all this talk for another time and let the facts. When will I get
clothes so tonight, in time for the ball or not?

Here know what matters.

- The will the gentleman or lose the name I bear. As far as the vest, which is all that is out,
I hope by now. Hastily, is held Pardito which is painted a single for BC and it's like the
clock. Since the gentleman has honor the goodness of my studio with his presence, test the
jacket, although I am certain and sure the gentleman will admit that I have a good eye, if
nothing else. Please do not repair in its present state, because I know that for people who
are not art here is work of two days, when an officer is an expert only work two hours. If any
I was once delayed the work, not my fault, or lack of officers, but because I like much at once.
In the workshop I have only five officers, outside, at home, how
I want, but I'd rather have my people always visible.

By then, standing before the mirror Leonardo had been stripped of his coat with the help the tailor,
and while he tested the new, thought he saw reflected in that the image of someone Watching
you sneak up from behind the door of the room. Although he came to mind I had seen that face somewhere,
suddenly could not remember where or when. In this effort of imagination
was a little pensive, completely oblivious.

Of course, during that time did not see what was happening, not heard or understood the teacher's
talk Uribe.

Happened to come at that time in tailoring a girl of color, medium head cover Burato in dark
brown blanket, to the Persian style.

He said good evening, and as if no had noticed what was done there,
passed over to the room, behind the cutting table.

But Uribe was waiting impatiently, and stopped before reaching the door, asking:

- Did you bring the vest, baby?

- Yes, sir, "she answered soft and musical voice, pausing at the top of the table it deposited a
small bundle out from under the blanket.

The name, as well as the voice of the girl, pulled Leonardo from his
abstraction, turned her face and stared him.

Both were recognized course, and exchanged glances intelligence and a smile of affection, signs
certainly not escaped the penetration Uribe .-- Here fishy, ​​he
thought.

Poor girl! I pity! Which claws have fallen!

At least this is the cause of the blood burnings Pepper ... You're right ... But otherwise,
must be about something more than that.

Then he took the vest silk scarf that was wrapped, and giving it to its owner, talking to Gamboa
said.

- Did not I told the gentleman? Here is the pledge. The seamstress is worth a Potosí.

It was the black satin jacket, dotted with bright green bees, woven into the fabric. Leonardo not
tried it, nor the tailor considered necessary.

Neither time was from there for much, because that by appointment, came most of the parishioners
of Uribe. Among them, Fernando O'Reilly, younger brother of the Earl of that name, the eldest son
of Filomeno, after the Marquis of Aguas Claras, Secretary or confidant of Conde de Peñalver,
the young Marquis de Villalta, the Steward of the Earl of Lombillo, and one they called Seiso
Ferino, protected by the wealthy family Valdés Herrera. Almost all of these parts had been ordered
clothing for themselves or for their masters in the master tailoring Uribe said, and on the
way to the Paseo outside the walls in their carriages, and on purpose, entered it and stopped
the time for that inquiry.

Upon entering the first of the above-named characters, put his hand familiarly on the Leonardo
shoulder, called him by that name, and you treated him for you. They had been classmates Philosophy
in the College of San Carlos from 1827 to 1828, in whose last O'Reilly
had left to go to Spain and continue his studies until he received
a lawyer, as received, making the patriotic dollars just a few months
before the day that we are speaking, with the use of Mayor.

After two years away, this was the first time who were, having had no occasion or mood Leonardo
went to greet him, perhaps because, While former classmates, he had not stopped being a member
of a family the proudest Havana, the first greatness of Spain. On the other hand, broke single and married
again a Madrid, a source of more to their tastes and interests were very different now than
they were when they were attending together to hear the eloquent philosopher friendly lessons
Francisco Javier de la Cruz.

The occasion of that influx of gentlemen and their servants was none other than the table dance
to be held in the evening the same day, at the top of the palace in the street San Ignacio
at the corner of Teniente Rey, hired for their duties by the Philharmonic Society in 1828. Since
the days of Carnival, in late February, when the celebrations coincided public through the
marriage of the Princess of Naples, María Cristina Fernando VII Spain, the Company aforesaid
had not reopened their classrooms. Now it was as to dismiss the year 1830, it is known that
the main people of Havana, only to right to attend to his duties, he left the camp since early
December and no returned to the city until long after Reyes. On the eve of the soiree, youth
both sexes flocked to stores to fashion and new costumes made new ornaments, jewelry and gloves.
Tailors like Federico, Turla and Uribe, were the favorites, the stores as the "Palo Gordo 'and' Wonderland
', the jewelers such as Rozan and "The Golden Key"; dressmakers shops like Madame Pitaux; the Baró
shoe like, across the street from O'Reilly and the "Ladies' Street in Health corner of Manrique,
outside the city, several days prior to that for dance were siege morning and evening, for the
most distinguished ladies and young for its elegance and luxury of
their costumes.

The first at that time began to wear shoes or white satin slippers to China, with ribbons to tie at
the throat of the foot and show silk stockings fishnet stockings, even though the dress was
worn over the short. Men also wore slippers golden calf next hebillita outside and silk socks color
of meat.

With the Knights, Uribe threw the rest of the courtesy and kindness, I knew coated whenever it
suited him, with the servants, but came on behalf of people with high position, was dry and sparing
in civil demonstrations. But he had skill enough to leave everyone happy and satisfied, like nothing
had trouble lavish promises right and left, imaginary currency it paid most of the debts to
society. This served exactly the way he talked big from the beginning to the remaining gave
a solemn disappointment without losing that sponsorship.

E gone all because none heated seat was of course to enable the proposed end pieces that night.
Not neglected, of course, the green jersey invisible Gamboa, who, satisfied that no would be
disappointed again, yielded to the request of his friend alive Fernando O'Reilly and he chitin
accompanied in the trip, called in imitation of the famous in Madrid, the Prado.

Occupied it, and takes in the day, the amount of land that spreads from the driveway of the Monte
to the reef at Punta Norte, the death of the glacis of the moats of the city by west side. Cienfuegos
extended road trip of the Mount to the Arsenal to the south, but has never been used as such
but as that part of Broad Street, whose name it bears. Among the works of ornament that had their
origins in the government of Don Luis de las Casas, there are The new Prado (the one we now
speak.) El Conde de Santa Clara finished the first source project left in the houses, and built another
further north, we refer to Neptune Prado on the average, and the Lions to the extreme. Both are
provided water from the ditch real, which crossed the ride (and he still crosses) in front of
the Botanical Garden station today Main railway from Havana to Guines,
and the trench was to shed their turbid waters at the bottom of the
harbor, next to the Arsenal.

Much later, at the southern end del Prado, which was originally the marble statue of Carlos
III, Don Miguel Tacon moved in 1835 to his military tour, he built at his own expense in 1837 the
Conde de Villanueva the beautiful fountain in India or Havana.

The new Prado consisted of a mile long, more or less at an angle almost imperceptible 80 degrees,
facing the square where the fountain rustic rose Neptune. We were four rows of common trees
of the forest of Cuba, some with very old stout, and improper all malls. Down the street from
the center, the widest, could run four carriages paired, the two sides, narrower, with a few seats
of stone served for ordinary people, men only, who in the days of gala feast formed in long
lines along the promenade. Most of these, especially Sunday, consisted of Spanish waiters employed
in retail trade in the city government offices in the navy and army, due to its quality singles
and their occupations, could not use carriage and visit the Prado in ordinary days. It also noted that
at the time of ride, it was forbidden even through Prado in rental car, and when a stranger she
did out of ignorance of the rule or consent sergeant of dragoons
picket guard was there, was struck and excited general laughter from
the public.

Or Creole Cuban youth had at least go to the Prado on foot, on all confused with the Spanish
in the rows of spectators sunday. So that took part there active in the ride just the main people:
women invariably chitin, some Steering Wheel elderly and some young people from wealthy families,
on horseback. No other species carriage was used then in Havana, with the exception of Bishop
and Captain General used car. Recess was reduced to revolve around the statue of Carlos III
and the source Neptune when the attendance was short when I was very, extended to that of Lions
or other anywhere in between, where the sergeant was estimated bite plant one of their dragons,
to maintain order and to keep it a safe distance between coach and carriage. The higher the
influx of these, the lower the step to were allowed to move, that was often a monotonous exercise,
not wasted indeed for the ladies, whose main entertainment consisted of going recognizing their
friends and acquaintances, among the spectators of the side streets, and greet with the fan ajar the graceful
and elegant way that is only given to Havana.

Luckily the monotony and the funereal gravity of such an innocent pleasure, the authorities
Spanish they called arbitrary order, which lasted the presence of dragons picket on Central
Avenue Prado, ie five to six in the afternoon. Because it is well known that, at times with
the tip of the spear, others caned, made the rickshaw pullers to keep pace and line. But after
greeting the Spanish Pavilion at the strength contour for lowering ceremony before, as well
as signals Morro marched the picket line along the edge of the trench in the street address and
headquarters of his name, and immediately began racing, the actual exercise, beauty and novelty
of the fun. Sight to behold was, in effect, then, the horse and carriage ride, the new Prado
de La Habana, half lit by the last rays of golden sun, afternoons in autumn or winter break down
in bunches of silver, before confused with the pure blue of the sky. The rickshaw pullers wanting
experts took advantage of the opportunity presented to them to show off their skill and dexterity,
not only the effect of horses on the turn violent and capricious of chitin, but in the tact
with which plunged into the straits and confusion, and were taken out without shock or friction
even with other wheels. Even the timid girls, at the height of enthusiasm for the whirlwind
of racing and turns, seized in aerial shells, with the action and sometimes with the word, cheering
the riders, with each other contributed to far more danger and grandeur of the spectacle. Gradually
the steamy twilight vanished; a subtle and ashen dust swirling rose to the first branches
of copudos trees and covered the entire ride, so that, when one after another chitin, with its
load beautiful young women, left the stadium around the city or the neighborhoods outside the walls,
least did not believe it went unnoticed spectator of the clouds, which other Venus foam of the
sea.

In those days the metropolis believed science to govern the colony
was enclosed to plant a few cannon battery, was designed to build
the walls of Havana work that began in the early seventeenth century
and was completed near the end of the eighteenth.

Of these walls were part of a vast and complete fortification, and by the landward side and by the
sea or the port and there will be four doors to the country, sally ports into the water, drawbridges,
moat wide and deep, embankments, warehouses, pilings, loopholes, and crenellated ramparts,
so that the most populous city of the island remained of been converted into a vast citadel.
So things existed until the coming of memorable Don Miguel Tacon, who opened three doors and replaced
with bridges, drawbridges fixed in stone. But at the time of history we talking about, that is, when
only were the five original gates, the three call center Monserrate, the Great Wall and Earth,
were for public use in a carriage, on horseback and on foot, and end, called the Punta and the pliers
were designed specifically to traffic. For them, was therefore carried the sugar, coffee and
other heavy effects the only means of transportation then, namely the huge primitive carts
pulled by oxen phlegmatic. The garrison Square, numerous in recent times, gave the guard the gates
and the sally ports, together with the guard, consisting in all of them, for no one and nothing
went in or out without being subject to dual registration, all as is customary in places under
siege.

After entering the carriage in which O'Reilly and Gamboa were in the inner portcullis where was
the booth of the guard, thrust, on the opposite side of the drawbridge, a horse so full of forage
maize in maloja commonly called, were not more the feet and head,
which sought to raise as he could, no doubt because of too weight.

On that mountain of grass came mounted to the philandering, rather, lying to the driver or malojero
rump, Canary Islands natural boy, dressed in the style of Cuban farmers. The Spanish sentinel,
who was walking between the two doors with rifle the arm, looked first to the bridge, then
to the rake, and stood in the middle of means a sign that both should stand, pending the outcome
of which one had to finance, or diverted. Forage stand the horse would be to obstruct, get
in the narrow bridge was impossible without risking a fall, while the carriage he was easy
to hire the horses on the guard barracks and leave the way open. Despite his natural clumsiness,
that it was clear, of course, the Sentinel, so I ordered malojero hand to stop and be moved
at a run into the carriage and shouted: - Back!

But the coachman proud of the nobility and authority of his master, puffed up shields embroidered
gun in his livery, as well as their silver spurs, which were loaded with metal fittings, even
the same carriage, instead of obeying the order of sentinel planted horses inside the front
door, and looked sideways to his master.

It came very astounded Gamboa telling the dangers he had run in his ascent of Mount Etna in
Sicily and even sudden stop of the carriage did not perceive that he had presented an obstacle. Naturally
the master's eyes met those of the slave asking him orders: - Arrea! he said, as if nothing
happened, "continued the intimate conversation with his classmate brought and friend.


After we had sat facing each other for some few minutes, little, except commonplace compliments,
having passed, my fair mistress ordered the old Ayesha (for that was the name of my conductress)
to leave the room, and then leaning forwards, as if to take up her fan of peacock’s feathers,
which was on the cushion, she permitted her veil to fall, and exhibited to my impatient eyes
the most beautiful face that nature had ever formed.

This was the signal for laying by all reserve, and I prostrated myself before this divinity
with all the adoration of a profound devotee, and poured out such a rhapsody of love and admiration,
as to leave no doubt in her mind of the tenderness of my heart, the acuteness of my wit, and
the excellence of my taste. In short, the emir’s widow had every reason to be satisfied with
the choice she had made; and she very soon showed the confidence which she intended to place
in me, by making me at once the depository of her secrets.

‘I am in a difficult situation,’ said she, ‘and the evil eye which many cast upon me hath embittered
my soul. You may conceive, that, owing to the wealth with which I have been endowed by my late
husband (upon whom be eternal blessings!) and to my own dower besides, which was considerable,
I have been tormented with many persecutions, and they have almost driven me mad. My relations
all claim a right to me, as if I were part of the family estate. My brothers have their own
interest in view when they would negotiate a husband for me, as if they would barter a sack
of wool against bags of rice. A nephew of my husband, a man of the law, pretends to claim an
old custom, by which, when a man died, one of his relations had a right to his widow, which
he might assert by throwing his cloak over her. Another relation again pretends, that, according
to the law, I am not entitled to the whole of what I now possess, and threatens to dispute
it. In short, so sadly perplexed have I been under these circumstances, I only saw one way
to set the matter at rest, which was to marry again. Fate has thrown you in my way, and I am
no longer at a loss.’

She then informed me of the arrangements she had made for our immediate union, in case I was
not averse to it, and referred me to a man of the law, whom she had secured to act in her behalf,
who would make out all the proper papers, and whom she informed me was now in the house ready
to officiate. I was not prepared for quite so much dispatch, and felt my heart misgive me,
as if it were hovering between heaven and earth; but I did not hesitate to reiterate my protestations
of eternal love and devotion, and said nothing to my intended but what seemed to overwhelm
her with delight.

So impatient was she of any delay, that she immediately ordered the old Ayesha to conduct me
to the man of the law, who was in attendance in a small apartment, in a more distant part of
the house. Besides himself he had brought another, who, he informed me, would act as my vakeel
or trustee, such an intervention being necessary on the part of the man as well as the woman;
and then he exhibited before me the akdnameh or marriage deed, in which he had already inscribed
the dower of my intended, consisting of her own property, and demanded from me what additions
it was my intention to make thereto.

I was again thrown back upon my ingenuity, and as the best answer I could give, repeated what
I had before said to Ayesha, namely, that a merchant was uncertain of his wealth, which was
dispersed in trade in different parts of the world; but I did not hesitate to settle all that
I possessed upon my wife, provided such engagement were mutual.

‘That is very liberal,’ replied my wily scribe; ‘but we require something more specific. As
for instance, what do you possess here at Constantinople? You cannot have come thus far, except
for important purposes. Settle the wealth which you can command upon the spot, be it in cash,
merchandise, or houses, and that will suffice for the present.’

‘Be it so,’ said I, putting the best face possible upon the demand. ‘Be it so--let us see.’
Then appearing to calculate within myself what I could command, I boldly said, ‘You may insert
that I give twenty purses in money and ten in clothes.’

Upon this, a communication took place between the emir’s widow and her agent, for the purpose
of informing her what were my proposals, and for gaining her consent to them. After some little
negotiation, the whole was arranged to the apparent satisfaction of both parties, and our different
seals having been affixed to the documents, and the necessary forms of speech having been pronounced
by our different vakeels, the marriage was declared lawful, and I received the compliments
of all present.

I did not fail to reward the scribes before they were dismissed, and also to send a very liberal
donation to be distributed throughout the household of my fair bride.

Then instead of returning to old Osman, and my pillow of pipe-sticks, I retired, with all the
dignity and consequence of the gravest Turk, into the inmost recesses of my harem.

I soon found that I had a very difficult part to perform. A Chinese philosopher is said to
have remarked, that if the operation of eating was confined to what takes place between the
mouth and the palate, then nothing could be more pleasant, and one might eat for ever; but
it is the stomach, the digestive organs, and, in fact, the rest of the body, which decide ultimately
whether the said operation has been prejudicial or healthful. So it is in marriage. If it were
confined to what takes place between man and wife, nothing more simple; but then come the ties
of relationship and the interests of families, and they decide much upon its happiness or misery.

My fair spouse entertained me for several successive days after our marriage with such manifold
and intricate stories of her family, of their quarrels and their makings-up, of their jealousies
and their hatreds, and particularly of their interested motives in their conduct towards her,
that she made me feel as if I might have got into a nest of scorpions. She recommended that
we should use the greatest circumspection in the manner of informing her brothers of our marriage;
and remarked that although we were so far secure in being lawful man and wife, still as much
of our future happiness depended upon their goodwill towards us (they being men of wealth,
and consequently of influence in the city), we ought to do everything in our power to conciliate
them. As a precautionary measure, she had spread a report that she was on the point of being
married to one of the richest and most respectable of the Bagdad merchants, and in a conversation
with one of her brothers, had not denied, although she had abstained from confessing it to
be the case. She now requested that our marriage might be proclaimed, and to that effect recommended
that we should give an entertainment to all her relations, and that no expense should be spared
in making it as magnificent as possible, in order that they might be convinced she had not
thrown herself away upon an adventurer, but, in fact, had made an alliance worthy of them and
of herself.

She found me ready in seconding her wishes, and I was delighted to have so early an opportunity
to make a display of our wealth. I began by hiring a suite of servants, each of whom had their
appropriate situation and title. I exchanged the deceased emir’s family of pipes for others
of greater value, and of the newest fashion. In the same manner I provided myself with a new
set of coffee-cups, the saucers of which were fashioned in the most expensive manner; some
of filigreed gold, others of enamel, and one or two, for my own particular use, inlaid with
precious stones. Then, as I had stepped into the emir’s shoes, I determined to slip on his
pelisses also. He was curious in the luxuries of dress, for his wardrobe consisted of robes
and furs of great value, which his widow informed me had existed in his family for many years,
and which I did not now blush to adjust to my own shoulders. In short, before the day of the
entertainment came, I had time to set up an establishment worthy of a great aga; and I do believe,
although born a barber, yet in look, manner, and deportment, no one could have acted a part
truer to my new character than I did.

But I must not omit to mention, that previously to the feast, I had not failed to visit my
new relations in all due form; and although I was greatly anxious respecting the result of
our meeting, yet when I rode through the streets mounted on one of the emir’s fat horses, caparisoned
in velvet housings that swept the ground, and surrounded by a crowd of well-dressed servants,
my delight and exultation exceeded any feeling that I had ever before experienced. To see the
crowd make way, look up, and lay their hands on their breast as I passed,--to feel and hear
the fretting and champing of my horse’s bit as he moved under me, apparently proud of the burden
he bore,--to enjoy the luxury of a soft and easy seat, whilst others were on foot; in fine,
to revel in those feelings of consequence and consideration which my appearance procured, and
not to have been intoxicated, was more than mere humanity could withstand, and accordingly
I was completely beside myself. But what added most to the zest of this my first exhibition,
was meeting some of my own needy countrymen in the streets, who had been my companions in the
caravan from Bagdad, and who, in their sheepskin caps and thin scanty cotton garments, made
but a sorry figure among the gaily dressed Osmanlies, and seemed to stand forth expressly to
make me relish in the highest degree the good fortune with which I had been visited. Whether
or no they recognized me, I know not; but this I recollect, that I turned my head on one side
as I passed, and buried my face as well as I could in the combined shade of my beard, great
turban, and furred pelisse.

My visits succeeded better than I could have expected. Whatever might have been the motives
of my wife’s brothers, they behaved to me with marked civility, and indeed flattered me into
the belief that I had conferred an honour on their family in taking their sister off their
hands. Merchants as they were, their conversation turned principally upon trade, and I made
my best endeavours to talk up to the character I had assumed, and convinced them of the extent
of my undertakings in commerce. But, at the same time, great was my circumspection not to commit
myself; for when they began to question and cross-examine me upon the trade of Bagdad and Bassorah,
the relations of those cities and of Arabia in general with India and China, and to propose
joint concerns in their various articles and produce, I immediately reduced my speech to monosyllables,
entrenched myself in general terms, and assented to proposals which led to nothing.

Having completed my visits, I felt that one duty was still left, which was, to make the good
old Osman a partaker of my happiness, to inform him of my marriage, and to invite him to our
ensuing entertainment. But, shall I own it? so much did I feel that I was acting a false part,
and so fearful was I of being detected, that I dared not trust even him, taciturn as he naturally
was, with my secret, and therefore determined for the present to have no communication with
him, or, in fact, with any of my countrymen, until I could feel myself so securely fixed in
my new situation as to be fearless of being displaced.

The entertainment went off with the greatest success, and there was every reason to suppose
that I fully succeeded in making my guests believe I was really the personage whom I pretended
to be. I therefore began to feel secure in my new possessions, and gave myself up to enjoyment,
associating with men of pleasure, dressing in the gayest attire, and, in short, keeping a house
that was the talk and envy of the city. ’Tis true that I almost daily felt the inconvenience
of being indebted to my wife for such good fortune; for, notwithstanding the previous assurances
of the old Ayesha, I soon found that differences of opinion would arise on many other subjects
besides the comparative delicacy of cream and cheese tarts. ‘Excellent man must that old emir
have been,’ frequently did I exclaim, ‘who could go through life with only one subject of dispute
with his wife! For my part, if there happens to be two sides to a question, we are sure to
appropriate them one in opposition to the other.

I had long promised to myself the enjoyment of one of the principal pleasures arising from
my good fortune; I mean, the exhibition of myself in all my splendour before my countrymen
in the caravanserai, and enjoying the astonishment which I should excite in the old Osman,
my former master.

Now, that all was safe, as I fully hoped, I could no longer resist the temptation, and accordingly
dressed myself in my best attire, mounted the finest horse in my stable, gathered my whole
suite of servants about me, and in the very busiest hour of the day proceeded to the caravanserai,
in which, on my first arrival at Constantinople, I had appeared as a vender of pipe-sticks.
Upon entering the gate, no one seemed to know me, but all were anxious to do me honour, hoping
that in me they might find a purchaser of their merchandise. I inquired for Osman Aga, whilst
my servants spread a beautiful Persian carpet for my seat, and at the same time offered me
one of my most costly amber-headed chibouks to smoke. He came and seated himself, with all
due respect, on the edge of my carpet, without recognizing me. I talked to him without reserve
for some time, and remarked that he eyed me with looks of peculiar interest, when at length,
unable to restrain himself any longer, he exclaimed, ‘By the beard of the blessed Mohammed,
you are either Hajji Baba, or you are nobody!’

I laughed with all my heart at his exclamation, and when we had mutually explained, very soon
related how I was situated, and to what profit I had turned the fifty pieces of gold which
he had lent me. His philosophic mind did not appear so much elated with my change of fortune
as I had anticipated; but my countrymen, the Persians, as soon as they heard that under that
large turban and that heavy pelisse was seated Hajji Baba, the once vender of little wares
like themselves, and that all that splendour and circumstance of horse, servants, and rich
pipes was attendant upon his person, their national feelings were awakened, and they could
neither contain their envy nor their malevolence.

I now, too late, discovered the mistake I had committed in showing myself off in this manner,
and would willingly have sneaked away without further triumph.

‘What! is this Hajji Baba?’ said one, ‘the son of the Ispahan barber? May his father’s grave
be polluted, and his mother abused!’

‘Well acted, true child of Irân!’ said another; ‘you have done your utmost with the Turk’s
beard, and may others do the same with yours!’

‘Look at his great turban, and his large trousers, and his long pipe,’ said a third: ‘his father
never saw such things, not even in a dream!’

In this manner did my envious countrymen taunt me, until, asserting all my dignity, I rose
from my seat, mounted my horse, and left the place amidst their scoffs and expressions of contempt.
My first sensation was that of indignation at them, my second of anger at myself.

‘You have been rightly served,’ said I to myself, ‘by the soul of Kerbelai Hassan, the barber!
What well-fed hound ever went among wolves without being torn to pieces? What fool of a townsman
ever risked himself amongst the wild Arabs of the desert without being robbed and beaten? Perhaps
Hajji may one day become a wise man, but plentiful is the vexation he must eat first! Of what
use is a beard,’ said I, taking mine into my hand, ‘when an empty sconce is tied to the end
of it? about as much as a handle is to a basket without dates. Great wisdom had the sage who
declared that no man was ever pleased with the elevation of his fellow, except perhaps when
he saw him dangling on a gibbet!’

In this manner did I soliloquize until I reached my house, where, having retired to the harem,
I endeavoured to seek repose for the remainder of the day, in order to chew the cud of my bitter
reflections. But I was mistaken; for, to add to my misery, Shekerleb, my wife, as if impelled
by some wicked demon, demanded that I should immediately advance her the money inserted in
the marriage settlement for clothes, and so worked upon me by her very unreasonable entreaties,
that, involving her in the ill-humour in which I had continued against my own countrymen, I
poured forth the current of my feelings in language and gestures the most violent. Curses upon
them and maledictions upon her came from my lips in horrid succession, until I, the once mild
and patient Hajji, had become more furious than a Mazanderan lion.

My wife at first was all astonishment, and, as she drew herself up at the head of her slaves
and handmaids, seconded by the old Ayesha, waited with impatient silence for an opportunity
to speak. At length, when she had found utterance, her mouth appeared too small for the volume
of words which flowed from it. Her volubility unloosed the tongue of Ayesha, and the old woman’s
those of all the other women, until there arose such a tempest of words and screams, all of
which were directed against me, that I was nearly overwhelmed.

I would have resisted, but I found it impossible. It raged with such fury, that the room in
which we all stood was not large enough to contain us. I was the first to seek shelter, and
made a retreat from my harem amid the groans, the revilings, and the clapping of hands of the
beings within it, who, with my wife at their head, looked more like maniacs than those fair
creatures, in paradise, promised by our Prophet to all true believers.

Tired, jaded, and distressed by my day’s adventures, I retired into my own apartment, locked
the door, and there, though surrounded by and master of every luxury that man can enjoy, I
felt myself the most miserable of beings, detesting myself for my idiotical conduct in the
present posture of my affairs, and full of evil forebodings for the future. The inconveniences
of lying now stared me full in the face. I felt that I was caught in my own snare; for if I
endeavoured to extricate myself from my present dilemma by telling more lies, it was evident
that at the end I should not fail to be entirely entangled.

I passed a feverish night, and did not fall asleep until the muezzins from the minarets had
announced the break of day. Scarcely had an hour elapsed, ere I was awoke by an unusual stir,
and then was informed by one of my servants that my wife’s brothers, attended by several other
persons, were in the house.

Involuntarily, upon hearing this, I was seized with a trembling, which at first deprived me
of all power of action, and the consequences of lying now spoke for themselves. Fifty horrors,
one more hideous than the other, rose in my mind, and I began to feel a tingling in the soles
of my feet, which the lapse of years had not been able to dispel, so impressive had been the
lesson received at Meshed. ‘But, after all,’ I reflected, ‘Shekerleb is my wife, happen what
may; and if I have pretended to be richer than is really the case, I have only done what thousands
before me have done also.’ I then turned to my servant, and said, ‘In the name of the Prophet
let them come in; and make ready the pipes and coffee.’

My bed was then rolled up and carried out of the room, and my visitors one after the other
in silent procession walked in, and seated themselves on my divan. They consisted of my wife’s
two brothers, of her late father’s brother, and his son, and of a stern-looking man whom I
had never before seen. These were seated; but, besides, a numerous train of servants followed,
who stood in a row at the end of the room, amongst whom, standing foremost, were two ruffian-like
looking fellows armed with heavy canes, eyeing me as I thought with peculiar fierceness.

I endeavoured to appear as innocent and undisturbed as possible, and pretended the greatest
delight at seeing them. Having made them every civil speech which I could devise, to which
indeed I received nothing but monosyllables for answers, I ordered pipes and coffee, at the
partaking of which I hoped to acquire some insight into the object of their visit.

‘May your hours be fortunate!’ said I to the elder brother. ‘Is there anything at this early
time of the day in which I can be of use? If there is, command me.’

‘Hajji,’ said he, after an ominous pause, ‘look at me! Do you take us for animals, without
understanding, without common sense? or do you look upon yourself as the man of his day without
compare, specially privileged to take the beards of humankind into your hand, and to do what
you like with them?’

‘What is this that you say?’ I replied. ‘O my Aga! I am nobody and nothing; I am less than
an ounce of dust.’

‘Man!’ said the second brother, in a warmer tone of voice, ‘nobody and nothing, do you say?
then what have you made of us? Are we nothing, that you should come all this distance from
Bagdad to make us dance like apes at your bidding?’

‘Oh, Allah, great and good!’ exclaimed I, ‘what is all this? Why do you speak after this manner?
What have I done? Speak, and speak truth!’

‘Ah, Hajji, Hajji!’ said my wife’s uncle, shaking his head and grey beard at the same time,
‘you have been eating much abomination! Could a man who has seen the world like you, suppose
that others will eat it with you, and say, thanks be to Allah! No, no--we may eat, but will
not digest your insolence.

‘But what have I done, O my uncle?’ said I to him; ‘by my soul, speak!’

‘What have you done?’ said my wife’s cousin. ‘Is lying nothing? is stealing nothing? is marrying
a wife under false pretences nothing? You must be a rare man without shame to call such acts
nothing!’

‘Perhaps,’ said the eldest brother, ‘you think it a great honour which the son of an Ispahan
barber confers upon one of the richest families of Constantinople, when he marries their daughter!’

‘And perhaps,’ said the other, ‘you may look upon a beggarly vender of pipe-sticks in the light
of a merchant, and think him worthy of any alliance!’

‘But Hajji, praise be to Allah! is a great merchant,’ said the uncle ironically: ‘his silks
and velvets are now on their way to bring us lambskins from Bokhara; his shawls are travelling
to us from Cashmere, and his ships are blackening the surface of the seas between China and
Bassorah!’

‘And his parentage,’ continued his son in the same strain, ‘a barber’s son did you say? forbid
it, Allah! No, no; he dates from the Koreish. He is not even the descendant, but, by the blessing
of God, of the ancestry of the Prophet; and who can come in competition with a Mansouri Arab?’

‘What is all this?’ again and again did I exclaim, as I saw the storm gathering about my ears.
‘If you want to kill me, do so; but do not pull off my skin by inches.’

‘I tell you what is it, man without faith,’ said the stern man, who hitherto had remained immovable;
‘you are a wretch who deserves not to live! and if you do not immediately give up all pretensions
to your wife, and leave this house and everything that belongs to it, without a moment’s delay,
do you see those men’ (pointing to the two ruffians before mentioned); ‘they will just make
your soul take leave of your body as easy as they would knock the tobacco out of their pipes.
I have spoken, and you are master to act as you please.’

Then the whole of the assembly, as if excited by this speech, unloosed their tongues at once,
and, without reserve of words or action, told me a great number of disagreeable truths.

This storm, which I permitted to rage without opening my lips, gave me time for reflection,
and I determined to try what a little resistance would do.

‘And who are you,’ said I to the stern man, ‘who dares come into my house, and treat me as
your dog? As for these,’ pointing to my wife’s relations, ‘the house is theirs, and they are
welcome; but you, who are neither her father, her brother, nor her uncle, what have you to
do here? I neither married your daughter, nor your sister, and therefore what can it be to
you who I am?’

All this while he seemed swelling with rage. He and his ruffians were curling up their mustachios
to the corners of their eyes, and eyeing me, as the lion does the hind, before he pounces upon it.

‘Who am I?’ said he with a voice of anger. ‘If you want to know, ask those who brought me here.
I and my men act from authority, which if you dispute, it will be the worse for you.’

‘But,’ said I, softening my tone, for I now found that they were officers of the police, ‘but
if you insist upon separating me from my wife, to whom I have been lawfully married, give me
time to consult the men of the law. Every son of Islâm has the blessed Koran as his refuge,
and ye would not be such infidels as to deprive me of that? Besides, I have not been told yet
that she agrees to what you propose. She first sought me out; I did not seek her. She wooed
me for my own sake, not for any worldly interest; and when I accepted her I knew her not, neither
had I any tidings of either her wealth or her family. The whole has been the business of predestination,
and if ye are Mussulmans, will ye dare to oppose that?’

‘As to the wishes of Shekerleb upon the subject,’ said the eldest brother, ‘make your mind
easy. She desires a separation more even than we do.’

‘Yes, yes, in the name of the Prophet, yes, let him go in peace. For the sake of Allah, let
us be free,’ and fifty other such exclamations, all at once struck my ear; and on looking to
the door which led into the women’s apartments, from whence the sound came, I beheld my women
veiled, headed by my wife, who had been conducted there on purpose to give evidence against
me, and who all seemed possessed by so many evil spirits, shouting and wailing out their lamentations
and entreaties for my dismissal, as if I were the wicked one in person to be exorcised from
the house.

Finding that all was over with me, that it was in vain to contend against a power I could not
withstand, stranger and unprotected as I was in a foreign land, I put the best face I could
upon my forlorn situation, and getting up from my seat, I exclaimed, ‘If it is so, be it so.
I neither want Shekerleb nor her money, nor her brothers, nor her uncle, nor anything that
belongs to them, since they do not want me; but this I will say, that they have treated me
in a manner unworthy of the creed and name of Mussulmans. Had I been a dog among the unbelievers,
I should have been treated better. From the bottom of my heart I believe that the same punishment
which shall be inflicted, on the last day, upon those who reject our Holy Prophet, shall be
inflicted upon my oppressors.’ I then, with great emphasis, pronounced the following sentence
against them, as near as my memory would serve me, from the blessed Koran:--‘They shall have
garments of living fire, fitted tight upon them; boiling water shall be poured over them; their
bowels and skins shall be dissolved, and, in this state, they be beaten with red hot maces
of iron, and flogged with whips, whose lashes are made of lightnings, and the noise of which
shall be claps of thunder.’

Upon this, roused and excited as I was with the speech I had made, I stood in the middle of
the room, and divested myself of every part of my dress which had belonged to my wife, or which
I might have purchased with her money. Throwing down every article from me, as if it had been
abomination, and then calling for an old cloak which had originally belonged to me, I threw
it over my shoulders and made my exit, denouncing a curse upon the staring assembly I left
behind me.

When I had got into the street I walked hastily on without, for some time, heeding whither
I was bending my steps. My breast was convulsed by a thousand contending passions; and so nearly
had I lost possession of my reason, that, when in sight of the sea, I began seriously to consider
whether it would not be wisdom to throw myself headlong in.

But, crossing a large open space, an occurrence happened which, however trifling it may appear,
was of great consequence to me, inasmuch as it turned the current of my thoughts into a new
channel, and saved me from destruction. I was witness to one of those dog fights so frequently
seen in the streets of Constantinople. A dog had strayed into the territory of another community,
had infringed their rights, and stolen a bone. Immediately an immense uproar ensued; all were
on foot, and in full cry, and the strange dog was chased across the border into his own territory.
Here, meeting some of his own friends, he called them about him, returned to the attack, and
a general engagement ensued as I was passing.

While I stood by, intent upon the scene, a thought struck me, and I exclaimed, ‘Allah, oh Allah,
how inscrutable are thy designs! and how little ought man, narrow-minded, short-sighted man,
ever to repine at thy decrees! Thou throwest into my path a lesson, which teaches me the way
that I should go, and that assistance is ever at hand to those who will seek it; and, though
given by a dog, let me not despise it. No, am I to be surprised at anything, when I see animals,
without reason, acting like men, with it? Let me not be cast down, but rather retreat to where
I may still find a friend, and seek consolation in his advice and experience!’

Upon this, I turned almost mechanically to where I knew I should find my faithful friend and
adviser, the old Osman, who, although a Turk and a Sûni, had always behaved to me as if he
had been my countryman, and one of my own religious persuasion. He received me in his usual
quiet manner; and when I had related all my misfortunes, he puffed out a long volume of smoke
from his never-failing chibouk, and exclaimed, with a deep sigh, ‘Allah kerim! (God is merciful!)’

‘My friend,’ said he, ‘when you appeared here in all your magnificence before the Persians,
from that moment I was apprehensive that some evil would befall you. You perhaps are yet not
old enough to have learnt how odious are comparisons. Could you for a moment suppose, that
men, in your own station in life, who are drudging on, day after day, intent upon the sale
of a pipestick or a bag of Shiraz tobacco, that they could bear to be bearded by an appearance
of greatness and prosperity, so much beyond anything which they could ever expect to attain?
Had you appeared with a better coat or a richer cap than they, or had you been mounted on a
horse, when they could only afford an ass, then, perhaps, nothing more would have been said,
but that you were more expert in making your fortune, and a better retailer of your wares.
But to crush, to beat them down, with your magnificent dress, your amber-headed pipes, your
train of servants, your richly caparisoned horse, and, above all, the airs of grandeur and
protection which you took upon yourself, was more than they could allow, and they immediately
rose in hostility, and determined to bring you down to their own level again, if possible.
Evidently, it is they who have whispered into the ear of your wife’s brothers that you were
not a Bagdad merchant, but only the son of an Ispahan barber, and a sorry vender of little
wares. They, doubtless, soon undeceived them respecting the possibility of fulfilling the stipulations
to which you have bound yourself in your wife’s marriage contract; and they, it is plain, have
commented freely upon your pretensions to noble birth, and upon the flourishing account which
you gave of your mercantile concerns, of your transactions in Bokhara, and of your ships sailing
to China. Had you first visited me in a quiet way, as Hajji Baba, the Ispahani, and not as
Hajji Baba, the Turkish Aga, I would have warned you against making an undue exhibition of
yourself and your prosperity before your countrymen; but the mischief was done as soon as the
deed was over, and now all that can be recommended is, that from the past you gain experience
for the future.’ After this speech he took to his pipe again, and puffed away with redoubled
vigour.

‘This may be very true,’ said I. ‘What is done, is done, and peace abide with it: but, after
all, I am a Mussulman, and justice is due to me as well as to another. I never heard of a woman
putting away her husband, although the contrary frequently happens; and it has not yet reached
my understanding why I should be the only true believer who is called into the house, and thrust
out of it again, in a manner that would even disgrace a dog, merely because it suits a capricious
woman one morning to like, and the evening after to dislike, me. Cadies, mufties, sheikh-el-islams,
abound here as well as in other Mohamedan cities, and why should I not have recourse to them?
They are paid to administer justice, and wherefore should they sit, with their hands across,
counting their beads, when such injustice as that, with which I have been visited, is going
about the land seeking for redress?’

‘Are you mad, Hajji’, rejoined the old man, ‘to think of redress from the widow and relations
of one of the most powerful emirs of Islam, and that, too, when she is supported by her brothers,
two of the richest merchants in Constantinople? Where have you lived all your lifetime, not
to know, that he who hath most gold hath most justice? and that, if such a man as you were
to appear before the tribunal of the mufti, with every word, line, leaf, and surai of the Koran
in your favour, and one as rich and powerful as your wife’s brother were to appear on the other
side against you, as long as he had gold in his favour, you might appeal to your sacred book
until you and it were tired of walking round each other, for justice you would never obtain.’

‘O, Ali! O, Mohammed!’ exclaimed I, ‘if the world is indeed as iniquitous as this, then Hajji
Baba, truly, has made a bad bargain, and I wish he were again in possession of his pipesticks:
but I cannot, and will not, lose all and everything in this easy manner,--I will go and proclaim
my misfortunes from the housetop, rather.’

Upon which, in utter despair, I began to cry and moan, and pulled out some of my beard by the
roots.

Osman Aga endeavoured to comfort me,--made me look back upon my past life, and brought to my
recollection our mutual adventures while prisoners among the Turcomans.

‘God is all-powerful and all-merciful,’ said he. ‘Our destinies are written in the book, and
therefore what is there left, but to submit?’

‘But I am a Persian,’ exclaimed I (a new thought having crossed my mind), ‘as well as a Mussulman;
why, therefore, should I submit to injustice from a Turk? We are, after all, a nation, and
have had our Jinghizs, our Timours, and our Nadirs, who made our name respected throughout
the world, and who burnt the fathers of the Turks wherever they could find them. I will seek
our ambassador, and, if he be a man, he will insist upon justice being done me. Yes, yes! the
ambassador shall get back my wife; (oh, lucky thought!) and then we shall see who will take
her from me again.’

So elated was I by this idea, that I did not stop to hear what Osman might have to say on the
subject, but immediately sallied forth, full of fresh spirits and vigour, to seek out the representative
of our King of Kings, who, at the best of all fortunate hours, had very recently arrived on
a mission to the Sublime Porte.

Upon inquiry I found that the ambassador had been provided with a residence at Scutari, and
thither I immediately bent my course, happy to have the time which I should pass in the boat
at my disposal, in order to arrange my ideas for the purpose of making out a clear and strong
case of complaint.

Having landed, I inquired the way to his house, the avenues of which were thronged by his numerous
servants, who reminded me of my country (so different from that in which we were) by their
loquaciousness and quick gesticulation.

They soon found by my discourse, that I was one of them, although disguised by a Turkish dress,
and without any difficulty I was promised immediately to be ushered into the presence of their
master. But previously to this, I was anxious to acquire some little insight into his character,
in order that I might shape my discourse accordingly; and therefore entered into conversation
with one of his valets, who did not scruple to talk fully and unreservedly upon every topic
upon which I required information.

The result of my inquiries was as follows:--The ambassador, by name Mirza Firouz, was by birth
a Shirazi, of respectable though not of high parentage, excepting in the instance of his mother,
who was sister to a former grand vizier of great power, who, in fact, had been the means of
placing the Shah upon his throne. The Mirza married his cousin, a daughter of the said vizier;
and this led to his being employed in the government, though he had previously undergone many
vicissitudes, which had caused him to travel into various countries. This circumstance, however,
was one of the reasons of his being selected by the Shah to transact his business at foreign
courts. ‘He is a man of a quick and penetrating mind,’ said my informant: ‘irascible, but easy
to soothe, of a tender and forgiving nature, although in his first anger led to commit acts
of violence. He is gifted with the most overwhelming powers of speech, which always are sure
to get him out of the scrapes into which his indiscreet use of them very frequently leads him.
To his servants and followers he is kind and the contrary, by turns. Sometimes he permits them
to do and say everything which they choose, at others, he keeps them at a most chilling distance.
But, on the whole, he is easy of access, of agreeable commerce, of most fascinating manners,
and of a joyous and sociable nature.’

Such was the man into whose presence I was conducted. He was seated in a corner, after the
manner of Persia; therefore I could not ascertain what his height might be, but his bust was
extremely fine. His head was symmetrically placed on his shoulders, which were blended in an
easy curve with his neck; whilst his tight dress helped to give great breadth to his breast.
His face was one of the handsomest I had ever seen amongst my countrymen, his nose aquiline,
his eyes large and sparkling, his teeth and mouth exquisite, and his beard the envy of all
beholders. In short, as a specimen of the country he represented, none could have been better
selected.

When we had interchanged our greetings as true believers, he said to me, ‘Are you an Irani?’

‘Yes,’ said I, ‘so please you.’

‘Then why in looks an Osmanli?’ said he. ‘Praise be to Allah, that we have a king and a country
of whom no one need be ashamed.’

‘Yes,’ answered I, ‘your ordonnances are truth, and I am become less than a dog, since I have
put on the airs of a Turk. My days have been passed in bitterness, and my liver has melted
into water, since I have entangled myself by a connexion with this hated people; and my only
refuge is in God and you.’

‘How is this?’ said he: ‘speak. Has a child of Ispahan (for such you are by your accent) been
taken in by a Turk? This is wonderful indeed! We travel all this way to make them feed upon
our abomination, not to learn to eat theirs.’

I then related the whole of my adventures from the beginning to the end. As I proceeded he
seemed wonderfully interested. When I got to my marriage he became much amused, and roared
with laughter at the settlements I had made on my wife. The account I gave of the entertainment,
the respect with which I was treated, my magnificence and grandeur, afforded him great delight;
and the more I descanted upon the deception which I had practised upon the cows of Turks, as
he called them, the more interest he took in my narrative, which he constantly interrupted
by his exclamations, ‘Aye, well done, oh Ispahani! Oh! thou bankrupt! By Allah! You did well!
If I had been there, I could not have done better.’

But when I informed him of the manner I had been served by my envious countrymen, of the finishing
scene in my own house, of the screams of my women, of the speeches of my wife’s relations,--and
when I represented the very words, look, and attitude with which I made my exit, far from having
produced the sympathy I expected, his mirth was excited to such a degree, that I thought the
veins in his forehead would have burst; and he actually rolled himself on his sofa in the convulsions
of laughter.

‘But may it please you to consider,’ said I, ‘oh my aga! the situation in which I am now placed.
Instead of the bed of roses upon which I slept, I have not even a pillow whereon to lay my
head. As for the horses and velvet which I used to bestride, happy should I now be could I
claim even an ass for my own. And when I call to mind the luxuries in which I revelled, my
rich dresses, my splendid horses, my train of servants, my marble baths, my pipes, my coffee-cups--in
short, what shall I say, my everything a man could wish for, and now find myself a beggar--conceive
the bitter recollections which prey upon me, and which excite anything but laughter in my breast,
whatever they may do in yours.’

‘But those Turks, those heavy buffaloes of Turks,’ roared he, still screaming with laughter;
‘praise be to Allah! I can see them now with their long beards, their great caps, and their
empty heads, believing all that the sharp-witted madman of Persia chose to tell them, and they
would have gone on believing, had they not been undeceived by a similar species of madman.

‘But what have I to do in the business?’ said he to me. ‘I am neither your father nor your
uncle, to interfere and make it up with your wife’s relations; nor am I a cadi, or a mufti,
who can judge the case between you.’

‘No,’ answered I; ‘but you are my refuge here, and the representative of God’s vicegerent upon
earth; and you can see justice done me, and not let a poor unfriended stranger be oppressed.’

‘But would you get back possession of your wife,’ said he, ‘and stand a chance of being murdered?
Of what good would all your riches be, if the day after repossessing them you were found dead
in your bed? No, no; lend me your ear, and hearken to good council. Throw off your Turkish
clothes, and be a Persian again; and when in your proper character, I will keep you in mind,
and see what may be done for you. Your story has interested me, your wit and manner are agreeable,
and believe me that many better things are to be done in the world than to smoke a long pipe
all day, with no other object in life than to sleep upon a bed of roses, and to ride a fat
horse. In the meanwhile, take up your quarters here; look upon yourself as one of my suite
for the present, and whenever I wish to be merry you shall come and relate your story over again.’

Upon this I went up to him, kissed his knee in token of acknowledgement, and retired, scarcely
knowing what steps to take in this unsettled posture of my affairs.

CHAPTER LXXIV

He becomes useful to an ambassador, who makes him a partaker of his confidence.

Necessity, so the poet sayeth, ‘is as a strong rider with sharp stirrups, who maketh the sorry
jade do that which the strong horse sometimes will not do.’

I was disappointed, vexed, and mortified. My hopes of living a life of ease and enjoyment had
disappeared, and I once more saw myself obliged to have recourse to my own ingenuity to keep
me from starvation.

‘If I have lost a home,’ said I, ‘see I have found a friend. Let me not reject his proffered
protection; and the same powerful destiny which has led me on step by step through the labyrinth
of life will doubtless again take me by the hand, and perhaps at length safely land me where
I shall no longer be perplexed respecting the path I ought to pursue.’

I determined to make the most of my access to the ambassador; and happy was I to find, that
the liking which he had taken to me at first sensibly, though gradually, increased during our
succeeding interviews. He made use of me to acquire information, and conversed freely upon
the business of his government, and upon matters connected with his mission.

Having all my life been taken up in making my own fortune, I had turned my mind but little
to public events. Of the nations of the world I scarcely knew any but my own and the Turks.
By name only the Chinese, the Indians, the Affghans, the Tartars, the Cûrds, and the Arabs
were known to me; and of the Africans I had some knowledge, having seen different specimens
of them as slaves in our houses. Of the Franks,--the Russians (if such they may be called)
were those of whom we had the most knowledge in Persia, and I had also heard of the Ingliz
and the Franciz. When I reached Constantinople, I was surprised to hear that many more Frank
nations existed besides the three above mentioned; but still occupied with my own affairs,
I acquired but little knowledge concerning them.

Now that I was thrown into the ambassador’s society, my ideas took a new turn, and hearing
matters discussed which had never even reached my understanding, I became more inquisitive.
He seemed pleased to have found in me one who took interest in his views, and at length let
me entirely into his confidence.

One morning, having received letters from his court, he called me to him, said that he wished
for some private conversation, and accordingly ordered every one to depart from before him
except myself.

He made me sit, and then in a low voice said, ‘Hajji, I have long wished to speak to you. Those
who compose my suite, between you and me, do not possess the sort of understanding I require.
’Tis true, they are Persians, and are endowed with more wit than all the world beside; but
in affairs of the dowlet (the state), they are nothing, and rather impede than forward the
business upon which I have been sent. Now, praise be to Allah! I see that you are not one of
them. You are much of a man, one who has seen the world and its business, and something may
come from out of your hands. You are a man who can make play under another’s beard, and suck
the marrow out of an affair without touching its outside. Such I am in want of, and if you
will devote yourself to me, and to our Shah, the King of Kings, both my face as well as your
own will be duly whitewashed; and, by the blessings of our good destinies, both our heads will
touch the skies.’

‘Whatever is of my strength,’ replied I, ‘is at your service. I am your slave and your servant,
and I myself will place my own ear into your hand. Order and command me: by my head and eyes,
I am ready.’

‘Perhaps you have heard it reported in the world,’ said he, ‘that the object of my mission
is to buy women slaves for the Shah, to see them instructed in dancing, music, and embroidery,
and to purchase spangled silks and other luxuries for the royal harem; but that is of course
a blind for the multitude. I am not an ambassador for such miserable purposes: no, my business
is of greater import; and our king, whose penetration is as searching as lightning itself,
does not select men to transact his affairs without very substantial reasons. Large sums have been consumed
at the opening of the channel, - beautiful and legitimate expectations were based on the work
and HOWEVER, what remains is a heap of ruins and a way of embarrassing and full navigation of
torture for the traveler.

At a distance of ten or twelve miles the canal, with a uniform width of ten to fourteen meters,
looks like a huge street drawn in perspective, generally straight and looking drab and dreary.
The ravines on both sides, cut and bare, the vegetation medium and inelegant, the sun burning
and devouring suffocate, the regularity of the journey; infinite pest insects that are flying out
the poisoned blood per bite and the incredible multitude of huge iguanas and lizards that crawl
among the toasted bushes on the banks, - all contribute to grieve the traveler during the first three
hours of sailing.

After the scene is changing at every turn and stirred the channel, and incredible pictures Nature
is wonderful to happen to delight travelers. The proximity of marshes is reflected in the vegetables
moist, rich vegetation and abundant waterfowl. Giant cedars and other trees are raised and their
arms twisted hang festoons of flowers wonderful to meet all the colors of the rainbow. The rod-santa
holds its mast high, as blue glass, purple, white, pink or yellow, according to the state Flower
and leaf, is the group most sumptuous wreaths can imagine, multiplied prodigiously. A huge carpet
of grass covers curled along the canal, and that endless festoons, stirred by the breezes, swaying
palms elegant grasses trees, interwoven with curtains and flowers floating parasites, which are
on the head Traveler's dark vault, full of perfumes unknown and indefinable artistic beauty. That
provides an endless triumphal arch lying on a street covered with flowers and rich hangings.

Suddenly the roof and channel it just blends into a morass of majestic
and melancholic beauty.

There he runs into the rubble masonry of another gate, and a machine to clean the bogs and channel
his red rose the tall chimney grasses. The spectacle of the morass of Sanaguare is admirable
and solemn. What loneliness that! The traveler feels overwhelmed, because it is very small, helpless,
in the presence of that lush, untamed nature .... Terrible alligators roam, poking their heads tan
crystalline wave curled over the breeze blowing from the distant shores Caribbean Sea, the lake
is large and the weirdest way. Everywhere rise dry, whitish trunks of thousands of guayacanes, which
has destroyed moisture vegetables of the waves around them, and cups, retostadas by the sun
in its upper part, released festoons everywhere sumptuous parasitic vines. Each of these trees
seems prom dress a skeleton - a body that, with the head, arms and legs bare leads on the chest
and shoulders a sumptuous robe of dark velvet, floating the wind like the flag of death ....
The sky is blue and is admirably reflected in wave serves as the basis of this romantic forest
of dead plants, and everywhere intersect, in innumerable crowd flocks of waterfowl of the rarest
colors and most unique ways that raise a wild concert harmony. The melancholy cry of chicoalí,
beautiful wild turkey - the depths of chilaca song - the cry of the heron fearful - the raven
flapping flapping among the high branches of Caracoli - the scream Duck or the coclí, the complaint
of the Caicos Islands, the songstress of the sadness of the forest and River - the deaf and vibrant
sound of his heavy shaking pelican wings, - The wild cry Monkey (the man's face, says Pelletan),
launched from the top of his swing gloomy - the roll of Alcara, the sentinel of the desert,
- the hum of the cicada tired and of thousands of insects fill the air, and a thousand other
echoes and background noises coming from the of the jungle solitude make a scene that overwhelms
the soul connection that requires the traveler to evoke all the memories of love and supreme
good, and that fills the heart an ineffable feeling of poetry divine veneration dreamer ....

Then, the night came with its shadows, its mystery and its solemn majesty, and to all those noises
of the afternoon came the silence of solitude awesome. Hardly the phosphoric light of the fireflies
and pointed to the white wire fish the waters of the canal, the swamp had been left behind;
the darkness was deep, the oars, waving immobile waves, produced
with its crackling a mysterious echo, the tall trees on the banks
taking the strangest ways the shadow of interior foliage, and the
infinite charm of the bitterness later succeeded each a night of incredible
suffering .... What the visitor can experience there, literally devoured
by mosquitoes, is indescribable.

It is excruciating pain, relentless, cruel, torturing, which gives the idea of ​​the Inquisition,
hell, the supreme despair .... Every minute is a century of trouble, and when the traveler sees
the sun appear the next day, the heat ago to escape the hellish plague, understands that in
one night has been for many years and has learned to be resignation.

The miserable people of Mahates and St. Stanislaus, located in the midst of endless marshes,
there delayed in most negligence and complete helplessness, and the canal, sometimes widening
in the middle of wide gaps or swamps, such as Sanaguare, the Cross and Palotal - or returning
to narrow as in principle, although changes in appearance by its form or its vegetation, never
loses its wild beauty, solitude and its charms. Here and there is any boat sailing slowly, sometimes
stopped by walls of water plants such interwoven that require strenuous work to make way for
the boats.

That nature Invincible has a wonderful power of reproduction, and to contemplate the scene traveler
admire the will power that presided at the opening of the channel, almost blocked in 1858.

Since the beginning of the great swamp of Palotal the landscape takes on new and admirable
proportions. There is a large lake of green that is offered to the eye of the traveler. Water
covered wherever a thick layer of deep-rooted grass has a depth average of three feet, but rarely
appears on the surface. Across the vast lake of green covers an area of ​​many miles, limited in
its circumference endless mangrove and very dense, rich and gorgeous appearance. Finally drain
the swamp is its principal and the traveler returns to hide in the
shady river dams or canals, entranced by incomparable charms of nature.

There, the disease has disappeared entirely, and the channel, with a width of 15 to 20 meters, gives
the idea of ​​a paradise that only the imagination of the poet could be devised. Bands are countless
colorful birds, - you delicious shade, under the thick foliage of a colossal and alternating
vegetation in the mangrove, elegant, straight and romantic roots sunk between waves, the large
Caracolí, the flexible bamboo thousand plants of the most beautiful ways, - the concerts all over
rise, and perfumes exhaled by the forest of lush, moist within reproductive force - all contrasts
with the maritime scene after it occurs. The channel ends between mangroves to get lost in
the crystal waves of the bay, very long towards the interior; Atlantic breezes blowing strongly,
the broad sail boat and floats deployed forward Aft, the horizon widens, the waters take the
smell, color and roughness of the water marine; stop stirring paddles, the shark pursues relentless
armies of exquisite fish; the coastal hills are offered at the sight, you feel the dull, distant
roar of the sea; the world of the jungle just the beginning of the infinite abyss, and finally,
soaring bay of admirable beauty, which enlarges the heart and gives the first notion of the
majesty of the ocean, the traveler sees to Cartagena, beautiful, melancholy, romantic, sitting between
two bays, as a heron swimming in the Atlantic, and the Colombian, the Granada, a lover of
freedom and glories of a heroic people, can not but speak out and say hello to the old and
noble city, saying the outburst of wonder, 'Hail, glorious Cartagena, ground supreme heroism
and devotion, the birthplace of poets and martyrs tomb lulled by the waves, debris from the opulence
that was not to resurrect it in the distant future! "

* * * * *

Cartagena is the capital of the federal state of Bolivar, one of the nine recently New Granada
has been divided, with a population of 200,000 souls, and an approximate of 40.000 square kilometers,
consisting mostly of splendid plains and forests, navigable rivers crossed by beautiful, with
a general climate of 33 degrees Celsius in summers, and a very considerable development of
coastline between the mouth of the Magdalena and the Atrato. If Cartagena once came to contain
more than 20.000 inhabitants their population has dropped to 7.000,
decimated since 1811 by war, epidemics, rivalry other shopping malls
and the slow development within agriculture.

       Today Cartagena is a huge debris, which show the traveler deeply
distressed, but the beauty romantic city, the splendor of its bays,
its admirable maritime position, its importance and facilities for
domestic trade, the character of its population and noble memories
belonging to it, make this place an object so interesting as sympathetic
to the observer strange.

Nothing more magnificent and varied landscape that unfolds before the eyes of the curious who
want to view the city from atop the hill that dominates the Popa entirely. Eminence isolation
is a high rocky hill surrounded by marshes and bays, a mile from the city and on top of which
the Spanish built a fortress and a monastery, the most characteristic things colonial system
that dominated Spanish-Colombia, but the Republic, who does not want monks and canyons, ruining
everything has stopped, and now nothing remains but a heap of rubble impressive. From that building
platforms mixed and mangled, visitors see a spectacular wonderful, worthy of the artist's brush
and the admiration of the poet, as the study of historian and archaeologist.

North of the city, isolated by its ramparts, moats, bays and lagoons, it opens a stream that determines
a narrow neck of land, full of coconut trees, houses and rustic huts.

Southwest expands at the beautiful bay or Boca-large entry, blocked by Spanish, then the Earth-pump
island, flanked by fortresses farther south entrance Mouth-girl, in short the great island of Baru,
separated from the mainland by the dam. The vast and wonderful bay almost an irregular circle,
in their midst are anchored 20 to 30 launches, boats and schooners with foreigners and the national pavilions,
a swarm of boats crosses in all directions - and several forts, built on islands or outgoing angles
coast between coconut trees and stray hold their old heavy masonry converted almost rubble, or very
poor, and without batteries. In front, towards the west, extends Atlantic, brilliant, agitated,
bellowing, vast and full of majesty and mystery of the sea ... with all its fascination, with
their reflections elusive, with its eternal mobility, and shaking
bright scales its back like a raging dragon by the resistance of rocks
I would like to eat or spraying.

In the middle of the ocean, bays, lagoon and the hill of La Popa, Cartagena vegetation as a
castaway who vacillates between the depths of the sea and the desert wilderness that limits
the continent. What memories there! Sublime what poverty! Begging glorious fall to a queen complied
with for what it was, and admire the majesty of your pain! The sea beats all side walls, the sky a
blanket with a blanket always clear and blue, and the thousand plumes floating coconut palms make
wonderful game with his venerable towers of churches half ruined, sad and blackened by time.
The main part of the city, forming an island, linked by a suspension bridge in the neighborhood
of Jimaní that touches the mainland, is all heavy masonry, a huge wall full of once formidable
fortifications, the circulation, defending it from invasion from the sea. Imagine the reader
what they will or have was these fortifications, just know that they made him eat the Spanish
government the stupendous sum of 250 million pesos, excluding a large part of the arms. The
traveler is astonished to consider the whole sum of human labor that
must go to the creation of that magnificent city of eternal masonry.

The Republic, who wants to rely only on the resources for peace, all guns sold as a useless
element of civilization; and Cartagena is now but a ruined commercial plaza, which hopes to open
industry resurrection.

The neighborhood of Jimaní, composed of straw houses, beautiful houses and strongholds, and extending
towards the foot of the stern, is more picturesque and lively, but less interesting because its
structure material. The city has excellent public buildings, and by a singular contradiction, While
all the streets are very narrow and dark, the houses are like palaces, almost all high, cheerful
inside with spacious and comfortable rooms. As the population is inferior to the town, many houses
are deserted, and neglect has made them in very sad debris, and what a contrast that is seen
in women of Cartagena! ... The girls are generally very beautiful, spiritual, expansive and
cheerful, and brings elegance or the kindness of the ways in saying grace in the eyes and smile,
really lovely. In contrast, the poor women of the working class (perhaps damaged the bred by poverty
and inaction) are a painful deformity: - thin, long, dark, pale as ghosts, grim as the shadows
wandering among the graves .... How explain this contradiction or the contrast? I could identify
the causes, but I shall content to make a reflection. Cartagena is a large ruin, is a vast
tomb, and among the ruins and the tombs are always, like the beautiful
lily filled with perfume and mystery and the wallflower of the walls
white, the stark and ugly lizard wandering among the hail vegetation
and debris where the ivy ....

Moreover, the population of Cartagena
has the most excellent social skills: hospital high grade, open, generous,
jovial and always animated by a deep sense of patriotism, seems maintained
by the same recollection of the glories of Cartagena.

The policy stirred much to the neighbors, but after the fight temporarily, everyone returns to
a fraternity that is revealed in social intercourse, in the sense of charity and the spirit of
political independence personal privacy and that motivates them all.

Cartagena has many elements of prosperity, and may be great for indoor farming and the import and
export trade. But to prepare for a future worthy of their position, you need to open passage to the
vapor between the port and the Magdalena river, restoring almost clogged its channel, or else
found the land communication through a railroad or via a good road. Colombian world in all its regions,
is how much wealth can imagine: nature has given him the promise of more adventurous future, in
opulence its territory, and the heroic bravery of their children.

Do you know that fact?’

‘I shall not be surprised to hear of anything they do,’ answered he, ‘so mad are they generally
reported to be; but that India is governed by infidel old women, that has never yet reached
our ears. Perhaps it is so. God knows,’ continued he, musing, ‘for mad people do wonderful things.’

After a pause, ‘Now,’ said I, ‘have I learnt all, or are there more unbelievers? By your beard,
tell me; for who would have thought that the world was so composed?’

He reflected for some time, and said, ‘O yes, I forgot to mention two or three nations; but,
in truth, they are not worthy of notice. There are Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian infidels,
who eat their swine, and worship their image after their own manner; but who, in fact, are
nothing even amongst the Franks. The first is known to us by their patakas (dollars); the second
sends us some Jews; and the third imports different sorts of dervishes, who pay considerable
sums into the imperial treasury for building churches, and for the privilege of ringing bells.
I must also mention the papa (pope), the Caliph of the Franks, who lives in Italia, and does
not cease his endeavours to make converts to his faith; but we are more than even with him,
for we convert infidels in greater proportion than they, notwithstanding all the previous pain
which man must suffer before he is accepted for a true believer.

‘One more question I must ask,’ said I, ‘and then I am satisfied. Can you tell me anything
positive about Yengi duniah, the New World; for I have heard so many contradictory reports
that my brain is bewildered? How do they get at it, underground, or how?’

‘We have not had many dealings with it,’ said the Katib, ‘and, therefore, know not much of
the matter; but this is true, that one can get there by ship, because ships belonging to the
New World have actually been seen here. They are all infidels, my friend,’ exclaimed he, with
a sigh; ‘all infidels, as much as those of the old world, and, by the blessing of Allah, they
will all grill in the same furnace.’

Finding that upon this subject the Katib was deficient, I ceased questioning; and our conversation
having now lasted a long time, I released him from further importunity, by calling for more
coffee and replenishing our pipes. We then separated, with mutual promises of meeting again.

I returned to my ambassador full of the information I had acquired, and all-joyous at the success
which had attended my first essay in diplomatic life. He was delighted at the memoir I had
drawn up from the materials furnished me by the Katib, and as long as we remained at Constantinople
daily sent me in search of further particulars, until we both thought ourselves sufficiently
in force to be able to draw up a general History of Europe, which the Centre of the Universe
in his instructions to the ambassador had ordered him to present on his return. Most assiduously
did I apply myself in composing this precious morsel of history. I made a rough draft, which
was submitted to the correction of my chief, and when he had seasoned its contents to the palate
of the King of Kings, softening down those parts which might appear improbable, and adding
to those not sufficiently strong, he delivered it over to a clerk, who in a fair hand transcribed
the whole, until a very handsome volume was produced. It was duly bound, ornamented, and inserted
in a silk and muslin bag, and then the ambassador conceived it might be fit to be placed in
the hands of the Shah.

Mirza Firouz having now, as he conceived, accomplished the objects of his mission, prepared
to return, and announced his intention not only of taking me with him, but also of continuing
me in the employ of the government as soon as we should reach Tehran; ‘for,’ said he, ‘a person
so well acquainted with the interests of the Franks will be of great use in treating with the
infidel ambassadors now in Persia.’

He could not have devised a plan better suited to my wishes; for after my cruel treatment by
the Turks, I hated everything relating to them. Their city was become odious to me, and whenever
I thought upon Shekerleb my heart swelled with rage. Much time had now elapsed since my affair
with the chief priest of Tehran. The mollah Nadân, so I had heard, had long ago been blown
from the mouth of a mortar, and the widow, whom I left in the hands of the Cûrds, had never
returned to Persia. Therefore, I concluded I might show myself in all safety, for I argued
thus: should I even be recognized, still who would venture to molest me, powerfully protected
as I should be by men in office? The chief executioner had recovered possession of his horse
and furniture, when the unfortunate Nadân had been seized; and there was every reason to suppose
that Abdul Kerim had shared the fate of his mistress, the chief priest’s widow, for he had
no more been heard of; so I did not fear that he would call upon me to refund the hundred tomauns.
What had I then to apprehend on returning to Tehran? Nothing that I could foresee; and if once
it were known that I was a servant of the Shah, even being a thousand times more criminal than
I was in fact, I might put my cap on one side and walk all over the empire with impunity.

Fortified by these reflections, I made my preparations with alacrity to accompany the ambassador.
But previous to our departure, I determined upon visiting my countrymen in the caravanserai,
where with a better chance of success I now might give myself those airs of importance which
had succeeded so ill at my last exhibition. Having taken some trouble to make it well understood
that I was attached to the embassy, I no longer dreaded their contempt; and such is the respect
that one invested with that character is sure to inspire, that on this occasion I had no reason
to complain of any want of attention. Every word addressed to me was now prefaced with, By
your favour, By your condescension, May your kindness never be less; and compliments which
never ended, interlarded all the fine discourses I heard. To hear them, nobody could have ever
supposed that I was the same person whom not two months before they had laughed to scorn: on
the contrary, one ignorant of the circumstance would have set me down for a personage upon
whom the issues of life and death depended. But when I took my leave of the old Osman, I found
him unchanged, and every word he spoke showed that his affection for the son of the barber
of Ispahan was the feeling which ever actuated his conduct towards me. ‘Go, my son,’ said he,
as he parted from me, ‘whether you be a prisoner with the Turcomans, or a priest, or a seller
of pipe-sticks, or a Turkish aga, or a Persian mirza; be you what you may. I shall always put
up my prayers for your prosperity, and may Allah attend your steps wherever you go.’

Having made his visits of ceremony, and taken his leave of the Turkish authorities, the ambassador
left Scutari, accompanied by a large company of his own countrymen, who conducted him about
one parasang on the road to Persia, and then received their dismissal. Our journey was propitious,
and nothing took place in it worthy of notice from the day of our departure until our arrival
in Persia. At Erivan we heard the news of the day, though but imperfectly; but at Tabriz, the
seat of Abbas Mirza’s government, we were initiated into the various questions which then agitated
the country and the court. The principal one was the rivalry between the French and English
ambassadors; the object of the former, who had already been received by the Shah, being to
keep away the latter, who had not yet reached the foot of the throne.

Various were the anecdotes related of the exertions made by them to attain their ends, and
the whole of Persia was thrown into astonishment upon seeing infidels come so far from their
own countries, at so much trouble and expense, to quarrel in the face of a whole nation of
true believers, who were sure to despise, to deride, and to take them in.

The Frenchman, by way of enforcing his demands, constantly brought forward the power of his
own sovereign, his greatness and preponderance over all the states of Europe, and did not cease
to extol the immense numbers of troops he could bring into the field.

To this he was answered, ‘That may be very true; but what is that to us? Whole empires intervene,
and, therefore, what affinity can there be between France and Persia?

‘But,’ said the Frenchman, ‘we want to conquer India from the English, and we wish to have
an open road through your territories.’

‘What is that to us?’ again said the Shah: ‘you may want India, but we are in no way anxious
to entertain your troops.’

‘But we will conquer Georgia for you, put you in possession of Teflis, and secure you from
further molestation from the Russians.’

‘That is another case,’ said the Shah; ‘when once we see the effects of your interference,
and hear that there are no more Russians on this side the Caucasus, we will treat with you:
until then we can allow no passage through our territories, nor break with our old friends
the English!’

On the other hand, the English said, ‘The French can have no other object in coming to Persia
than to molest us; we require that you send them away.’

‘How!’ said the Shah, ‘we cannot do that; for that would be against the laws of hospitality.
The gate of our palace is open to every one.’

‘But,’ urged the English, ‘you must either retain one or the other--and must decide between
us. Either agree to be our friends and expel the French, or make up your minds to receive us
as enemies.’

‘Why should we make ourselves enemies to please you? We want to be friends with all the world.’

‘But,’ continued the English, ‘we will help and strengthen you, and give you money.’

‘Oh! that is another case,’ said the Shah; ‘tell me how much, and then all may be done.’

Such was nearly the state of things when we left Tabriz, and as my ambassador was expected
with impatience at Tehran, we did not tarry long with the prince royal, but prosecuted our
journey with all dispatch.

On the morning of our arrival at Sultanieh, on the road from Tehran, we discovered a long train
of horsemen with their baggage, whom we could make out were not Persians, and whom as they
approached we saw were Franks. They were accompanied by a mehmander, an officer from the Shah,
who informed us, that this was the French embassy on its return, who it seems had been politely
requested to take its leave; and it was moreover added, that the English ambassador would very
shortly take its place.

This at once explained how matters stood at court, and that between the rival bidders for his
majesty’s favour, the King of Kings had come to a good market. My ambassador was rather surprised
how such a determination could have been taken previous to his arrival, fraught as he was with
important information upon all the nations of Europe; but every difficulty is easily explained
away when money is permitted to exert its eloquence, particularly if one recollects the words
of the sheikh--

     ‘Let money only appear, and every head is prostrate.
     ’Tis thus, the heaviest weight in the scales lowers the iron beam.’

We were happy to have an opportunity of observing the manners of a nation about whom we had
lately heard so much, and as we passed the day together in the same place, my chief did not
fail to make himself known to the French ambassador.

We expected of course to find them much depressed in spirits, and in no good humour, having
been driven as it were from the presence of the Earth’s Centre; but what was our surprise to
remark the contrary! Never did Persia see such a company of madmen. They were singing, dancing,
and making the lûti all the livelong day. They all talked at once, one louder than the other,
without any apparent deference to rank, for all seemed on the same footing. Without in the
least respecting our carpets, they were eternally pacing them with rapid strides, and, what
most shocked our feelings, spitting upon them. As I now looked upon myself in some measure
identified with the Franks, considering at what pains I had lately been to acquire information
concerning them, I endeavoured to discover if there was any affinity between their language
and ours; but not a word could I comprehend. However, I thought to have made some progress
in it, by recollecting and writing down the words in their speech which most frequently occurred--one
was sacré, the other Paris, and a third l’Empereur.

On the whole we liked them. We thought to discern many points of similitude between them and
ourselves; and were of opinion, that if as infidels they were doomed to the douzak of hereafter,
even there, instead of moaning over and deploring their lot, they would still be found in the
same happy mood we saw them at Sultanieh.

We parted on the following morning, they laughing, chattering, and screaming with joy; we,
full of anxiety and apprehension about the reception with which our ambassador would meet from
the King of Kings.

CHAPTER LXXVII

The ceremony of receiving a Frank ambassador at the court is described.

My chief, the Mirza Firouz, was received with great condescension by the Shah, who was pleased
at the ready answers he received to his numerous questions concerning the nations of Europe.
Never was man better adapted to fill the situation to which he had been appointed than the
Mirza. Every question which the Shah put to him was received with a ready answer. Ignorance
did not confound him, no difficulty stopped him. The words ‘nemi danum, I don’t know,’ ever
a sin in the hearing of a king, were never known to pass his lips. He discoursed upon every
matter with a confidence that made his hearers believe that whatever he said must be conclusive;
and upon the subject of Europeans, to listen to him, one could not but suppose he had been
born and bred among them.

As I was known to have been employed under him in ‘seizing news’, as the phrase goes, concerning
Europe, and also in writing its history, I in some measure enjoyed the reputation of being
learned in whatever regarded its inhabitants. Although my assurance was nothing equal to my
master’s, yet I managed to answer the questions put to me with tolerable readiness, although,
in so doing, I was obliged to be very circumspect not to commit him: therefore, I passed my
days in the double fear of appearing ignorant, and of having my ears cut off in case I happened
to be too wise. However, as none among our own countrymen could contradict us, we were listened
to as oracles, and we exemplified what the poet Al Miei has so justly remarked: ‘That in the
country of the dumb the sound of one voice, be it even that of an ass, would be called harmony.’

The English elchi (ambassador) had reached Tehran a few days before we arrived there, and his
reception was as brilliant as it was possible for a dog of an unbeliever to expect from our
blessed Prophet’s own lieutenant. Indeed the city was almost shocked at the honours paid him,
and some of the most violent of our mollahs declared, that in treating a Giaour so well, we
were ourselves in some measure guilty of his infidelity, and preparing our own damnation. At
different stations on the road, the throats of oxen had been cut before his horse’s feet, in
many places his path was strewn with sugar-candy, and on the day of his entry he was permitted
to have his trumpets sounded in the procession, all of which were honours that could be exacted
by none, save our own princes.

Then all the proper attentions of hospitality were shown. The house of a khan was taken from
him and given to the ambassador, and whatever furniture was wanting was demanded from the neighbours
and placed therein. A handsome garden was levied upon another, and added to the house. The
lord high treasurer was commanded to feed the strangers at his own expense as long as they
chose, and clothes and shawls were collected from the courtiers and servants of the court,
for the dresses of honour which it is the custom to make on such occasions. The princes and
noblemen were enjoined to send the ambassador presents, and a general command issued that he
and his suite were the Shah’s guests, and that, on the pain of the royal anger, nothing but
what was agreeable should be said to them.

All these attentions, one might suppose, would be more than sufficient to make infidels contented
with their lot; but, on the contrary, when the subject of etiquette came to be discussed, interminable
difficulties seemed to arise. The elchi was the most intractable of mortals. First, on the
subject of sitting. On the day of his audience of the Shah, he would not sit on the ground,
but insisted upon having a chair; then the chair was to be placed so far, and no farther, from
the throne. In the second place, of shoes, he insisted upon keeping on his shoes, and not walking
barefooted upon the pavement; and he would not even put on our red cloth stockings. Thirdly,
with respect to hats: he announced his intention of pulling his off to make his bow to the
king, although we assured him that it was an act of great indecorum to uncover the head. And
then, on the article of dress, a most violent dispute arose: at first, it was intimated that
proper dresses should be sent to him and his suite, which would cover their persons (now too
indecently exposed) so effectually that they might be fit to be seen by the king; but this
proposal he rejected with derision. He said, that he would appear before the Shah of Persia
in the very same dress he wore when before his own sovereign. Now, as there was not a Persian
who had ever been at the court of a Frank king, no body could say what that proper dress was;
and, for aught we knew, the elchi might put on his bed-gown and night-cap on the occasion.
This was a difficulty apparently not to be overcome, when, turning the subject over in my own
mind, I recollected that among the paintings in the palace of Forty Pillars at Ispahan, there
were portraits of Europeans, who, in the days of the great Shah Abbas, flocked to his court,
and even established themselves in the city. In particular, I well recollected one in the very
same painting in which Shah Abbas himself is represented, whose dress was doubtless the only
proper costume to wear before a crowned head. I immediately suggested this to my master, who
mentioned it to the grand vizier, who ordered that a copy of it should, without loss of time,
be made by the best artist of Ispahan, and sent to Tehran.

So soon as it arrived it was officially presented to the English elchi, with a notification
that the Shah was satisfied to receive him in the same dress he wore before his own sovereign,
a model of which was now offered to him, and to which it was expected that he and his suite
would strictly conform.

The shouts of laughter which the infidels set up, upon seeing the picture and hearing the message,
are not to be described. They asked if we thought them monkeys, that they should dress themselves
as such at our bidding, and were so obstinate in their resolution of keeping to their own mode
of attire, that at length they were permitted to do as they chose.

The audience of the Shah passed off much better than could have been expected from such rude
and uncivilized people, and we were all astonished that men, so unaccustomed to the manners
and forms of the world, should have conducted themselves on this difficult occasion without
committing some act that was flagrant and improper. The king was seated on his throne of gold,
dressed with a magnificence that dazzled the eyes of the strangers, and made even his subjects
exclaim, ‘Jemshîd? who was he? or Darab? or Nûshirvan? that they should be mentioned in the
same breath?’ On the right and left of the throne stood the princes, more beautiful than the
gems which blazed upon their father’s person. At a distance were placed the three viziers of
the state, those depositaries of wisdom and good council; and, with their backs to the wall,
each bearing a part of the paraphernalia of the crown, were marshalled in a row the black-eyed
pages of royalty, who might be compared to angels supporting planets from the starry firmament.
In the midst appeared the Franks, who, with their unhidden legs, their coats cut to the quick,
their unbearded chins, and unwhiskered lips, looked like birds moulting, or diseased apes,
or anything but human creatures, when contrasted with the ample and splendidly dressed persons
by whom they were surrounded. And they stood their ground, not in the least abashed by the
refulgent presence of the great king; but their attitude, manner, and expression of countenance,
would have made us suppose they were as good and as undefiled as ourselves.

The speech made on the occasion by the elchi was characteristic of the people he represented--that
is, unadorned, unpolished, neither more nor less than the truth, such as a camel-driver might
use to a muleteer; and had it not been for the ingenuity of the interpreter our Shah would
neither have been addressed by his title of King of Kings, or of the Kebleh of the Universe.

It would be taking up the pen of eternity were I to attempt to describe the boundless difference
that we discovered between the manners and sentiments of these people and ourselves. Some of
our sages endeavoured to account for it upon philosophical principles, and attributed much
to the climate of those dark, watery, and sunless regions in which they were bred and born:
‘for,’said they, ‘how can men living surrounded by water, and who never feel the warmth of
the sun, be like those who are never a day without enjoying the full effulgence of its rays,
and do not even know what the sea means?’ But the men of the law settled the question in a
much more satisfactory manner, by saying ‘it was owing to their infidelity that they were doomed
to be cursed even in this life; and that if the ambassador, his suite, and even his whole nation,
would submit to become Mussulmans, and embrace the only true faith, they would immediately
be like ourselves, their defilements would be washed clean, and they even might stand a chance
of walking in the same story of the heavens as the genuine children of Islam would in the world
to come.

The transactions just recorded were all propitious to my advancement. Owing to the knowledge
I was supposed to have acquired respecting Europe, I was employed in most of the affairs which
concerned the Franks in Persia, and this had furnished me with many opportunities of becoming
known to the grand vizier, and to other ministers and men in power.

The Mirza Firouz was not rich, and the maintenance which he received in his public character
ceasing as soon as he returned to Tehran, he could no longer afford to support me, and he was
happy to find that I was able to work my own way into a livelihood. He did not fail to praise
my good qualities, and never lost an opportunity of extolling my abilities. Nor was I backward
in seconding his endeavours, for I brought everything and every person, infidels as well as
true believers, to bear upon my ambitious views; and destiny (without whose aid man’s endeavours
are of no avail) almost as much as whispered, that the buffetings of the world had taken their
departure from me.

The grand vizier was, without a doubt, the man in Persia, who from his acuteness, tact, and
presence of mind, had the most influence over the Shah. He had enjoyed his high situation almost
from the commencement of the present long reign, and had so interlaced his office with every
transaction, public as well as private, that his councils became as necessary to the country
as the rising and setting of the sun.

To secure his protection became then the first object of my endeavours. I began by daily attending
his levees and standing before him, and as the affairs relating to Europe now took up his principal
attention, he never saw me without asking some question referring thereto. This led to my being
entrusted with messages to the English ambassador, the answers to which I always brought back,
with something of my own surcharged, flattering to his abilities as a great statesman, and
thus by creating goodwill between the parties, I myself became a favourite.

The leading passion of the vizier was the love of receiving presents. This was my kebleh in
all transactions with the elchi, and my ingenuity was constantly exercised in endeavouring
to extract something from him which would be acceptable to the vizier, and serviceable to myself.
That presents of ceremony should be received and given was a matter of course, and, therefore,
I stood no chance of acquiring any credit on such occasions; but I was once or twice accessory
in making the balance strongly preponderate in favour of my own countrymen, and the vizier
from that time began to look upon me with a favourable aspect.

A treaty was to be negotiated between the two countries, and my patron was appointed one of
the plenipotentiaries on the part of the Shah. Although this was matter in which one of my
insignificance could not expect to be employed, yet I did not cease to ply about the negotiators,
like a dog at an entertainment seeking for a chance bone; and every now and then I got so much
of the scent as to make me almost sure of springing some game for myself.

At length, one morning, after a late sitting of the negotiators, I was summoned to attend the
grand vizier in his very anderûn, a place to which none but his most confidential servants
were ever admitted. I found him still in bed, bolstered up with many soft pillows, and entirely
alone.

‘Hajji,’ said he, in a familiar tone, ‘draw near, and seat yourself close to me; I have something
of importance to say.’

I was staggered by so high an honour; but as his command was law, I did not hesitate to kneel
by his bedside.

Without circumlocution, he at once told me that he was placed in a situation of great difficulty,
for the English ambassador had made some demands impossible to be granted, and declared that
he must quit Tehran, should they not receive our acquiescence.

‘Now,’ said he, ‘the Shah has threatened if I permit the elchi to leave Persia dissatisfied,
that my head shall answer for it; and at the same time I and my brother plenipotentiary are
half persuaded that his majesty will never accede to the demands of England. What is to be done?’

‘Could he not be bribed?’ said I, with all humility, and looking as if I would give other meaning
to my words.

‘He be bribed?’ said the vizier; ‘in the first place, whence could the bribe come? and in the
second, these people are such fools, that they know not what a bribe means. But give me your
ear. We are no fools, whatever they may be. The elchi is very anxious to carry his point, and
you know me well enough to be aware that there is nothing I cannot accomplish if once I take
it in hand. You must go and talk to him. You are his friend. You may say that you are mine--you
may whisper many things to him which I cannot--do you understand?’

Upon this I kissed his hand with much fervour, and raising it to my head I exclaimed, ‘By my
head and by my eyes, I will go--and inshallah, please God, I will not return without a white face.’

He then dismissed me, and full of happy prospects I made the best of my way to the English
ambassador.

I will not relate all I said and did to induce him to come into the grand vizier’s terms; but
in two words, I so entirely and completely succeeded, that I returned with a heavy sack of
gold, of good and solid cash, in my hand, as the forerunner of what was to follow in case all
was concluded to the ambassador’s satisfaction, and I also secured the promise of a large diamond
ring that was forthwith to be transferred from the finger of England to that of Persia, by
way of an emblem of eternal friendship between the representatives of the two states. 

       * * * * *

The topography of the Belgian provinces, but mostly flat or slightly undulating, is well demarcated
by the basins or valleys of its rivers, which form one of the systems European hydrographic more
abundant, relatively, taking for base the Scheldt and the Meuse, and to some extent the Moselle, Luxembourg
side. All maritime region, the left Scheldt and between that river and the central Meuse, which
contains in Flanders and Southern Brabant, is flat or almost entirely the same level, while
the regions Luxembourg, Liège, Namur and Hainau, belonging to the basin of the Meuse and its
tributary the Sambra, and watered by streams Geete and Dyle, tributaries of the Scheldt, are generally
mountain or at least undulating.

The weather is remarkably cold and bleak, and the country generally
fertile, except the side of Antwerp, on the banks of the Scheldt.

Measure the entire Belgian territory superficiary 2,956,183 hectar area, 981 miles perimeter
along its borders with France, Germany and Holland and its coastline, 277 kilometers mostly long,
at Ostend (N.-O.) the limit of Luxembourg (S.-E.), and 160 mostly
width.

The territory is divided into 9 provinces are: Antwerp, Brabant, the two Flanders, Hainau, Liege,
Limburg, Luxembourg and Namur.

Among all these provinces nature has established a remarkable demarcation on soil conditions.
Thus, in the mountainous region are immense deposits coal-rich mines of iron, copper, lead and
other metals, quarries of beautiful marble, thick forests and graceful covering the hills
and mountains, vineyards that thrive in the valley the Meuse, etc., while in the maritime belt,
poorly defended by its sandy cliffs, and on the plains of Flanders and Antwerp, wheat blossom
and potatoes, beets and hops, filamentous plants and oilseeds, and
reigns in cities activity trade, factories and the arts.

The topography, therefore, produced in Belgium a large variety of industries, operations and
products by promoting the country's manifold.

No one does not know that Belgium is in Europe, its political institutions, a model liberalism
and the practice of these institutions a fine example of good sense and patriotism. HOWEVER
some contradictions are not lacking in the Belgian organization, such as the imposition of strong
census set for the senators elected, what which is not the deputies,
and the contrast is striking between freedom shout agreed to complete
teaching and cults that have limited the interference by illogical
government in the provision or maintenance officer of the same religion.

Actually

Belgium is a democratic nation, governed apparently by a citizen-king and actually led by the
popular vote and public opinion. It's very flattering to see that asícomo the first king of
the young monarch has been able to accommodate with complete loyalty to his duty constitutional
monarch, the whole town, notwithstanding the legal fight that move the ultramontane liberal
and has entered fully from the first day of practice democratic constitutional government,
has the full awareness of their rights and duties, and occurs in all business-minded solidity
uncommon and wonderful background of good sense that it has lacked in any difficult time. Free
demonstrations of opinion, influential in Europe for the independence of the press, considered
and appreciated by neutral hospitality and agreed to outlaw foreign thought, and grew through
work, the Belgian people is worth much more respect the more visible the smallness of their territory.
 The practice was now
totally laid aside; our faculty continued to treat the disorder as our forefathers had done,
and the usual quantity of children died as heretofore. A doctor was also attached to the suite
of the present elchi, and he was impelled by more than common anxiety to do us good. His zeal
to renew the practice of the cow medicine was unbounded, and the quantity of mothers whom he
enticed to bring their children to him astonishing.

I, in pursuit of my own schemes, was the first to cry out, that this great influx of women
of the true faith into the dwelling of an infidel, be the object what it might, was highly
indecorous, and I persuaded the grand vizier to place an officer of the police as sentry at
the doctor’s door to prevent the women entering. This very soon stopped his practice, and he
was in despair.

‘But why should you grieve?’ said I to him. ‘You get nothing for your trouble, and the people
are not obliged to you.’

‘Oh,’ said he (for he and his countrymen had learnt our language), ‘you know not what you say.
This blessing must be spread throughout the world; and if your government stops it here, it
will be guilty of the blood of all those lives which might have been saved.’

‘What is that to us?’ answered I: ‘let them die--we get nothing by their being alive.’

‘If it be profit that you require,’ exclaimed the doctor, ‘I will willingly pay any sum you
may demand, rather than lose my vaccinating matter, which must dry up and be lost if my practice
ceases.’

Here we entered into a negotiation, and after much difficulty and show of apprehension concerning
the risk I ran of incurring the grand vizier’s displeasure, it was agreed that for certain
advantages which I should enjoy, the restriction should be taken from the doctor’s house; and
I leave those who know me to guess the numbers of children who now flocked to the man of medicine.
His gate was thronged, and nothing more was said respecting the impropriety of the women’s
attendance.

Another of his manias was a desire to cut up dead bodies. He did so languish after every corpse
that was carried by his house for burial, that I was surprised the people did not set upon
him for his impure propensities.

‘But what possible good will accrue to mankind in general,’ said I to him, ‘if you dissect
a dead Mussulman?’

‘It is impossible to say what good may be lost by my not dissecting him,’ said he; ‘besides,
if I do not keep my hand in practice, I shall lose my former skill.’

He then of his own accord proposed to give a large sum for a corpse, and avowed that he was
not particular about its quality, for that of a Jew, Christian, or a true believer, would be
equally acceptable. Architecture Renaissance,
as well as imitating ancient Greek temples, it seems too classical and by excess cold composure and
symmetry and lack of boldness. And there is much worse this contemporary architecture, eclectic
and trivial, it seems the daughter of compas and squad more than the inspiration, that combines
all the orders without regard for poetry art and specialty of each style, making the architect
a mason polished Instead of a poet who draws his pictures on the stone.

He announced it as his intention to make a present to us of a certain produce of the earth,
unknown in most parts of Asia, but much cultivated in Europe, which would not fail to be of
incalculable benefit to the people of Persia; and he requested the vizier to assist him in
his undertaking, promising shortly to send him a specimen of the intended gift. The vizier,
whose nose was always carried very high whenever a present was in the wind, did not fail daily
to discuss with me what this great benefit which the ambassador was about to confer might be,
and his impatience to gain possession became very great. He discovered through me, that the
English representative had brought with him a store of fine broadcloth, upon which he had constantly
kept a steady eye. Finding that the projected public benefit was not forthcoming, he conceived
in his wisdom that the elchi would have an easy bargain, if he agreed to commute it for a private
gift to himself. Therefore, one morning at his uprising he called me, and said, ‘By the blessing
of God, whatever we want we have: we have bread and meat--we have salt, and rice, and corn,
and fruits, such as the infidels never even saw in a dream; in short, we have everything that
it is possible to conceive. Then why should we become indebted to this infidel ambassador for
things that we do not want? A happy thought has struck me, by which he will be a gainer, and
be saved the trouble he wishes to incur: I will agree to receive cloth in lieu of the public
benefit. This is so easy a transaction, that you, who, praise be to Allah! are a man of sharp
wit, will easily negotiate. Go, say this to the ambassador, and without loss of time bring
me the cloth.’

I forthwith presented myself, and delivered the message. Will it be believed that he and all
his beardless suite, upon hearing it, set up such shouts of laughter, as might be heard from
the top of Demawend? ‘What affinity has cloth to potatoes?’ said one. ‘We wish to give a cheap
and comfortable article of food to your countrymen,’ said another. ‘But it seems that your
vizier likes to transfer the whole advantage of the gift from the bellies of the nation to
his own back,’ cried a third. The ambassador, however, who appeared the most reasonable of
the party, without hesitation very politely ordered a piece of cloth to be delivered to me,
which he requested me to present to my master with reiterated expressions of friendship; and
with the assurance that it could make no alteration in the sentiments which he entertained
for the Persian nation, who he hoped would still receive the potato, as a mark of his high
esteem and consideration.

I returned to the vizier full of exultation at the success of my visit; and this, with the
preceding and subsequent instances of my abilities, so entirely won his affections, that I
soon outstripped every rival, and became his principal favourite and confidant.

The negotiations with the infidels were now about being closed; and it was agreed, in order
to strengthen the bonds of friendship between the two, that an embassy on the part of the Shah
should forthwith be sent to the king of England.

The experience of each succeeding day convinced me of the influence I had acquired over the
mind of the grand vizier; and the event just recorded was the means of showing me to what extent
he depended upon my services and zeal. The day after the treaty with England was signed, he
called me into his private apartment, and spoke to me in the following manner:--

‘Hajji,’ said he, ‘give me your ear. I have things of importance to impart, and as I look upon
you as one exclusively mine, I am sure that you will listen to them with becoming attention.’

I was proceeding to make the necessary protestations of my entire devotedness, when he stopped
me, and proceeded thus:--

‘Well or ill, our business with the English ambassador is at length concluded, and the Shah
has ceded to his wishes of sending an ambassador to England in return. Now, you know the Persians
as well as I, how they detest leaving their own country, and the difficulty I shall find in
selecting a man to devote himself to this service. I have one in my eye, whom I wish to send
above every other; and as it is of the utmost importance to me that he should be removed for
the present from Persia, and particularly from the presence of the Centre of the Universe,
I require that you use your best endeavours to persuade his acceptance of the appointment.’

I immediately felt assured that he could mean no other than me, although I did not see what
reason he could have for removing me from the presence of the king; and elated by so bright
a prospect of sudden elevation to rank and honours, I sprung towards him, and seizing his hand
with fervour to kiss, I exclaimed, ‘The least of your slaves will always prove to be the most
faithful of your servants: speak, and you will always find me ready, even to death.’

‘That is well spoken,’ said he, with great composure, ‘and now listen to me. The man I allude
to is Mirza Firouz’ (here my countenance fell, and I drawled out in answer a long ‘belli, yes’).
‘The truth is, I have lately discovered that his influence with the Shah has been considerably
upon the increase. He possesses such great volubility of speech, and such vast command of language,--he
flatters so intensely, and lies so profoundly,--that the king is more amused by him than by
any other man of his court. Who knows how far he may go? Besides, I am assured that secretly
he is my most bitter enemy, whilst openly he affects to be my most devoted of servants; and
although to this day I have never for a moment dreaded the hatred or the intrigues of any one,
yet I cannot but own, that, in this instance, I am not without my fears. By sending him among
the infidels, as the Shah’s representative, I at once cut off the source of my uneasiness;
and once let him be gone, I will so arrange matters, that even should he return successful
from his mission (which, please God, he never may!) he shall never acquire the influence over
the Shah which he is now attempting to establish.’

I agreed to all he said with hesitation; and was losing myself in the reflection how I could
possibly turn this piece of confidence to my own advantage, when the vizier accosted me again,
and said:--

‘I have only let you into one part of my scheme: the second object is, that you, Hajji, should
accompany the ambassador in the capacity of his first mirza, or chief secretary. On the other France, land of glorious memories, but something versatile, infinitely
sympathetic, despite his serious defects; - classic country of science and art, literature and the
heroic exploits - the social omnipotence that suppresses the individual. In England let freedom
without equality. In France was to find the equality without freedom ....

I departed from the British coast without regret but with respect. England is a country that
does not inspire sympathy, for many reasons, but always conquers
the estimate, or at less respect.

The traveler feels great, to get away, that this noble island is a sanctuary and hope of freedom
of the ancient world, and the outpost of humanity in the way of the progress.

When approaching a to France, where Republican Colombia, easy to understand that if your spirit
will find its true home (because France is the country's thought initiator and literary activity),
your heart is to live in a way, in silence - because France today,
as amended in the moral and political, is a country where the spirit
subdues feeling, where there is no city, and the individual has abdicated
his personality the sake of social community.

One hundred minutes after leaving Dover Bay, entered the steam on the narrow and difficult roadstead
of Calais, inaccessible to large ships. The port is so bad and embarrassing, that just to please
a huge dock, very long outside the levees, can dock vapors for download. After a long journey
on the pier, which is walking or car, the passenger gets to the narrow halls of the Customs,
passing successively of anteroom anteroom, under the scrutiny of
the guards, customs officers and police officers.

A moment distracted by curiosity to see the structure of the building (where the customs is in combination
with the railroad station), had forgotten the French police with that calm which has nothing to fear
and is accustomed to travel freely in Colombia. Suddenly, a compelling voice said: - "Your passport!"
I woke up and hiding my indignation first told me: "Ah! we are in France, I began to be submissive.
"- Introducing passports, gave our names and pronouns, signing to compare the characters; and after
suffering for five minutes scrutinizing eyes of the guardians, the
same imperious voice he said: - "Come in!"

We passed under the critical threshold of the door, and entered the French empire. To get to
France was not enough to step on the French territory: it needed to be stamped, registered
and unknown origin, or go under the gallows Caudine customs and police. France, as a nation is
not a people is an office and a guard post. By taking the first step, between rows of guards
and soldiers, we understand that it has entered a region where bureaucracy reigns and the police.
And yet, it would be unfair (relatively) when I complained. If the alien coming only was subjected
to rigorous inquisition (especially if I had an Italian name) the
parent who did not inspire the same distrust, was (in 1858) much better
treated by dragons of the Treasury and the police.

Yet it would be very candidly of the traveler who was relying on those appearances. Things are
arranged in such a way in France, that no act of the individual, even the most innocent escapes to
the vigilance of the police. In 1858, the consul in London, for example,
extending the visa, but after a thorough examination to be towards
the passenger, without knowing it, by an employee secret police who
watched him in silence, and took note of the parentage of the individual.
 I could think of nothing
save my approaching honours; and my mind was riveted by the one idea of seeing myself mounted
on a finely caparisoned horse, adorned by a gold chain round its neck, and a silver tassel
under its throat, preceded by my led horses, and my running footmen, and greeted by a deputation
from the governor of the city, to welcome my arrival in my native place.

However, I proceeded to the house of Mirza Firouz, whom I found prepared to converse on the
subject of the embassy, because the English elchi had already made proposals to him to the
same effect as those which the grand vizier intended to make. Although I had attached myself
almost exclusively to the service of the prime minister, yet I persevered in my friendship
with the intended ambassador, who was glad to hear I was to accompany him. We talked long upon
our future plans, as well as past adventures, and when, roaring with laughter, he asked whether
I should now endeavour to regain possession of my faithless Shekerleb, I slipped away, not
over-pleased to have that event of my life recalled to my recollection.

The next day, the Shah announced at the public audience his intention of sending Mirza Firouz
to England as his representative, and the grand vizier ordered me to be in readiness to proceed
to Ispahan, as soon as the proper firmans necessary to arm me with power should be prepared.

I will not tire the reader with a description of the numerous details of my preparatives for
this expedition. He would sicken and I should blush at my vanity. It is sufficient to say that
I travelled to Ispahan with all the parade of a man of consequence; and that I entered my native
city with feelings that none but a Persian, bred and born in the cravings of ambition, can
understand. I found myself at the summit of what, in my eyes, was perfect human bliss. Misfortune
seemed to have taken its leave, and everything informed me that a new chapter in the book of
my life was about to open. Hajji Baba, the barber’s son, entered his native place as Mirza
Hajji Baba, the Shah’s deputy. Need I say more?

And here, gentle Reader! the humble translator of the Adventures of Hajji Baba presumes to
address you, and profiting by the hint afforded him by the Persian story-tellers, stops his
narrative, makes his bow, and says, ‘Give me encouragement, and I will tell you more. You shall
be informed how Hajji Baba accompanied a great ambassador to England, of their adventures by
sea and land, of all he saw, and all he remarked, and of what happened to him on his return
to Persia.’ But he begs to add, should he find, like Hajji’s friend the third dervish, he has
not yet acquired the art of leading on the attention of the curious, he will never venture
to appear again before the public until he has gained the necessary experience to ensure success.
And so he very humbly takes his leave.

P.P.

THE END

FOOTNOTES.

[Footnote 1: It is perhaps almost needless to remind the reader, that the Mussulmans are divided
into two inimical sects; viz. suni and shiah; and that the Turks are of the former, and the
Persians of the latter, persuasion. The Sunies hold, that Omar, Osman and Abubekr, were the
lawful successors of Mohamed. The Shiahs assert that they were usurpers, and that Ali, his
son-in-law, was the next in succession.]

[Footnote 2: This is the Persian pipe, made upon the principle of the Indian hookah.]

[Footnote 3: Officers whose duties are to find quarters for the pilgrims, establish the prices
of provisions, make arrangements for their supply, regulate the hours of march, settle disputes,
announce the time of prayer, etc.]

[Footnote 4: This takes place in the spring, when the sun enters Aries, and is called the No
Ruz, or the new day. The festival is not of Mohamedan origin, and dates from very remote antiquity.]

[Footnote 5: By heel ropes is meant those fastenings which are used to secures horses in the East.]

[Footnote 6: The Turcomans, as well as the Turks, their descendants, are of the Suni persuasion:
with them green is a sacred colour; but it is not so among the Shiahs.]

[Footnote 7: The word Sultan, which in Europe is generally used to designate the sovereign
of Turkey, among the Tartars, Turcomans, etc., means captain or chief, and is given frequently
to subalterns, as well as to those of higher rank.]

[Footnote 8: Banou implies a female head or chief; thus in the Arabian Nights, Paribanou, or
more properly Peribanou means the chief of the fairies. The King of Persia's principal wife
is styled Banou Harem, chief of the harem.]

[Footnote 9: All classes of Mohamedans shave the crown of the head. In Persia two patches of
hair are left behind each ear by way of curls. In Turkey, a tuft is left on the very summit
of the head.]

[Footnote 10: The Turks differ materially from the Persians in their tastes for women, the
one admiring corpulency, whilst the latter show greater refinement, and esteem those forms
which are mostly prized in Europe.]

[Footnote 11: The races that take place among the Turcomans and the Persians are intended to
try the bottom, rather than the actual speed of their horses.]

[Footnote 12: The bread here alluded to is baked on small and convex iron plates, and when
prepared is about the thickness of brown paper.]

[Footnote 13: Rustam is the fabulous hero of Persian history, so much celebrated in the Shah
Nameh as a paragon of strength and courage. 

The hall of mammals, amphibians, is admirable. Those monsters of the ocean inspires horror, by shape
and appearance, and HOWEVER, some, such as seals, exercise, still stuffed I do not know what mysterious
attraction that seems to be the sympathy of the homogeneity. There's something forms, the face
and the look of the seal, which features sharp image of the brutal or woman, and at times makes
suspect the intelligence hidden in the skull of this animal, remarkable for their customs, their
tendency to noble fraternity and its value in defense of his family. Frankly, I wish that many
selfish people who live or crumbling each other, learn a little, in the maritime school of seals, estimates,
defense and live in intimate fellowship of the common cause.

The most notable wonders of the British Museum are in the halls Egyptians, Nineveh Carthage, Memphis,
India, Herculaneum, Pompeii, etc.. There is meeting all the civilization Modern has been able to
collect more wonderful and more interesting and distinctive among other ancient civilization,
transformed by time into rubble and ashes. Hence the architecture sculpture and other arts such
strongly reflect (as in every time and country) beliefs religious customs, institutions and the rule
more or less primitive and crude, but or less refined social development. The moral world is
shown here in its infancy lush and unpolished as the physical world. The colossal Sphinx, the Centaur,
the sacred bull, the animal-man, the human monster in all forms bizarre and brutal, clotted
ralieves of crude, synthetic hieroglyphics, incorrect signs - are revealing time when everything
was gigantic and monstrous as the Iguanodon or the megatherium, in all lived to excess, without
profiles and polish the secular work of creation has brought slowly to improve things. Thus,
far from the supposed greatness amaze of ancient Egypt or elsewhere, I see in his works, but
the demonstration of the titanic exuberance barbarism and weakness, which over the centuries has
been modified with the substitution of intelligence to the force, - the spiritualized art, the
simple imitation material things, - the physiognomy delineated, pure, to the enormous mass, cold and
expressionless.

How great and noble humanity appears, looking on, in different rooms Museum, the image of herself
that she has left drawn, century by century, in many monuments such as the eloquent testimony of his
progress, his destiny, his immortality, of his intelligence and prodigious strength and freedom!

*
* * * *

       

If Westminster-Abbey and the London-Tower are the monuments of history, London Bridge and Tunnel
the industry, and the British-Museum and the Zoological and Botanical Gardens, the Science, St.
Paul's Cathedral is to the English monument to his greatness, his religion and his pride, and
the Crystal-Palace is the cosmopolitanism and artistic progress.

San Pablo, built in much depending on the model of the Cathedral of St. Peter's in Rome, took
almost the entire surface of a place in the City, leaving little space to the four sides for circulation.
If the monument was not so impressive in its grandeur would go unnoticed, because the English have
had the bad taste to fit it in the most complicated, irregular and agitated that is London, enclosing
black miserably amid stacks, bundles and warehouses. Except for making a climb at some high monument
near impossible see St. Paul in perspective. You have to take it to point-blank as he turns
to look at sky towards the zenith.

The great cathedral of the Anglican cost about seven million dollars,
was built by Wren's famous architect, in 1675, having invested in
the work thirty-five years of work. The Persians dye the whole of their hands as far as the wrist with it, and also
the soles of their feet. The Turks more commonly only tinge the nails; both use it for the hair.]

[Footnote 40: The Yezeedies are a tribe of the Curds, who are said to worship the devil.]

[Footnote 41: The Persians give the most magnificent names to their negro slaves. Thus Nur
Jehan means "light of the world."]

[Footnote 42: Khanum is the title usually given to a Persian lady, and is equivalent to "madam."]

[Footnote 43: The priest is so called who invites the Mohamedans to prayers from the minaret,
or from the roof of the mosque.]

[Footnote 44: This no doubt relates to certain mysterious and obscene customs which are said
to be practised among the Yezeedies, at the village of Kerrund, in the Curdistan, and peculiar
to the tribe of Nusiri, commonly called Chiragh Kush, or lamp extinguishers. Antiquarians pretend
in them to trace a resemblance to the abominable worship of Venus, as practised by the Babylonians,
and recorded in Herodotus, book i. sect. cxcix.]

[Footnote 45: The cherkajis (literally wheelers about) in Oriental armies are skirmishers,
who are thrown out from the main body to engage in the fight, and are generally esteemed the
most expert horsemen and the best soldiers.]

[Footnote 46: The point to which the Mohamedans turn in prayer.]

[Footnote 47: Light of the world. The Persians are apt to give high- sounding names to their
slaves, and particularly to the guardians of their women.]

[Footnote 48: Aga is used in the sense of master.]

[Footnote 49: The surme is a collyrium.]

[Footnote 50: The sham is, in truth, the evening meal, and is served up at sunset.]

[Footnote 51: The ceremony of the pahendaz consists in spreading rich stuffs for the king to
walk upon.]

[Footnote 52: This is an ancient Persian custom, and is supposed to secure good fortune--sweetness,
and consequently sugar, being an emblem of felicity.]

[Footnote 53: The musnud, in Eastern acceptation, is, in fact, the throne; but on occasions
such as the one here described the mode of making a musnud is to double up a thick carpet,
by which means there is only room for one person to be seated upon it.]

[Footnote 54: Catherine II. is so styled by the Persians.]

[Footnote 55: Kizzil Bash, or Red Head, is a sort of nickname given from old times to the Persians.]

[Footnote 56: The inner, or women's apartment.]

[Footnote 57: Mumiai and pahzer are antidotes in which the Persians have great faith. Our bezoar
is evidently a corruption of pahzer.]

[Footnote 58: This is a Persian idiom, and is intended to denote the fascinations of a brunette.]

[Footnote 59: The jika is an upright ornament worn in front of the crown, and is an insignia
of royalty.]

[Footnote 60: Roast meat.]

[Footnote 61: So Hippocrates is called in Persia.]

[Footnote 62: The gate of the palace, where public business is transacted.]

[Footnote 63: Perhaps the description of this personage will bring to the recollection of those
who were in Persia in the years 1813 and 1814 the character of the nasakchi bashi of that day.]

[Footnote 64: Luti here is used in the sense of polisson.]

[Footnote 65: Celebrated heroes in the Shah Nameh, a book which is believed, by the present
Persians, to contain their ancient history.]

[Footnote 66: Strict Mussulmans hold silk unclean.]

[Footnote 67: In the direction of Mecca.]

[Footnote 68: The third month in the Arabic calendar.]

[Footnote 69: A ghez is not quite a yard.]

[Footnote 70: Shir bi pir--a lion without a saint, is a favourite Persian epithet, when applied
to a desperado, a fellow without compassion.]

[Footnote 72: A maun is seven pounds and a half; a miscal, twenty-four grains.]

[Footnote 73: The Shah's great diamond, which he wears in one of his armlets, is called the
koh nur, or the mountain of light.]

[Footnote 74: The camel tie is made by fastening the lower and upper limb of one of the forelegs
together, which is done to prevent an unruly animal from straying from the pasture ground.]

[Footnote 75: It is supposed that the instruments here alluded to were hand-grenades.]

[Footnote 76: Hassan Khan Serdan, the governor of Erivan, was said to have attacked Armenian
villages in the manner here described, by throwing grenades into the houses from the orifice
at the top.]

[Footnote 77: This is a circumstance which is said to have really happened.]

[Footnote 78: I.e. Mecca, to which all Mohamedans turn in their prayers.]

[Footnote 79: Khon-khor, literally "blood-drinker"; so the Sultan of Roum, or Turkey, is styled
in Persia.]

[Footnote 80: The kabob shops at Constantinople are eating-houses, where, at a moment's notice,
a dish of roast meat, and small bits of meat done on skewers, are served up to whoever asks
for them.]

[Footnote 81: So the Persians call Freemasons, about whom they are very inquisitive.]

[Footnote 82: Sheikh Attar and Jelaledin Rumi are the two great doctors of the Sufies.]

[Footnote 83: A mollah who is a schoolmaster is also styled ahkon.]

[Footnote 84: It is a popular belief that near the city of Kashan there exists a well of fabulous
depth, at the bottom of which are found enchanted groves and gardens.]

[Footnote 85: A real is about two shillings--eight reals one tomaun.]

[Footnote 86: Peder sukhteh is the most common term of abuse in a Persian's mouth. The overt
or visible floors are composed of a multitude of rooms or bedrooms of sad nakedness, without
air, light or fire, piled in disorder, and to where the miserable tenants fearful climb scaffolds
that do not deserve the name of stairs. Medium
was incorporated into the seat, as to better show the red cross of Calatrava, who had embroidered
on the lapel of his coat, and shouted: - Corporal of the guard! And then it was presented open
right hand over his forehead, he said: - Do you clear the way!