"The scheme I have devised for the accomplishment of the common object of the patriotic enterprise
which your Highness has put afoot, proposes a new vice, which, passing under the guise of innocent
pastime, will not only, by itself, be fully equal to any other of the many vices now known
among men, for its certainty to lure them to its embrace, fascinate, infatuate, deprave, and
destroy them, but will insure the exercise and combine the powers of them all. It addresses
itself to the intellectual by the implied challenge it holds out to them to make a trial of
their skill; it appears to the unfortunate in business as a welcome friend, which is rarely
turned away; it presents to pride and vanity the means of gratification that are not to be
rejected; it holds out to avarice an irresistible temptation; it begets habits of drunkenness;
and thus insures all the fruits of that desolating vice; it engenders envy, hatred, and the
spirit of revenge; in short, it brings into play every evil thought and passion that ever entered
the head and heart of man, while it the most securely holds its victims, and most speedily
hunts them down to ruin and death."

"The name? the name?" eagerly shouted an hundred voices from the excited fiend-throng around.

"The name," resumed the speaker, in reply, "the name by which I propose to christen this new
and terrible device of mine, to counteract the power of virtue, and curtail the dominions of
Heaven, is GAMBLING!"

"Gambling! Gambling!" responded all hell, in thunders of applause; "and Gambling let it be,"
shouted Lucifer, as the prize was thus awarded by acclamation to the distinguished inventor
of Gambling.

From this supposable scene among the demons, we pass, by no unnatural transition, to a kindred
one among men.

In a back, secluded room, in the third story of a public house in Boston, of questionable respectability,
there might have been found, a few hours after the dispersion of the party before described,
a small band of men sitting around a table, intently engaged in games of chance, in which money
was at stake; while on a sideboard stood several bottles of different kinds of liquors, with
a liberal supply of crackers and cigars. Of this company, two, who have been already introduced
to the reader,--Mark Elwood and Gaut Gurley,--seemed to be especially pitted against each other
in the game. It was now deep into the night, and Elwood said something about going home. But
his remark being received only with jeers by the company, he sank into an abashed silence and
played on. Another hour elapsed, and he spoke of it again, but less decidedly. Another passed,
and he seemed wholly to have forgotten his purpose; for he, as well as all the rest of the
company, had, by this time, become intensely absorbed in the play, allowing themselves no respite
or intermission, except to snatch occasionally a glass of liquor from the sideboard, in the
entrancing business before them. And, as the sport proceeded, deeper and deeper grew the excitement
among the infatuated participants, till every sense and feeling seemed lost to every thing
save the result of each rapidly succeeding game; and the heat of concentrated thought and passion
gleamed fiercely from every eye, and found vent, in repeated exclamations of triumph or despair,
from every tongue, according to the varying fortunes of the parties engaged. On one side was
heard the loud and exultant shout of the winner at his success, and on the other, the low bitter
curse of the loser at his disappointment; the countenance of the one, in his joy and exultation,
assuming the self-satisfied and domineering air of the victor and master, and the countenance
of the other, in his grief and envy, darkening into the mingled look of the demon and the slave.

And thus played on this desperate band of gamesters till morning light, which, now stealing
through the shutters of their darkened room, came and joined its voiceless monitions with those
which their consciences had long since given them, in warning them to break up and return to
their families, made wretched by their absence. So completely, however, had they abandoned
themselves to the fatal witcheries of the play, that they heeded not even this significant
admonition; but, with uneasy glances towards the windows, to note the progress of the unwelcome
intrusions of day, turned with the redoubled eagerness often shown by those who know their
time is limited to their hellish engagement.

Through the whole night, Fortune seemed to have held nearly an even scale between Elwood and
his special adversary, Gaut Gurley, contrary to the evident anticipations of the latter, and
despite all his attempts to secure an advantage. Thus far, however, he had signally failed
in his purpose; and, at the last game, Elwood had even won of him the largest sum that had
as yet been put at stake between them. This seemed to drive him almost to madness; and in his
desperation he loudly demanded that the stakes should be doubled for the next trial. It was
done. The game was played, and Gurley was again the loser.

"I will now stay no longer," said Elwood, rising. "I was forced here to-night, as you well
know, Gurley, against my will, and against all reason, to stop your clamor for a chance to
win back what you absurdly called your money lost at our last sitting; though Heaven knows
that what I then won was but a pitiful fraction of the amount you have taken from me, within
the last two years, in the same or in a worse way. I have now given you your chance,--yes,
chance upon chance, all night,--till your claim has been a dozen times cancelled; and, I repeat
I will stay no longer."

"You shall!" fiercely cried Gurley, with an oath. "You shall stay to give me another chance,
or I will brand you as a trickster and a sneak!"

"Gentlemen," said Elwood, turning to the company, in an expostulating tone, "gentlemen, I appeal
to you all if I have not--"

"I will have no appeal," interrupted Gurley, in a voice trembling with rage. "I say I will
have another chance, or--"

"Take it, then," hastily interposed Elwood, as if unwilling to let the other finish the sentence;
"take it: what will you have the stakes?"

"Double the last."

"Double?"

"Yes, double!"

"Have your own way, then," said Elwood, with forced composure, taking up and shuffling the
cards for the important game.

The stake was for a thousand; and the trembling antagonists played as if life and death hung
on the event. And the whole company, indeed, forgetful of their own comparatively slight interest,
in the momentous one thus put at stake, at once turned their eyes on the two players, and watched
the result with breathless interest. That result was soon disclosed; when, to the surprise
of all, and the dismay of Gaut Gurley, the victory once more strangely fell to the lot of Mark
Elwood, who, gathering up the stakes with trembling eagerness, hastily rose from the table,
as if to depart.

"What in the name of Tophet does all this mean?" fiercely exclaimed Gurley, throwing an angry
and suspicious look round the table upon those who had doubtless been, at other sittings, his
confederates in fleecing Elwood. "Yes, what is the meaning of this? I ask you, and you, sir?"

"Better ask your own partner," said one of the men addressed, with a defiant look.

"Elwood? Pooh!" exclaimed Gaut, with a bitter sneer.

"And why not?" responded the former. "He may have as good luck as the best of us, as it appears
he has had. And hark ye, Gaut, you look things at us that it might not be safe for you to say
in this room."

"Gentlemen, you will all bear me out in leaving, now," here interposed Elwood, beginning to
make towards the door.

"Stop, sir!" thundered Gaut. "You are not a-going to sneak off with all that money in your
pocket, by a d--d sight!"

"Why not, sir?" replied Elwood; "why not, for all you can say?"

"Because I have lost, sir!" shouted Gurley, hoarse with rage. "I have lost three games running,--lost
all I have. I demand a fair chance to win it back; and that chance I will have, or I'll make
you, Mark Elwood, curse the hour you refused it."

"Gaut Gurley, you insatiate fiend!" exclaimed Elwood, in a tone of mingled anger and distress;
"you it was who first led me into this accursed habit of play, by which you have robbed me
of untold thousands yourself, and been the means of my being robbed of thousands more by others.
You have brought me to the door of ruin before, and would now take all I have to save me from
absolute bankruptcy."

"Whining hypocrite!" cried Gurley, starting up in rage. "Do you tell that story when you have
my last dollar in your pocket? But your pitiful whining shall not avail you. If you leave this
room alive, you leave that money behind you."

"Stop, stop!" here interposed one of the company, who had noted what had inadvertently fallen
from Elwood, in his warmth, respecting his apprehended bankruptcy; "stop, no such recriminations
and threatenings here! I can show Elwood a way to dispose of a part of his money, at least,
without bringing on any one the charge of robbing or being robbed. Here is a note of your signing,
Mr. Elwood,--a debt of honor,--for a couple of hundreds, contracted in this very room, you
will remember. You may as well pay it."

"I have a similar bit of paper," said another, coming forward and presenting a note for a still
larger sum.

"And I, likewise," said a third, joining the group, with an additional piece of evidence of
Elwood's folly, in the shape of a gambling note; "and I shall insist on payment with the rest,
seeing the money cannot be disposed of between you and Gaut without a quarrel and danger of
bloodshed."

With a perplexed and troubled air Elwood paced the room a moment, without uttering a word in
reply to the different demands that had so unexpectedly been made upon him. He glanced furtively
towards the door, as if calculating the chances of escaping through it before any one could
interpose to prevent him. He then glanced inquiringly at the company for such indications of
sympathy or forbearance as might warrant the attempt; but in their countenances he read only
that which should deter him from resorting to any such means of escaping the dilemma in which
he now found himself. And, suddenly stopping short and turning to the new claimants for his
money, he said:

"Well, gentlemen, have your way, then. I had hoped to be permitted to carry away money enough
to meet my bills and engagements of to-day,--at least, as much as I brought here. But, as I
am not to be allowed that privilege, hand on your paper, every scrap of my signing, and you
shall have your pay."

A half-dozen notes of hand were instantly produced and thrown upon the table, and the holder
of each was paid off in turn; the last of whom drew from Elwood nearly every dollar he had
in his possession.

"There, gentlemen," he exclaimed, with a sort of desperate calmness, "in this line of deal,
at least, my accounts are all squared. I am quits with you all."

"Not with me, by a d--d sight!" exclaimed Gurley, no longer able to restrain his rage at being
thus baulked in his desperate purpose of getting hold of Elwood's money, by fair means or foul,
before permitting him to leave the room. "Not with me, sir, till the amount of that last stake,
which was just enough to make me whole, is again in my pocket; and I'll follow you to the gates
of hell, but I'll have it!"

Cowering and trembling beneath the threats and fiendish glances of the other, Elwood siezed
his hat, and rushed from the room.

On escaping from this "den of thieves," and gaining the street below, Elwood's first thought
was of home and his shamefully neglected family, and he turned his steps in that direction.
But, before proceeding far, he began to hesitate and falter in his course. He became oppressed
with the feelings of a criminal. He was ashamed to meet his family; for, fully conscious that
his looks must be haggard, his eyes red and bloodshot, and his whole appearance disordered,
he knew his return in such a plight, at that hour in the morning, would betray the wretched
employments of the night, especially to his keen-sighted brother, on whose assistance he now
doubly depended to save him from ruin. He therefore changed his course, and was proceeding
towards his store, when he met his confidential clerk, who was out in search of him, and who,
in great agitation, informed him that his drafts of yesterday had all been returned dishonored;
that bills were pouring in, and the holders clamorous for their pay. Struck dumb by the startling
announcement, it was some moments before Elwood could collect his thoughts sufficiently to
bid his clerk return, and put off his creditors till the next day, when he would try to satisfy
them all. And, having done this, he turned suddenly into another street, wound his way back
to the inn he had just left, took a private room, locked himself in, and for a while gave way
to alternate paroxysms of grief, remorse, and self-reproaches. After exhausting himself by
the violence of his emotions, he threw himself upon a bed, and, thinking an hour's repose might
mend his appearance, so as to enable him the better to disguise the cause of his absence, on
his return to his family, which he now concluded to defer till towards dinner-time, he fell
into a slumber so profound and absorbing, that he did not awake till the shadows of approaching
night had begun to darken his room.

Leaping from his couch, in his surprise and vexation at having so overslept himself, he hastily
made his toilet, and immediately set out for home,--a home which, for the first time in his
life, he now dreaded to enter. To that wretched home we will now repair, preceding his arrival,
to relate what had there occurred in his absence.

CHAPTER IV.

"Better is a poor and wise child than an old and foolish father, who will no more be admonished."--ECCL.

After the breaking up of the party, as described in the former chapter, Arthur Elwood, on joining
the family circle, and not meeting his host and brother there, as he naturally expected, expressed
his surprise at the circumstance, and inquired the cause of his absence. But, perceiving that
the subject gave pain to Mrs. Elwood, who deemed it prudent but to repeat, as she hesitatingly
did, what her husband had told her, that he had gone out, soon to be back, the former forbore
any further inquiries or comments, and soon retired to rest, wishing her a good-night and pleasant
slumbers.

"Good-night and pleasant slumbers!" slowly and murmuringly repeated the anxious and troubled
wife, on whose ear the words, kindly meant as she knew them to be, fell as if in mockery to
her feelings. "Pleasant slumbers for me! Heaven grant they may be made so by his speedy coming;
but--" and, being now alone, and thus relieved of the restraining presence of others, she burst
into tears, and wept long and bitterly.

Woman was not created to act independently. The sphere in which she is formed to move, though
different, is yet so immediately connected--with that of man, that her destiny is inseparable
from his. Her happiness and prosperity are not in her own keeping. The welfare of the husband
is the welfare of the wife; and, if poverty and disgrace, the concomitants of vice, fall on
him, she must participate equally in the physical evil, and drink as much deeper of the cup
of moral misery as her unblunted sensibilities are more lively, and her sense of right and
wrong are more acute, than those of him who has become dead to the one and lost to the other.
What wonder, then, that she should so agonize and weep in secret over his moral deviations,
and all the more bitterly, because, with the most intense desire to do so, she has no power
to remedy the evil? But, for that sorrow and suffering, who before high Heaven will be held
responsible? Who, but the doubly-guilty husband whose conduct has caused them?

Through the whole of that, to her, long and dreary night, Mrs. Elwood never once thought of
retiring to rest, but kept up her vigils in waiting and watching for her husband: now listening
pensively to the wind that seemed to moan round her solitary apartment in unison with her own
feelings; now straining her senses to catch some sound of his approach; and now, perhaps, throwing
herself upon a sofa, and falling, for a moment, into a troubled slumber, but only to start
up at the first sound of the rattling windows, to listen again, and again to be disappointed.
In this manner she wore away the lingering hours of the night, till the long prayed-for daylight,
which she supposed, at the farthest, would bring back her truant husband, made its welcome
appearance. But daylight came not this time to remove the cause of her anxieties. Elwood had
several times before staid out nearly through the night, but the approach of daylight had always,
till now, brought him home; and, not making his appearance, as she confidently expected, she
became, as the morning advanced, really alarmed for his personal safety, and would have immediately
sent out for him, but she knew not whom to send. She therefore concluded to put off the already
long-delayed breakfast no longer; and, summoning her brother-in-law, who, with herself (her
son, whom we have yet more particularly to introduce to the reader, being temporarily absent
from town), now constituted all the family remaining to join in the repast. The two then sat
down to the table, and partook the meal mostly in gloomy silence, one still hoping all might
yet turn out well, and therefore repressing her twofold apprehensions; and the other, out of
regard to her feelings, kindly forbearing to pain her with remarks and inquiries on a subject
which they mutually felt conscious was oppressing the hearts of both.

After the meal was over, Arthur Elwood arose, and, briefly announcing his intention of going
out to look up his brother, who, he said, would be likely soon to be found at his store, left
the house. At the usual dinner hour, Arthur Elwood returned to the house, and was met at the
door by his anxious hostess, whose countenance quickly fell as she perceived him to be alone.

"Have you not yet seen my husband?" she eagerly demanded.

"No, but have heard of him. He is somewhere in the city, I believe," replied the other.

"In the city and not return?" persisted the surprised and distressed wife. "How can this be?--what
does it mean?"

"I do not know," replied Arthur, with a thoughtful and perplexed air.

Mrs. Elwood for a moment stood mute as a statue; for, but too well conjecturing what was passing
in the mind of the other, she durst not ask his opinion. But, soon regaining her usual composure,
she led the way to the dinner-table, where the meal that followed was partaken much as the
one that preceded it,--in silence and mutual constraint, which was only relieved by an occasional
forced, commonplace remark.

"I shall again go to Mark's store," said Arthur, with stern gravity, as he rose from the table,
after he had finished his repast, "and I shall also take the liberty of looking into the condition
of his affairs. After that, I may return here again, though to remain only for a short time,
as I leave for home in the evening."

Towards night Arthur Elwood returned, and in his usual quiet way entered the room where Mrs.
Elwood was sitting; when, shaking his head as if in reply to the question respecting her still
absent husband, which he saw, by the painfully inquiring expression of her countenance, was
rising to her lips, he took a seat by her side, and, with an air of concern and a slight tremor
of voice, commenced:

"I have been debating with myself, sister Alice, whether it were a greater kindness to go away
without seeing you, and of course without apprising you of what I may have discovered respecting
your husband and his affairs, or come here and tell you truths which would be painful,--too
painful, perhaps, for you to bear."

"'Tis better I should know all," rather gasped than uttered Mrs. Elwood. "You will tell me
the truth,--others may not. Go on."

"Your husband," resumed the other, "wrote me for the help of a few thousands, which I would
have freely loaned, but for my suspicions that all was not right with him; and, as I plainly
told him, I came on to ascertain for myself whether such help would be thrown away, or really
relieve him, as he represented, from a mere temporary embarrassment. I have now been into the
painful investigation, and find matters, I grieve to say, tenfold worse than I suspected. He
is, and must have been for a long time, the companion and the victim of blacklegs and cutthroats,
and--"

"I suspected,--I knew it," interrupted the eager and trembling listener; "and O Arthur, how
I have tried and wept and prayed to induce him to break off from them; for I felt they would
eventually ruin him."

"Eventually ruin him! Why, Alice, with his own miscalculations in business, folly and extravagance
in every thing, they have done so already."

"But the main part of his property," demanded the other, with a startled look, "you don't mean
but what the main part of his property is still left?"

"Yes, I do, Alice,--but I see you are not prepared for this. Still, you may as well know it
now as ever. Yes, Alice, your husband is irretrievably bankrupt!"

Mrs. Elwood was not indeed prepared for this development. She had foreseen, it was true, the
coming evil; but she supposed it was yet in the distance. She knew her husband's property had
been a large one; and the announcement, from one she could not disbelieve, that it was all
gone, struck her dumb with surprise and consternation. She uttered not a word. She could not
speak, but sat pale and trembling, the very picture of distress.

After pacing the room a few moments, with frequent commiserating glances at the face of the
other, whose distress evidently deeply moved him, Arthur Elwood stopped short before her and said:

"Sister Alice, my time is about up,--I must go."

"Have you no word to leave for my husband when he comes?" asked Mrs. Elwood, with an effort
to appear composed.

"No,--none whatever to him; but with you, Alice," he added, drawing out a small package of
bank notes and dropping them into her lap, "with you, and for you alone, against a day of necessity,
I leave that trifle--no hesitation--keep it--put it out of sight--there, that is right. Now
only one thing more,--what of your son?"

"Claud?"

"Yes. You know it has happened that I have never seen him."

"I do know it, and have much regretted his absence; for I wished you to see him. But I am now
looking for him every hour, and if you could delay--"

"No, no, I must go. Tell him to forget, at once, that he was ever a rich man's only son and
heir, and learn to profit by a rich man's errors; for, till he does this, which, if he is like
others, will require some time, he will make no real advance in life."

"Your impression may be natural, but it hardly does him justice. He is not like most others.
Claud is a man now."

"So much the better, then, for you and himself. But you see with a mother's eyes, probably,
and speak with a mother's heart. I will inquire about him, however, as indeed I will about
you all. Good-by."

Thus did the unimpassioned Arthur Elwood, with a seeming business-like roughness and want of
feeling, assume to hide the emotions which he really felt in the discovery of his brother's
ruin, and in witnessing the distress he had just caused in communicating it, hurry through
the painful interview, and abruptly depart, leaving Mrs. Elwood to struggle in secret with
the chaos of thoughts and emotions which Arthur's unexpected revelation had brought over her.
She was not left long, however, to struggle with her feelings alone. In a short time the sound
of a familiar footstep hastily entering the front hall of the magnificent mansion,--alas! now
no longer her own,--suddenly caught her ear; when, with the exclamation, "Claud, O Claud!"
she rushed forward to her advancing son, and, to use the expressive language of Scripture,
"fell on his neck and wept."

"I heard of father's failure," said the son, a fine looking youth of about twenty, with his
mother's cleanly cut features and firm, thoughtful countenance, joined to his father's manly
proportions. "I learned, as I came into the city, an hour ago, that father had just failed,
his store been shut up, and all his property put into the hands of his creditors; and I hurried
home to break the news to you. But I see you know it all."

"Yes, that the blow was impending, but not that it had already fallen, as you now report; but
it may as well come to-day as to-morrow or next week. Half my nights, for months, Claud, have
been made sleepless by the bodings and fears of the evil day, which, as things were going,
I felt must eventually come; but never, till within this very hour, did I dream that our misfortunes
were so near. But, though the storm has burst so much sooner than I expected, I could bravely
face it, could we say that it was caused by no fault of our own; but to be brought upon us
in this manner, my son, it is hard, hard to bear."

"But you have not been to blame, mother; and I did not suppose you thought enough of wealth
to grieve so at its loss."

"I do not, Claud. It is not that; still, I could not help thinking of your disappointment,
even in that view of the misfortune."

"Mine, mother? Why, I am no worse off than father was when he started in life; no worse off
than thousands who begin with no other resources than what lie in clear heads and strong hearts.
I can take care of myself; and, what is more, I can take care of you, dear mother. Surely,
you won't doubt me?"

"No, Claud, no. You have always been my pride, latterly almost my only hope; and I know not
now but that you must be my only staff, on which to lean as I pass down the decline of life."

"And I will be one to you, mother; but come, cheer up, and let us go in and talk over these
matters more calmly."

The mother and son accordingly retired to her usual sitting-room; where, since her overcharged
bosom had found relief in tears, and her sinking spirits had been raised by the kind and comforting
words of her dutiful son, she told him all that had occurred during the two preceding days,
which constituted the brief but eventful period of his absence. They then were beginning to
counsel together on the prospects and probabilities of their gloomy future; but their conversation
was suddenly cut short by the abrupt entrance of the wretched husband and father, who, on his
way from the hotel where he had spent the day in sleeping off his debauch in concealment, having
received an intimation of what was going on among his creditors, had hurried home, with a confidence
and self-possession which he could not summon when he started; for, out of this movement among
his creditors, which he still would not believe was any thing more than a sort of practical
menace to enforce payment, he saw not only how he could frame a plausible excuse for his guilty
absence, but make the circumstance an irresistible plea for forcing from his brother a loan
sufficient to enable him to arrest his failure and continue business. On entering the room,
therefore, after saluting his wife and son in a sort of brisk, unconcerned manner, and muttering
that he "thought they would never let him get home again," he eagerly inquired for Arthur;
and, on being informed that his brother had started for his home, without leaving any note
or word for him, and especially on being told by his son--as he at length calmly and persistingly
was, in despite of his multiplied prevarications and denials, what they all knew, and what
he himself should have been the last to be ignorant of--that the question of his failure, for
more than he could ever pay, had already been settled against him, he became frantic in the
outpourings of his rage, disappointment, and chagrin; sometimes declaring that the world, grown
envious of his prosperity, had all suddenly become his enemies, and grossly belied him; sometimes
savagely charging his brother, wife, and son with conspiring together against him; and sometimes
cursing his own blindness and folly. And thus he continued to rave, and walk the room for hours,
till his wife and son, having partaken their evening meal before his unheeding eyes, and become
sick and wearied in listening to his insane ravings,--to which they had wholly ceased making
any reply,--retired to rest, leaving him to partake such food as was left on the table, to
occupy, as he chose to do, the same sofa which his hapless wife had done the night before,
to sleep down the wild commotion of his feelings, and awake a calmer and more humbled, but
not yet a better or much wiser man.

But we do not propose to describe in detail the rapid descent from opulence and station to
poverty and insignificance, which now transpired to mark this era in the singular fortunes
of Elwood and his family. Their history, for the next three months, was but the usual painful
one which awaits the failed merchant everywhere in the cities. The crushing sense of misfortune
which, for the first few days after the unexpected blow has fallen, weighs down the self-deceived
or otherwise unprepared victims; the succeeding weeks of dejection and mortified pride; then
the painful trial of parting with the showy equipage, the costly furniture, and the cherished
mementoes, which had required, perhaps, the care of half a life in gathering; then the compulsory
abdication of the great and conspicuous mansion for the small, obscure, hired cottage; then
the saddening bodings and deep concern felt in seeing the means of living daily diminishing,
with no prospect of ever being replenished; and, finally, the humiliating resort of the wife
and children to the needle or menial employments, for the actual necessaries of life,--these,
all these, are but the usual graduated vicissitudes of sorrow and trial which are allotted
to those whose folly and extravagance have suddenly thrown them on the downward track of fortune,
and which the Elwoods, in common with others, were now doomed to experience, and, on the part
of Mrs. Elwood, especially, with aggravations not necessarily incident to such reverses. She
would have borne all the deprivations and evils incident to her husband's failure without a
murmur, could she have seen in him any amendment in those habits and vicious inclinations which
had led to his downfall. But she could not. The hopes she had confidently entertained, that
his misfortunes would humble and reform him, were doomed to disappointment. He still madly
clung to his old associates of the gambling-table; and all the money he could get was lost
or squandered among them, till he became too poor and desperate even for them, and they drove
him from their society to join another and a lower set, who in turn compelled him to seek other
still lower and more degraded associations. And so descended, step by step, along the path
of degradation, the once princely merchant, till, despised and shunned by all respectable men,
he became the fit companion of the meanest thimble-riggers of the cellars, and the lounging
tipplers of the streets.

His case, however, as hopeless as it might appear, was not permitted to become an irretrievable
one. Through a seemingly accidental circumstance, a light one day broke on his beclouded and
half-maddened brain, that led to a self-redemption as happy for himself and family as it was
unexpected by all. A former friend, one morning, moved perhaps by his forlorn appearance, in
passing him with a light carriage, invited him to ride a few miles into the country; where,
being unexpectedly called off in another direction, he left Elwood to return on foot by a nearer
route across the fields to his home. After travelling some distance, he reached an elevation
which overlooked the city, and, feeling a little fatigued, he sat down on a mossy hillock to
rest and enjoy the prospect. As he cast his eye over that busy haunt of men, with its numerous
spires shooting upward, its long lines of princely dwellings, its encircling forest of masts,
its lofty warehouses, and other evidences of wealth and business, his own former important
participation in its busy scenes, and his present worse than insignificant position there,
rose in vivid contrast in his awakening mind; and the thought of his past but squandered wealth
came up only to add poignancy to the sense of his present poverty and humiliation, which thus,
and for the first time, was brought home to his agitated bosom. Suddenly leaping from his seat,
from the torturing force of the reflection, he exclaimed: "Must I bear this? Cannot I still
be a man? I will! yes, before Heaven, I will!" And, resuming his seat, his mind became intently
engaged in studying out ways and means for carrying the sudden but stern resolution into effect;
when, after another hour thus employed, he again jumped up, and, with the air of one who has
reached some unalterable conclusion, he rapidly made his way homeward.

While the besotted Elwood was undergoing, so unexpectedly, even to himself, such a moral transformation
in the solitude of the fields, an event occurred to his sorrowful wife at home, which was equally
unexpected to her; which, though of a wholly different character, produced an equally great
revulsion in her feelings as the one happening to her husband, about the same hour, was to
him, or was producing in his feelings, and which, by the singular coincidence, seemed to indicate
that the angel of mercy was at length spreading his wings at the same time over both heads
of this unfortunate family. She had been having one of her most disconsolate days, and was
sitting alone in her little room, gloomily pondering over her disheartening trials, without
being able to see one ray of light in the dark future, when she received a call from one of
her husband's chief creditors; who announced that those creditors, at a recent meeting, having
ascertained her meritorious conduct and needy situation, had voted her the sum of five hundred
dollars, which, confiding in her discretion for a judicious outlay of the money, he now, he
said, had the pleasure of presenting her. And, having placed the money in her hands, and taken
the tear of gratitude--which, preventing the utterance of the word-thanks she attempted, had
started to her cheek at the unexpected boon--as a sufficient acknowledgment, he kindly bade
her adieu, and departed.

That evening the husband and wife met as they had not for months before: each at first surprised
at seeing the unclouded brow and hopeful countenance of the other, but each soon instinctively
feeling that something had occurred to both, which was not only of present moment, but the
harbinger of happier days to come. When confidence and hope are springing up in doubtful or
despairing bosoms, the tongue is soon loosened from the frosts of reserve, however closely
they may have before imprisoned it. Elwood, with many expressions of regret at his past conduct,
and of wonder at the blindness and folly which had permitted him so long to persevere in it,
told his gratified companion all that had that day passed through his mind,--his sudden sense
of shame and degradation; his bitter self-reproaches, and succeeding determination to reform;
to atone for the past, as far as he could, by future good conduct; to begin, in fine, the world
anew, and, after placing himself beyond the reach of those temptations to which he had so fatally
yielded, devote the remainder of his days to honest industry. And she, anxious to encourage
and strengthen him, and fearing his total want of means might defeat his good resolutions,--she,
also, as she believed it would be true wisdom to do, informed him of her good fortune, and
offered him a portion of her unexpected acquisition, to enable him to engage in such business
as he should decide to follow. They then discussed, and soon mutually agreed on, the expediency
of leaving the city, where, as they had once there enjoyed wealth and station, they must both
ever be subjected to mortifying contrasts,--both constantly doomed

  "To see profusion which they must not share,"--

and he be exposed to temptations which he might not always have the firmness to withstand.

"But I resolved," said Elwood, after a pause, "not only on going to the country, but on to
a new lot of land in the very outskirts of civilization. You, however, should I succeed in
getting up comfortable quarters, would not be content to make such a place your home?"

"Anywhere, Mark; and the farther from the dangerous influences of this wicked city, the better.
Yes, to the very depths of the wilderness, and I will not complain."

"It is settled, then. I was once, in one of my early excursions, along the borders of the wild
lakes lying on the northeastern line of New Hampshire, where a living may be obtained from
the cultivation of the soil alone; but where more may be made, at particular seasons, in taking
the valuable furs that there abound. There I will go, contract for a lot of land, and prepare
a home, leaving you, and Claud, if he shall decide for a woodman's life, to come on and join
me next summer."

"That Claud will do; for he often declares himself disgusted with the trickery of trade, and
to be longing for the country life of his boyhood. But here he comes, and can speak for himself."

The son now joined in the family deliberations, and learning, with surprise and gratification,
what had occurred during the eventful day, joyfully fell in with his father's proposition;
when it was soon decided that the latter should take half the money that day given to Mrs.
Elwood, to lay out in a lot of land and house, and immediately proceed on his journey.

Whatever Mark Elwood had once firmly decided on, he was always prompt and energetic in executing.
Before nine o'clock that evening, his knapsack of clothing was made up for a journey on foot,
which, contrary to the wishes of his wife and son, he decided should be his mode of travelling.
He then went to bed, slept six hours, rose, dressed, bade his family good-by, turned his back
on the now loathed city, and, by sunrise next morning, was far on his way towards his designated
home among the distant wilds of the North.

Once more in the green wilderness! Welcome the wild scenes of our boyhood, which, as the checkered
panorama of the past is unrolled at our bidding, rise on the mental vision in all their original
freshness and beauty! It was here we first essayed to study the works of nature, and in them
trace the Master-hand that moulded and perfected them. It was here we learned to recognize
the voice of God in the rolling thunder, and his messengers in the swift-winged lightnings;
to mark the forms of beauty and grandeur in every thing, from the humble lichen of the logs
and rocks, to the high and towering pine of the plain and the mountain,--from the low murmurings
of the quiet rivulet, to the loud thunderings of the headlong cataract,--and from the soft
whisperings of the gentle breeze, to the angry roar of the desolating tornado; and, finally,
it was here that our first and most enduring lessons of devotion were learned, here that our
first and truest conceptions of the grand and beautiful were acquired, and here that the leading
tone of our intellectual character, such as it may be, was generated and stamped on us for life.

The second part of our story, to which the preceding chapters should be taken, perhaps, as
merely introductory, opens about midsummer, and among that remarkable group of sylvan lakes--nearly
a dozen in number--which, commencing on the wild borders of northerly New Hampshire, and shooting
off in an irregular line some fifty miles northeasterly into the dark and unbroken forests
of Maine, appear on the map, in their strangely shapeless forms and scattered locations, as
if they must have been hurled, by the hand of some Borean giant, down from the North Pole in
a volley of huge ice-blocks, which fell and melted where they now lie, sparkling, like rough
gems, on the shaggy bosom of the wilderness.

Near the centre of an opening of perhaps a dozen acres, about a mile from where the sinuous
Androscoggin debouches full grown, like Minerva from the head of Jupiter, from its parent reservoir,
the picturesque Umbagog, stood a newly rigged log house, of dimensions and finish which indicated
more taste and enterprise than is usually exhibited in the rude habitations of the first settlers.
It was a story and a half high, and the walls were built of solid pine timber, originally roughly
hewed, but recently dressed down with broad axe over the whole outward and inner surfaces so
smoothly that, at a little distance, they presented, with their still visible seams, more the
appearance of the wainscoting of some costly cottage than the humble log cabin. The building
had also been newly shingled, new doors supplied, the windows enlarged, the yard around leveled
off, with other improvements, of a late date, betokening considerable ambition for appearance,
and considerable outlay of means, for so new a place, to fit up a tidy and comfortable abode
for the occupants. In the surrounding field were patches of growing maize, wheat, potatoes,
and some of the common table vegetables; the hay crop for the winter sustenance of the only
cow and yoke of oxen, the best friends of the new settler, having been just cut and stored
in an adjoining log-building, as was evident from the fresh look of the stubble, and the stray
straws hanging to the slivered stumps or bushes in the field, and from the fragrant and far-scenting
locks protruding from the upper and lower windows of the well-crammed receptacle passing under
the name of barn. Beyond this little opening, and bounding it on every side, stood the encircling
wall of woods, through and over which gleamed the bright waters of the far-spreading Umbagog
on the north; while all around, towering up in their green glories, rose, one above another,
the amphitheatric hills, till their lessening individual forms were lost, or mingled in the
vision with the lofty summits of the distant White Mountains in the south and west, and of
the bold detached eminences which shot up from the dark wilderness and studded the horizon
in all other directions.

Such, and in such a locality, was, as the reader probably has already inferred, the residence
which Mark Elwood had pitched upon for beginning life anew. On leaving the city, as represented
in the last chapter, he had, under the goading remembrance of follies left behind, and the
incitements of hope-constructed prospects before, perseveringly pushed on, till he reached
this lone and wild terminus of civilized life; when, finding, a mile beyond the last of the
scattered settlements of the vicinity, a place on which an opening had been made and the walls
and roof of a spacious log house erected, the year before, he had succeeded in purchasing it,
for ready money, at a price which was much below its value, and which left him nearly half
his little fund to be expended in more thoroughly clearing the land, getting in crops, making
the house habitable, and felling an additional tract of forest. And with so much energy and
resolution had he pursued his object of seeing himself and family once more united at a comfortable
home, that, within three months from the time he commenced operations, which was in the first
of the spring months, he had accomplished it all; for his wife and son, rejoicing in the knowledge
of his success which he had communicated to them, and promptly responding to his invitation
to join him, had come on, with their little all of goods and money, in teams hired for the
purpose; and they were now all together fully installed in their new home, pleased with the
novelty and freshness of every thing around them, proud and secure in their conscious independence
and exemption from the dangers and trials they had recently passed through, and contented and
happy in their situation.

The particular time we have taken for the reappearance of the family on this, their new stage
of action, was a warm but breezy afternoon, on one of the last days of July. Elwood was engaged
in his new-mown field, in cutting and grubbing up the bushes and sprouts which had sprung up
during the season around the log-heaps and stumps, and could not easily or conveniently be
cut by the common scythe while mowing the grass. He was no longer robed in the broadcloth and
fine linen, in which, as the rich merchant, he might have been seen, perhaps, one year ago
that day, sauntering about "on 'change" among the solid men of Boston. These had been mostly
worn out or sold during the changing fortunes of the year, and their place was now wisely supplied
by the long tow-frock and the other coarse garments in common use among the settlers. Nor had
his physical appearance undergone a much less change. Instead of the pallid brow, leaden eye,
fleshly look, and the red cheek of the wine-bibber and luxurist of the cities, he exhibited
the embrowned, thin, but firm and healthy face, and the clear and cheerful complexion of the
contented laborer of the country,--tell-tale looks both, which we always encounter with as
much secret disgust in the former as we do with involuntary respect in the latter. He now paused
in his labors, and stood for some time looking about the horizon, as if watching the signs
of the weather; now noting the progress of the haze gathering in the south, and now turning
his cheek first one way and then another, apparently to ascertain the doubtful direction of
the wind, which, from a lively western breeze, had within the last hour lulled down into those
small, fluctuating puffs usually observable when counter-currents are springing up, balancing,
and beginning to strive for the mastery. After a while he moved slowly towards the house, continuing
his observations as he went, till he came near the open window at which Mrs. Elwood was sitting
at her needle-work, from which she occasionally lifted her eyes, and glanced somewhat anxiously
along the path leading down through the woods to a landing-place on the lake; when, looking
round and observing her husband standing near, giving token of being about to speak, she interposed
and said:

"You have seen nothing of Claud, I suppose? What can be the reason why he does not return?
He was to have been at home long before this, was he not?"

"Yes," carelessly replied Elwood, "unless he concluded to take a bout in the woods. He took
his fowling-piece with him, to use in case the trout wouldn't bite, you know. Phillips, the
old hunter, came into the field where we were last night, and said he was out of meat, and
must skirt the lake to-day for a buck. I presume Claud may have joined him. There! hark! that
sounded like Claud's piece," he added, as the distant report of a gun rose from the woods westward
of the lake and died away in swelling echoes on the opposite shore. "And there, again!" he
continued, as another and sharper report burst, the next moment, from the same locality,--"there
goes another, but not his, as he could not have loaded so quick. That must have been Phillips'
long rifle. They are doubtless together somewhere near the Magalloway,--some three miles distant,
I should judge,--and are probably having fine sport with something."

"That may be the case, perhaps," responded Mrs. Elwood. "I wish, however, he would come; for
I cannot yet quite divest myself of the idea that there may be danger in these wild scenes
of the lakes and the woods. But what was you about to say when I first spoke? You were going
to say something, I thought."

"O--yes--why, I was about to say that I had made up my mind to set fire to the slash. It is
dry enough now to get a good burn; and it looks to me a good deal like rain. I wish to get
the land cleared and ready to sow with winter wheat by the first of September; and I don't
like to risk the chance of finding every thing in so good order again."

"There is no danger that the fire will spread, or be blown to the buildings, is there?"

"No, the wind is springing up in the south now, and will drive the fire only towards the lake
in the direction of the landing."

"But Claud may be there."

"Well, if he should be, the fire won't burn up the lake, I think; and, if it besets the path
in the woods, he can come round some other way," jocosely said Elwood, moving away to carry
his purpose into execution.

Having procured a parcel of splinters split from the dry and resinous roots of some old pine
stub,--that never-failing and by no means contemptible substitute for lamp or candle among
the pioneers of a pine-growing country,--he proceeded rapidly to the edge of the slash, as
a tract of felled forest is generally denominated by the first settlers, especially of the
northern States. Here, pausing a moment to mark with his eye the most favorable places to communicate
the fire, he picked his way along the southern end to the farthest side of the tangled mass
of trees of every description composing the slash, which was a piece of some four or five acres,
lying on the western border and extending north and south the whole length of the opening.
And, having reached his destination, and kindled all his splinters into a blaze, he threw one
of them into the thickest nest of pine or other evergreen boughs at hand, and darted back to
his next marked station, where he threw in another of his blazing torches, and so on till he
reached the cleared ground, which was not one moment too soon for his safety. For so dry and
inflammable had every thing there become, under the scorching sun of the preceding fortnight,
which had been relieved by neither rain nor cloud, that, the instant the fire touched the tinder-like
leaves, it flashed up as from a parcel of scattered gunpowder; and, bursting with almost explosive
quickness all around, and swiftly leaping from bough to bough and treetop to treetop, it spread
with such astonishing celerity that he found it hard on his heels, or whirling in a hot cloud
over his head, at every pause he made to throw in a new but now unnecessary torch, in his rapid
and constantly quickened run through the slash. And when, after running some distance into
the open field, to escape the stifling smoke and heat by which he was even there assailed,
he turned round to note more fully the surprising progress that the terrible element he had
thus let loose was making, he beheld all that part of the slash which he had a moment before
passed through already enveloped, from side to side, in a continuous blaze, whose red, curling
crest, mounting every instant higher and higher, was advancing with the seeming speed of a
race-horse on its fiery destination. Half-appalled by the sight of such a sudden and unexpected
outburst of the fire he had kindled, Elwood hurried on to his house, and joined his startled
wife in the yard; when the two took station on an adjoining knoll, and looked down upon the
conflagration in progress with increasing wonder and uneasiness,--so comparatively new was
the scene to them both, and so far did it promise to exceed all their previous conceptions,
in magnitude and grandeur, of any thing of the kind to be met with in the new settlements.
And it was, indeed, a grand and fearful spectacle: For, with constantly increasing fury, and
with the rapidity of the wind before which it was driving, still raged and rolled on the red
tempest of fire. Now surging aloft, and streaking with its winding jets of flame the fiercely
whirling clouds of smoke that marked its advance, and now dying away in hoarse murmurs, as
if to gather strength for the new and more furious outburst that the next moment followed,
it kept on its terrific march till it reached the central elevation, which embraced the most
tangled, densely covered, and combustible part of the slash, and on which had been left standing
an enormous dry pine, that towered so up high above the surrounding forest as to have long
served as a landmark for the hunters and fishermen, in setting their courses through the woods
or over the lake. Here the fiery billow, as if governed by the human tactics of a military
assault, paused, parted, and swept by on either side, till it had inclosed the elevation; when
suddenly it shot up from every side in an hundred converging tongues of flame, which, soon
meeting and expanding into one, quickly enveloped the whole hill in one broad, unbroken robe
of sheeted fire, encompassed and mounted the veteran pine, and around its colossal trunk formed
a huge, whirling pyramid of mingling smoke and flame that rose to the mid-heavens, shedding,
in place of the darkened sun, a lurid glare over the forest, and sending forth the stormy roar
of a belching volcano. The next moment a shower of cinders and the burning fragments of twigs,
bark, and boughs which had been carried high up by the force of the ascending currents, fell
hot and hissing to the earth over every part of the adjoining fields, to and even far beyond
the spot where Elwood and his wife were standing.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Elwood, aroused from the mute amazement with which he and his more
terrified companion had been beholding the scene, as soon as these indications of danger were
thus brought to his very feet. "Good Heavens! this is more than I bargained for. See,--the
fire is catching on the stumps all over the field!"

"The house!" half-screamed Mrs. Elwood. "What is that rising from the shingles up there near
the top of the roof?"

"Smoke, as I am alive!" cried the other, in serious alarm, as he glanced up to the roof, where
several slender threads of smoke were beginning to steal along the shingles. "Run, Alice, run
with the pails for the brook, while I throw up the ladder against the gable. We must be lively,
or within one hour we shall be as houseless as beggars."

"O, where is Claud? where is Claud?" exclaimed the distressed wife and mother, as she flew
to the house to do her husband's bidding.

Yes, where was Claud? At the risk of the charge of purposely tantalizing the reader, we must
break off here, to follow the young man just named, in the unexpected adventures which he also
had experienced during that eventful day. But for this we will take a new chapter.

It was about the middle of the forenoon, on the day marked by the incidents narrated in the
preceding chapter, when Claud Elwood, who had become pretty well initiated into the sports
of the locality, entered his light canoe, with his fishing-tackle and fowling-piece, and pushed
out upon the broad bosom of the forest-girt Umbagog. Having had the best success, when up on
the lake the last time, on the western margin, he pulled away in that direction, and, after
rowing a couple of miles up the lake, he laid down his oar, unrolled his elm-bark cable, and
let down his stone anchor, at a station a furlong or so from the shore.

It was a beautiful spot, and a beautiful day to enjoy it in. From the water's edge rose, deeply
enshrouded in their bright green, flowing, and furbelowed robes of thickly interwoven pines,
the undulating hills, back to the summit level of that long, narrow tongue of forest land,
which, for many miles, only separates the Umbagog from the parallel Magalloway, the noble stream
that here comes rushing down from the British highlands, to join the scarcely larger Androscoggin,
almost at the very outset of its "varied journey to the deep." Turning from this magnificent
swell on the west, the eye, as it wandered to the right over the bright expanse of intervening
waters, next rested on the long, crescent-shaped mountain ridge, behind which slept, in their
still deeper and wilder seclusion, the broad Mooseeluk-maguntic and the Molechunk-a-munk, which,
with the Umbagog, make up the three principal links in this remarkable chain of lakes. Still
farther to the right lay the seemingly boundless, rolling forests, forming the eastern and
southern rim of this basin of the lakes; whose gradually sloping sides, like some old pinnacled
city, were everywhere bristling with the giant forms of the heaven-aspiring pine, and whose
nearer recesses were pierced, in the midst, by the long, lessening line of the gleaming Umbagog;
while around the whole circle of the horizon, scattered here and there far back into the blue
distance, rose mountain after mountain in misty grandeur to the heavens.

After thus slowly sweeping the horizon, to note, for the tenth time, perhaps, the impressive
character of the scenery, whose everywhere intermingling beauty and grandeur he was never tired
of contemplating, Claud withdrew his gaze, and turned his attention to, the more immediate
object of his excursion. After a few moments spent in regulating his hook and line, he strung
his angle-rod, and threw out to see whether he could succeed in tempting, at that unfavorable
hour, the fickle trout from their watery recesses. But all in vain the attempt. Not a trout
was seen stirring the water at the surface, or manifesting his presence around the hook beneath;
and all the endeavors which the tantalized angler made, by changing the bait, and throwing
the line in different directions around him, proved, for the next hour, equally fruitless.
While he was thus engaged, intently watching his line, each moment expecting that the next
must bring him a bite, one of those peculiar, subdued, but far-reaching sounds, which are made
by the grazing of the oar against the side of the boat in rowing, occasionally greeted his
ear from some point to the south of him; though, for a while, nothing was to be seen to indicate
by whom the sounds were produced. Soon, however, a man in a canoe, who had been coasting, unseen,
along the indentures of the shore, and whom Claud instantly recognized as Phillips, the hunter
already named, shot round a neighboring point, and, in a few minutes more, was at his side.

"Well, what luck?" cheerily exclaimed Phillips, a keen, hawk-eyed, self-possessed looking man,
with a round, compact, and sinewy frame. "What luck to-day, young man?"

"None whatever," replied Claud, with an air of disappointment.

"I suppose so, unless you began before ten o'clock."

"But why did you suppose so?"

"O, I knew it from my knowledge of human nature," said the hunter, humorously. "Trout are very
much like other folks, only a great deal more sensitive to heat. Now, you don't see men, who
are well fixed under a cool shade in a sweltering hot day, very anxious to run out bare-headed
in the sun, when there is no call for it; much less, then, the trout, that can't bear the sun
and heat at all. Though there are, probably, a ton of them within a stone's throw of us, not
one will come out with this bright sun; they are lying behind the rocks and old logs at the
bottom, and won't begin to circulate these three hours."

"And are you not a-going to try them?"

"I? No; I would as soon think of fishing now on the top of these hills. Besides this, I have
a different object. I am bound to carry home something that will pass for fresh meat, if it
is nothing but a coon. I shall haul up my canoe somewhere about here; follow up the lake-shore
a mile or so, with the idea of catching a deer in the edge of the water, come there to keep
off the flies; then, perhaps, cross over to the Magalloway, down that, and over to this place;
when, by way of topping off, I will show you, by that time, if you are about here so long,
how trout are taken."

So saying, the hunter dipped his springy oar into the water, and, with a few vigorous strokes,
sent his canoe to the shore, and, having moored it to a root, he glided into the thickets,
and disappeared with a tread so noiseless as to leave Claud, for many minutes, wholly in doubt
whether the man was standing still in the bushes or proceeding on his excursion.

It was now noon, and Claud, seeing no prospect of any immediate success in his piscatory employment,
which had been made to appear to him, by the remarks of the hunter, more discouraging than
ever, drew up his anchor, and rowed to a point of the shore which was embowered by a group
of magnificent pines. Here, finding a cool spring, as well as a refreshing shade, he drew out
his lunch, and very leisurely proceeded to discuss it, with the ice-cold water of the spring
by which he had seated himself for the purpose. His fare was coarse; but it was partaken with
a relish of which those who have never experienced the effects of the air and exercise, incident
to a life in the woods, can have no just conception; and to which the palled appetite of the

                    "vain lords of luxury and ease,
  Whom slumber soothes not, pleasure cannot please,"

is poor in comparison, though all the king's banquets and metropolitan feasts in the world
should vie together to make good the substitute. Claud's life had thus far been, in the main,
a quiet and commonplace one; nothing having occurred to him to arouse those strong and over-mastering
passions to which it is the lot of most of us, at some period of our lives, to become subjected.
It had been checkered, however, by one bit of romance, which, to say the least, had greatly
excited his imagination. About a year previous to the time of which we are now writing, and
one day while he was walking the streets of Boston, a small, closely-enwrapped package was
put in his hand by an unknown boy, who, with the simple announcement, "For you, Sir," turned
quickly away, and made off with the air of one who has completed his mission, and would avoid
being questioned. Glancing within the wrapper, and perceiving it inclosed a small encased picture,
or likeness, of some female, which he thought must have been delivered to him through mistake,
Claud looked hastily round for the messenger, and, not seeing him, he walked backward and forward
along the street, and lingered some time in the vicinity, still expecting the boy would soon
return to claim the package. But, being disappointed in this, he went home, and, retiring to
his room, undid the wrapper, which he carefully but vainly examined for some name, mark, or
other clue to the mystery; and then, with much interest, fell to inspecting the picture. It
was, obviously, a well-painted miniature likeness of a fair, dark-eyed girl, but representing
no remembered face, except in the peculiar expression of the strong and commanding countenance;
which, he thought, either in man or woman, he must have somewhere before encountered. The whole
likeness, indeed, together with the circumstances under which it came into his hands, made,
at the time, a lively impression on his mind; and, keeping the affair wholly to himself, he
often contemplated that fair face in private; and, for months afterwards, he never was in a
public assembly, where the sex were present, without running his eye over it in search of the
original. But, as he never found it, the impression gradually wore away, and, in the exciting
changes that had occurred in the fortunes of his family, it had been nearly obliterated from
his mind; when, that morning, while searching his trunk for some implement belonging to his
gun, he came across the miniature, and put it in his pocket. And now, in the leisure that followed
his repast, he bethought him of it; and, laying it before him on the bed of moss on which he
was reclining, he contemplated it with renewed interest, and that sort of dreamy enthusiasm
which the sudden revival of old associations in such solitudes is apt to awaken in the mind,
especially when those associations are connected, as now, with a matter of mystery and romance.

After indulging in his reveries a while, he put up his miniature, aroused himself from his
day-dream, and rose to his feet when, feeling inclined for some kind of action, he decided
on a short excursion in the woods, in the direction of the Magalloway, where probably he would
fall in with Phillips, and return with him to the lake. Accordingly, after loading his gun
with ball and buckshot, so as to be prepared for any large wild animals he might chance to
encounter, he leisurely took his way through the heavy, ascending forest that lay in his course;
here pausing to note the last night's bed of some solitary bear, and there to trace the marks
of the death-struggle of a victim deer, that, with all its vigilance and wondrous agility,
had been surprised and brought down by the stealthy and far-leaping catamount. The ever-varying
tenants of the forest, also, were constantly presenting as he passed on, some novelty to attract
his unaccustomed eye; now in the smooth, tall shaft of the fusiform fir--the dandy of the forest--standing
up with its beautiful cone-shaped top among its rougher neighbors, trim and straight as the
bonneted cavalier of the old pictures, among the slouchy forms of his homelier but worthier
opponents; now in the low and stocky birch standing on its broad, staunch pedestal of strongly-braced
roots below, and throwing out widely above its giant arms, as if striving to shoulder and stay
up the weight of the superincumbent forest; and now in the imperial pine, proudly lifting its
tall form an hundred feet over the tops of the plebeian trees around, to revel in the upper
currents of the air, or bathe its crowning plumes of living green in the clouds of heaven.

Proceeding in this manner, he at length found himself gradually descending the western slope
of the hill; when he soon arrived in the vicinity of the river, a glimpse of which, together
with a small clearing and a tidy-looking cottage on its banks, he now caught through the tops
of the intervening trees. While still walking on, his attention was attracted to a comparatively
open place in the woods, where, at some previous period, a severe fire had killed all the smaller
trees, and consumed the underbrush, which had been replaced by scattering shrubs of the white
poplar intermingled with a plentiful growth of the black-raspberry, whose luscious fruit--the
first to reward the pioneer, and for which he has to contend sharply with the birds and bears
to obtain his share--was now beginning to ripen. As he was entering this open space, which
appeared to extend some distance round the point of a screening knoll, he was suddenly brought
to a stand by a noise somewhere in the bushes or woods ahead, such as had never before saluted
his ears. It was like nothing else, or if any thing else, like the wild snorting of a frightened
horse prolonged into the dying note of the steam whistle. Claud recoiled a step before the
unaccustomed sound, and involuntarily cocked and raised his gun to his shoulder. But he was
allowed no time to speculate. The next instant, the loud and piercing shriek of a female, nearer
but in the same direction, rose and rang through the forest. With a speed quickened at every
step by the rapidly repeated cry of distress, he bounded towards the spot, when, turning the
point of the knoll, he suddenly found himself in full view of the object of his solicitude,--a
girl, in the full bloom of youthful beauty, who, with bonnet thrown back and her loosened hair
streaming in wild disorder over her shoulders, instantly rushed forward for his protection.
Claud stopped short, in mute surprise at the unexpected apparition; for the first glance at
her face told him that the original of his mysterious miniature was before him,--before him,
here in the woods! Breathless and speechless in her wild affright, she pointed, with a glance
over her shoulder, to a thick, high tangle of large, strongly limbed, knotty, windfallen trees,
a short distance behind her, and fled past him to the rear. Looking in the indicated direction,
the startled and perplexed young man distinguished the outlines of a monstrous moose madly
plunging at the woody barrier, and trying to force his enormous antlers through the unyielding
limbs preparatory to leaping it in pursuit of his victim, who had eluded the infuriated animal,
and barely escaped the fatal blows of his uplifted hoofs, by creeping under the providentially
placed obstruction. Claud instantly raised his piece, when, feeling uncertain of his aim, he
withheld his fire, and stood waiting for a fairer view. But, before he could obtain it, the
moose, tired of vain attempts to force his passage through the bristling barricade of logs
and limbs before him, disappeared for one moment, but the next came crashing round the nearest
end of it, and, with renewed demonstrations of rage and hostility, made directly for the new
opponent he beheld in his way. Still unalarmed for his own safety, Claud waited with levelled
gun till his formidable assailant was within forty yards of him, when he took a quick aim and
fired. Reeling under the discharge of his heavily loaded piece, and blinded by the smoke, he
could not, at first, see the effect of his fire; but when he did so, the next instant, it was
only to behold the monster brute, maddened, not stopped, by the flesh wounds inflicted, rushing
on him with a force and fury which compelled him to leap suddenly aside, to avoid being beat
into the earth by those terrible hoofs, which he saw lifted higher and higher, at each approaching
step, for his destruction. Mindful, in his peril, of the precautions already learned from the
hunters, Claude, while the moose, whose tremendous impetus was driving him straight ahead,
could break up, so as to turn in the pursuit,--Claud made, with all the speed of which he was
master, for a huge hemlock, luckily standing at no great distance on his right; a course which
he thought would divert the monster from pursuit of the maiden, and, at the same time, best
insure his own safety. But, so prodigious was the rushing speed of the foiled and now doubly
exasperated moose, that the imperilled huntsman had barely time to reach the sheltering tree
and dodge behind it, before the hotly pursuing foe was at his heels, rasping and tearing with
his spiked antlers the rough bark of the tree, in his attempts to follow round it near and
fast enough to overtake and strike down his intended victim. Round and round then sped both
pursuer and pursued, as fast as the frantic rage of the one, and the keen instinct of self-preservation
in the other, could impel them. Although the moose, from the great width of his interfering
horns, was compelled to sweep round the tree in a circle requiring him to go over double the
distance travelled by Claude, yet so much greater was his speed, that it called for the utmost
exertions of the latter to keep clear of the battle-axe blows which he heard falling every
instant with fatal force behind him. His gun had already been struck, shivered, and beat from
his hand; and, as he glanced over his shoulder and saw the fierce and glaring eyes of his ruthless
pursuer, and his uplifted and forward-thrown hoofs striking closer and closer to his heels
at every bound, a sense of his deadly peril flashed over his mind with that strange and paralyzing
effect which the first full conviction of impending death often produces on the stoutest hearts.
He felt his strength giving way, his brain beginning to whirl, and he was on the point of yielding
himself to his fate; when a stream of smoke and flame accompanied the startling report of a
rifle, shot out from the edge of a neighboring thicket. The moose gave a convulsive start,
floundered forward on his knees, swayed backward and forward an instant, then fell over broad-side
into the bushes with a heavy crash, straightened out, gasped, and died.

"Dunno but you'll think I waited too long, young man," cried Phillips, now advancing with a
quick, leaping step from his covert. "The fact was, I felt, on seeing you getting into such
close quarters, that I had better be rather particular about my aim, so as to stop him at once;
besides that, I was at first a little out of breath. I had heard the fellow blow when an hundred
rods off,--then the woman scream,--then your gun; and, thinking like enough there would be
trouble, I legged it for the spot, and got to my stand just as he treed you."

"I feel very grateful to you, Mr. Phillips, for this timely rescue," responded Claud, recovering
his composure. "This, I suppose, is the far-famed moose?"

"Yes, and a bouncer at that," replied the hunter, going up and, placing his foot on the broad
and still quivering flank of the huge animal. "Good twenty hands high, and weighs, well, not
much short of fifteen hundred, I should say."

"But are they often thus dangerous?" asked Claud.

"Not very often, perhaps," rejoined the hunter. "But still the bull moose, at this season of
the year, is sometimes, when wounded, about as ugly a customer as you meet with in the woods.
This fellow I judge to have been oncommon vicious, as he begun his tantrums before he was touched
at all, it seems. I dunno but 'twas the woman put the devil into him, as women do into two-legged
animals sometimes,--don't they, young man?"

"The woman? O yes, the young lady," said Claud, reminded of his duty as a gallant by the remark,
though unwilling to appropriate to himself the prophetic joke with which it was coupled. "Where
is she? I must go and see to her."

"She has already seen to herself, I guess," said the hunter. "As I was coming up, I glimpsed
her cutting round and running, like a wild turkey, for the clearing, to which the moose had
cut off her retreat. She has reached the house by this time, doubtless; for it is hard by,
down on the river here, a hundred rods or such a matter."

"Who is she? Do you know the family?" eagerly inquired the young man.

"No," answered the hunter. "They are new-comers in these parts."

"What could have brought her here so far into the woods?" persisted Claud.

"The raspberries, very likely," said the other, indifferently, while taking out and examining
the edge of his knife. "But come, we must get this moose into some condition, so that he will
keep; then be off to let the settlers know of our luck. And early to-morrow morning, we will,
all hands, come up the river in boats, and distribute him. He will make fresh meat enough to
supply the whole settlement."

The hunter now, with the assistance of his new pupil in the craft, proceeded to dressing the
moose, the process of which, bleeding, disemboweling, and partially skinning, was soon completed;
when, cutting some stout green skids with the hatchet he ever carried in his belt, and inserting
the ends under the bulky carcass, the two contrived to raise it, by means of old logs rolled
up for the purpose, several feet from the ground, so as to insure a free circulation of air
beneath it. This being done, the hunter kindled two log fires, one on each side, to keep off,
he said, the wolves and other carnivorous animals. They then, after cutting out the tongue
and lip, which are esteemed the tidbits of this animal, took up their line of march for the
lake, which, with the long, rapid lope of the woodsman, measured off, as usual, in Indian file,
and with little or no interrupting conversation, they reached in a short time, and without
further adventure.

"Now," said the hunter, as he reached the spot where his canoe was tied, and turned round towards
his lagging companion,--"now, sir, what say you to taking a five-pound trout?"

"Perfectly willing," replied Claud, smiling; "and I would even take up with a smaller one."

"Well, I won't,--that is, not much smaller; and I think I'll have one of at least the size
I named."

"What makes you so confident?"

"Because, it being a hot, shiny morning, they took to their coverts early, and must be sharp-set,
by this time. Besides that, it is just about the best time for them that could be got up: a
deep cloud, as you see, is coming over the sun, and this wind is moving the water to the bottom.
All sizes will now be coming out, and the big ones, like big folks, will make all the little
ones stand back till their betters are served."

Each now taking to his canoe, they pushed out some twenty or thirty rods into the lake, cast
anchor, and threw out their lines. Claud, who baited with grubs, soon had drawn in two, weighing
as many pounds a piece, and began to feel disposed to banter the hunter, who had baited with
a flap of moose-skin, which he had brought along with him, and which, to Claud, seemed little
likely to attract the fishes to his hook. But he soon found himself mistaken; for, turning
to give utterance to what was passing in his mind, he beheld the other dallying with a trout,
which he had hooked, and now held flapping on the surface of the water, evidently much larger
than either of his own.

"That is a fine one!" cried Claud. "Why don't you pull him in?"

"Not big enough," said the hunter, in reply to the question; while he turned to the fish with
an impatient "Pshaw! what work the cretur makes of it! Hop off, hop off, you fool! There,"
he added, as the trout at length broke away and disappeared, "there, that is right. Now be
off with yourself till you grow bigger, and give me a chance at the fine fellow whose tail
I saw swashing up round here just now."

The hunter then carefully adjusted his bait, and threw out the whole lingth of his line. After
alternately sinking his hook, and then drawing it to the surface, for two or three throws,
the line suddenly straightened, moved slowly backward at first, then swept rapidly round and
round, or darted off in sharp short angles, with downward and forward plunges so quick and
powerful as to make the stout sapling pole sway and bend, like a whipstock, in the steadying
hands of the hunter. For four or five minutes he made no attempt to draw in his prize, but
let the fish have full play to the length of its tether, till its efforts had become comparatively
feeble; when, slowly bringing it alongside, he took the line in his hand, and, with a quick
jerk, landed the noble fellow safely on the bottom of the canoe.

"There, sir!" exclaimed the hunter, seizing the trout by the gills, and triumphantly holding
it up to view, "there is about what I bargained for: two feet long, not an inch shorter,--seven
pounds weight, and not an ounce lighter! Now, being satisfied, I am done."

"What, leave off with such luck?" asked Claud in surprise.

"Yes, young man," said the other, "I hold it all but a downright sin to draw from God's storehouse
a single pound more than is really needed. This will last my family as long as it will keep,
this warm weather, with the plenty of moose-meat we shall have. Any thing more is a waste,
which I will not commit. And you, sir, who have just hauled in your third and largest one,
I perceive, and have now nearly as many pounds as I have,--what can you want of more? Come,
let us pull up and off for our homes. It is nearly time, any way."

Although loth to break off his sport, yet inwardly acknowledging the justness of the hunter's
philosophy, Claud reluctantly drew in and wound up his line, hauled in his anchor, and, handling
his oar, shot out abreast of the other, who had already got under way, into the heaving waters
of the now agitated lake. Side by side, with the quick and easy dip of their elastic single
oars, the rowers now sent their light, sharp canoes, dug out to the thinness of a board from
the straight-grained dry pine, rapidly ahead over the broken and subdued waves of the cove,
in which they had been stationed, till they rounded the intervening woody point which had cut
off the view of the lower end of the lake.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Claud, starting back, with suspended oar, as now, coming out in view
of the lake, his eye fell on the huge pillar of smoke, which, deeply enshrouding that part
of the distant forest lying east of the outlet of the lake with its expanded base, was rolling
upward its thousand dark, doubling folds; "good Heavens, Phillips, look yonder! Where and what
is it? It looks like a burning city."

"It is a fire, of course, and no small one, either; but where, I can't exactly make out," slowly
responded the hunter, intently fixing his keen eyes on the magnificent spectacle which had
thus unexpectedly burst on their view in the distance. "Let me see," he continued, running
his eye along the border of the lake in search of his old landmarks: "there is the tall stub
that stands half a mile down on the west bank of the river, and is now just visible in the
edge of the smoke; but where is the king pine, that stands nearly against it, over in your
slash? Young man," he added, with a startled air, "was your father calculating to burn that
slash to-day?"

"No, unless it looked likely to rain."

"Well it does look likely to rain, in the shape of a shower gathering yonder, which has already
given out one or two grumbles of distant thunder, if my ears served me as well as usual."

"Yes; but such a smoke and fire can't come from our slash. It must be a larger and more distant
one."

"So I thought at first; but I begin to think different. Do you see that perpendicular, broken
line of light, occasionally flashing out from the smoke, and extending upward to a height that
no ground fire ever reached? That is your king pine in a blaze from bottom to top. Hark! why,
I can hear it roaring clear here, like a distant hurricane. It must be a prodigious hot fire
to make all that show and noise."

"Can it endanger our buildings?" asked Claud, in alarm.

"I am afraid so," replied the other, with a dubious shake of the head. "But hark again! 'tis
your father's horn blowing for help."

"Let us row, then, as for our lives!" cried the now thoroughly aroused and agitated young man.
"If any thing happens before I get there, I shall never forgive myself for my prolonged absence,
to the last day of my life. You will join me in going there, will you not?"

"Yes, and outstrip you by half a mile. But that won't be the best way. Throw your anchor into
the stern of my canoe, and fall in behind. There; now keep the anchor-line slack between us,
if you can," rapidly said the hunter, bending his sinewy form to the work, with a power that
sent his canoe half out of the water at every stroke of his swiftly-falling oar.

Leaving them to bound over the billowy waters of the lake towards their destination, with all
the speed which strong arms and nerves made tense with excitement could impart, let us anticipate
their arrival, to note what befell the objects of their anxieties, whom we so abruptly left
in their perils from the fire, to bring up the other incidents of the day having an equal bearing
on the story, with which we have thus far occupied the present somewhat extended chapter.

The immediate danger to their house from the fire, with which we left the alarmed Elwood and
his wife contending, was, indeed, easily overcome by dashing pails of water over the roof.
But scarcely had they achieved this temporary triumph in one place over an element proverbially
terrible when it becomes master, before it was seen kindling into flickering blazes on the
roof of the barn and the locks of hay protruding from its windows and the crevices between
the logs of which it was built. Here, also, they soon succeeded in extinguishing the fire in
the same manner. They were not, however, allowed a moment's respite from either their labors
or alarms. The fences were by this time on fire in numerous places; and the chips and wood
in the door-yard were seen to be igniting from the sparks and cinders which, every instant,
fell thicker and hotter around their seemingly devoted domicil. The fences, after a few vain
attempts to save them, were given up a prey to the devouring element, and the whole exertions
of the panting and exhausted sufferers were turned to saving their buildings; and even at that
they had no time to spare; for, so hot had the air become from the burning slash, which, through
its whole length, was now glowing with the red heat of a furnace, that every vestige of moisture
had soon disappeared from the drenched roofs, and they were again on fire.

"Is there no way of raising help?" exclaimed Mrs. Elwood, in her extremity, as she witnessed
these increasing manifestations of danger.

"I never thought of that," said Elwood. "Hand me the dinner-horn. If there are any within hearing,
they will understand, with the appearance of this fire, that we are calling for assistance."

With a few sharp, loud blasts, Elwood threw aside the horn, and again flew to the work of extinguishing
the fires where they became most threatening. And thus, for nearly another hour, the distressed
settler and his heroic wife, suffering deeply from heat and exhaustion, toiled on, without
gaining the least on the fearful enemy by which they were so closely encompassed. And they
were on the point of giving up in despair, when the welcome shout of "Help at hand!" from the
ringing voice of the hunter, then just entering the opening, revived hope in their sinking
hearts. The next moment that help was on the spot; but it was unnecessary. A mightier Hand
was about to interpose. From the bold, black van of the hurrying and deeply-charged rack of
cloud, that had now unheeded gained the zenith, a stream of fire, before which all other fires
paled into nothing, at that instant descended on the top of the burning pine, and, rending
it from top to bottom by the single explosion, sent its wide-flying fragments in blazing circles
to the ground. A sharp, rattling sound, terminating in a cannon-like report, followed, shaking
the rent and crashing heavens above, and the bounding earth beneath, in the awful concussion.
Before the stunned and blinded settlers had recovered from the shock, or the deep roll of the
echoing thunder had died away among the distant mountains, another and more welcome roar saluted
their ears. It was that of the rapidly-approaching rain striking the foliage of the neighboring
forest; and, scarcely had they time to gain the cover of the house, before the deluging torrents
poured over it with a force and fury beneath which the quelled fires speedily sunk, hissing,
into darkness and death.

CHAPTER VII.

  "Wo is the youth whom Fancy gains,
  Winning from Reason's hands the reins."

The morning of the next day, serene and beautiful as a bride decked in her fresh robes and
redolent in her forest perfumery, came smiling over the wilderness hills of the east, to greet
our little pioneer family on their deliverance from the perils of yesterday. The war of the
elements, that had raged so fearfully round their seemingly devoted domicile, had all passed
away; and, after sleeping off the fatigue and excitement of the previous day, they rose to
look around them, to find themselves safe, and call themselves satisfied. Their buildings had
been, after all, but very slightly injured, and their green crops but little damaged; their
fences, indeed, were mostly consumed; but these could be replaced from the timber of the burnt
slash, with little more labor than would be required to pile up and burn that timber where
it lay. But, whatever such additional labor might be, it was more than compensated by the very
intensity of the fire which caused it, and which, at the same time, had so utterly consumed
all the underbrush, limbs of the trees, and even the smaller trees themselves, that weeks less
than with ordinary burns would be required in the clearing. Elwood, therefore, came in from
his morning survey happily disappointed in the supposed extent of his losses; and, joining
his wife and son in the house, whom he found busily engaged in cutting up, mealing, and placing
in the hissing pan over the fire the broad, red, and rich-looking pieces of trout, the fruit
of yesterday's excursion on the lake, he told them, with a gratified air, the result of his
observation, which, on a merchant-like calculation of loss and gain from the conflagration,
he made out to show even a balance in his favor. Mrs. Elwood rejoiced with her husband on the
happy turn of affairs, and wondered why her son did not manifest the same flow of spirits.
But the latter, for some reason or other, appeared unusually abstracted during the whole morning;
and, when asked to relate the particulars of his perilous adventure with the moose, which he
had the evening before but briefly mentioned, he exhibited a hesitation, and a sort of shying
of the question, in that part of the adventure relating to the rescued girl, which did not
escape the quick eye of the mother. It was evident to her that something was kept back. But
what that something was she was wholly unable to conjecture. It was so unusual for her son
to show any lack of frankness that the circumstance disturbed her, and, though she knew not
exactly why, sent a boding chill over her heart, which caused her also to become thoughtful
and silent. And Mr. Elwood, who possessed none of those mental sympathies which, in some, will
often be found unconsciously mingling with the thoughts of others, so far, at least, as to
apprise them of the general character and drift of those thoughts, now, in his turn, wondered
why his wife, as well as son, should all at once become so unsocial and taciturn.

It will doubtless be generally said that this mental sympathy, or the intuitive perception
of the main drift of what is passing in the minds of others, has an existence only in the fancy
of fictionists. We, however, after years of close observation, have wholly ceased to doubt
its reality. Scores of times have we been affected by thoughts and intentions which we knew
must have a source other than in our own mind. Scores of times have we, in this manner, been
put on our guard against the selfish designs which others were harboring to our disadvantage,
of which no tongue had informed us, and of which, afterwards, we had tangible proof. And, on
careful inquiry among persons of thought and sensibility, we have become convinced that the
principle holds good to a very considerable extent among others; and that attention to the
subject is only wanting to make it a generally received opinion. It was this principle that
now affected Mrs. Elwood: not that she had the most distant idea that her son harbored aught
of wrong intention toward any of his family, but she felt that his mind was somehow becoming
subservient to schemes which existed somewhere in the minds of others, which concerned her
or her family. But she felt rather than thought this; and, knowing she could give no reason
for her singular impression, prudently kept it to herself.

"Good-morning, good-morning, gentlefolks," rang out the cheery voice of the hunter, who now
looked in at the door as the Elwoods were rising from their breakfast. "Things look a little
altered round here, this morning. I should hardly have known the place without the king pine,
which, in its prime, was a tree of a thousand."

"That tree was an old acquaintance of yours, I suppose," remarked Elwood.

"Yes, of twenty years' standing; and I shall miss and mourn it as an old friend. But it died
like a monarch, yielding only under the direct blow of the Almighty."

"Then you consider the lightning more especially the instrument of Heaven than the wind, fire,
and other elements, do you?"

"To be sure I do. Wind, we know what it is; fire we know; water we also know; because we can
see them, touch them, measure them. But who can see a piece of lightning when not in motion?
who can find the least fragment of it after it has struck? It rends a tree, makes a smooth
hole through a board, and ploughs up the ground. But go to the tree, and there is nothing there;
look under the board, it is the same; and dig along the furrow it has ploughed to where it
stopped, and it is not there, as it would be if it was any material thing, like a bullet, an
axe, knife, or other instrument that produces such effects, in all other instances. No, 'tis
not matter; it is the power of God; and your philosophers, who pretend to explain it, don't
know what they are talking about. But enough of that. I came here to rally you out to go up
the river with the rest of us, for the moose. You will both go, won't you?"

"Claud will, doubtless," replied Mr. Elwood. "Indeed, I have half a mind to go myself."

"Perhaps Claud, having had a fatiguing excursion yesterday, will stay at home, and let his
father go, to-day," suggested Mrs. Elwood.

"It was not at all fatiguing, mother," responded Claud.

"The wind blows up the river to-day, ma'am," said the hunter, with a knowing look.

Little more was said; but the result was that Claud and the hunter now soon went off together
on the proposed excursion. On reaching the mouth of the Magalloway, they found four others
waiting for them, with their canoes, when the whole party commenced their little voyage up
the river. After leisurely rowing against the here slow and gentle current of the stream for
an hour or two, they reached their destination, and hauled up at a point most convenient for
gaining the spot where the slaughtered moose had been left the evening before. Led on by the
hunter, all now started for the place just named, except Claud, who, under pretence of taking
a short gunning bout in the woods, and of soon coming round to join his companions, proceeded,
as soon as the latter were out of sight, with slow and hesitating steps, up the river, for
the opening and supposed residence of the fair unknown who had so long been the object of his
wondering fancies, and who had, notwithstanding the exciting scenes he had witnessed at home,
been the especial subject of his dreams after he retired to rest the night before. But what
a strange, wayward, timid, doubting, and inconsistent thing is the tender passion in its incipient
stages, especially when that passion has principally been wrought up by the imagination! He
soon came to the clearing of which he was in quest, and obtained a clear view of the, to him,
charmed cottage. But, instead of entering the opening directly, he went nearly round it, frequently
pausing and advancing nearly to the edge of the woods; but as often retreating, being unable
quite to make up his mind to show himself at all to the inmates of the cottage. Once he gave
it up entirely, and started off for his companions. But, after he had proceeded a dozen rods,
he came again to a stand, hesitated a while, and, as if ashamed of his irresolution, wheeled
rapidly about, proceeded, with a quick, firm step, to the border of the woods, struck directly
for the house, and, with assumed unconcern, marched up to the door,--where he was met, not
by the young lady he expected first to see, but by her father. But who was that father? To
his utter surprise, it was his father's old tempter and ruiner, the dark and inscrutable Gaut
Gurley!

With a manner, for him, unusually gracious, Gurley extended his hand to Claud; ushered him
into the house; formally introduced him to his wife, an ordinary, abject-looking woman; and
then to his daughter, the fair, dark-eyed, tall, shapely, and every way magnificent Avis Gurley,
the girl who had so long, but unwittingly, been the object of the young man's dreamy fancies.

"I have but very lately discovered," remarked Gurley, who seemed to feel himself called on
to lead off in the conversation, after the usual commonplace remarks had been exchanged, "I
have but lately discovered that I had, by a singular coincidence, again cast my lot in the
same settlement with your family. Having made up my mind, a few months ago, to try a new country,
and coming across the owner of this place, who was on a journey in New Hampshire, and who offered
to sell and move off at once, I came on with him, struck a bargain, returned for my family,
and brought them here about a fortnight ago. But, having been absent most of the time since,
I didn't mistrust who my neighbors were."

"And you probably perceived, sir," said Avis, turning to Claud, with a smile, "you probably
perceived, in your yesterday's adventure up here in the woods, that I have been in as bad a
predicament as my father."

"How is that, Avis?" asked Gurley.

"Why, father," responded the other, "Mr. Elwood will readily suppose that I should not have
been straying into the wood for flowers and berries, had I known we had any such neighbors
as the one from whose pursuit he so kindly rescued me last evening."

"I was as much surprised at the ferocity of the animal as you were, I presume," said Claud,
in reply. "And I was far more indebted to the hunter, Phillips, for my own rescue, than you
were to me for yours. I merely turned the furious brute aside. It was he who, coming up in
the nick of time, brought him dead to the earth."

"I supposed there were two of you," remarked Gurley. "I was half a mile up the river, yet I
heard the firing plain enough; and, returning soon after, and hearing my daughter's story,
I went to the place; but, by that time, you had dressed the animal and were gone. By the voices
I heard in the woods, a short time ago, I concluded you came up, with others, for the beef."

"We did. You here should certainly be entitled to a liberal share. Will you not go up there?"

"Yes; I was thinking about it before you came in. I will go; but, as I wish to go a short distance
into the woods, partly in another direction, I will now walk on and come round to the spot;
and, if I don't meet you there, you may just tell your father how surprised I have been to
find myself again in the same neighborhood with himself."

"Umph!" half audibly exclaimed the hitherto mute wife, with a look that seemed to say, "What
a bouncer he is telling now!" and she was evidently about to say something, comporting with
the significant exclamation, but a glance from her husband, as he passed out of the door, quelled
her into silence.

On the departure of Gurley, his wife rose and left the room; when Claud, unexpectedly finding
himself alone with his fair companion, instead of entering into the easy conversation with
her which the dictates of common gallantry would seem to require, soon began to manifest signs
of constraint and embarrassment, which did not escape the eye of the young lady, and which
caused her no little surprise and perplexity. She knew nothing of what had been passing in
his mind, nor once dreamed of the circumstance which had first impressed her image there. She
had, indeed, known nothing of the Elwoods, except what she had heard her father say of them
as a family, with whose head he had in some way been formerly connected in business. Had she
been asked, she would doubtless have recalled the fact that her father had, the year before,
employed an artist to paint a miniature likeness of her, which he subsequently pretended to
have sent to a relative of his residing in Quebec, and she never entertained the least suspicion
that it was not thus properly disposed of. She had never seen Claud till yesterday, when he
so opportunely appeared for her rescue; and, even then, she had no idea who it was to whom
she had thus become indebted. She, however, had been much prepossessed with his appearance
and manly bearing, and felt a lively sense of gratitude for the voluntary service; and when,
by the introduction of her father, she became apprised of the character of her deliverer, she
felt doubly gratified that he had turned out to be one who, she believed, would not take any
mean advantage of the obligation. For these reasons, she could not understand why he should
appear so reserved, unless it was that she had failed to interest him; and, finally concluding
that this must be the case, she did that which, with her maidenly pride and high spirit, she
would otherwise have scorned to do, she exerted herself to the utmost to interest and please
him; and, when he rose to return to his companions, she followed him into the yard, and smilingly
said:

"You are fond of gunning excursions, are you not, Mr. Elwood?"

"Yes, O yes, quite so," replied Claud, with awkward hesitation.

"And would not an occasional excursion in this direction be as pleasant as any other?" she
asked, with playful significance.

But, instead of replying in the same spirit, the bewildered young man turned, and sent a gaze
into the depths of her lustrous dark eyes, so serious and intense that it brought a blush to
her cheek; when, stammering out his intention of often taking her house in his way in future,
he hurriedly bade her good-by, and departed, leaving her more perplexed than ever.

As for Claud, it would be difficult to describe his sensations on leaving the house, or make
any thing definite out of the operations of his mind. Both heart and brain were working tumultuously,
but not in unison. The train which his imagination had been laying was on the point of being
kindled into, a blaze by the reality. He knew it; he felt it; but he knew also that it was
the part of wisdom to smother the flame while it yet might be controlled. The unexpected and
startling discovery which he had just made, that the girl who had so wrought upon his fancy,
both when seen in the picture and met in the original, was the daughter of Gaut Gurley, raised
difficulties and dangers in the path he found himself entering, which his judgment told him
could only be avoided by his immediate desistance. For he was well aware how deeply rooted
was his mother's aversion to this man, and how fatal had been his influence over his father,
who had but a few months before escaped from his toils, and then only, perhaps, because there
was no more to be gained by keeping him in them any longer. A connection with the daughter,
therefore, however opposite in character from her father, would not only greatly mar his mother's
happiness, but in all probability lead to a renewal of the intimacy between his father and
Gurley; an event which he himself felt was to be deprecated. But the Demon of Sophistry, who
first taught self-deceiving man how to make "the wish father to the thought," here interposing,
whispered to the incipient lover that his father had reformed, and why not then Gaut Gurley?
This reasoning, however, could not be made to satisfy his judgment; and again commenced the
struggle between head and heart, one pulling one way and the other in another way,--too often
an unequal struggle, too often like one of those contests between man and wife, where reason
succumbs and will comes off triumphant.

Such were the fluctuating thoughts and purposes which occupied the agitated bosom of Claud
Elwood, in his solitary walk to the place where the boats had been left, and where the subject
was now driven from his mind, for a while, by the appearance of his companions and the merry
jokes of the hunter. They had cut up the moose meat, which they had found in good condition,
and brought all they deemed worth saving down to the landing. And, being now ready to embark,
they apportioned the meat among the different canoes, and rowed with the now favoring current
rapidly down the river together till they reached its mouth, when they separated, and bore
their allotted portions of the moose to their respective homes.

For the two succeeding days and nights the hapless Claud was the prey of conflicting emotions,--the
more oppressive because he carefully kept them pent up in his own bosom. He dared not make
the least allusion before his parents to the lady whom they knew he had rescued, or his visit
to her home, for he could not do so without revealing the fact that the dreaded Gaut Gurley,
with his family, had found his way into the vicinity; while, if he did disclose this fact,
he felt that he could not hold up his head before them till he had conquered his feelings towards
the daughter. And sometimes he thought he had conquered them, and resolved that he would never
see her again. But, brooding over his feelings in the solitudes of the woods, he only cherished
and fanned the flame he was thinking to extinguish; and he again relapsed,--again paused,--again
"resolved, re-resolved, and did the same;" for, on the third day, under the excuse of taking
another excursion on the lake, he was drawn, as surely as the vibrating needle to the pole,
to the beautiful load-star of the Magalloway.

Suspecting the state of young Elwood's feelings towards her, and fearing that she might have
been too forward in her advances at their last interview, Avis Gurley, this time, received
him with a dignity and maidenly reserve, which, when contrasted with her former sociability
and cordiality of manner, seemed to him like studied coolness. This soon led him, in turn,
to sue for favor. And so earnestly did he pursue his object, that, before he was aware of what
he was saying, he had revealed the secret of his heart. She received his remarks in respectful
silence, but gave no indication by which he could judge whether the inadvertent disclosure
was pleasing or otherwise, except what might be gathered from her increased cordiality on other
subjects, to which she now adroitly turned the conversation. This was just enough to encourage
him, and at the same time leave him in that degree of doubt and suspense which generally operate
as the greatest incentive to persevere in the pursuit of an object. It proved so in his case;
and, to this natural incentive to persevere, was now added another, that of respect for her
character,--a respect which every hour's conversation with her enhanced, and which he might
accord to her with entire justice. Gaut Gurley, like many other bad men, was proud of having
a good daughter. He early perceived that she inherited all that was comely and good in him,
physically and morally, without any of his defects or faults of character. And, desirous so
to rear her as to make the most of her natural endowments, and so, at the same time, that her
character should not be marred by his example, he had been at considerable expense with her
education, and had even deported himself with much circumspection in her presence. This, as
will be readily inferred of one of his designing character, he did from a mixed motive: partly
from parental pride and affection, and partly to make her, through some advantageous marriage,
subservient to his own personal interests.

In this state of affairs between Claud and Avis, closed this, their second interview. Another,
and another, and yet another, succeeded at brief intervals. And so rapid is the course of love,
when springing up in solitudes like these, where nothing occurs to divert the gathering current,
but every thing conspires to increase it,--where to our young devotees all around them seemed
to reflect their own feelings,--where the aeolian music of the whispering pines that embowered
their solitary walks seemed but to give voice to the melody that filled their own hearts,--where
to them the birds all sang of love,--where love smiled upon them in the pensive beams of the
moon, glistened in the stars, and was stamped on all the expanse of blue sky above, and on
all the forms of beauty on the green earth beneath,--so rapid, we repeat, is the course of
love, thus born, and thus fostered, that a fortnight had scarcely elapsed before they had both
yielded up heart and soul to the dominion of the well-named blind god, and uttered their mutual
vows of love and constancy.

This was the sunshine of their love; but the storms were already gathering in the distance.

CHAPTER VIII.

  "The sigh that lifts her breastie comes.
  Like sad winds frae the sea,
  Wi' sic a dreary sough, as wad
  Bring tears into yer e'e."

When Claud Elwood reached home, on the eventful visit to the Magalloway which resulted in the
exchange of vows between him and Avis Gurley, as intimated at the close of the last chapter,
he at once suspected, from the sad and troubled looks of his mother and the disturbed manner
of his father, that the secret of his late visits abroad, as well as of the unexpected advent
of the family visited, had, in some way, become known to them in his absence. A feeling of
mingled delicacy and self-condemnation, however, prevented him from making any inquiries; and,
with a commonplace remark, which was received in silence, he took a seat, and, with much inward
trembling, awaited the expected denouement. But it did not come so soon nor in so harsh terms
as he expected. There are occasions when we feel so deeply that we are reluctant to begin the
task of unburdening our minds; and, when we do speak out, it is oftener in sorrow than in anger.
It was so in the present instance. Mr. Elwood had that day been abroad among the settlers,
and, for the first time, learned not only that Gaut Gurley had moved with his family into the
settlement, but that Claud was courting his daughter, and a match already settled on between
them. On his return home, Elwood felt almost as much reluctance in making known his discoveries
to his wife as Claud had before him; for he well knew how deeply they would disquiet her. But,
soon concluding there would be no wisdom in attempting concealment, he told her what he had
heard. As he had anticipated, the news fell like a sudden thunderclap on her heart. She had
experienced, indeed, many strange misgivings respecting her son's late mysterious absences;
but she was not prepared for such a double portion of ill-omened news as she deemed this to
be, and it struck her mute with dismay, for it at once brought a cloud over the future, which
to her eye was dark with portents. Elwood himself was also obviously considerably disquieted
by the news, showing no little uneasiness and excitement,--an excitement, perhaps, resembling
that which is said to be manifested by a bird in the presence of the devouring reptile. He
doubtless would gladly have been relieved from any further connection with Gaut. He doubtless
would gladly have avoided even the slightest renewal of their former acquaintance. But, for
reasons which he had never disclosed, he felt confident he should not long be suffered to enjoy
any such exemption. And feeling, for the same reasons, how weak he should be in the hands of
that man, he was troubled, far more troubled than he would have been willing to own, at the
discoveries of the day, even if that part of it relating to the intimacy of his son and Gaut's
daughter should prove, as he believed, a mere conjecture.

It was at this juncture, and before a word of comment had been offered either by Mrs. Elwood
or her husband on the news he had related, that Claud arrived and entered the room.

"Well, God's will be done!" sadly uttered Mrs. Elwood, at length breaking the embarrassing
silence, but without raising her eyes from her work, which lay neglected in her lap.

"What does mother mean?" doubtfully asked Claud, turning to his father.

"I have been telling her some unexpected news, which greatly disturbs her mind,--more than
is necessary, perhaps," replied the other, with poorly assumed indifference.

"What news?" rejoined the son, having made up his mind that, if his own secret was involved,
as he supposed, the long dreaded eclaircissement might as well come now as ever.

"Why, that Gaut Gurley has moved with his family into the settlement. And that is not all;
but the rest of it, which relates to a lately-formed intimacy between you and Gaut's daughter,
I presume is mere guess-work."

Mrs. Elwood turned a searching glance to the face of her son, and waited to hear his reply
to the last remarks, but he was silent; and the last gleam of hope, which had for the moment
lighted up the mother's countenance, faded like a moon-beam on the edge of an eclipsing cloud;
and, after a long pause and silence which no one interrupted, she slowly and sadly said:

"When I consented to leave the comforts and social blessings to which I had been accustomed,
and come into this lone wilderness, with its well-known hardships and privations, my great
and indeed only motive was, to see my family placed beyond the temptations of the city, and
especially beyond the fatal, and to me always mysterious, influence of that wicked and dangerous
man, Gaut Gurley. And with this object I came cheerfully, gladly. And when I reached this place,
fondly hoping and believing we had escaped that man, and were forever secure from his wiles,
I became happy,--happier than since I left my native hills in New-Hampshire. It soon became
to me, lone and dreary as it might appear to others,--it soon became to me, in my fancied security
from the evils we had fled, a second Paradise. But to me it is a Paradise no longer; the Serpent
has found his way into our Eden; and, not content with having beguiled and ruined one, must
now have the other so entangled in the toils that both will be kept in his power."

"You are going a great ways to borrow trouble, it appears to me, Alice," remarked Elwood, after
a pause.

"It certainly seems so to me, also, mother," said Claud. "You cannot know but Gurley comes
here with as honest purposes as father. But, were it otherwise, the daughter should not be
held responsible for the faults of the father, nor, without good reason, be accused of favoring
any sinister designs he may entertain."

"Claud takes a just view of the case, on both points, I presume," rejoined Mr. Elwood. "As
to Gurley, I know not how, or why, he came here; nor do I wish or expect to have any thing
to do with him. And as to Claud, I trust he knows enough to take care of himself."

"You have both evaded the spirit of my remarks," responded Mrs. Elwood. "When I speak of Gaut
Gurley's motives and designs, you must know I judge from his past conduct. Have either of you
as safe grounds of judging him? And when I allude to his daughter, I do so with no thought
of holding her amenable for the faults of her father, or even of assuming the ground that she
has inherited any of his objectionable traits of character. I intend nothing of the kind, for
I know nothing of her. But I do say, that, whenever she marries, she becomes the connecting
link between her husband and her father, the chain extending both ways, so as to bind their
respective families together, and give one the power and means of evil which could in no other
way be obtained. In view of all these circumstances, then, I feel that a calamity is in store
for us. God grant that my fears and forebodings may prove groundless."

The husband and son were saved the difficult and embarrassing task of replying, by the arrival
of Philips, who, in his free and easy manner, entered and took a seat with the family.

"I came, gentlefolks," said the hunter, after a few commonplace remarks had been exchanged,--"I
came to see if you know what a 'bee' means?"

"A bee? what, honey-bees?" asked Mr. Elwood, in surprise at the oddness of the question.

"No, not a honey-bee, exactly, or a humble-bee, but a sort of work-meeting of men or women,
to help a neighbor to husk his corn, for instance, build him a log house, or do off some other
job for him in a day, which alone would take him perhaps weeks. These turn-outs we new settlers
call 'bees.' Nothing is more common than for a man to get up a bee to knock off at once a pressing
job he wants done. And, when a new-comer appears to be delicate about moving in the matter,
the neighbors sometimes volunteer, and get up a bee for him, among themselves."

"I may have heard of the custom; but why do you say you came to ask me if I know any thing
about it?"

"Well, I kinder thought I would. You have a pretty stiff-looking burnt piece here to be logged
off soon, have you not?"

"Why, yes."

"And it would be a hard and heavy month's job for you and the young man to do it, would it not?"

"The best part of a month, perhaps; but I was intending to go at it in season, that we might
get it all cleared and sown by the middle of September; which must be done, if I join you and
the rest of the usual company in the fall trapping and hunting expedition."

"Of course you will join us. It is our main and almost only chance here of getting any money."

"So I have always understood, and therefore made up my mind to go into it, if I can get ready.
I have been down the river to-day and engaged my seed wheat. To-morrow I thought of going abroad
again, to try to engage some help for clearing the piece."

"Well, you need not go a rod for that purpose."

"Why not?"

"Because we have got up a bee for you in the settlement, large enough, we think, to log off
your whole piece in a day."

"Indeed! Who has been so kind as to start such a project?"

"Several of us: Codman, that you may have seen, or at least heard of, as the best trapper in
the settlement, took upon himself to enlist those round the southerly end of the lake, where
he lives; and I have arranged matters a little in this section and on the river below. But,
in justice, I should name, as the man who has taken the most interest in the movement, the
new settler who has this summer come into the parts, and made his pitch over on the Magalloway.
His name is Gurley."

A dead silence of several minutes ensued, during which Mrs. Elwood looked sadly and meaningly
from the husband to the son, both of whose countenances seemed to fall and shrink before her
significant glances.

"Well," at length resumed the hunter, perceiving no response was to be made to his last remark,
"seeing we had got all arranged and ready, I came to notify you, so that you should not be
taken by surprise. We propose to be on the ground, men and oxen, early day after to-morrow.
There will be fifteen or twenty of us, perhaps, with five or six yoke of oxen, and like enough
a stiff horse or two."

"But how can I provision such a company on so short notice?"

"No trouble about that. You have salt pork?"

"A good supply."

"Corn meal?"

"Yes; and wheat flour, with fine new potatoes."

"All right. I will take care of the rest. I will take the young man, here, into my largest
canoe, to-morrow morning, if he be so disposed, and we will go up the lake, perhaps into the
upper lake, and it will be a strange case if we don't return at night with fish, and I think
flesh, enough to victual the company; and, in the mean time, my women will come up and be on
hand to-morrow and next day, to help Mrs. Elwood do the baking and cooking."

The friendly movement of the neighbors, thus announced, was not, of course, to be opposed or
questioned by those for whose benefit it was intended, any further than Mr. Elwood had done
in relation to his ability to entertain the company so well as their kindness deserved. Mr.
Elwood and his son, indeed, who had been dreading the hard job of clearing off their land,
were greatly gratified at the unexpected kindness. And even Mrs. Elwood, pained and annoyed
as she was by the part taken by Gaut Gurley, whose only motive she believed was to gain some
advantage for meditated evil, entered cheerfully into the affair, and joined her husband in
handsome expressions of acknowledgment to the hunter, and assurances of doing their best to
provide properly for the company. The matter was therefore considered as settled; and the hunter
departed, to call, as he had proposed, early the next morning for Claud, for an excursion up
the lake, to procure fresh provisions for the coming occasion.

The family were early astir the next morning, intent on their respective duties in preparation
for the appointed logging bee. They had scarcely dispatched their breakfast, before the hunter,
as he had promised, called for Claud; when the two departed together, with their guns and fishing
gear, for the lake, whither we propose to accompany them.

"Well, now, let us settle the order of the day," said Phillips, after they had reached the
landing and deposited their luggage in the canoe selected for the purpose.

"I am a companion of the voyage, to-day, and, as you know, but a learner in these sports,"
responded Claud. "You have but to name your plan."

"Well, my plan is this: to steer across and get up the lake to the inlet and rapids which connect
this to the next upper lake, called by the Indians the Molechunk-a-munk; up these rapids into
that lake, where we will take a row of a few hours, and home again by nightfall. In these rapids,
going or returning, we may safely count, at this season, on a plenty of trout; and, on the
borders of the lake beyond, I know of several favorite haunts of the deer, one of which I propose
to take into the canoe as ballast to steady it for running the rapids, on our way back."

"What is the whole distance?"

"Four or five miles of this lake, as many of the river or rapids, and as far into the upper
lake as we please."

"You are laying out largely for one day, are you not?"

"No, 'tis nothing. You see, I have brought round for our use my best birch bark canoe. I have
rowed her fifty miles a day round the lakes many a time. We shall bound over the lake in almost
no time, and the rapids, which are the only drawback, can soon be surmounted, by oar or setting-pole,
or, what may be cheapest, carrying the canoe round those most difficult of passage. The boat
does not weigh an hundred. I could travel with it a mile on my head, as fast as you would wish
to walk without a pound of luggage. So, in with you, and I'll show you how it is done."

Accordingly they launched forth in their primitive craft, which, as before intimated, was the
once noted birch bark canoe built by the hunter agreeably to the exact rules of Indian art.
Few, who have never seen and observed the process of constructing this canoe, which, for thousands
of years before the advent of the white man, was the only craft used by the aborigines in navigating
the interior waters, have any idea how, from such seemingly fragile materials, and with no
other tools than a hatchet, knife, and perhaps a bone needle, the Indian can construct a canoe
so extremely light and at the same time so tough and durable. In building his canoe, which
is one of the greatest efforts of his mechanical skill, the Indian goes to work systematically.
He first peels his bark from a middle-sized birch tree, and cuts it in strips five or six inches
wide, and twelve, fifteen, or twenty feet long, according to the length and size of the designed
canoe. He then dries them thoroughly in the sun, after which he nicely scrapes and smooths
off the outside. He next proceeds to soak these strips, which are thus made to go through a
sort of tanning process, to render them tough and pliable, as well as to obviate their liability
to crack by exposure to the sun. After the materials are thus prepared, he smooths off a level
piece of ground, and drives around the outside a line of strong stakes, so that the space within
shall describe the exact form of the boat in contemplation. Inside of these stakes he places
and braces up the wet and pliable pieces of bark, beginning at the bottom and building up and
bending into form the sides and ends, till the structure has attained the required height.
In this situation it is left till it is again thoroughly dried and all the pieces become fixed
in shape. A light inside framework is then constructed, resembling the skeleton of a fish,
and of dimensions to fit the canoe already put in form in the manner we have described. The
pieces of cured material are then numbered and taken down; when the architect, beginning at
the bottom, lapping and sewing together the different pieces, proceeds patiently in his work,
till the sides are built, the ends closed nicely up, and each piece lashed firmly to the framework,
which, though of surprising lightness, is made to serve as keel, knees, and ribs of the boat.
Every seam and crevice is then filled with melted pitch. The Indian then has his canoe fit
for use; and he may well boast of a boat, which, for combined strength and lightness, and especially
for capacity of burden, no art of the shipbuilder has ever been able to surpass, and which,
if it has not already, might serve for a model of the best lifeboat ever constructed, in these
days of boasted perfection in marine arts and improvements.

Bounding over the smooth waters like a seabird half on wing, our voyagers soon found themselves
on the northerly side of the lake; when, rounding a point, they began to skirt the easterly
shore of the bay that makes up to the inlet, at a more leisurely pace, for the purpose of being
on the lookout for deer, which might be standing in the edge of the water round the coves,
to cool themselves and keep off the flies. Not seeing any signs of game, however, they steered
out so as to clear the various little capes or woody points of land inclosing the numerous
coves scattered along the indented shore, and struck a line for the great inlet at the head
of the lake, which they now soon reached, and commenced rowing against the at first gentle
and then rapid current, which here pours down from, the upper lakes, through the rocky and
picturesque defiles, in the form of a magnificent river, rivalling in its size the midway portions
of the Connecticut or Hudson.

"Now, young man," said the hunter, laying aside his paddle and taking up the strong, elastic
setting-pole he had provided for the occasion, "now you must look out for your balance. The
river, to be sure, is quite low, and the current, of course, at its feeblest point; but we
shall find places enough within the next mile where the canoe, to go up at all, must go up
like the jump of a catamount. So, down in the bottom of the boat, on your braced knees, with
your haunches on your heels, and leave all to me."

"What! do you expect to force the canoe up rapids like these?" asked Claud, in surprise, as
he cast his eye over the long reach of eddying, tumbling waters, that looked like a lessening
sheet of foam as it lay stretched upward in the distant perspective.

"I expect to try," coolly replied the hunter; "and, if you lay asleep in the bottom of the
canoe, I should expect to succeed. And, as it is, if you can keep cool and obey orders, we
will see what can be done."

Claud implicitly obeyed the directions of the hunter, without much faith, however, in the success
of his bold attempt. But he soon perceived he had underrated the skill and strength of arm
which had been relied on to accomplish the seemingly impossible feat. Standing upright and
slightly bracing in the bottom of his canoe, the hunter first marked out with his eye his course
through a given reach of the rock-broken and foaming waters above; then, nicely calculating
the resisting force of each rapid to be overcome, and the required impetus, and the direction
to be given to his canoe to effect it, he sharply bid Claud be on his guard, and sent the light
craft like an arrow into the boiling eddies before him. And now, by sudden and powerful shoves,
he was seen shooting obliquely up one rapid; tacking with the quickness of light, and darting
off zigzag among the rocks and eddies towards another, which was in turn surmounted; while
the boat was forced, surging and bounding forward, with increasing impetus, now up and now
athwart the rushing currents, till he had gained a resting-place in the still water of some
sheltering boulder in the stream, when he would mark off, with a rapid glance, another reach
of falls, and shoot in among them as before. Thus, with the quick tacks and turns and sudden
leaps of the ascending salmon, and almost with the celerity, he made his way up the long succession
of rapids, until the last of the series was overcome, and he found himself safely emerging
into the smooth waters of the beautiful lakelet or pond which divides, in the upper portion
of its course, this remarkable stream. Another row of a mile or so now brought the voyagers
where the water again took the form of a swift river, tumbling and foaming over the rocks,
in the last series of rapids to be overcome. These also were surmounted in the same manner
and with the same success as the former.

But this part of the voyage was marked with an unexpected adventure, and one which seemed destined
to lead to the operation of new and singular moral agencies, both in the near and more distant
future, having an important bearing on the fate and fortunes of young Elwood. They had reached
the last and most difficult of all the rapids yet encountered, and were resting, preparatory
to the anticipated struggle, in a smooth piece of water under the lee of a huge rock, on either
side of which the divided stream rushed in two foam-covered torrents, with the force and swiftness
of a mill-race; when they were startled by the shrill exclamations of a female voice, in tones
indicative of surprise and alarm. The sounds, which came from some unseen point not far above
them in the stream, were evidently drawing near at a rapid rate. Presently a small Indian canoe,
with a single female occupant, whose youth and beauty, even in the distance, were apparent,
shot swiftly into view, and came tossing and whirling down the stream, unguided, and wholly
at the mercy of the crooked and raging currents along which it was borne with the speed of
the wind. The imperilled maiden uttered a cry of joy at the appearance of our voyagers, and
held up the handle of a broken oar, to indicate to them at once the cause of her fearful dilemma
and need of assistance.

"I will throw her one of our paddles, and she will best take care of herself," hurriedly exclaimed
the hunter, seizing the implement, and awaiting her nearest approach to throw it within her reach.

The critical point was the next instant reached, but the hunter, in his nervous anxiety and
haste, made his throw a little too soon and with too much force. The paddle struck directly
under the prow of the canoe, and shot beyond, far out of reach of the expectant maiden's extended
hands. Another oar was hurled after her, with no better effect; when, for the first time, a
shade of despair passed over her agitated countenance; for she saw herself rapidly drifting
directly into the jaws of a wild and fearful labyrinth of breakers not fifty yards below, where,
in all probability, her fragile canoe would be dashed to pieces, and herself thrown against
the slippery and jagged rock, drawn down, and lost. Claud, who had witnessed, with trembling
anxiety, the hunter's vain attempts to place the means of self-preservation in the hands of
the maiden, and who now perceived, in their full light, the perils of the path to which she
was helplessly hastening, could restrain his generous impulses no longer; and, quickly throwing
off his hat and coat, he leaped overboard, dashed headlong into the current, and struck boldly
down it to overtake the receding canoe.

"Hold! madness! They will both perish together!" rapidly exclaimed the hunter, surprised and
alarmed at the rash attempt of his young companion. "But I will share in their dangers,--perhaps
save them, yet."

Accordingly he hastily headed round his canoe, and, hazardous as he knew must be the experiment,
sent it surging down the current after his endangered young friends; for the one, as will soon
appear, was no less his favorite than the other. In the mean time, Claud, in swimming over
a sunken rock, luckily gained a foothold, which enabled him to rise and plunge forward again
with redoubled speed; and, so well-timed and powerful were his exertions, that he came within
reach of the stern of the fugitive canoe just as it was whirling round sideways in the reflux
of the waves caused by the water dashing against a high rock standing partly in the current.
It was a moment of life or death, both to the man and maiden; for the boat was on the point
of going broadside over the first fall into the wild and seething waters, seen leaping and
roaring in whirlpools and jets of foam among the intricate passes of the ragged rocks below.
Making sure of his grasp on the end of the canoe that had been thus fortunately thrown within
his reach, the struggling Claud made an effort to draw it from the edge of the abyss into which
it was about to be precipitated; but, with his most desperate exertions, he was barely enabled
to keep it in position, while his strength was rapidly giving way. The unequal contest was
quickly noticed by the hapless girl; and, after watching a moment, with a troubled eye, the
fruitless efforts and wasting strength of the young man, she calmly rose to her feet, exhibiting,
as she stood upright in the boat, with the spray dashing over her marble forehead and long
flowing hair, in the faultless symmetry of her person, the beautiful cast of her features,
and the touching eloquence of her speaking countenance, a figure which might well serve as
a subject for the pencil of the artist.

"Let go, brave stranger," she cried, in clear, silvery tones, after throwing a grateful and
admiring glance down upon her gallant rescuer; "let me go, and save yourself. I can die as
befits a daughter of my people."

"Hold on, there, Claud! Courage, girl! I see a way to save you both," at that critical instant
rang above the roar of the waters the sharp voice of the hunter, who, with wonderful tact and
celerity, had shot down obliquely across the main current, out of it through a narrow side
pass, down that and round the intervening rocks, and was now driving with main strength up
another pass, abreast of the objects of his anxiety. "There: now seize the head of my canoe,
and hold on to both; and, on your life, be quick!" he continued, shouting to the exhausted
young man, while he himself was struggling with all his might to get and keep his boat in the
right position among the battling currents.

After one or two ineffectual attempts, Claud, with a last desperate effort, fortunately succeeded
in securing his grasp on the hunter's boat, without losing his hold on the other; when, with
one mighty effort of the latter, they were all drawn out of the vortex together, and soon brought
safely to shore.

"Fluella, my fair young friend," said the hunter, taking a long breath, and respectfully turning
to the rescued girl, as the party stepped on to the dry beach, "I have not often--no, never--felt
more rejoiced than now, in seeing you stand here in safety."

"I know the danger I have been in," responded the maiden, feelingly. "O yes, know to remember,
and know to remember, also, those who made my escape. Mr. Phillips, I am grateful much."

"Don't thank me," promptly replied the hunter. "I am ashamed not to have been the first in
the rescue, when the chief's daughter was in danger."

"But, Mr. Phillips," rejoined the other, with an expressive smile, "you have not told me who
this stranger is, who seemed to measure the value of his own life by such a worthless thing
as mine."

"True, no," returned the hunter; "but this gentleman, Fluella, is young Mr. Claud Elwood, who,
with his father and mother, has recently moved into the settlement; and they are now my nearest
neighbors, at the foot of the lower lake. And to you, Claud, I have to say, that this young
lady is the daughter of Wenongonet, the red chief, the original lord of these lakes, and still
living on the one next above."

Both the maiden and her gallant young preserver seemed equally surprised, at the announcement
of each others' name and character: the former, because it suggested questions in the solution
of which she felt an interest, but which, with the characteristic prudence of her race, she
forbore to ask; and the latter, because he found it hard to realize that the fair-complexioned
and every way beautiful girl, who stood before him, readily speaking his own language, and
neatly and even richly arrayed in the usual female habiliments of the day, with the single
exception of the gay, beaded moccasins, that enveloped her small feet and ankles,--found it
extremely difficult to realize that one of such an exterior, and of so much evident culture,
could possibly have descended from the tawny and uncultivated sons of the forest.

"You two should hereafter be friends, should you not?" observed the hunter, perceiving their
mutual restraint, of which he wished to relieve them.

Rousing himself, with a prompt affirmative reply to the question, Claud gallantly advanced,
and extended his hand to his fair companion, who, with evident emotion, and a slight suffusion
of the cheek, gave him her own in return, as she said:

"O yes. Mr. Phillips' friend is my friend, and, I--I--why, I can't thank him now; the words
don't come; the thanks remain unshaped in my heart."

"Excuse me," replied Claud, "excuse me if I say, Miss Fluella, as Mr. Phillips calls you, that
you have already expressed, and in the finest terms, far more than I am entitled to; so let
that pass, and tell us how your mishap occurred?"

"O, naturally enough, though rather stupidly," responded the other, regaining her ease and
usually animated manner. "You must know that I sometimes play the Indian girl, in doing my
father's trouting. And, having rowed down to the rapids this morning for that purpose, I ran
my canoe on to a rock, up here at the head of the falls, and threw into an eddy below, till
I had taken a supply. But, like other folks, I must have the one more,--a large one I had seen
playing round my hook; and, in my eagerness to take him, I did not notice that my canoe had
slipped off the rock till I found it drifting down the current. I seized my oar, but, with
the first blow in the water it snapt in my hands. You know the rest, unless, perhaps, the number
of fish I caught," she added, pointing to a string of fine trout still lying safely in the
bottom of her canoe.

"Brave girl!" exclaimed the hunter, going up to the boat with Claud, to inspect the fish, which
they had not before noticed. "A good ten pounds, and fine ones, too. Claud shall remain here
while I go a piece up the lake for a deer, and follow your example, except the race down the
rapids; but that he can't do, for I shall take our canoe with me, and make him fish from the
shore, which will be just as well. Are you agreed to that arrangement, young man?"

This proposition being accepted, and it being also settled by common consent that no further
attempt should, at this time, be made to ascend the remaining rapids with either of the boats
the hunter and Claud, accompanied by the light-footed Fluella, took up her canoe and set off
with it, along shore, towards a convenient landing in the lake above, then not more than sixty
or seventy rods distant. In a short time the proposed landing was reached, and the boat let
down into the water. The maiden, with an easy and sprightly movement, then flung herself into
her seat, and, with a paddle hastily whittled for her out of a piece of drift-wood, by the
ever ready hunter, sent her little craft in a curving sweep into the lake; when, facing round
to her preservers, while a sweet and grateful smile broke over her dimpling features, she bade
and bowed them adieu, and went bounding over the undulating waves towards her home, on an island
some miles distant, near the southeastern border of this romantic sheet of water.

"Can it be," half-soliloquized Claud, as he stood rivetting his wondering gaze on the beauteous
figure, which, gracefully bowing with the lightly-dipping oar, was receding from his rapt view,
and gradually melting away in the distance; "can it be that she is but a mere Indian girl,
one of those wild, untutored children of the forest?"

"It is even so, young man," responded the hunter, rousing himself from the reverie into which
he also seemed to have fallen at the departure of his fair favorite; "it is even so; but, for
all that, the very flower of all the womankind, white or red, according to my ideas, that ever
graced the borders of these lakes."

"But how came she by those neatly-turned English features, and that clear, white complexion?"

"Why, her mother, who is now dead, was an uncommon handsome woman for a squaw, and had, as
I perhaps should have qualified when I answered so about this girl, some white blood in her
veins; or rather had, as the old chief once told me, somewhere away back among the gone-by
generations, a female ancestor, a pure white woman, who was made captive by the Indians, and
married into their tribe, and who was as handsome as a picture. But the white blood seemed
to have been pretty much lost among the descendants, till the appearance of this nonsuch of
a girl, in whom every drop of it seemed to have again been collected."

"Some might, perhaps, draw different conclusions in the case."

"Yes, and draw them very wrongfully, too, as I have no doubt many people do in such cases;
for I have often noticed it among families, and ascertained it as a fact, that where a person
of particular looks and character once lived, his or her like, though not coming out visibly
in any of the descendants for a long time, is sure sooner or later to appear, and so will frequently
leap out in a child four or five generations off; a complete copy, in looks, blood, and character,
of the original (as far as can be judged from family tradition), who may have been dead an
hundred years. This is my notion; and I hold that every person is destined to be at least once
reproduced among some of his descendants. I, or the exact like of me, will likely enough be
seen in some of my blood descendants, fifty or an hundred years hence, building dams or mills
on these very falls, or even riding in a carriage around these wild lakes, where I have spent
nearly my whole life in hunting moose, and the other wild animals known only in the unbroken
forest."

"Your theory may be true, but it does not quite account, I think, for the evident intelligence
and culture of this remarkable girl. To appear and converse as she does, she must have seen
considerable of good society out of the forest, and, I should think, schools."

"She has, both. Her father, one fall, when she was a girl of ten or eleven, took her along
with him to a city on the coast, where he went to sell his furs and nice basket-work, and where
she, some how, excited the lively interest of a good family, and particularly of a wealthy
gentleman then living in the family. Well, the short of the matter is, that they persuaded
the chief to leave her through the winter; and, she becoming a favorite with them all, they
instructed her, sent her to school, and dressed her as they would an own daughter, and would
only part with her in the spring on condition of her returning in the fall. And so it has gone
on till now, she living with them winters, and here with her father summers; for, though they
would like to take her entirely out of the woods, she would not desert her father, who loves
her as his life, and calls her the light of his lodge,--no, not for all the gold in the cities."

"You must then be well acquainted with this Indian family, and can give me their history."

"As far as is proper for me to tell, as well as anybody, perhaps. When I was a young man, I
at times used to live with the chief, who always made me welcome to his lodge, and gave me
his confidence. He was then but little past his prime, and one of the smartest men, every way,
I ever knew. He was then worth property, and lived with his first wife, this girl's mother,
who, as I told you, was very good-looking and intelligent. But his second wife was as homely
as his first was handsome. As to Wenongonet himself, who has now got to be, though still active,
an old man, he claims to have been a direct descendant of Paugus,--a grandson, I believe, of
that noted chief,--who was slain in Lovewell's bloody fight, and whose tribe, once known as
the Sokokis or Saco Indians, who were great fighters, it is said, were then forever broken
up, the most of them fleeing over the British highlands and joining the St. Francis Indians
in Canada. The family of Paugus, however, with a few of the head men, who survived the battle,
concluded to remain this side of the mountain, and try to keep up a show of the tribe on these
lakes, where they lived till Paugus' son, who on the death of his father became their sagamore
or chief, died, when they gradually drew off into Canada, leaving Wenongonet, the last chief's
son, the only permanent Indian resident, after a while, on these lakes. But come, young man,
enough of Indian matters for to-day: we must now be stirring, or our day's work may come short.
Help me to take my canoe up here into the lake; and, within four hours, the time to which I
will limit my absence, we will see what can be done by each, in our different undertakings."

The employment of another half-hour fully sufficed to place the canoe of the hunter in the
smooth water above the rapids; when the latter, with a cheery "heigh ho," at each light dip
of his springy oar, struck off towards the foot of the pine-covered hills that lift their green
summits from the western shores of the lake, leaving his young companion to proceed to his
allotted portion of the sports or labors of the day. Preparing his long fishing-rod and tackle,
according to the instructions which the hunter had given him for adapting his mode of fishing
to the locality and season, Claud made his way along down the edge of the stream to a designated
point, a short distance above the place where, on the occurrence of the incident before described,
they had ceased to ascend the rapids in their canoes. He here found, as he had been told, below
a traversing reach of bare breakers, a large, deep eddy of gently revolving water, in the centre
of which lay tossing on the swell a broad spiral wreath of spotless foam. The hunter, in selecting
these rapids, and especially this resting-spot of the ascending fish, as the place where he
could safely warrant the taking of the needed supply of trout, had not spoken without knowledge;
for it may well be doubted whether there could be found, in all the regions of the north, a
reach of running water of equal length with this wild and singularly picturesque portion of
the Androscoggin river, containing such quantities of this beautiful fish as are found about
midsummer, swarming up the rapids on their way from the Umbagog to the upper lakes.

So, at least, Claud then found it; for, having passed to the most outward point of rocks inclosing
the eddy, he no sooner threw in and drew his skip bait round the borders of the foam-island
just named, than a dozen large trout shot up from beneath, and leaped splashing along the surface,
in keen rivalry for the prize of the bait. With a second throw, he securely hooked one of a
size which required all his strength to draw it, as he at length did, flapping and floundering
to a safe landing. And for the next three hours he pursued the sport with a success which,
notwithstanding the great number that broke away from his hook, well made good the augury of
his beginning. By that time he had caught some dozens, of sizes varying from one to seven pounds,
and enough, and more than he needed. But still he could not forego his exciting employment,
and, insensible of the lapse of time, continued his drafts on the seemingly inexhaustible eddy,
till roused by the long, shrill halloo of the returned hunter, summoning him to the landing
above. Throwing down his pole by the side of his proud display of fish, he hastened up to the
lake, where he found the hunter complacently employed in removing, for lightness of carriage,
the head and offal of a noble fat buck; when the two, with mutual congratulations on their
success, took up canoe, and, with a stop only long enough to take in the trout, carried and
launched their richly-freighted craft at a convenient place in the stream below. Seeing Claud
securely seated in the bottom of the canoe, and the freight nicely balanced, the hunter took
his paddle, instead of setting-pole, the better to restrain the speed of the boat at the most
rapid and dangerous passes, and struck out into the current, adown which, under the quick and
skilful strokes of its experienced oarsman, it was borne with almost the swiftness of a bird
on the wing, till it reached the quiet waters of the pond; and, this being soon passed over,
they entered and descended the next reach of rapids with equal speed and safety. All the dangers
and difficulties were now over; and, leisurely rowing homeward, they were, by sunset, at the
cottage of the Elwoods, displaying the fruits of their enterprise, and recounting their singular
adventures to the surprised and gratified inmates.

CHAPTER IX

  "Then came the woodman with his sturdy-team
  Of broad-horned oxen, to complete the toil
  Which axe and fire had left him, to redeem,
  For culture's hand, the cold and root-bound soil."

The next morning, it being the day appointed for the "logging bee," the Elwoods were again
up betimes, to be prepared for the reception of the expected visitants. On going out into the
yard, while yet the coming sun was only beginning to flush the eastern horizon, Mr. Elwood
perceived, early as it was, a man, whom he presumed, from the handspike and axe on his shoulder,
to be one of the company, entering the opening and leisurely approaching, with an occasional
glance backward along the road from the settlements below. Not recognizing the man as an acquaintance,
Elwood noted his appearance closely as he was coming up. He was a rather young-looking man,
of a short, compactly built figure, with quick motions, and that peculiar springy step which
distinguishes men of active temperament and hopeful, buoyant spirits; while the fox like cut
of his features, the lively gray eyes that beamed from them, and the evidently quick coming
and going thoughts that seemed to flash from his thin-moving nostrils and play on his curling
lips, served to indicate rapid perceptions, shrewdness, and a kind and perhaps fun-loving disposition.

"Hillo, captain,--or captain of the house, as I suppose you must be," he sang out cheerily,
as with slackening step he approached Elwood; "did you ever hear spoken of, a certain rough-and-ready
talking sort of a chap they call Jonas Codman?"

"I have heard of a Mr. Codman, and was told that he would probably be here to-day," doubtfully
replied Elwood.

"Well, I am he, such as he is, pushed forward as a sort of advanced guard,--no, herald must
be the book-word,--to tell you that you are taken. Did you mistrust it?"

"No, not exactly."

"You are, nevertheless. But I'll tell you a story, which, if you can see the moral, may give
you some hints to show you how to turn the affair to your advantage without suffering the least
inconvenience yourself; and here it is:

"There was once a curious sort of a fellow, whose land was so covered with stones, which had
rolled down from a mountain, that little or nothing could grow among them; and the question
was, how he should ever remove them. Well, one day, when he was thinking on the matter, he
found in the field an old Black-Art book, on the cover of which he read, 'One chapter will
bring one, two chapters two, and so on; but set and keep them at work, lest a worst thing befall.'
So, to see what would come of it, he read one chapter; when a great, stout, dubious-looking
devil made his appearance, and asked what he should go about? 'Go to throwing these stones
over the mountain,' said the man. The devil went at it. But the man, seeing the poor devil
was having a hard job of it, read on till he had raised about a dozen of the same kind of chaps,
and set them all at work. And so smashingly did they make the stones fly that, by sunset, the
last were disappearing; and the man was about to set them to pulling up the stumps on his newly-cleared
land. But they shook their heads at this, and, being pretty well tuckered out, agreed to quit
even, if he would, and go off without the usual pay in such cases made and provided in devildom;
when, he making no objections, they, with another squint at the green gnarly stumps, cut and
run; and all the chapters he could read after that--for he began to like the fun of having
his land cleared at so cheap a rate--would never bring them back again."

So saying, the speaker turned; and, without the explanation or addition of a single word, retraced
his steps and disappeared in the woods, leaving the puzzled Elwood to construe the meaning
of his story as he best could. Very soon, however, sounds reached his ears which enabled him
to form some conjecture what the man intended by his odd announcement. The mingling voices
of ox-team drivers, with their loud and peculiarly modulated "Haw Buck! gee! and up there,
ye lazy loons!" were now heard resounding through the woods, and evidently approaching along
the road from the settlement. And soon an array of eight sturdy pair of oxen, each bearing
a bundle of hay bound on the top of their yoke with a log chain, and each attended by a driver,
with a handspike on his shoulder, marching by their side, emerged one after another from the
woods, and came filing up the road towards the spot where he stood. As the long column approached,
Elwood, with a flutter of the heart, recognized in the driver most in advance, the erect, stalwart
figure and the proud and haughty bearing of Gaut Gurley.

"Good-morning, good-morning, neighbor Elwood, as I have lately been pleased to find you," exclaimed
Gurley, with an air of careless assurance, as he came within speaking distance. "We have come,
as you see, to give you a lift at your logging. So show us right into your slash, and let us
go at it, at once. We shall find time to talk afterwards."

Elwood, with some general remark expressive of his obligation to the whole of the company at
hand for their voluntary and unexpected kindness, led the way to the burned slash, and went
back to meet and salute the rest of the company, as they severally came up. Having performed
this ceremony with those having the immediate charge of the oxen, till the whole had passed
on to their work, he turned to the rest of the company, whom, though before unnoticed by him,
he now found following immediately behind the teams. These consisted of some half-dozen sturdy
logmen, with their implements, appointed to pair off with the drivers of the teams, so as to
provide two men to each yoke of oxen; the hunter, Phillips, with his brisk wife and buxom daughter,
bearing a basket of plates, knives, forks, spoons, and extra frying-pans, to supply any deficiency
Mrs. Elwood might find in furnishing her tables or in cooking for so large a company; and lastly,
Comical Codman, as he was often called by the settlers, who, though the first to come forward
to meet Elwood, was now bringing up the rear.

"A merry morning to you," exclaimed the hunter, as the logmen turned off to the slash; "a merry
morning to you, neighbor Elwood. This looks some like business to-day. You were not expecting
us a very great sight earlier than this, I conclude," he added, with a jocular smile.

"Earlier? Why, it is hardly sunrise yet, and I am wholly at a loss to know how men living at
such distances could get here at this hour."

"Well, that is easily explained. They haven't had to travel so far this morning as you imagine.
They came on as far as my place last night, mostly, and such as could be accommodated nestled
with me in my house. The rest camped out near by in the bush, which is just as well generally
with us woodsmen. But you, having no mistrust of this, as it seems, were taken, I suppose,
by surprise at our appearance so early."

"I should have been, wholly so, but for the coming ahead of this gentleman," replied Elwood,
pointing to Codman; "and then, I was rather at loss to know what he intended by his queer way
of announcing you."

"Very likely. He never does or says any thing like other folks. Jonas," continued the hunter,
turning to the odd genius of whom he was speaking, "you are a good trapper, but I fear you
make a bad fore-runner."

"Well, I am all right now here in the rear, I suppose," replied the other, with an oddly assumed
air of abashment. "A man is generally good for one thing or t'other. If I ain't a good forerunner,
it then follows that I am a good hind-runner."

"You see he must have his fol-de-rol, Mr. Elwood," said the hunter. "But, for all that, he
is a good fellow enough at the bottom, if you can ever find it: ain't all that so, Jonas?"

"Sort of so and sort of not so; but a little more not than sorter, they may say, perhaps. And
I don't think, myself, there is much either at the top or bottom to brag on," rejoined Codman,
suddenly darting off to join his companions in the slash; and now whistling a tune, as he went,
and now crowing like a cock, in notes and tones each of its kind so wondrous loud and shrill
that the whole valley of the lake seemed wakened by the strange music.

The operations of the day having been thus auspicuously commenced in the slash, Elwood, retaining
the hunter with him at the house to advise and assist in such arrangements and preparations
for breakfast as might render the meal most acceptable to the company, entered at once upon
his duties as host; and, it being found that neither the room nor tables in the house were
sufficient to seat all the company, it was decided, for the purpose of avoiding every appearance
of invidious distinction, to prepare temporary tables and seat the whole of them, except the
females, in the open air near the house. Accordingly the hunter, who, from his experience as
a woodman, was ever ready at such contrivances, went to work; and, clearing and levelling off
a smooth place, driving into the ground three sets of short stout crotches, laying cross-pieces
in each, and then two new pine planks longitudinally over the whole, he soon erected a neat
and substantial table, long enough to seat a score of guests. Seats on each side were then
supplied by a similar process; when Mrs. Elwood, who had watched the operation with a housewife's
interest, made her appearance with a roll of fine white tablecloths, the relics of her better
days, and covered the whole with the snowy drapery, making a table which might vie in appearance
with those of the most fashionable restaurants of the cities. Upon this table, plates, knives
and forks, with all other of the usual accompaniments, were speedily arranged by the quick-footed
females; while the sounds of boiling pots, and the hissing frying-pans spreading through the
house and around the yard the savory fumes of the cooking trout, betokened the advanced progress
of the culinary operations within, which were now soon completed; when the fact was announced
by Mr. Elwood by several long and loud blasts on his "tin horn" to the expectant laborers in
the field, who, while the meal was being borne smoking on to the table, chained their oxen
to stumps and saplings about the field, parcelled out to them the hay, and repaired to their
morning banquet.

Banquet! A banquet among backwoodsmen? Yes; and why not? It is strange that a thousand generations
of epicures should have lived, gluttonized, and passed away from the earth, without appearing
to understand the chief requisite for that class of animal enjoyments which they seem to make
the great end and aim of their lives,--without appearing to realize that it is the appetite,
not the quality of the food, that makes the feast; that there can be no such thing as a feast,
indeed, without a real not factitious appetite; and that there can be no real appetite without
toil or some prolonged and vigorous exercise. Nero ransacked his whole kingdom, and expended
millions for delicacies; and yet he never experienced, probably, one-half the enjoyments of
the palate that were experienced from the coarsest fare by his poorest laboring subject. No,
the men of ease and idleness may have surfeits, the men of toil can only have banquets. And
it is doubtless a part of that nicely balanced system of compensations which Providence applies
to men, that the appetites of the industrious poor should make good the deficiencies in the
quality of their food, so that it should always afford equal enjoyment in the consumption with
that experienced by the idle rich over their sumptuous tables.

The meal passed off pleasantly; and when finished, the gratified and chatty workmen, with their
numbers now increased by the addition of the two Elwoods and the hunter, returned, with the
eager alacrity of boys hurrying to an appointed game of football, to their voluntary labors
in the field, in which they had already made surprising progress.

The business of the day was now resumed in earnest. The teamsters having quickly scattered
to their respective teams and brought them with a lively step on to the ground, and having
there each received their allotted quota of log-rollers, to pile up the logs as fast as drawn,
at once penetrated at different points into the thickest parts of the blackened masses of timber
before them, awaiting their sturdy labors. Here the largest log in a given space, and the one
the most difficult to be removed, was usually selected as the nucleus of the proposed pile.
Then two logs of the next largest size were drawn up on each side, and placed at a little distance
in a line parallel with the first, when the intermediate spaces were filled with limbs, knots,
and the smallest timber at hand; so that a fire, when the process of burning the piles should
be commenced, communicated at the centre thus prepared, would spread through the whole, and
not be likely to go out till all the logs were consumed. When this foundation was laid, the
next nearest surrounding logs were drawn alongside and rolled up on skids, by the logmen stationed
there with their handspikes for the purpose. Then generally commenced a keen strife between
the teamster and the log-rollers, to see which should first do their part and keep the others
the most closely employed. And the result was that in a very short time a large pile of logs
was completed, and a space of ten or fifteen square rods was completely cleared around it.
This done, an adjoining thicket of timber was sought out, another pile started, and another
space cleared off in the same manner. And thus proceeded the work, with each team and its attendants,
in every part of the slash; while the same spirit of rivalry which had thus began to be exhibited
between the members of each gang soon took the form of a competition between one gang and another,
who were now everywhere seen vieing with each other in the strife to do the most or to build
up the largest and greatest number of log-heaps in the shortest space of time. The whole field,
indeed, was thus soon made to exhibit the animated but singular spectacle of men, engaged in
a wholly voluntary labor, putting forth all the unstinted applications of strength and displaying
all the alertness and zeal of men at work for a wager. But, among all the participants in the
labors of the day, no one manifested so much interest in advancing the work, no one was so
active and laborious, as Gaut Gurley. Not only was he continually inciting and pressing up
all others to the labor, but was ever foremost in the heaviest work himself, generally selecting
the most difficult parts for himself, and often performing feats of strength that scarcely
any two men on the ground were able to perform. Nor was the Herculean strength which he so
often displayed before the eyes of the astonished workmen, ever made useless, as is sometimes
the case with men of great physical powers, by any misapplication of his efforts. He seemed
perfectly to understand the business in which they were engaged; and, while all wondered, though
no one knew, where he had received his training for such work, it was soon, by common consent,
decided that he was much the most efficient hand on the ground, many even going so far as to
declare that his equal was never before seen in that part of the country.

"You see that, don't you, captain?" said Codman, coming up close to Elwood, and speaking in
a half whisper, as he pointed to Gaut Gurley, who, having noticed two of the stoutest of the
hands vainly trying to roll up a large log, rushed forward, and, bidding them stand aside,
threw it up single-handed without appearing to exert half his strength. "You see that, don't
you, captain?" he repeated, with an air of mingled wonder and waggishness. "Now, what do you
think of my story, and the great, stout, black-looking devil that came, on reading the first
chapter, and made the big stones fly so?"

"I haven't thought much about it," carelessly replied Elwood, evidently wishing not to appear
to understand the allusion of the other. "But why do you ask such a question?"

"Don't know myself, it's a fact; but I happened to be thinking of things. But say, captain,
you haven't been reading any chapters in any strange book yourself, lately, have you?" said
Codman, with a queer look.

"No, I guess not," replied Elwood, laughingly, though visibly annoyed by the subject.

"No? Nor none of the family?" persisted the other, glancing towards Claud Elwood, who was standing
near by. "Well, I wish I knew what put that story into my head, when I let it off this morning.
It is de-ive-lish queer, at any rate, considering." So saying, he walked off to his work, croaking
like a rooster at some questionable object.

Although none of the settlers present seemed disposed to attribute the extraordinary physical
powers, which Gaut Gurley had so unmistakably shown, to any supernatural agency, as the trapper,
Codman, whose other singularities were not without a smart sprinkling of superstition, was
obviously inclining to do, yet those powers were especially calculated, as may well be supposed
of men of their class, to make a strong impression on the minds of them all, and invest the
possessor with an importance which, in their eyes, he could in no other way obtain. Accordingly
he soon came to be looked upon as the lion of the day, and suddenly thus acquired, for the
time being, as he doubtless shrewdly calculated he could do in this way, a consequence and
influence of which no other man could boast, perhaps, in the whole settlement.

Meanwhile the work of clearing off the logs was prosecuted with increasing spirit and resolution.
And so eagerly intent had all the hands become, in pressing forward to its completion their
self-imposed task, which all could see was now fast drawing to a close, that they took no note
of the flight of time, and were consequently taken by surprise when the sound of the horn summoned
them to their midday meal.

"Why! it can't yet be noon," exclaimed one, glancing up at the sun.

"No" responded another. "Some of us here have been counting on seeing the whole job nearly
done by noon, but it will take three hours yet to do that. No, the women must have made a mistake."

"Well, I don't know about that: let us see," said the hunter, turning his back to the sun,
and throwing out one foot as far as he could while keeping his body perpendicular. "Now my
clock, which, for noon on the 21st of June, or longest day of summer, is the shadow of my head
falling on half my foot, and then passing off beyond it about half an inch each day for the
rest of the season, makes it, as I should calculate the distance between my foot and the shadow
of my head, now evidently receding,--makes it, for this last day of August, about a quarter
past twelve."

"I am but little over half past eleven," said Codman, pulling out and inspecting an old watch.
"Phillips, may be, is thinking of that deer that he has been promising himself and us for dinner;
and, before I take his calculation on shadows and distances, I should like to know how many
inches he allowed for the hurrying influence of his appetite."

"What nonsense, Comical! But what you mean by it is, I suppose, that I can't tell the time?"

"Not within half an hour by the sun."

"Why, man, it is the sun that makes the time; and, as that body never gets out of order or
runs down, why not learn to read it, and depend directly upon it for the hour of the day? If
half the time men spend in bothering over timepieces were devoted to studying the great clock
of the heavens, they need not depend on such uncertain contrivances as common clocks and watches
to know the time of day."

"But how in cloudy weather?"

"Tell the time of day by your feelings. Take note of the state of your appetite and general
feelings at the various hours of the day, when it is fair and you know the time, and then apply
the rule when you have no other means of judging; and you may thus train yourself, so that
you need not be half an hour out of the way in your reckoning through the whole day."

"Well, supposing it is night?"

"Night is for sleep, and it is no consequence to know the time, except the time waking. And,
as to that, none need be in fault, if they had you anywhere within two miles to crow for them."

"A regular hit! I own it a hit, Mr. Hunter. But here comes Mr. Elwood: we will leave the question
of the time of day to him."

"We have a correct noon-mark at the house, and the women are probably right," replied Elwood.
"At all events, men who have worked like lions, as you all have this forenoon, must by this
time need refreshment. So, let us all drop work, and at once be off to dinner."

With such familiar jokes and converse, the light-hearted backwoodsmen threw off their crocky
frocks, and, after washing up at a runlet at hand, marched off in chatty groups to the house,
where they found awaiting their arrival the well-spread board of their appreciating hostess,
this time made more tempting to their vigorous and healthy appetites by the addition, to the
fine trout of the morning, of the variously-cooked haunches of the hunter's venison. And, having
here done ample justice to their excellent meal, they again hastened back to their labor in
the field, unanimously declaring for the good husbandman's rule, "Work first and play afterwards,"
and saying they would have no rest nor recreation till they had seen the last log of the slash
disposed of. And with such animation did they resume their labors, and with such vigor continue
to apply themselves in carrying out their resolution, and in hastening the hour of its fulfilment,
that by the middle of the afternoon their task was ended; and the gratified Mr. Elwood had
the satisfaction of seeing the formidable-looking slash of the morning converted into a comparatively
smooth field, requiring only the action of the fire on the log heaps, with a few days' tending,
to make it fit for the seed and harrow.

"Come, boys," said the hunter to the company, now all within speaking distance, except two
or three who had somehow disappeared; "come, boys," he repeated, after pausing to see the last
log thrown up in its place, "let us gather up here near the middle of the lot. Comical Codman
and some others, I have noticed, have been putting their heads together, and I kinder surmise
we may now soon expect some sort of christening ceremony of the field we have walked through
in such fine style to-day; and, if they make out any thing worth the while, it may be well
to give them a good cheer or two, to wind off with."

While the men were taking their stand at the spot designated by the hunter, Codman was seen
mounting a conspicuous logheap at the southerly end of the field; and two more men, at the
same time, made their appearance on the tops of different piles on opposite sides of the lot,
and nearly abreast of the place where the expectant company were collected and standing, silently
awaiting the commencement of the promised ceremony. Presently one of the two last-named, with
a preliminary flourish of his hand, slowly and loudly began:

  "Since we see the last logs fairly roll'd,
  And log-heaps full fifty, all told,
      We should deem it a shame
  If so handsome and well-cleared a field,
  Bidding fair for a hundred-fold yield,
      Be afforded no name."

To this, the man standing on the opposite pile, in the same loud and measured tone promptly
responded:

  "Then a name we will certainly give it,
  If you'll listen, and all well receive it,
  As justly you may:

  We will call it the thing it will make,
  We will name it the Pride of the Lake,
  Or the Job of a Day."

Before the last words of this unique duet had died on the ear, Comical Codman on his distant
perch straightened up, and, triumphantly clapping his sides like the boastful bird whose crowing
he could so wonderfully imitate, raised his shrill, loud, and long-drawn kuk-kuk-ke-o-ho in
a volume of sound that thrilled through the forest and sent its repeating echoes from hill
to hill along the distant borders of the lake.

"There, the dog has got the start of us!" exclaimed the hunter, joining the rest of the company
in their surprise and laughter at the prompt action of the trapper as well as at the striking
character of his performance,--"fairly the start of us; but let's follow him up close, boys.
So here goes for the new name!"

And the prolonged "hurra! hurra! hurra!" burst from the lips of the strong-voiced woodmen in
three tremendous cheers for the "Pride of the Lake and the Job of a Day."

All the labors and performances of the field being now over, the company gathered up their
tools, and by common consent moved towards the house, where, it was understood, an hour or
so, before starting for their respective homes, should be spent in rest, chatting with the
women, or other recreation, and a consultation also be held, among those interested, for forming
a company, fixing on the time, and making other arrangements for the contemplated trapping
and hunting expedition of the now fast-approaching season.

As the company were proceeding along promiscuously towards the house, Gaut Gurley, who had
thus far through the day manifested no desire for any particular conversation with Mr. Elwood,
nor in any way deported himself so as to lead others to infer a former acquaintance between
them, now suddenly fell in by his side; when, contriving to detain him till the rest had passed
on out of sight, he paused in his steps and said:

"Well, Elwood, I told you in the morning, you know, that we would do the work first and the
talking afterwards. The work has now been done, and I hope to your satisfaction."

"Yes--O yes--entirely," replied Elwood, hesitating in his doubt about what was to follow from
the other, whose unexpected conduct and stand for his benefit he hardly knew how to construe.
"Yes, the neighbors have done me a substantial favor, and you all deserve my hearty thanks."

"I was not fishing for thanks," returned Gaut, half-contemptuously, "but wished a few words
with you on private matters which concern only you and myself. And, to come to the point at
once, I would ascertain, in the first place, if you know whether you and I are understood,
in this settlement, to be old acquaintances or new ones?"

"New ones, I suppose, of course, unless it be known to the contrary through your means. I have
not said a word about it, nor have my family, I feel confident," replied Elwood, demurely.

"Very well; our former acquaintance is then wholly unsuspected here. Let it remain so. But
have you ever hinted to any of the settlers what you may have known or heard about me, or any
former passages of my life, which occurred when I used to operate in this section or elsewhere?"

"No, not one word."

"All is well, then. As you have kept and continue to keep my secrets, so shall yours be kept.
It is a dozen or fifteen years since I have been in this section at all. It is filling up with
new men. There are but two persons now in the settlement that can ever have seen or known me.
And they will not disturb me."

"Then there are two that have known you? Who can they be?"

"One is Wenongonet, an old Indian chief, as he calls himself, still living on one of the upper
lakes, they say, but too old to ramble or attend to anybody's business but his own. The other
is Phillips, the hunter."

"Phillips! Phillips, did you say? Why, as much as he has been at our house, he has never dropt
a word from which one could infer that you were not a perfect stranger to him."

"I did not suppose he had. Phillips is a peaceable, close-mouthed fellow; pretends not to know
any thing about anybody, when he thinks the parties concerned would rather have him ignorant;
keeps a secret by never letting anybody know he has one; and never means to cross another man's
path. I can get along with him, too. And the only question now is whether you and I can live
together in the same settlement."

"It will probably be your fault if we can't. I shall make war on no one."

"My fault! Why I wish to be on good terms with you; and yet, Elwood, you feel out of sorts
with me, and, in spite of all I can do, seem disposed to keep yourself aloof."

"If I do seem so, it may be because the past teaches me that the best way to avoid quarrels
is to avoid intimacies. You know how we last parted in that gambling-room. I had no business
to be there, I admit; but that was no excuse for your treatment."

"Treatment! Why, Elwood, is it possible you have been under a misapprehension about that, all
this time?" responded Gaut, with that peculiar wheedling manner which he so well knew how to
assume when he wished to carry his point with another. "My object then was to save the money
for you and me, so that we could divide it satisfactorily between ourselves. I was angry enough
at those other fellows, whom I saw getting all your money in that way, I confess; and, in what
I said, I was whipping them over your shoulders. I thought you understood it."

"I didn't understand it in that way," replied Elwood, surprised and evidently staggered at
the bold and unexpected statement. "I didn't take you so: could that be all you intended?"

"Certainly it was," resumed Gaut, in the same insinuating tone. "Had I supposed it necessary,
I should have seen you and explained it at the time. But it is explained now; so let it go,
and every thing go that has been unpleasant between us; let us forget all, and henceforth be
on good terms. Our children, as you may have suspected, seem intent on being friends; and why
should not we be friends also? It will be a gratification to them, and we can easily make it
the means of benefiting each other. You know how much I once did in helping you to property,--I
can do so again, if we will but understand each other. What say you, Elwood? Will you establish
the treaty, and give me your hand upon it?"

Elwood trembled as the other bent his fascinating gaze upon him, hesitated, began to demur
feebly; but, being artfully answered, soon yielded and extended his hand, which Gaut seized
and shook heartily; when at the suggestion of the latter they separated and proceeded by different
courses, so that they might not be seen together, to join the company at the house, whom they
found, as they expected, in consultation about the proposed trapping and hunting expedition
to the upper lakes, the time of starting, and the names and number of those volunteering to
join the association, only remaining to be fixed and ascertained. That time was finally fixed
on the 15th of September, and the company was formed to consist of the two Elwoods, Phillips,
Gurley, Codman, and such others as might thereafter wish to join them. This being settled,
they broke up and departed for their respective homes.

CHAPTER X.

      "All good to me is lost;
  Evil, be thou my good"--

The next scene in the slowly unfolding panorama of our story opens at the house of Gaut Gurley,
on the banks of the Magalloway. Gaut reached home, on the evening of the logging bee, about
sunset; and, having put out his team, entered his house, where he found his wife alone, his
daughter being absent on a visit to a neighbor. Contrary to what might have been expected,
after the favorable impression he had so evidently made on the settlers that day, and the attainment
of the still more important object with him, the regaining of his old fatal influence over
Elwood, he appeared morose and dissatisfied. Something had not worked to his liking in the
complicated machinery of his plans, and he showed his vexation so palpably as soon to attract
the attention of his submissive but by no means unobservant wife, who, after a while, plucked
up the courage to remark:

"What is the case, Gaut? Have you been working yourself to death for those Elwoods, to-day,
or has something gone wrong with you, that makes you look so sour this evening?"

"I have worked hard enough, God knows; but that I intended, for I had objects in view, most
of which I think I have accomplished, but--"

"But not all, I suppose you would say?"

"Well, yes, there is one thing that has not gone exactly to suit me, over there."

"What is that, Gaut?"

"It is of no consequence that you should know it. If I should name it, you would not see its
bearing on my plans, I presume."

"Perhaps not, for I don't know what your plans are, these days. I used to be able to guess
out the objects you had in view, before you came here, whether you told me or not. But, since
you have been in this settlement, I have been at loss to know what you are driving at; I can't
understand your movements at all."

"What movements do you mean, woman?"

"All of them; but particularly those that have to do with the Elwoods."

"What is there in my course toward them, since they came here, that you can't understand?"

"Well, I'll tell you, Gaut. When you believed Elwood to be rich, I could easily see that you
thought it would be an object to bring about an acquaintance between his son and only heir,
and our Avis; and I knew you was, those days, studying how it could be done, and I always suspected
that you in some way disposed of that picture of her for the purpose, instead of sending it
to your relations, and----"

"And what?" exclaimed Gaut, turning fiercely on his wife. "Suspected! What business had you
to suspect? And you told Avis what you thought, I suppose?"

"Not a word, never one word; for I knew she was so proud and particular, that, if she mistrusted
any thing of that kind to have been done, she would flounce in a minute. No, I never hinted
it to her, or anybody else, and it was guesswork, after all," replied the abashed wife, in
a deprecating tone,--she having been tempted, by the unusual mood which her stern husband had
manifested for discussing his private affairs with her, to venture to speak much more freely
than was her wont.

"Well, see that you don't hint any thing about that, nor any thing else you may take it into
your silly head to guess about my objects," rejoined the other, in a somewhat mollified tone.
"But now go on with what you were going to say."

"Well, I could understand your course before Elwood failed; but, when he did, I could see no
object, either in following him here, or having any thing particular to do with him, or any
of his family. But you seized on the first chance, after we came here, to court them, and have
followed it up; first, in the affair of the young man and Avis, and then, in drumming up the
whole settlement in getting up this logging bee for the old man. Now, Gaut, you don't generally
drive matters at this rate without something in view that will pay; and, as I can see nothing
to be gained worth so much pains, I don't understand it."

"I didn't suppose you did, and it is generally of little consequence whether you see through
my plans or not; but, in this case--"

Here Gaut suddenly paused, rose, and took several turns across the room, evidently debating
with himself how far it was policy to disclose his plans to his wife; when, appearing to make
up his mind, he again seated himself and resumed:

"Yes, as this is a peculiar case, and coming, perhaps, in part within the range of a woman's
help, if she knows what is wanted, and one which she may unintentionally hurt, if she don't,
I suppose I must give you some insight into my movements, so that you can manage accordingly,
help when you can, and do no mischief when you can't; as you probably will do, for you well
know the consequences of doing otherwise."

"I will do all I can, if I can understand what you want, and can see any object in it," meekly
responded the woman.

"Well, then, in the first place," resumed the other, "you know how many years I slaved myself,
and what risks I run, to help Elwood make that fortune; how he threw me off with simple wages,
instead of the share I always intended to have for such hard and dangerous services; and how
he failed, like a fool, before I got it."

"I knew it all."

"Then you can easily imagine how much it went against my grain to be balked in that manner.
At all events, it did; and I soon determined not to give up the game so, even if that was all.
And ascertaining that Elwood, by allowances made by the creditors to his wife, and sales of
furniture which they allowed the family to retain, brought quite a little sum of money into
the settlement,--enough, at any rate, to pay for his place, put him well afloat, and make him
a man of consequence in such a new place,--I soon made up my mind on buying and settling, for
present purposes, here, too, as we did."

"Yes, but what do you expect to make here more than in any other new country? And what can
you make out of the Elwoods, more than any other new settlers?"

"A good deal, if all things work to my mind. There is money to be made here. I could do well
in the fur business alone, and at the worst. And, by the aid of one who could be made to favor
my interests, there is no telling what could be done. Now, what claim had I on any other settler
to be that one to aid me? On Elwood I had a claim to help me to property in turn; and I determined
he should do it. But he must first be brought into the traces. He has got out with me, and
must be reconciled before I can do much with him."

"Well, I should think he ought to be by this time, after what you have been doing for him,
without his asking."

"Without asking? Why, that was just the way to do it. As I calculated, he was taken by surprise,
disarmed, and yielded; so that object is accomplished, as well as making the right impression
on the other settlers by beating them at their own work."

"I begin to understand, now."

"You will understand more, soon; that was only part of my object."

"What was the other part?"

"To insure the consummation of the match between Avis and young Elwood, which now seems in
fair progress, but which would be liable to be broken off, if his family should continue to
be unfriendly to me."

"Why, that was the thing I could understand least of all. The young man is well enough, I suppose,
but I thought you had looked to have Avis make more of herself, and do better for us. She is
still young, and we don't know what chances she may have. If she and the young man should keep
on intimate, and set their hearts on it, I don't know that I should oppose it much; but what
object we can have in helping it on, I can't, for the life of me, see. I have not said a word
against it, because I saw that you were for it. But, if I had been governed by my own notions,
I should have sooner discouraged than helped it on."

"I suspected so; and, for that reason, as well as others, I see I must tell you a secret, which
the Elwoods themselves don't know, and which I meant should never pass my lips; and, when I
tell it to you, see that it never passes yours. That young man, Claud Elwood, whom you think
so ordinary a match, is heir to a large property. A will is already executed making him so."

"Is that so, Gaut?"

"Yes, I have known it for months. I made the discovery before I decided to move here."

"It is a wonder how you could keep it from me."

"Humph! It is a greater wonder how I came to tell you at all, and I fear I shall yet repent
it; but things had come to a pass that seemed to make it necessary."

"But who is the man, and where, who is going to give the young man such a property?"

"It is not for you to know. I have told you enough for all my purposes. And this brings me
back to your first question, when I admitted that there was one thing which had not gone to
my liking. There was, indeed, one thing that disturbed and vexed me; and that was the discovery
I made, over there, today, that Elwood's wife is an enemy to me. I contrived all ways to get
speech with her, but she studiously avoided giving me a chance, nor was I able once even to
catch her eye, that I might give her a friendly nod of recognition. I know she never wished
me about, in former times, but I then attributed her coldness to the pride of the rich over
the poor. But I now think it was because she hated me. I am satisfied she is an enemy, at heart;
and will, for that reason, prove a secret and I fear dangerous opposer to a match which will
connect me with her family, unless something is done to reconcile her."

"How can that be done?"

"Perhaps you can do something. We start, in about a fortnight, on the fall hunt,--both the
Elwoods, myself, and others. When we are gone, you can go down into that neighborhood, get
acquainted with some of the women, and get them to call with you on Mrs. Elwood; and, if Avis
could be made to go and see her, so much the better. She would make an impression without trying.
You would have to manage, but how, I am not now prepared to decide. I will think of it, and
you may, and we will talk it over again. I have told you this, now, that you might understand
the situation of affairs; and the object, which you will now see, is worth playing for. And,
if we can carry this last point, the last danger will be removed,--unless Claud himself proves
fickle."

"I guess there will not be much danger of that in this settlement. What girl is there that
he could think of in comparison with Avis?"

"I think there is none; and still, there is one whom I would rather he would not see."

"Who can that be, I should like to know?"

"She is the daughter, or is claimed to be, of an old Indian chief, called Wenongonet, who lives
up the lakes, and was once a man of some consequence, both with Indians and whites."

"An Indian girl! Fudge!"

"You might alter that tune, if you should see her. She is white as you are, and has, most of
the time, of late years, lived in some of the old settlements, been schooled, and so on. I
saw her, soon after we came here, with another woman, at the south end of the lake, where she
was visiting in the family of one of the settlers, and I inquired her out, as she appeared
so much above the common run of girls. But she is courted, they say, by a young educated Indian,
called Tomah, from Connecticut-river way, where I used to see him. He ought to be able to take
care of her. But hark! what was that? It sounded like the trotting of some heavy horse. I'll see."

So saying, Gaut rose and went to the window, when, after casting a searching look out into
the road, and pausing a moment, in evident doubt and surprise at what met his gaze, he muttered:
"The devil is always at hand when you are talking about him; for that must be the very fellow,--Tomah
himself! But what a rig-out! Wife, look here."

The woman promptly came to the window, when her eyes were greeted with the appearance of a
smart-looking and jauntily-equipped young Indian, mounted on the back of a stately, antlered
moose, that, by some contrivance answering to a bridle, he was about bringing to a stand in
the road, opposite to the house. Without heeding the exclamations of surprise and questions
of his wife, who had never seen an animal of the kind, Gaut stepped out of the door, and, after
pausing long enough to satisfy himself that he was not known to the other, said, after the
distant greeting customary among strangers had been exchanged:

"That is a strange horse you are travelling on, friend."

"No matter that, when he carry you well," replied the Indian, whose language was a little idiomatic,
notwithstanding his education.

"Perhaps not; but I should think he would be a hard trotter for most riders."

"Moose don't care for that: he say, he carry you ten miles an hour, you not the one to complain:
if you no like, you no ride."

"How did you tame him to be so manageable?"

"Caught him a little calf, four years ago; trained him young to mind halter; then ox-work,
horse-work. This year ride him. No trouble, you let him enough to eat."

"Where did you catch him?"

"Over the mountain. Live there. My name John Tomah. Been here to hunt some, but not see you
before. Another man live in this house last spring."

"Yes, I am a new-comer. But I have heard some of the settlers speak of you, I think. You are
the Indian that has been to college?"

"Yes, been there some, but in the woods more. Love to hunt, catch beaver, sable, and such things.
Come here to hunt now, soon as time. But must have moose kept when off hunting: thought the
man lived here do that. May be you keep him, while I come back. Pay you, all right."

"Yes, if I could; but where could I keep him? He would jump any pasture or yard fence there
is here, and then run away, would he not?"

"No. Stay, after week or two, and get wonted, same as horse or cow. I go to work, make yard,
keep him in a while, and feed him with grass or browse. I tend him first. You keep him,--you
keep me, till go hunting; then get boy. Pay well, much as you suit."

Gaut Gurley never acted without a strong secret motive. He had been intently studying the young
Indian during the conversation just detailed, with a view of forming an opinion how far his
subservience could be secured; and, appearing to become satisfied on this point, and believing
the first great step for making him what was desired would be accomplished by yielding to his
request gracefully, however much family inconvenience it might occasion, Gaut now turned cordially
to him, and said:

"Yes, Tomah, I will do it. I like your looks, and I will do it for you, but wouldn't for anybody
else. We can get along with your animal, somehow; and you shall stay, too, till our company
start on our hunt, and then you shall go with us. I will see that you have fair play. I will
be your friend; and perhaps I may want a good turn of you some time."

"Like that; go with you; show you how catch beaver. Do all I can."

"Very well; and perhaps I can help you in some way. You have an affair that you feel a peculiar
interest in, with somebody on the upper lake, and--"

"You know that?" interrupted the startled but evidently not displeased Indian.

"Yes, I have heard something about it."

"But how you help there?"

"O, I can contrive a way for you to make the matter work as you wish, if you will only persevere."

"Persevere? Ah, means keep trying. Yes, do that; but she don't talk right, now; perhaps, will,
you help, then we be great friends, sure."

The treaty being thus concluded, the gratified young Indian dismounted, with his rifle and
pack, containing his blanket, hunting-suit, etc., which he carried before him, laid across
the shoulder of his novel steed; and, under the guidance of Gaut, he led the animal into the
cow-yard, where he was tied and fed, and the fence, already made high to exclude the wolves,
as usual among first settlers, was topped out by laying on a few additional poles, so as to
prevent the possibility of his escape. This being done, Gaut conducted his new-found friend
into the house, and introduced him, to his wife and also to his daughter, who had by this time
returned, as the young Indian that had been to college, but still had a liking for the woods.

"I have often thought I should feel interested in seeing an educated native of the forest,"
remarked Avis, after the civilities of the introduction had been exchanged. "Books, when you
became able to read and understand them," she continued, turning to the Indian, "books must
have opened a new world to you, and the many new and curious things you found in them must
have been exceedingly gratifying to you, Mr. Tomah."

"Yes, many curious things in books," replied Tomah, indifferently.

"And also much valuable knowledge?" rejoined Avis, interrogatively.

"Valuable enough to some folks, suppose," replied the other, with the air of one speaking on
a subject in which he felt no particular interest. "Lawyers make money; preachers get good
pay for talking what they learn in books; so doctors."

"But surely," persisted the former, who, though disappointed in his replies, yet still expected
to see, if she could draw him out, the naturally shrewd mind of the native made brilliant by
the light of science, "surely you consider an education a good thing for all, giving those
who receive it a great advantage over those who do not?"

"Yes, education good thing," responded Tomah, his stolid countenance beginning to lighten up
at the idea which now struck him as involving the chief if not the sole benefit of his scientific
acquirements; "yes, education good, very good, sometime. Instance: I go to Boston with my moose
next winter; show him for pay, one, two days; then reckon up money--add; then reckon up expenses--subtract;
tell how much I make. Make much, stay; make little, go to other place. Yes, education good thing."

"But I should think you might do better with your education than you could by following the
usual employments of your kind of people," resumed the other, still unwilling to see the subject
of her scrutiny fall so much below her preconception of an educated Indian. "You say, lawyers,
preachers, and doctors make money from the superiority which their education has given them;
now, why don't you profit by your education, and go into a profession like one of theirs, and
obtain by it the same wealth and position which you see them enjoying?"

"Did try," replied Tomah, with an evident effort to elevate his language, and meet the question
candidly. "When I came home from the school, people all say, Now you go and live like white
folks, in village, and study to be doctor, make money, be great man. So went; study one year;
try hard to like; but no use. Uneasy all the time; could not keep down the Indian in me; he
always rising up, more every day, all the time drawing me away to the woods,--pull, pull, pull.
I fight against him; put him down little some time; but he soon up again, stronger than ever.
Found could not make myself over again; must be as first made; so gave up; left study for the
woods; and said, Now let Indian be Indian as long as he like."

Satisfied, or rather silenced, by Tomah's reasons, Avis turned the conversation by asking him
to relate to her how he caught and tamed his moose. She found him completely at home in this
and other of his adventures in the forest, which he was thus encouraged to relate, and in which
he often became a graphic and interesting narrator, and displayed the keen observation of the
objects of nature, together with the other peculiar qualities of his race, to so much advantage
that she soon relinquished her favorite idea of ever finding a philosopher in an educated Indian.

In presenting the above picture, drawn from one of the many living prototypes that have fallen
within our personal observation, or come within our knowledge derived from reliable sources,
we had no wish to disparage the praiseworthy acts and motives of those spirited and patriotic
men who, like Moore, in establishing his well-known charity school, in connection with Dartmouth
college, may have, in times past, founded and endowed schools for the education of the natives
of the forest; nor would we dampen the faith and hopes of those philanthropists who still believe
in the redemption of that dwindling race by the aids of science and civilization; but we confess
our inability to perceive any general results, flowing from the attempts of that character,
at all adequate to the pains and outlay bestowed on the experiment. And we think we cannot
be alone in this opinion. We believe that those results, when gathered up so that all their
meagreness could be seen, have sadly disappointed public expectations; that this once favorite
object and theory, of elevating and benefiting the red man by taking him from his native woods
and immuring him in the schoolroom, has been, in the great majority of the cases, a futile
one; and that whole system, indeed, can now be regarded as but little less than a magnificent
failure.

There have been, it is true, some brilliant exceptions to the application of our remarks, such
as may be found in the pious and comparatively learned Samson Occom, the noted Indian preacher
of the times of the Pilgrims; in the eloquent Ojibway chief of our own times, and a few others;
as well as in the person we have already introduced into this work, the intelligent and beautiful
Fluella. But only as exceptions to the general rule, we fear, can we fairly regard them,--for,
where there is one Occom, there are probably ten Tomahs.

Education, or so much of it as he has the patience and ability to acquire, seems often to unsettle
and confuse the mind of the red man; for, while his old notions and traditions are disturbed
or swept away by it, he fails of grasping and digesting the new ones which science and civilization
present to his mind; and he falters and gropes, like an owl in the too strong light of the
unaccustomed sun.

But now, in his new and anomalous position, even this happiness and this content is taken away,
while he is unable to embrace an adequate substitute. His old faith is shaken, but no new one
is established. Before, he could see God in clouds or hear him in the wind; but now he can
scarcely see God in any thing. His physical system, in the mean while, deprived as it is of
the forest atmosphere, in which it was alone fitted to exist and reach its greatest perfection,
suffers even more than his mental one. And his whole man, both mental and physical, begins
to degenerate, and soon dwindles into insignificance. Yes, it is only in his native forests
that the Indian appears in his wild and peculiar dignity of character. There only can he become
a being of romance, and there only a hero. And there, in conclusion, we would say, in view
of the unsatisfactory results of the experiments made to elevate him by any of the methods
yet adopted,--there we would let him remain.

But we must now on with our tale, the main incidents of which we have only foreshadowed, not
touched.

CHAPTER XI.

  "Hearts will be prophets still."

The week succeeding the logging bee was an extremely busy one with the Elwoods, who still had
a heavy task to perform on their new field, before it could be considered properly cleared
or fitted for seeding and harrowing. Sixty days before, that field was covered with a heavy
growth of primitive forest, standing in its native majesty, a mountain mass of green vigor
and sturdy life, and as seemingly invincible against the assaults of man as it had been against
those of the elements whose fury it had so long withstood. But the busy and fatal axe had done
its work. That towering forest had been laid prostrate with the earth, and the first process
of the Herculean task of converting the forest into the field had been completed. The second
and third process, also, in the burning of the slash and the gathering the trunks of the trees
into log-heaps, as we have seen, had been in turn successfully accomplished. But the fourth
and last process still remained to be performed. Those unseemly log-heaps, cumbering no inconsiderable
portion of the field, must be disposed of, to complete the work. This was now the first task
of the Elwoods, and time pressed for its speedy execution. Accordingly, the next morning after
the bee, they sallied out, each with a blazing brand in his hand, and commenced the work of
firing the piles,--a work which, unlike that of firing a combustible and readily catching slash,
required not only considerable time, but often the exercise of much skill and patience. But
they steadily persevered, and, before sunset, had the gratification of beholding every one
of those many scores of huge log-piles, that thickly dotted the ground, clearly within the
grasp of the devouring element; and afterwards of seeing that grasp grow stronger and stronger
on the solid material on which it had securely fastened, till, to the eye of fancy, the dark
old forest seemed by day to be reproduced in the numerous, thickly-set columns of smoke that
shot upward and spread out into over-arching canopies above, while, with the gathering darkness
of the night, that forest seemed gradually to take the form of a distant burning city in the
manifold tapering pillars of fire which everywhere rose from the field, fiercely illuminating
the dark and sombre wood-wall of the surrounding forest, and dimly glimmering over the sleeping
waters of river and lake beyond.

They had now made the fire their servant, and got it safely at work for them; but that servant,
to insure its continued and profitable action, must be constantly fed and fostered. The logs,
becoming by the action of the fire partially consumed, and, by thus losing their contact with
each other, ceasing to burn, required, every few hours, to be rolled together, adjusted, and
repacked; when, being already thoroughly heated and still partly on fire, they would soon burst
out again into a brisk blaze. This tending and re-packing of the piles demanded, for many of
the succeeding days, the constant attention of the Elwoods; who, going out early each morning,
and keeping up their rounds at short intervals through the day and to a late hour at night,
assiduously pursued their object, till they had seen every log-heap disappear from the field,
and the last step of their severe task fully accomplished.

Few of those who live in cities, villages, or other places than those where agricultural pursuits
prevail; few of those, indeed, who have been tillers only of the subdued and time-mellowed
soils of the old States and countries, have any adequate conception of the immense amount of
hard labor required to clear off the primitive forest, and prepare the land for the first crop;
nor have they, consequently, any just appreciation of the degree of resolution, energy, and
endurance necessary to insure continued perseverance in subduing one piece of forest-land after
another, till a considerable opening is effected. It is the labor of one man's life to clear
up a new farm; and few there be, among the multitudes found making the attempt, who have the
sustaining will and resolution--even if the pecuniary ability is not wanting--to accomplish
that formidable achievement. Probably not one in five of all the first pioneer settlers of
a new country ever remain to become its permanent settlers. The first set of emigrants, or
pioneers, are seen beginning with great resolution and energy, and persevering unfalteringly
till the usual ten-acre lot is cleared, the log-house thrown up, and the settlement of the
family effected. Another piece of forest is the next year attacked, but with a far less determined
will, and the clearing prosecuted with a proportionate lack of energy and resolution; and the
job, after being suffered to linger along for months beyond the usual period for completion,
is finally finished. But, in view of the hard labors and prolonged struggles they have experienced
in their two former trials for conquering the wilderness, they too often now falter and hesitate
at a third attempt. Perhaps the lack of means to hire that help, which would make the toil
more endurable, comes also into the case; and the result is that no new clearing is begun.
They live along a while as they are; but, for want of the first crops of the newly-cleared
land and the usual accessions to their older fields, they soon find themselves on the retrograde,
and finally sell out to a new set of incoming settlers, who in their turn begin with fresh
vigor, and with more means generally for prosecuting advantageously the work which had discouraged
or worn out their predecessors. But even of this second set a large proportion fail to succeed,
and, like the former, eventually yield their places to more enterprising and able men, who,
with those of the two former sets of settlers that had succeeded in overcoming the difficulties
and retaining their places, now join in making up the permanent settlers of the country.

Such is generally the history of the early settlement of every new country. Those who have
endured the most hardship, encountered the greatest difficulties, and performed the hardest
labor, do not generally reap the reward which might eventually crown their toils, but leave
that reward to be enjoyed by those to whom such hardships and toils are comparatively unknown.
This seems hard and unjust; but, from the unequal conditions and characters of men, it is doubtless
a necessary state of things, and one which, though it may occasionally be somewhat modified,
will never, probably, as a general thing, be very essentially altered.

The Elwoods, having now thus brought the labors of clearing to a successful close, next proceeded
to the lighter and more cleanly task of taking the incipient step towards securing the ever-important
first crop which was to reward them, in a good part, for their arduous toils. Accordingly,
the previously engaged supply of winter wheat intended for seed was brought home, the requisite
help and ox-work enlisted, the seed sown, and the harrows and hoes put in motion to insure
its lodgment beneath the surface of the broken soil. And, by the end of the second day from
its commencement, this task was also completed, leaving our two persevering settlers only the
work of gathering in the small crops of grain and potatoes they had succeeded in raising on
their older grounds, to be performed before leaving home on the contemplated trapping and hunting
expedition; the appointed day for which was still sufficiently distant to allow them abundant
time to do this, and also to make all other of the necessary arrangements and preparations
for that, to them, novel and interesting event.

But how, in the meanwhile, stood that domestic drama of love and its entanglements, which was
destined to be deeply interwoven with the other principal incidents of this singular story?
All on the surface seemed as bright and unruffled as the halcyon waters of the sleeping ocean
before the days of storm have come to move and vex it. But how was it within the vail of the
heart and teeming mind, where the currents and counter-currents of that subtle but powerful
passion flow and clash unseen, often gaining their full height and unmasterable strength before
any event shall occur to betray their existence to the public. How was it there? We shall see.

While the events we have described in the last foregoing chapters were transpiring, Mrs. Elwood
held her peace, studiously avoiding all allusion to what still constituted the burden of her
mind,--the thickening intimacy between her family and the Gurleys; but, though she was silent
on the subject, yet her heart was not any the less sad, nor her thoughts any the less busy.
She had been made aware that a reconciliation had taken place between her husband and Gaut
Gurley; and she had seen how artfully the latter had brought it about, and regained his old
fatal influence over the former. She believed she fully understood the motives which actuated
Gaut in all these movements. And she now looked on in helpless anguish of heart to see the
toils thus drawn tighter and tighter around the unconscious victims, and those victims, too,
her husband and son, with whose happiness and welfare her own was indissolubly connected. She
saw it with anguish, because her feelings never for once were permitted even the alleviation
of a doubt that it could result in aught else than evil to her family. She could not reason
herself into any belief of Gaut's reformation. She felt his black heart constantly throwing
its shadow on to her own; she felt this, but could not give to others, nor perhaps even to
herself, what might be deemed a satisfactory reason for her impressions and forebodings; for
in her was exemplified the words of the poet:

  "The mind is capable to show
  Thoughts of so dim a feature,
  That consciousness can only know
  Their presence and their nature."

Such thoughts were hers,--dim and flitting, indeed; but she felt conscious of their continued
presence, of their general character, and deeply conscious what they portended. They took one
shape, moved in one course, and all pointed one way, and that was to evil,--some great impending
evil to the two objects of her love and solicitude.

"But is there no hope?" she murmured aloud, in the fullness of her heart, while deeply pondering
the matter, one day, as she sat alone at her open window, looking out on her husband and son
engaged in their harvest, which she knew they were hurrying on to a close, before leaving her
on the contemplated long, and perhaps perilous, expedition into the wilderness,--a circumstance
that doubtless caused the subject, in the thus awakened state of her anxieties, to weigh at
this time peculiarly heavy on her mind. "Is there no hope," she repeated, with a sigh, "that
this impending calamity may in some part be averted? Must they both be sacrificed? Must the
faults of the erring father be visited on the innocent son, who had become the last hope of
the mother's heart? Kind Heaven! may not that son, at least, be delivered from the web of toils
into which he has so strangely fallen, and yet be saved? Grant, O grant that hope--that one
ray of hope--in this my hour of darkness!"

But what sound was that which now fell upon her ear, as if responsive to her ejaculation? It
was a light tap or two on the door, which, after the customary bidding of walk in had been
pronounced, was gently opened, when a young female of extreme beauty and loveliness entered.
Mrs. Elwood involuntarily rose, and stood a moment, mute with surprise, in the unexpected presence.
Soon recovering, however, she invited the fair stranger to a seat, still deeply wondering who
she could be and what had occasioned her visit.

"You are the good woman of the house?--the wife of the new settler?--the mother of Mr. Claud
Elwood?" asked the stranger girl, pausing between each interrogatory, till she had received
an affirmative nod from Mrs. Elwood.

"Yes," replied the latter kindly, but with an air of increasing curiosity, "yes, I am Mrs.
Elwood. Would you like to see my son, Claud?"

"No," rejoined the girl, in the same subdued and musical accents. "No, it was not him, but
you, I came to see and speak with," she added, carefully, withdrawing a screening handkerchief
from a light parcel she bore in her hand, and displaying a small work-basket of exquisite make,
which, advancing with hesitating steps, she presented to the other, as she resumed:

"I came with this, good lady, to see if you would be suited to have such an article?"

"It is very pretty," said Mrs. Elwood, examining the workmanship with admiration, "beautiful,
indeed. Did you make it?"

"I did, lady," said the other modestly.

"Well, it certainly does great credit to your skill and taste," rejoined the other. "I should,
of course, be pleased to own it, but I have little money to pay for such things. You ought
to sell it for quite a sum."

"But I do not wish to sell it," responded the girl, looking up to Mrs. Elwood with an expostulating
and wounded expression. "I do not wish to take money for it; but hoped you would like it well
enough to accept it for a gift,--a small token."

"O, I should," said Mrs. Elwood, "if I was entitled to any such present; but what have I ever
done to deserve it of you? I do not even know who you are, kind stranger."

"They, call me Fluella," responded the other, the blood slightly suffusing her fair, rounded
cheek. "You have not seen me, I know. You have not done me the great favor that brings my gratitude.
It is your brave son that has done both."

"O, I understand now," exclaimed Mrs. Elwood. "You are the chief's daughter, whom Claud and
Mr. Phillips helped out of a difficulty and danger on the rapids, some time since. But your
token should be given to Claud, should it not?"

"It would be unsuitable, too much," quickly replied the maiden, in a low, hurried tone. "I
could not do a thing like that. But if you would accept such a small thing?"

"I cannot but appreciate and honor your delicacy," returned Mrs. Elwood, with a look of mingled
admiration and respect. "I think you must be an excellent girl; and I will accept your present,--yes,
thankfully,--and never forget the manner in which it was bestowed."

"Your words are in my heart, lady. I came, feeling much doubtful; I return, much happy," said
the maiden, rising to depart.

"Do not go yet," interposed the matron, who was beginning to feel a lively interest in the
other; "do not go yet. Claud should know you are here. I will call him," she added, starting
for the door.

"O no, no,--do not, do not. He would not wish to be troubled by one like me," hurriedly entreated
the maiden, with a look of alarmed delicacy.

"O, you are mistaken. He would be pleased to see you, and expect to be called," said Mrs. Elwood,
in a tone of gentle remonstrance, while pausing at the unexpected objection. "But it is unnecessary;
for I see that he is already coming, and in a moment will be here," she added, glancing out
of the window.

Having made the announcement, she turned encouragingly to the maiden, to reassure her, believing
her request that Claud should not be called in proceeded entirely from over-diffidence. But
one glance of her quick and searching eye was sufficient to apprise the former that there was
a deeper cause for those tender alarms. The cheeks of the beautiful girl were deeply suffused
with crimson, her bosom was heaving wildly, and her whole frame was trembling like an aspen.
As her eyes met the surprised gaze of the matron, she became conscious that her looks had betrayed
the secret she was the most anxious to conceal; and she cast an imploring look on the face
of the other, as if to entreat the mercy of shielding the weakness.

Mrs. Elwood understood the silent appeal; and, approaching and laying her hand gently on the
shoulder of the other, said, in a low, kindly tone:

"Have no fears. You have made a friend of me."

The girl silently removed the hand, brought it to her lips, and, as a bright tear-drop fell
upon it, kissed it eagerly. The two then separated, and resumed their respective seats, to
compose themselves before the expected entrance should be made.

In a few moments Claud carelessly entered the house; but stopped short in surprise, at the
threshold, on so unexpectedly seeing the well-remembered face and form of the heroine of his
late romantic adventure on the rapids, in the room with his mother. But, almost instantly recovering
his usual manner, he gallantly advanced to the trembling maiden, took her by the hand, and
respectfully inquired about her welfare, and pleasantly adverted to the singular circumstances
under which they had become acquainted. Soon becoming in a good measure assured, by a reception
so much more condescending and cordial than she had dared hope for, from one whose image she
had been cherishing as that of some superior being, the grateful and happy girl, now forgetful
of her wish to depart, gradually regained her natural ease and vivacity, and sustained her
part in the general conversation that now ensued, with an intelligence and instinctive refinement
of thought and expression that equally charmed and surprised her listeners. She at length,
however, rose to depart, observing that her father, who was in waiting for her at the landing,
would chide her for her long delay; when Claud offered to attend her to the lake. To this she
at first objected; but, on Claud's assurance that he should be pleased with the walk, and that
it would afford him the opportunity of meeting her father, whom he had a curiosity to see,
she blushingly assented, and the couple sociably took their way to the lake together, leaving
Mrs. Elwood deeply revolving in her mind the new train of thoughts that had been awakened by
the remarkable personal beauty and evident rare qualities of her fair visitor, and the discovery
of the state of her feelings,--thoughts which the matron laid up in her heart, but forbade
her tongue to utter.

On reaching the landing, Fluella drew a bone whistle from her pocket, and blew a blast so loud
and shrill that the sound seemed to penetrate the inmost depths of the surrounding forest.
The next moment a similar sound rose in response from the woods, apparently about half a mile
distant, on the right.

"He has heard me; that was my father's whistle. He has been taking a short bout in the woods
with his rifle, but will now soon be here. And Mr. Elwood will wait, I know, for the chief
wishes to thank the brave that rescued his daughter," said the maiden, looking inquiringly
at Claud.

"Yes," replied Claud, "yes, certainly; for, even without company, I am never tired of standing
on this commanding point, and looking out on this beautiful lake and its surrounding scenery."

"You Indians!" said Elwood, looking at the other with a playful yet half-chiding expression.
"Why, Fluella, should a stranger look at your fair skin, hear you conversing so well in our
language, and quoting so appropriately from our books, he would hardly believe you an Indian,
I think, unless you told him."

"Then I would tell him, Mr. Elwood," responded the maiden, with dignity, and a scarcely perceptible
spice of offended pride in her manner. "I am one,--on my father's side, at least, wholly so;
and, for the first ten or twelve years of my life, was but a child of the woods and the wigwam;
and I will never shame at my origin, so far as that matters."

"But you did not learn to read in the wigwam, Fluella?" said Claud, inquiringly.

"No," replied the girl; the proud air she had assumed, while speaking of her origin, quickly
subsiding into one of meekness. "No; but I supposed that Mr. Phillips, who knows, might have
told you that, for many years past, I have lived much with your people, learned their ways,
been to their schools, and read their books. And, in owning my natural red father, may be I
should have also said, I have a good white father, who has done every thing for the poor, ignorant,
Indian girl."

"But where does this good and generous white father live, and what is his name?" asked Claud.

"He lives near the seaside city," answered she, demurely; "I may say so far. But I do not name
him, ever. We think it not best. But, if he comes here sometime, as he may, you shall see him,
Mr. Elwood."

At this point of the dialogue, the attention of its participants was arrested by the sound
of breaking twigs and other indications of the near approach of some one from the forest; and,
the next moment, emerging through the thick underbrush, which he parted by the muzzle of his
rifle as he made his way, the expected visitant came into view. Seemingly unmindful of the
presence of others near by, or of the curious and scrutinizing gaze of Claud, he advanced with
a firm, elastic tread, and stately bearing, exhibiting a strong, erect frame, a large, intellectual
head, and handsomely moulded features, with a countenance of a grave and thoughtful cast, but
now and then enlivened by the keenly-glancing black eyes by which it was particularly distinguished.
With the exception of moccasins and wampum belt, he was garbed in a good English dress; and,
so far as his exterior was in question, might have easily been mistaken, at a little distance,
for some amateur hunter from the cities; while, from the vigor of his movements, and other
general appearance, he might have equally well passed for a man of the middle age, had not
the frosts of time, which were profusely sprinkled over his temples, and other visible parts
of his head, betrayed the secret of his advanced age.

"My daughter is not alone," he said, in very fair English utterance, coming to a stand ten
or twelve yards distant from the young couple.

"No" promptly replied the daughter, assuming the dignified tone and attitude usual among those
engaged in the ceremonies of some formal presentation, or public introduction. "No, but my
father will be pleased to learn that this is the Mr. Claud Elwood, who did your daughter such
good service in her dangers on the rapids, and whom she has now conducted here, that he might
have the opportunity to see the chief, and receive the thanks which it is more fitting for
the father than the daughter to bestow."

"My daughter's words are good," said the chief. "The young brave has our thanks to last; but
the Red Man's thanks are acted, the White Man's spoken. Does the young man understand the creed
of our people?"

Fluella looked at Claud as if he was the one to answer the question, and he accordingly remarked:

"I have ever heard, chief, that your people always notice a benefit done to them, and that
he who does them one secures their lasting gratitude."

"The young man," rejoined the chief, considerately, "has heard words that make, sometime, too
much; they make true, the good-doer doing no wrong to us after. But when he takes advantage
of our gratitude he wipes out the debt; he does more,--he stands to be punished like one an
enemy always."

The maiden here cast an uneasy glance at Claud, and a deprecating one at her father, at the
unnecessary caution, as she believed it, which she perceived the latter intended to convey
by his words to the former. But, to her relief, Claud did not appear as if he thought the remarks
had any application to himself, for he frankly responded:

"Your distinction is a just one, chief. Your views about these matters are my own views. Your
creed is a good creed, so far as the remembrance of benefits is concerned; and I wish I could
see it observed as generally among my people as I believe it to be among yours. But, chief,
your daughter makes too much out of my assistance, the other day. I did only a common duty,--what
I should have been a coward not to have done. I have no claim for any particular gratitude
from her or you."

"Our gratitude was strong before; the young man now makes stronger," remarked the other, exchanging
appreciating glances with his daughter.

"No, chief," resumed Claud, "I did not come here to boast of that small service, nor claim
any thanks for it, but to see a sagamore, who could give me the knowledge of the Red Man which
I would like to possess; to see one who, in times gone by, was as a king in this lake country.
His own history, and that of his people especially, I would like to hear. They must be full
of interest and instruction to an inquirer like me. Will not the chief relate it briefly? I
have leisure,--my ears are open to his words."

"Would the young man know the history of Wenongonet, alone?" said the other, with a musing
and melancholy air. "It may be told easier than by words. Does the young man see on yonder
hill that tall, green pine, which stands braced on the rocks, and laughs at the storms, because
it is strong and not afraid?"

"I do."

"That is Wenongonet fifty winters ago. Now, does the young man see that tall, dry pine, in
the quiet valley below, with a slender young tree shooting up, and tenderly spreading its green
branches around that aged trunk, so it would shield its bare sides in the colds of winter,
and fan its leafless head in the heats of summer?"

"Yes, I see that, also."

"That dry tree, already tottering to its fall, is Wenongonet now."

"But what is the young tree with which you have coupled it?"

"The young man has eyes," said the speaker, glancing affectionately at his blushing daughter.

"But the young man," he resumed after a thoughtful pause, "would know more of the history of
the Red Men who once held the country as their own? Let him read it in the history of his own
people, turned about to the opposite. Let him call the white man's increase from a little beginning,
the red man's decrease from a great,--the white man's victories, the red man's defeats,--the
white man's flourishing, the red man's fading; and he will have the history of the red men,
and the reasons of their sad history, in this country.

"Two hundred year-seasons ago, the Abenaques were the great nation of the east. From the sea
to the mountains they were the lords of Mavoshen. [Footnote: The name by which the Province
of Maine was designated by the early voyagers, and the Indian word probably from which the
present name of the State of Maine was derived.] They were a nation of warriors and a wise
and active people. But, of all the four tribes--the Sokokis, the Anasquanticooks, the Kenabas,
the Wawenocks--who made up this great nation, the Sokokis were the wisest and bravest. Wenongonet
is proud when he thinks of them. They were his tribe. All the land that sent its waters through
the Sawocotuc [Footnote: The Indian appellation of the river Saco, which is doubtless an abbreviation
of the Indian name here introduced.] to the sea was theirs. They stood with their warriors
at the outposts against the crowding white settlers from the west and south. They were pleased
to stand there, because it was the post of danger and of honor in the nation. And there they
bravely kept their stand against that wide front of war, and took the battle on themselves,
till the snows of more than a hundred winters were made red by their rifles and tomahawks.
But those who court death must often fall into his embrace. So with the Sokokis. They were
at first a great and many people; but they wasted and fell, as time, the bringer of new and
strange things, wore away, before the thick and more thick coming of their greedy and pushing
foes,--by their fire-water in peace and their bullets in war, till the many became few, the
great small. What the bloody Church, with his swarm of picked warriors, had left after his
four terrible comings with fire and slaughter, the bold Lovewell finished, on that black day
when the great Paugus and all the flower of the tribe found red graves round their ancient
stronghold and home,--their beloved Pegwacket. [Footnote: The name of a once populous Indian
village, which occupied the present beautiful site of the village of Fryeburg, Me., near Lovewell's
Pond, where the sanguinary conflict here alluded to occurred in 1725.] This was the last time
the tribe was ever assembled as a separate people. The name of the Sokokis, at which so many
pale faces had been made paler, was buried in the graves of the brave warriors who had here
died to defend its glory. The feeble remnant, panic-struck and heart-broken, fled northward,
and, like the withered leaves of the forest flying before the strong east wind, were scattered
and swept over the mountains into Canada; all but the family of Paugus, who took their stand
on these lakes, where his son, Waurumba, took the empty title of chief and, dying, left it
still more empty to Wenongonet, the last of the long line of sagamores,--the last ever to stand
here to tell the young white man the story of their greatness, and the fate of their tribe."

On concluding his story, the chief turned to his daughter and significantly pointed to the
lengthening shadows of the trees on the water, with a motion of his head towards their home
up the lakes.

"The chief thinks," said Fluella, arousing herself from the thoughtful attitude in which she
had been silently listening to the conversation,--"the chief thinks it time we were on the
water, on our way home. We shall have now to bid Mr. Elwood a good-evening."

So saying, she stepped lightly into the canoe and took her seat. She was immediately followed
by the chief, who, quickly handling his oar, sent the light craft, with a single stroke, some
rods into the lake, when, partially turning its bow towards the spot where Claud was standing
on the shore, he said:

"Should the young man ever stray from his companions in the hunt, or find himself weary, or
wet, or cold, or in want of food, when out on the borders of the Molechunk-a-munk, let him
feel, and doubt not, that he will be welcome to the lodge of Wenongonet."

"And, if Mr. Elwood should be in the vicinity of our lake this fall, and not happen to be in
a so very sad condition, he might, perhaps, find a good welcome on calling,--so, especially,
if he come before the time of the first snows," added Fluella, playfully at first, but with
a slight suffusion of the cheek as she proceeded to the close.

"I thank the chief," responded Claud with a respectful bow. "And I thank you, my fair friend,"
he continued, turning more familiarly to Fluella. "I hope to come, some time. But why do you
speak of the first snows?"

"O, the birds take wing for a warmer country about that time, and perhaps some who have not
wings may be off with them," replied Fluella, in the same tone of playfulness and emotion.

A stately bow from the father, and another with a sweetly eloquent smile from the daughter,
completed, on their part, the ceremonies of the adieu; when the canoe was headed round, and,
by the easy and powerful paddle-strokes of the still vigorous old man, sent bounding over the
waters of the glassy lake.

Slowly and thoughtfully Claud turned and took his way homeward. "Who could have expected,"
he soliloquized, "to witness such an exhibition of intellect and exalted tone of feeling in
one of that despised race, as that proud old man displayed, in his eloquently-told story? And
that daughter! Well, what is she to me? My faith is given to another. But why feel this strange
interest? Yet, after all, it is probably nothing but what any one would naturally feel in the
surprise occasioned on beholding such qualities in such a place and person. No, no, it can
be nothing more; and I will whistle it to the winds."

And he accordingly quickened his steps, and literally began to whistle a lively tune, by way
of silencing the unbidden sensation which he felt conscious had often, since he first met this
fair daughter of the wilds, been lurking within. But, though he thus resolved and reasoned
the intruding feeling into nothing, yet he felt he would not like to have Avis Gurley know
how often the sparkling countenance and witching smile of this new and beautiful face had been
found mingling themselves with the previously exclusive images of his dreams. But, if they
did so before this second interview, would they do it less now? His head resolutely answered,
"Yes, less, till they are banished." His heart softly whispered, "No." And we will not anticipate
by disclosing whether head or heart was to prove the better prophet.

CHAPTER XII.

  "Away! nor let me loiter in my song,
  For we have many a mountain path to tread,
  And many a varied shore to sail along,--
  By truth and sadness, not by fiction, led."

The day agreed on, by the trappers, for starting on their expedition into the unbroken wilds
around and beyond the upper lakes to the extreme reservoirs of the lordly Androscoggin, had
at length arrived. All the married men belonging to the company, not having sons of their own
old enough, had engaged those of their neighbors to come and remain with their families during
their absence from home, which, it was thought probable, would be prolonged to nearly December.
Steel-traps and rifles had been put in order, ammunition plentifully provided, and supplies
of such provisions as could not be generally procured by the rifle and fish-hook in the woods
and its waters, carefully laid in; and all were packed up the night previous, and in readiness
for a start the next morning.

It had been agreed that the company should rendezvous on the lake-shore, at the spot which
we have already often mentioned, and which, by common consent, was now beginning to be called
Elwood's Landing. And, accordingly, early on the appointed morning, Mark Elwood and his son
Claud, having dispatched their breakfast, which Mrs. Elwood had been careful to make an unusually
good and plentiful one, shouldered their large hunting packs, with their blankets neatly folded
and strapped outside; and, having bid that anxious and thoughtful wife and mother a tender
farewell, left the house and proceeded with a lively step to the border of the lake. On reaching
their canoe at the landing, they glanced inquiringly around them for some indications of the
presence or coming of their expected companions. But not a living object met their strained
gaze, and not the semblance of a sound greeted their listening ears. A light sheeted fog, of
varying thickness and density in the different portions of the wide expanse,--here thin and
spray-like, as if formed of the breath of some marine monster, and there thickening to the
appearance of the stratiform cloud,--lay low stretched, in long, slow-creeping undulations,
over the bosom of the waveless lake.

"The first on the ground, after all," exclaimed Mr. Elwood, on peering out sharply through
the partially-obstructing fog in the direction of the outlet of the lake, up through which
most of the company, who lived on the rivers below, were expected to come. "That is smart,
after so much cautioning to us to be here in season. But they cannot be very far off, can they,
Claud?"

"One would suppose not," replied the latter; "but sounds, in this dense and quiet state of
the atmosphere, could be distinguished at a great distance, and, with all that my best faculties
can do, I cannot hear a single sound from any quarter.--But stay, what was that?"

"What did you think you heard, Claud?" asked Mr. Elwood, after waiting a moment for the other
to proceed or explain.

"Why, I can hardly tell, myself," was the musing reply; "but it was some shrill, long-drawn
sound, that seemed to come from a great distance in the woods off here to the south-east, or
on the lake beyond."

"Perhaps it was a loon somewhere up the lake," suggested Mr. Elwood.

"It may be so, possibly," rejoined Claud, doubtfully; "but, if there were any inhabitants near
enough in that direction, I should think it must be--hark, there it is again! and, as I thought,
the crowing of a rooster."

"A rooster! then it must be the echo of one, that has somehow struck across from Phillips'
barn; but how could that be? Ah, I have just thought: your rooster must be Codman coming down
the lake. You know how curiously he imitated that creature at the logging bee, don't you?"

"No; I happened to be in a noisy bustle in the house, just at the time of those queer performances
of his, and heard them imperfectly. But, if the sound I heard was not that of a veritable rooster,
I never was so deceived in my life respecting the character of a sound."

"Well, I think you will find I am right, but we will wait, listen, and see."

The event soon proved the truth of Mr. Elwood's conjecture. Suddenly a canoe, rounding a woody
point a half-mile to the right, shot into view, and the old loud and shrill Kuk-kuk-ke-o-ho
of Comical Codman rang far and wide over the waters to the echoing hills beyond. But, before
Claud had sufficiently recovered from his surprise to respond to the triumphant "I told you
so" of his father, the strange salute was answered by a merry, responsive shout of voices in
the opposite direction; and presently two canoes, each containing two men, emerged into view
from the fog hanging over the outlet, and, joining in a contest of speed, to which they seemed
to perceive the single boatman was, by his movements, challenging them, rapidly made their
way towards the understood goal of the landing.

  "The race is run.
  The vict'ry won!"

exclaimed the trapper, in his usual cheery tone and inimitable air of mock gravity, as he drew
up his oar, to let the impulse of his last stroke send his canoe in to the shore of the landing,
as it did, while the foremost of his competitors in the friendly race was yet fifty yards distant.
"Mighty smart fellows, you!" he resumed, waggishly cocking his eye towards the hunter, who
had charge of the boat most in advance. "What bright and early chaps, living only from two
to five miles off, to let one who has ten miles to come be in first at the rendezvous!"

"Well, Codman, I suppose we must give in," responded the hunter. "But, to do all this, you
must have risen long before day; how did you contrive to wake up?"

"Why, crowed like the house a-fire, and waked myself up, to be sure!" replied Codman, promptly.
"How did you suppose I did it? But let that all go; I want to look you over a little. You have
brought some new faces with you, this time, haven't you, Mr. Hunter?"

"Yes, here is one," answered Phillips, pointing to a tall, sandy-complexioned, but good-looking
man of about thirty, who, having occupied the forward seat of the canoe, now quietly stepped
ashore; "yes, gentlemen," added the hunter, addressing himself to the Elwoods, standing on
the bank, as well as to the trapper, "I make you acquainted with Mr. Carvil,--a man, if I ain't
a good deal out in my reckoning, who might be relied on in most any circumstances."

The customary salutations were then exchanged with the stranger; when the hunter, instinctively
understanding that often violated rule of true politeness which requires of the introducer
some accompanying remark, giving a clue to the position and character of the introduced, so
as to gratify the natural curiosity felt on such occasions, and to impart more freedom to the
conversation, quickly resumed:

"Mr. Carvil is a Green Mountain boy, who loves hunting, partly for the health it gives, and
partly for the fun of it. His old range has usually been round the Great Megantic, the other
side of the highlands, in Canada, where I have heard of him through the St. Francis Indians.
But, having a mind to see and try this side, he came on a few days ago, inquired me out, and
turned in with me. We from below have invited him to join our company; are you all here agreed
to that?"

"Certainly," said Mark Elwood, in his usual off-hand manner.

"Certainly," added Claud, more specifically, "I think we ought to be gratified in such an acquisition
to our company."

"And you, Codman?" said the hunter, turning inquiringly to the trapper. "It is your turn to
speak. But don't show the gentleman so many of your bad streaks, to begin with, as to put him
out of conceit of you before he has time to find out your good ones."

"Well, I don't see but I must run the risk, then," said the trapper; "my streaks always come
out as they come up, I never pick any of them out as samples for strangers. But to the question,--well,
let's run him over once, if he won't be mad: high cheek bones, showing him enough of the Indian
make to be a good hunter; a crank, steady eye, indicating honest motives, and a good resolution,
that won't allow a man to rest easy till his object is carried out; and lastly, a well-put-together,
wiry frame, to bear fatigues, and do the work which so large a head must often lay out for
it. Yes, he passes muster with me bravely: let him in, with a welcome."

Carvil rewarded these good-natured running commentaries on his person and supposed qualities,
with a complacent bow; when the trapper turned to the other canoe, which, with Gaut Gurley
and the young Indian described in a preceding chapter on board, now came within speaking distance,
and sang out:

"Hil-lo! there, you, captain, who made the big logs fly so like the de-i-vel, the other day,
whether the old chap had any hand in it or not, what red genius is that you have brought along
with you?"

"It's Tomah, the young red man from the Connecticut-river region, who hunted some in this section
last fall, I understand. I supposed you had met him before," replied Gaut.

"O, ah, well, yes," responded Codman; "I bethink me, now, it is the young Indian that went
to college, but couldn't be kept there long enough to make any thing else, though long enough,
may be, to spoil him for a hunter."

"May be not, too," retorted Tomah, with a miffed air, which showed he did not so readily appreciate
the half-serious, half-sportive manner of the trapper as the other stranger had done. "May
be, when you out with me catching beaver, one, two month, you no crow so loud."

"That's right," interposed the hunter; "the Indian gives you what you deserve for your nonsense,
Codman. But a truce to jokes. Let us all aboard, strike out, and be on our way over the lake."

In compliance with this suggestion, those not already in the boats took to their seats, handled
their oars, pushed off, and, headed by the hunter and his boat companion, and falling, one
after another, into a line, rowed steadily on across, the broadest part of the lake, taking
a lofty pine, whose attenuated top looked like a reed rising over the fog in the distance,
as a guide and landmark to the great inlet, where the most arduous task of their expedition
was to be encountered,--the surmounting of the long line of rapids leading to the great lakes
above. But that task, after a pleasant rowing of a couple of hours had brought them to it,
was, by dint of hard struggles against the current, with oars as long as oars could be made
to prevail; with setting-poles when oars ceased to serve the purpose; and with ropes attached
to the boats and drawn from point to point or rock to rock, when neither oars nor poles were
of any avail; together with the carrying both boats and baggage by land round the last and
most difficult ascent,--that task was at length accomplished, and, before one o'clock in the
afternoon, all the boats, with their loading, were safely launched on the broad bosom of the
wild and picturesque Molechunk-a-munk.

Here, however, the company decided on taking their mid-day's lunch, and an hour's rest, before
proceeding on their voyage. But, not deeming it expedient to incur the trouble and delay which
the building of fires and the new cooking of provisions would require, they drew out only their
bread and cold meats, for the occasion; and these, as the company were seated in an irregular
circle on the rocks, were discussed and dispatched with that keen relish which abstinence and
a toil-earned appetite alone could have brought them.

After they had finished their repast, they, at the suggestion of Phillips and Codman, the only
persons of the company who were familiar with the lakes and country above, took up a question
which they had before discussed, without settling, but which, they were told by the persons
just named, must now, before proceeding any farther, be definitely settled and understood.
This question was that of the expediency of establishing a general head-quarters for the season,
by building a large, storm-proof camp, and locating it at some central point on the shore of
one of the two great lakes opening still above the one on which they were now about to embark.
The object of this was to insure the company comfortable quarters, to which they could resort
in case of falling sick, or encountering long storms, at which their furs could be collected
and more safely kept, their more cumbrous stores left, and from which their provisions could
be distributed, with the least trouble and travel, to the smaller and more temporary camps
that each of the company, or any two of them, might make at the nearest terminations, on the
neighboring waters, of the different ranges of woods they should select for their respective
fields of operations. The main part of the question, that of the necessity of establishing
general head-quarters, was at once, and unanimously, decided in the affirmative. The remaining
part, that of the most eligible location for these quarters, was then fully discussed, and
finally settled by fixing the point of location about midway of the eastern side of the Mooseeluk-maguntic,
the next great lake above, and, counting from the south, the third in this unique chain of
secluded lakes and widely clustering lakelets, through which the far-spanning Androscoggin
pours its vast volume of wild waters to the distant bosom of the welcoming ocean.

"Wisely arranged," remarked the hunter, at the close of the discussion. "The next object in
view, then, is to reach there this evening, in season to work up something in the shape of
a camp, that will serve for the night, and until the good one we propose to build can be completed."

"That can be done easily enough," said Codman, "that is, if we will tax our marrow-bones a
little extra in pulling at the oars. The distance over this lake, up the narrows, or river,
and across the end of the Maguntic to the mouth of that second stream we have talked of, can't
be much more than a dozen miles, and all smooth sailing. Lord, yes! if we put in like decent
oarsmen, I warrant we make fetch come, so as to be there by the sun an hour high, which will
give time to build a comfortable camp, and for cooking up the jolly good supper I'm thinking
to have, to pay us for all these sweats and hard pulls up these confounded rapids and over
these never-ending lakes."

"Well, let us put in, then, boys," responded Gaut Gurley. "I am as much for the go-ahead principle
as the best of you. Let us try the motion, and earn the good supper, whether we get it or not.
But, to make the supper quite the thing for the occasion, it strikes me we ought to have something
a little fresher than our salt junk."

"True, O King, and Great Mogul of the lubber-lifts," rejoined the trapper; "thou talkest like
one not altogether without knowledge of the good living of the woods. That something fresher
we will have, if it be only a mess of fish, which I think I can take out of that stream in
a short time after we get there."

"That could be done as we go along, if these lakes are as well stocked with large trout as
they are reputed," observed Carvil, in the calm, deliberate manner which characterized him
on all occasions.

"But we mustn't stop for that," said the trapper.

"There is no need of stopping," quietly replied the former.

"That's a queer idea," said the trapper, evidently at fault. "How are we to put in and wait
for bites, without stopping, I would like to know?"

"Perhaps I may be able to demonstrate the matter, as we proceed on our way. At all events,
since the question is raised, I will try," replied Carvil, drawing from his pocket a roll of
small silk cord, to which a fish-hook, without any sinker, was attached. "Can any of you handily
get at your pork, so as to cut off and throw me a small bit? There, that will do," he continued,
taking the proffered bit of meat, and baiting his hook with it. "Now, the experiment I propose
to try is what in my region we call 'troulling,' which consists of throwing out a baited hook
and paying out, as the boat moves on, a hundred feet, or so, of line, that is left to trail,
floating on the surface of the water behind; when most large fish, like bass, or trout, especially
if you make a sharp tack, occasionally, so as to draw the line across an undisturbed portion
of the water, will see, and, darting up, sieze it, and hook themselves. And, if you have many
large trout here, and they are any related to those I have found in the Great Maguntic, and
other large bodies of fresh water, they will some of them stand a pretty good chance to be
found adding to our supper to-night."

"Sorry to hear it," said the trapper, "for I have always considered the trout a sensible fish,
and I should be sorry to lose my respect for them. But, if they will do that, they are bigger
fools than I took them to be. But you'll find they just won't."

"Well, I don't know about that, now. I am not so sure but there may be something in it," remarked
the hunter, who had been listening to Carvil with evident interest. "Though we have never tried
that method in this region, to my knowledge, yet my experience rather goes to confirm the notion.
I remember to have caught several fine trout, when I had laid down my pole, and was moving
off with my boat, but had left my line trailing behind. Those great fellows are not very bashful
about seizing any thing they think they can eat, which they can see on the surface. I have
known them do a stranger thing than to come up and seize a piece of pork."

"What was that?" asked the trapper.

"Well, I don't know as you will believe the story," answered the other, "but it will be equally
true, if you don't. Some years ago I was out on the Umbagog, for a mess of trout, but couldn't
get a bite; and, seeing a flock of black ducks in a neighboring cove, I hauled in my line,
and rowed off towards them, thinking I might get a shot, and so have something to carry home,
by way of mending my luck at fishing. But, before I got near enough to count with much certainty
on the effect of a shot, if I fired, they all flew up, but one, which, though it seemed to
be trying hard enough, could not raise its body out of the water. As my canoe drifted in nearer,
I once or twice raised my rifle to fire at it; but it acted so strangely, flapping the water
with its wings, and tugging away at swimming, without appearing to gain scarce a single foot,
that I soon laid down my piece and concluded I would try to take it alive, supposing it must
have got fast tangled with something, but with what, I was wholly unable to conceive. So, taking
up my oar, and gunning my canoe, so as to send it by within reach of the bird, I gave two or
three strong pulls, threw down the oar, put out my hand, and sat ready for the grab, which
the next moment I made, seizing the panting and now sinking duck by one of its outspread wings,
and pulling it in, with a big trout fastened to its foot and leg so tight by the teeth that
the hold did not give way till the greedy fish was brought slapping over the side, and landed
safely in the bottom of the canoe. That trout, when I got home, weighed just seven pounds and
nine ounces."

"Wheugh! whiz! kak! ke-o-ho!" exclaimed, whistled, and crowed Comical Codman.

"I do not doubt it in the least," said Carvil.

"Nor can I, of course, on Mr. Phillips' statement," added Mark Elwood; "but, if I had not known
his scrupulousness in matters of fact, I should not have believed that so strange a circumstance
had ever happened in the world."

"So the story is voted gospel, is it?" rejoined the trapper. "Well, then, I propose we commission
its author to cruise along the coves this afternoon, so that he may bring into camp to-night
trout enough caught in that way to make up what Mr. Carvil may miss taking by his method, together
with a brace or two of nice ducks, which would be a still further fine addition to our supper."

"Yes, ducks or some other kind of flesh, to go with the fish, we may now safely count on being
secured, by some of the various proposed methods," here interposed Claud Elwood, seriously.
"And I second the motion of such a cruise along the shores, by Mr. Phillips, who so seldom
fails of killing something. And if he, Mr. Carvil, and father, will agree to an exchange of
boat companions for the afternoon, I should like to go with him. I have chosen him my schoolmaster
in hunting, and I should have a chance for another lesson before we go into the separate fields
of our approaching operations."

Gaut Gurley started at the suggestion, and cast a few quick, searching glances at Claud and
the hunter, as if suspecting a concert of action between them, for some purpose affecting his
secret plans; but, appearing to read nothing in either of their countenances to confirm such
suspicions, and seeing all the rest of the company readily falling in with the proposal, he
held his peace, and joined the others in handling the oars for their immediate departure; which
was now in a few minutes taken, the main part of the company striking in a direct line across
the middle of the lake for their destination, leaving the hunter and Claud moving off obliquely
to the right, for a different and farther route among the intervening islands, and along the
indented shores beyond,--where it will best comport with the objects of our story, we think,
to accompany them in their solitary excursion.

"Where away, as the sailors have it?" said Claud, after the two, each with a single oar, had
rowed on a while in silence; "where away, Mr. Phillips, or in the line of what object in sight
would you lay your course?"

"Why, I had proposed, in my own mind," replied the hunter, "to steer direct across, so as to
graze the east side of the great island you see yonder in the distance; but, as we shall pass
so near the cove which lies snuggled away between two sharp, woody points here, a little ahead
to the right, we might as well, perhaps, haul in and take a squint round it."

"What shall we find there?"

"Perhaps nothing. It is the place, however, where I found that deer which I killed when we
were here before."

"Well, if you can count on another, we should turn in there now."

"We will; but a hunter, young man, must never talk of certainties when going to any particular
spot in search of such roving things as the animals of the forest. He must learn to bear disappointment,
and be prepared to find nothing where he or others had before found every thing. He must have
patience. Loss of patience is very apt to be fatal to success in almost any business, but especially
so in hunting. You spoke of taking lessons of me in the craft: this is the very first grand
lesson I would impress on your mind. But we are now close upon the point of land, which we
are only to round to be in the cove. If you are disposed to row the boat alone, now, keep in
or out, stop or move on, as I from to time give the word, I will down on my knees in the bow
of the boat, with cocked rifle in hand, ready for what may be seen."

Readily complying, Claud carefully rowed round the point and entered the dark and deep indenture
constituting the cove, whose few acres of surface were thrown almost wholly into the shade,
even at sunny noonday, by the thickly-clustered groups of tall, princely pines, which, like
giant warriors in council, stood nodding their green plumes around the closely-encircling shores.
Closely hugging the banks, now stopping behind some projecting clump of bushes, now in some
rock-formed nook, and now in the covert of some low-bending treetop, to give the keen-eyed
hunter a chance to peer round or through these screening objects into the open spaces along
the shore beyond, he slowly pushed along the canoe till the whole line of the cove was explored,
and they reached the point corresponding to the one at which they commenced their look-out
for game, and all without seeing a living creature.

"Pshaw! this is dull business," exclaimed Claud, as they came out into the open lake, where
he was left free to speak aloud. "This was so fine a looking place for game that I felt sure
we should see something worth taking; and I am quite disappointed in the result."

"So that, then, is the best fruit you can show of my first lesson in hunting, is it, young
man?" responded the hunter, with a significant smile.

Claud felt the implied rebuke, and promised better behavior for the future; when both seated
themselves at the oars, and, as men naturally do, after an interval of suppressed action, plied
themselves with a vigor that sent their craft swiftly surging over the waters in the line of
their original destination.

They now soon reached, and shot along the shore of, a beautifully-wooded island, nearly a half-mile
in extent, about midway of which the hunter-rested on his oars, and, after Claud, on his motion,
had done the same, observed, pointing through a partial opening among the trees, along a visible
path that led up a gentle slope into the interior of the island:

"There! do you catch a glimpse of a house-like looking structure, in an open and light spot
in the woods, a little beyond where you cease to trace the path?"

"Yes, quite distinctly. What is it?"

"That belongs to the chief, and might properly enough be called his summer-house, as he generally
comes here with his family to spend the hot months. He raises fine crops of corn in his clearing
on there beyond the house, and saves it all, because the bears, coons, and squirrels, that
trouble him else-where, are so completely fenced out by the surrounding water."

"Are the family there, now?"

"No; they have moved back to his principal residence, a mile or two distant, on a point of
land over against the opposite side of this island, and not far out of our course."

"Indeed! what say you, then, to giving them a call as we pass by?"

"We shall not have time, which is a good reason for not calling now, if there were not still
stronger ones."

"What stronger reasons, or what other reasons at all?"

"Well, perhaps there are none. But, supposing two of the company we left behind, who might
happen to conceive they have some secret interest at stake, should ever suspect that your leading
object in leaving them was to make the very visit you are now proposing, would you not prefer
that we should have it in our power to set their minds at rest, when we join them to-night,
by telling them all the places we did touch at?"

"It is possible I should, in such a case," replied Claud, looking surprised and puzzled; "but,
'suspected,' did you say? Why should they suspect? and what if they do?"

"Three questions in a heap, when one is more than I could wisely attempt to answer," evasively
answered the cautious hunter.

"But you must have some reasons for what you said," persisted the other.

"Reasons founded upon guesses are poor things to build a statement on," rejoined the hunter.
"Half the mischief and ill-feeling in the world comes from statements so made. And, guessing
aloud is often no better. I rather think, all things considered, we had better not stop at
the chief's, this time. I can show you where he lives, as we pass; and, if that will do, we
will now handle oars, and be on our way."

Much wondering at the enigmatical words of the other, Claud, without further remark, put in
his oar and thoughtfully rowed on, till they had passed round the head of the island; when,
on the indication of the hunter, they stretched away towards a distant promontory, on the northeastern
shore of the lake. A steady and vigorous rowing of half an hour brought them within a few hundred
yards of the headland, for which they had been steering; when the hunter lifted his oar, and said:

"There! let the canoe run on alone, a while, and give me your attention. Now, you see," he
continued, pointing in shore to the right, "you see that opening in the woods, yonder, on the
southern slope extending down near the lake, eighty rods or such a matter off, don't you? Well,
that, and divers other openings, where the timber has been cut down and burnt over, for planting
corn, scattered about in the woods in different places, as well as a large tract of the surrounding
forest-land, are the possessions of the chief."

"But where is their house?"

"Down near the lake, among the trees. You can't see much of it, but it is a smart, comfortable
house, like one of our houses, and built by a carpenter; for the chief used formerly to handle
considerable money, got by the furs caught by himself, and by the profits on the furs he bought
of the St. Francis Indians, who came over this way to hunt. But stay: there are some of the
family at his boat-landing. I think it must be Fluella and her Indian half-brother. She is
waving a handkerchief towards us. Let us wait and see what she wants."

The female, whose trim figure, English-fashioned dress, and graceful motions went to confirm
the hunter's conjectures, now appeared to turn and give some directions to the boy, who immediately
disappeared, but in a few minutes came back, entered a canoe, and put off towards the spot
where our two voyagers were resting on their oars. In a short time the canoe came up, rowed
by an ordinary Indian boy of about fourteen, who, pulling alongside, held up a neatly-made,
new, wampum-trimmed hunting pouch, and said:

"The chief send this Mr. Claud Elwood,--gift. Fluella say, wish Mr. Phillips and Mr. Claud
Elwood good time."

And so saying, and tossing the article to Claud, he wheeled his canoe around, and, without
turning his head or appearing to hear the compliments and thanks that both the hunter and Claud
told him to take to the chief and his daughter, sped his way back to the landing.

"There, young man!" exclaimed the obviously gratified hunter, "that is a present, with a meaning.
I would rather have it, coming as it does from an Indian, and that Indian such a man as the
chief,--I would rather have it, as a pledge of watchfulness over your interests in the settlement,
whether you are present there or absent,--than a white man's bond for a hundred dollars; and
I would also rather have it, as a token of faith, given when you are roaming this northern
wilderness, than a passport from the king of England. The chief's Totem, the bald eagle, is
woven in, I see, among the ornaments. Every Indian found anywhere from the great river of Canada
to the sea eastward will know and respect it, and know, likewise, how to treat the man to whom
it was given."

"But how," asked Claud, "could stranger Indians, whom I encountered, know to whom it was given,
or that I did not find, buy, or steal the article?"

"Let an Indian alone for that. You have but three fingers on your left hand, I have noticed."

"True, the little finger was accidentally cut clean off by an axe, when I was a child; but
what has that to do with the question?"

"Enough to settle it. Do you notice something protruding as if from under the protecting wing
of the eagle of the Totem, there?"

"Yes; and surely enough it resembles a human hand, with only three fingers."

"That is it; and you may yet, in your experiences in these rough and sometimes dangerous wilds,
know the value of that gift."

"At any rate, I feel gratified at this mark of the chiefs good will; the more because I was
so little expecting it, especially at this time. How could they have possibly made out who
I, or indeed either of us, was, at such a distance?"

"A very natural inquiry, but answered when I tell you that Fluella has a good spy-glass, that
a year or two ago she brought, among other curious trinkets, from her other home in the old
settlement. And she makes it often serve a good purpose, too. She has spied out, for her father's
killing, many a moose or deer that had come down to the edge or into the water of the lake
round the shores to drink, eat wild-grass, or cool themselves, as well as many a flock of wild
geese, lighting here on their fall or spring passages. She knew, I think, about the day we
were to start, and, being on the lookout, saw the rest of our company passing off here to the
west, an hour or two ago, and, not seeing us among them, expected us to be along somewhere
in this direction. Now, is all explained?"

"Yes, curiously but satisfactorily."

"Then, only one word more on the subject: let me advise you not to show that hunting-pouch
when we join the company, nor wear it till we are off on our separate ranges. I have my reasons,
but mustn't be asked to give them."

"All this is odd, Mr. Phillips; but, taking it for granted that your reasons are good ones,
I will comply with your advice."

"Very well. The whole matter being now disposed of, let us move on round the point, and into
the large cove we shall find round there. We mustn't give up about game so. No knowing what
may yet be done in that line."

Having risen to his feet, raised his hunting-cap, and bowed his adieu to the still lingering
maiden on shore, Claud now joined his companion at the oars; when they rapidly passed round
the headland, and soon entered the bay-like recess of water, which, sweeping round in a large
wood-fringed circle, opened upon the view immediately beyond. After skirting along the sometimes
bold and rocky, and sometimes low and swampy, thickly-wooded shore, with a sharp lookout for
whatever might come within range of the eye, but without stopping for any special examination
till they had reached the most secluded part of the cove, the hunter suspended his oar, and
signified his intention of landing. Accordingly, running in their canoe by the side of an old
treetop extending into the water, and, throwing their mooring-line around one of its bare limbs,
they stepped noiselessly ashore, and ascended the bank, when the hunter, pausing and pointing
inward, said, in a low, suppressed tone:

"There, within a short distance from us, commences one of the thickest windfall jungles in
these parts, and extends up nearly to the chiefs outermost cornfield, about half a mile off.
I have been threatening to come here some time; and if, as I will propose, we go into the tangle,
and get through, or half through, without encounter of some kind, I confess I shall be uncommonly
disappointed. But, before entering, let us sit down on this old log a few minutes, and, while
looking to our flints and priming, keep our ears open for such sounds as may reach them."

And, bending low his head, with closed eyes, and an ear turned towards the thicket, the hunter
listened long and intently in motionless silence, after which he quickly rose, and, while glancing
at his gun-flint and priming, said:

"There are no distinct sounds, but the air is disturbed in the kind of way that I have frequently
noticed when animals of some size were in the vicinity. Let us forward into the thicket, spreading
out some ten rods apart, and worming ourselves among the windfalls, with a stop and a thorough
look every few rods of our progress. Should you start up a panther, which ain't very likely,
you had better whistle for me, before firing; but, if any thing else, blaze away at it."

Nodding his assent, and starting off in a course diverging to the right of the one he perceived
his companion to be taking, Claud slowly, and as he best could, made his way forward, sometimes
crawling underhand sometimes clambering over the tangled masses of fallen trees, which, with
a thick upshooting second growth, lay piled and crossed in all conceivable shapes and directions
before him. After proceeding in this manner thirty or forty rods, he paused, for the third
or fourth time, to look and listen; but lastly quite as much for his companion as for game,
for, with all his powers, he could detect no sound indicating that the latter could be anywhere
in the vicinity. While thus engaged, he heard a small, shrill, plaintive sort of cry, as of
a little child, coming from somewhere above him; when, casting up his eyes, he beheld a large
raccoon sidling round a limb, and seemingly winking and nodding down towards him. With the
suppressed exclamation of "Far better than nothing," he brought his piece to his face and fired;
when the glimpse of a straight-falling body, and the heavy thump on the ground that followed,
told him that the object of his aim was a "dead coon." But his half-uttered shout of exultation
was cut short by the startling report of a rifle, a little distance to the rear, on his left.
And the next moment a huge old bear, followed by a smaller one, came smashing and tearing through
the brush and tree-tops directly towards him. And with such headlong speed did the frightened
brutes advance upon him, that he had scarce time to draw-his clubbed rifle before the old one
had broke into the little open space where he stood, and thrown herself on her haunches, in
an attitude of angry defiance. Recoiling a step in the only way he could move, and expecting
the next moment to find himself within the fatal grasp of the bear, if he did not disable her,
Claud aimed and struck with all his might a blow at her head. But, before the swiftly-descending
implement reached its mark, it was struck by the fending paw of the enraged brute, with a force
that sent its tightly-grasping owner spinning and floundering into the entangled brushwood,
till he landed prostrate on the ground. And, ere he had time to turn himself, the desperate
animal had rushed and trampled over him, and disappeared through a breach effected in one of
the treetops that had hemmed him in and prevented his retreat from such a doubtful, hand-to-hand
encounter. As the discomfited young huntsman was rising to his feet, his eyes fell upon Phillips,
hurrying forward, with looks of lively concern; which, however, as he leaped into the small
open space comprising the battle-ground, and saw how matters stood, at first gave place to
a ludicrous smile, and then to a merry peal of laughter.

"I can't say I blame you much for your merriment," said Claud, joining, though rather feebly,
in the laugh, as he brushed himself and picked up his rifle; "for, to be upset and run over
by a bear would have been about the last thing I should have dreamed of myself."

"O well," said the other, checking his risibles, "it had better turn out a laughing than a
crying matter, as it might have done if you had kept your footing; for, if you had not been
overthrown and run over, you would have probably, in this cramped-up place, stood up to be
hugged and scratched in a way not so very agreeable; and I rather guess, under the circumstances,
you may as well call yourself satisfied to quit so; for the bears have left you with a whole
skin and unbroken ribs, though they have escaped themselves where, with our time, it will be
useless to follow them. But, if you had not fired just as you did, we would have had all three
of them."

"What! have you killed one?" asked Claud, in surprise.

"To be sure I have," answered the hunter. "Then you supposed it was one of your rough visitors
I fired at, and missed? No, no. I had got one of the black youngsters in range, and was waiting
for a chance at the old one, knowing if I killed her first the young ones would take to the
trees, where they could easily be brought down. Seeing them, however, on the point of running
at the report of your rifle, I let drive at the only one I was sure of; when the two others,
they being nearly between us, tacked about and ran towards you. But go get your 'coon, and
come along this way, to look at my black beauty."

"How did you know I had killed a 'coon?" inquired the other.

"Heard him squall before you fired, then strike the ground afterwards with a force that I thought
must have killed him, whether your bullet had or not," replied the hunter, moving off for his
bear, with which, tugging it along by a hind leg, he soon joined Claud, who was threading his
way out with his mottled trophy swung over his shoulder.

"Why, a much larger one than I supposed," exclaimed the latter, turning and looking at the
cub; "really, a fine one!"

"Ain't he, now?" complacently said the hunter. "There, heft him; must weigh over half a hundred,
and as fat as butter,--for which he is doubtless indebted to the chiefs cornfield. And I presume
we may say the same of that streaked squaller of yours, which I see is an uncommonly large,
plump fellow. Well," continued the speaker, shouldering the cub, "we may now as well call our
hunt over, for to-day,--out of this plaguey hole as soon as we can, and over the lakes to camp,
as fast as strong arms and good oars can send us."

On, after reaching and pushing off their now well-freighted canoe, on,--along the extended
coast-line of this wild lake, westward to the great inlet, up the gently inflowing waters of
that broad, cypress-lined stream, to the Maguntic, and then, tacking eastward, around the borders
of that still wilder and more secluded lake,--on, on, they sped for hours, until the ringing
of the axe-fall, and the lively echo of human voices in the woods, apprised them of their near
approach to the spot which their companions had selected, both for their night's rest and permanent
head-quarters for the season.

CHAPTER XIII.

  "And now their hatchets, with resounding stroke,
  Hew'd down the boscage that around them rose,
  And the dry pine of brittle branches broke,
  To yield them fuel for the night's repose;
  The gathered heap an ample store bespoke.
  They smite the steel: the tinder brightly glows,
  And the fired match the kindled flames awoke,
  And light upon night's seated darkness broke.
  High branch'd the pines, and far the colonnade
  Of tapering trunks stood glimmering through the glen;
  So joyed the hunters in their lonely glade."

"Hurra! the stragglers have arrived!" exclaimed Codman, the first to notice the hunter and
Claud as they shot into the mouth of the small, quiet river, on whose bank was busily progressing
the work of the incipient encampment. "Hurra for the arrival of the good ship Brag, Phillips,
master; but where is his black duck, with a big trout to its foot? Ah, ha! not forthcoming,
hey? Kuk-kuk-ke-oh-o!"

"Don't crow till you see what I have got, Mr. Trapper," replied the hunter, running in his
canoe by the sides of those of his companions on shore. "Don't crow yet,--especially over the
failure of what I didn't undertake: you or Mr. Carvil was to furnish the big trout, you will
recollect."

"That has been attended to by me, to the satisfaction of the company, I rather think," remarked
Carvil, now advancing towards the bank with the rest. "Not only one big trout, but two more
with it, was drawn in by my method, on the way."

"O, accident, accident!" waggishly rejoined the trapper; "they were hooked by mere accident.
The fact is, the trouts are so thick in these lakes that a hook and line can't be drawn such
a distance through them without getting into some of their mouths. But, allowing it otherwise,
it don't cure but half of your case, Mr. Hunter. Where is the black duck?"

"Here is the black duck," responded the hunter, stepping ashore and drawing his cub out from
under some screening boughs in the bow of the boat.

A lively shout of laughter burst from the lips of the company at the disclosure, showing alike
their amusement at the practical way in which the hunter had turned the jokes of the teasing
trapper, and their agreeable surprise at his luck in the uncertain hunting cruise along the
shores, on which they, without any expectation of his success, had banteringly dispatched him.
"Ah, I think you may as well give up beat, all round, Mr. Codman," observed Mark Elwood, after
the surprise and laughter had subsided. "But come up here, neighbor Phillips, and see what
a nice place we are going to have for our camp."

Leaving the game in charge of Claud and Carvil, who volunteered to dress it, the rest of the
company walked up with the hunter to the spot where the new shanty was in progress, wishing
to hear his opinion of the location selected, and the plan on which it had been commenced.

The location to which the company had been guided by the trapper was a level space, about ten
rods back from the stream here falling into the lake from the east, and at the foot of a rocky
acclivity forming a portion of the southern side of a high ridge that ran down to the lake.
The first ten feet of the rise was formed by the smooth, even face of a perpendicular rock,
which from the narrow shelf at the top fell off into a less precipitous ascent, extending up
as far as the eye could reach among the stunted evergreens and other low bushes that partially
covered it. About a dozen feet in front of this abutting rock, equidistant from it, and some
fifteen feet apart, stood two spruce trees, six or eight inches in diameter at the bottom,
but tall, and tapering towards the top. These, the company, who had reached the place about
two hours before, had contrived, by rolling up some old logs to stand on, to cut off, and fell,
six or seven feet from the ground; so that the tall stumps might serve for the two front posts
of the proposed structure. And, having trimmed out the tops of the two fallen trees, and cut
them into the required lengths, they had laid them from the top of the rock to the tops of
the stumps, which had been first grooved out, so as to receive and securely fasten the ends
of the timbers. These, with the stout poles which they had then cut and laid on transversely,
at short intervals, made a substantial framework for the roof of the shantee. And, in addition
to this, rows of side and front posts had been cut, sharpened, driven into the ground at the
bottom, and securely fastened at the top to the two rafters at the sides and the principal
beam, which had been notched into them at the lower ends to serve for the front plate.

"Just the spot," said the hunter, after running his eye over and around the locality a moment,
and then going up and inspecting the structure in progress. "I thought Codman could not miss
so remarkable a place. I have been thinking of building a camp here for several years; but
it never seemed to come just right till this fall. Why, you all must have worked like beavers
to get along with the job so well, and to do it so thoroughly. The bones of the thing are all
now up, as far as I can see, and made strong enough to withstand all the snows and blows of
half a dozen winters. So, now, nothing remains but to put on the bark covering."

"But how are we to get the bark covering?" asked Gaut Gurley. "Bark will not peel well at this
season, will it?"

"No, not very well, I suppose," replied the former. "But I will see what I can do towards hunting
up the material, to-morrow. A coat of these spruce boughs, spread over this framework above,
and set up here against the sides, will answer for to-night. And this rigging up, gathering
hemlock boughs for our beds, building a good fire here in front, and cooking the supper, are
all we had better think of attempting this evening; and, as it is now about sunset, let us
divide off the labor, and go at it."

The encampment of these adventurous woodsmen presented, for the next hour, a stirring and animated
scene. The different duties to be performed having been apportioned by mutual agreement among
the company, they proceeded with cheerful alacrity to the performance of their respective tasks.
Phillips and Carvil set busily to work in covering, inclosing, and rigging up the camp,--to
adopt the woodsman's use of that word, as we notify the critic we shall do, as often as we
please, albeit that use, contrary to Noah Webster, indicates the structure in which men lodge
in the woods, rather than the place or company encamping. Mark Elwood, Gaut Gurley, and the
young Indian Tomah, proceeding to a neighboring windfall of different kinds of wood, went to
work in cutting and drawing up a supply of fuel, among which, the accustomed backlog, forestick,
and intermediate kindling-wood, being adjusted before the entrance of the camp, the fire from
the smitten steel and preserving punkwood was soon crackling and throwing around its ruddy
glow, as it more and more successfully competed with the waning light of the departing day.
Claud and Codman, in fulfilment of their part of the business on hand, then unpacked the light
frying-pans, laid in them the customary slices of fat salted pork, and shortly had them sharply
hissing over the fire, preparatory to receiving respectively their allotted quotas of the tender
and nutritious bearsteaks, or the broad layers of the rich, red-meated trout.

In a short time the plentiful contents of the pans were thoroughly cooked, the pans taken from
the fires, the potatoes raked from the glowing embers, in which they had been roasting under
the forestick, the brown bread and condiments brought forward, and all placed upon the even
face of a broad, thin sheet of cleft rock, which they had luckily found in the adjacent ledge,
and brought forward and elevated on blocks within the camp, to serve, as it well did, for their
sylvan table. Gathering round this, they proceeded to help themselves, with their camp knives
and rude trenchers, split from blocks of the freely-cleaving basswood, to such kinds and portions
of the savory viands, smoking so invitingly in the pans before them, as their inclinations
severally prompted. Having done this, they drew back to seats on broad chips, blocks of wood,
piles of boughs, or other objects nearest at hand, and began upon their long anticipated meal
with a gusto which made them for a while too busy for conversation, other than an occasional
brief remark on the quality of the food, or some jocose allusion to the adventures of the day.
After they had finished their repast, however, and cleared away the relics of the supper, together
with the few utensils they had used in cooking and eating it, they replenished their fire;
and, while the cheerful light of its fagot-fed blaze was flashing up against the dark forest
around, and shooting away through the openings of the foliage in long glimmering lines over
the waters below, they all placed themselves at their ease,--some sitting on blocks, some leaning
against the posts, and some reclining on piles of boughs,--and commenced the social confab,
or that general conversation, in which woodsmen, if they ever do, are prone to indulge after
the fatigues of the day are over, and the consequent demands of appetite have been appeased
by a satisfactory meal.

"Now, gentlemen, I will make a proposition," said Mark Elwood, in a pause of the conversation,
which, though it had been engaged in with considerable spirit, yet now began to flag. "I will
propose, as we have an hour or two on hand, to be spent somehow, before we shall think of rolling
ourselves up in our blankets for the night,--I propose that you professional hunters, like
Phillips, Codman, and Carvil, here, each give us a story of one of your most remarkable adventures
in the woods. It would not only while away the hour pleasantly for us all, but might furnish
useful information and timely hints for us beginners in this new life, upon which we are about
to enter. For my part, I should like to listen to a story, by these old witnesses, of the strange
things they must have encountered in the woods. What say you, Gurley, Claud, and Tomah? Shall
we put them on the stand?"

"Yes, a good idea," replied Gaut, his habitual cold reserve relaxing into something like cordiality;
"I feel just in the humor to listen,--more so than to talk, on this hearty supper. Yes, by
all means let us have the stories."

"O, I should be exceedingly gratified," joined in Claud, in his usual frank and animated manner.

"I like that, too; like to hear hunting story, always, much," added Tomah, with a glistening eye.

"Well, no particular objection as far as I am concerned," responded the trapper, seriously;
but adding, with his old waggish gleam of the eye: "that is, if you will take what I give,
and swallow it as easily as you did Phillips' fish story. But let Carvil, who must be the youngest,
go on with his story first; I will follow; and Phillips shall bring up the rear."

Carvil, after making a few excuses that were not suffered to avail him, commenced his narration,
which we will head

  THE AMATEUR WOODSMAN'S STORY.

"I call myself a woodsman, and a pretty good one, now; but, four years ago, I was almost any
thing else but one of any kind. I should have then thought it would have certainly been the
death of me to have lain out one night in the woods. And I had no more idea of ever becoming
a hunter or trapper, to remain out, as I have since done, for weeks and months in the depths
of the wilderness, with no other protection than my rifle, and no other shelter than what I
could fix up with my hatchet for the night, where I happened to be, on the approach of darkness,
than I now have of undertaking to swim the Atlantic. And, as the circumstances which led to
this revolution in my opinions and habits, when out of the woods, may as much interest you,
in the account, as any thing that happened to me after I got into them, I will first briefly
tell you how I came to be a woodsman, and then answer your call by relating a hunting incident
which occurred to me after I became one; which, if not very marvellous, shall, at least, have
the merit of truth and reality.

"I was brought up rather tenderly, as to work; and my parents, absurdly believing that, with
my then slight frame, any employment requiring any labor or physical exertion would injure
me, put me to study, and assisted me to the means of entering college at eighteen, and of graduating
at twenty-two. Well, I did not misimprove my opportunities for knowledge, I believe; but, instead
of gaining strength and manhood by my exemption from labor, I grew feebler and feebler. Still,
I did not know what was wanting to give me health and constitution, nor once think that a mind
without a body is a thing not worth having; and so I went on, keeping within doors and studying
a profession, until I found myself a poor, nervous, miserable dyspeptic, and threatened with
consumption. It was now plain enough that, if I would avoid a speedy death, something must
be done; and, by the advice of the doctors, who were about as ignorant of the philosophy of
health as myself, I concluded to seek a residence and livelihood in one of the Southern States.
Accordingly, I packed up and took stage for Boston, timing my journey so as to get there the
day before the ship, on which I had previously ascertained I could find a passage, was to sail
for Savannah. But, the morning after I arrived, a severe storm came on, and the sailing of
the ship was deferred till the next day; so, having nothing to do, knowing nobody to talk with,
and the weather being too stormy to go out to see the city, I took to my solitary room in the
hotel, where, fortunately, there were neither books nor papers to prevent me from thinking.
And I did think, that day, almost for the first time in my life, without the trammels of fashionable
book-theories, and more effectually than I had ever done before. I had a favorite classmate
in college, whose name was Silas Wright, who had a mind that penetrated, like light, every
thing it was turned upon, and who never failed to see the truth of a matter, though his towering
ambition sometimes prevented him from following the path where it led. In recalling, as I was
pacing the floor that gloomy day, my old college friends and their conversation, I happened
to think of what Wright once said to me on the subject of health and long life.

"'Carvil,' said he, 'did you know that we students were committing treason against the great
laws of life which God has laid down for us?'

"'No.'

"'Well, we are. Man was made for active life, and in the open air.'

"'But you, it seems, are not observing the theory about which you are so positive?'

"'No, and don't intend to. To observe that, I must relinquish all thought of mounting the professional
and political ladder, even half way to the mark I must and will reach. I have naturally a strong
constitution, and I calculate it will last, with the rapid mounting I intend, till I reach
the top round, and that is all that I care for. But I shall know, all the while, that I am
going up like a rocket, whose height and brilliancy are only attained by the certain and rapid
wasting of the substance that composes it. But the case is different with you, Carvil. You
have a constitution yet to make, or your rocket will go out, before you can get high enough,
in these days of jostling and severe competition, to warrant the attempt of mounting at all.'

"Such was one of Wright's intuitive grasps at the truth, hid under the false notions of the
times, or the artificial theories of books, which he was wasting his life to master, and often
only mastering to despise. And I, being now earnestly in search of the best means of health,
eagerly caught at his notion, which placed the matter in a light in which I had never before
seriously viewed it, and, indeed, struck me with a force that soon brought me to a dead stand
in all my calculations for the future. 'What is it,' thought I, running into a sort of mental
dialogue with myself, and calling in what little true science I had learned, to aid me in fully
testing the soundness of the notion, before I finally gave in to it; 'what is it that hardens
the muscles, and compacts the human system?'--'Thorough exercise, and constant use.'--'Can
these be had in the study-room?' 'No.'--'And what is the invigorating and fattening principle
of the air we breathe?'--'Oxygen.'--'Can this be had in the close or artificially-heated room?'--'No,
except in stinted and uncertain proportions. It can be breathed in the open fields, but much
more abundantly in the woods.'--'Well, what do I need?'--'Only hardening and invigorating.'--'But
shall I go to the relaxing clime of the South for this?'--'No; the northern wilderness were
a hundred times better.'--'It is settled, then.'--'Landlord,' I cried aloud, as I saw that
personage at that moment passing by my partly open door, 'when does the first stage, going
north, start?'

"'In twenty minutes, and from my door.'

"'Order on my luggage, here; make out your bill; and I will be on hand.'

"And I was on hand at the time, and the next hour on my way home, which I duly reached, but
only to start off immediately to the residence of a hunter acquaintance, a dozen miles off,
who, I knew, was about to start for the head-waters of the Connecticut, on his annual fall
hunting expedition. I found him, joined him, and within ten days was entering, with pack and
rifle, the unbroken wilderness, by his side, though with many misgivings. But my first night
out tested and settled the matter forever. We had had a fatiguing march, at least to me, and
the last part of it in the rain. We had to lay down in a leaking camp, and I counted myself
a dead man. But, to my astonishment, I awoke the next morning, unhurt, and even feeling better
than I had for a month. And I constantly grew better and hardier, through that and my next
year's campaign in that region, and through the two succeeding ones I made on the Great Megantic;
where the incident which I propose to relate to you, it being my best strike in moose-hunting,
occurred, and which happened in this wise:

"It was a raw, gloomy day in November, and I had been lazily lying in my solitary camp, on
the borders of this magnificent lake, all the forenoon. But, after dinner, I began to feel
a little more like action, and soon concluded I would explore a sort of creek-looking stream,
four or five rods wide, which I had noticed entering the lake about a mile off, but which I
had never entered. Accordingly, I loaded my rifle, took my powder-horn, put two spare bullets
in my vest-pocket, not supposing I could have use for more, entered my canoe, and pulled leisurely
away for the place. After reaching and entering this sluggish stream, I went on paddling and
pushing my way along through and under the overhanging bushes and treetops, something like
half a mile, when I came to higher banks and a series of knolls jutting down to the stream,
which, with frequent sharp curves and crooks, wound its way among them. On turning one of these
sharp points, my eyes suddenly encountered a sight that made my heart jump. On a high, open,
and almost bare bluff, directly before me, and not fifteen rods distant, stood two tremendous
moose, as unconcernedly as a pair of oxen chewing their cuds, or dozing in a pasture. The last
was unusually large, the biggest a monster, appearing, to my wide-opened eyes, with his eight
or nine foot height, and ten or eleven foot spread of antlers, as he stood up there against
the sky, like some reproduced mastodon of the old legends. Quietly falling back and running
in under a screening treetop, I pulled down a branch and put in under my foot to hold and steady
my canoe. When I raised my rifle, I aimed it for the heart of the big moose, and fired. But,
to my great surprise, the animal never stirred nor moved a muscle. Supposing I had somehow
unaccountably missed hitting him, even at all, I fell, with nervous haste, to reloading my
piece; and, having got all right, as I supposed, I raised it this time towards the smaller
moose, standing a little nearer and presenting a fairer mark; took a long and careful aim,
and again let drive; but again without the least effect. Utterly confounded to have missed
a second time, with so fair a shot, I stood half confused a moment, first querying whether
something was not the matter with my eyes, and then thinking of stories I had heard of witches
turning away bullets from their object. But I soon mechanically began to load up again; and,
having got in my powder, I put my hand in my pocket for a bullet, when I found there both the
balls I had brought with me from camp, and consequently knew that in my eager haste in loading
for my last shot, I had neglected to put in any bullet at all! But I now put in the bullet,
looked at it after it was entered, to make sure it was there, and then felt it all the way
down, till I had rammed it home. I then raised the luckless piece once more, uncertain at first
which of the two moose I should take, this time. But, seeing the smaller one beginning to move
his head and lay back his horns, which I well enough knew was his signal for running, I instantly
decided to take him, took a quick, good aim, and fired. With three dashing bounds forward,
the animal plunged headlong to the ground. Knowing that one to be secure, at least, I then
turned my attention to the big one. To my astonishment, he was still there, and, notwithstanding
all the firing, had not moved an inch. But, before I got loaded for another trial upon him,
I looked up again, when a motion in his body had become plainly visible. Presently he began
to sway to and fro, like a rocking tower, and, the next moment, went over broadside, with a
thundering crash, into the bushes. My first shot, it appeared, had, after all, done the business,
having pierced his lungs and caused an inward flow of blood, that stopped his breath at the
time he fell. All was now explained, except the wonder that such shy animals should stand so
much firing without running. But the probability is, that, not seeing me, they took the reports
of my rifle for some natural sound, such as that of thunder, or the falling of a tree; while,
perhaps, the great one, when he was hit, was too much paralyzed to move, by the rupture of
some important nerve. But, however that may be, you have the facts by which to judge for yourselves.
And I have now only to add, that, having gone to the spot, bled, partially dressed the animals,
and got them into a condition to be left, I went off to the nearest camps and rallied out help;
when, after much toil and tugging, we got the carcases home to my shanty, for present eating,
curing, and distributing among the neighboring hunters, who soon flocked in to congratulate
me on my singular good luck, and receive their ever freely-bestowed portions, and who unanimously
pronounced my big prize the largest moose ever slain in all the regions of the Great Megantic."

  THE TRAPPER'S STORY.

"My story," commenced the trapper, who was next called on for his promised contribution to
the entertainment of the evening, "my story is of a different character from the one you have
just heard. It don't run so much to the great and terrible as the small and curious. It may
appear to you perhaps a little queer, in some parts; but which, after the modest drafts that
have been made on my credulity, you will, of course, have the good manners to believe. It relates
to an adventure in beaver-hunting, which I met with, many years ago, on Moosehead Lake, where
I served my apprenticeship at trapping. I had established myself in camp, the last of August,
about the time the beavers, after having collected in communities, and established their never-failing
democratic government, generally get fairly at work on their dams and dwelling-houses, for
the ensuing cold months, in places along the small streams, which they have looked out and
decided on for the purpose. I was thus early on the ground, in order to have time, before I
went to other hunting, to look up the localities of the different societies, so that I need
not blunder on them and disturb them, in the chase for other animals, and so that I should
know where to find them, when their fur got thick enough to warrant the onslaught upon them
which I designed to make.

"In hunting for these localities in the vicinity around me, I soon unexpectedly discovered
marks of what I thought must be a very promising one, situated on a small stream, not over
half a mile in a bee-line over the hills from my camp. When I discovered the place,--as I did
from encountering, at short intervals in the woods, two wolverines, always the great enemy
and generally the prowling attendant of assembled beavers,--these curious creatures had just
begun to lay the foundation of their dam. And the place being so near, and the nights moon-light,
I concluded I would go over occasionally, evenings,--the night being the only time when they
can ever be seen engaged on their work,--and see if I could gain some covert near the bank,
where, unperceived, I might watch their operations, and obtain some new knowledge of their
habits, of which I might thereafter avail myself, when the season for hunting them arrived.
Accordingly, I went over that very evening, in the twilight, secured a favorable lookout, and
laid in wait for the appearance of the beavers. Presently I was startled by a loud rap, as
of a small paddle struck flatwise on the water, then another, and another, in quick succession.
It was the signal of the master workman, for all the workers to leave their hiding-places in
the banks, and repair to their labors in making the dam. The next moment the whole stream seemed
to be alive with the numbers in motion. I could hear them, sousing and plunging in the water,
in every direction,--then swimming and puffing across or up and down the stream,--then scrambling
up the banks,--then the auger-like sound of their sharp teeth, at work on the small trees,--then
soon the falling of the trees,--then the rustling and tugging of the creatures, in getting
the fallen trees out of the water,--and, finally, the surging and splashing with which they
came swimming towards the ground-work of the dam, with the butt end of those trees in their
mouths. The line of the dam they had begun, passed with a curve up stream in the middle, so
as to give it more strength to resist the current; across the low-water bed of the river some
five rods; and extended up over the first low bank, about as much farther, to a second and
higher bank, which must have bounded the water at the greatest floods. They had already cut,
drawn on, and put down, a double layer of trees, with their butts brought up evenly to the
central line, and their tops pointing in opposite directions,--those of one layer, or row,
pointing up, and those of the other, down stream. Among and under this line of butts had been
worked in an extra quantity of limbs, old wood, and short bushes, so as to give the centre
an elevation of a foot or two, over the lowest part of the sides, which, of course, fell off
considerably each way in the lessening of the tops of the trees, thus put down. Over all these
they had plastered mud, mixed in with stones, grass, and moss, so thick as not only to hold
down securely the bodies of the trees, but nearly conceal them from sight.

"Scarcely had I time to glance over these works, which I had not approached near enough to
inspect much, before the beavers from below, and above came tugging along, by dozens on a side
to the lower edges of their embankment, with the loads or rafts of trees which they had respectively
drawn to the spot. Lodging these on the solid ground, with the ends just out of water, they
relinquished their holds, mounted the slopes, paused a minute to take breath, and then, seizing
these ends again, drew them, with the seeming strength of horses, out of the water and up to
the central line on top; laid the stems or bodies of the trees parallel, and as near together
as they could be got; and adjusted the butt ends, as I have stated they did with the foundation
layers, so as to bring them to a sort of joint on the top. They then all went off for new loads,
with the exception of a small squad, a part of which were still holding their trees in a small
space in the dam, where the current had not been checked, and the other part bringing stones,
till they had confined the trees down to the bottom, so that they would not be swept away.
This task of filling the gap, however, after some severe struggling with the current, was before
long accomplished; when those engaged upon it joined in the common work, in which they steadily
persevered till this second double layer of trees, with the large quantities of short bushes
which they brought and wove into the chinks, near the top, was completed, through the whole
length of their dam. They then collected along on the top of the dam, and seemed to hold a
sort of consultation, after which they scattered for the banks of the stream, but soon returned,
walking on their hind legs, and each bringing a load of mud or stones, held between his fore
paws and throat. These loads were successively deposited, as they came up, among the stems
and interlacing branches of the trees and bushes they had just laid down, giving each deposited
pile, as they turned to go back, a smart blow with the flat of their broad thick tails, producing
the same sound as the one I have mentioned as the signal-raps for calling them out to work,
only far less loud and sharp, since the former raps were struck on water, and the latter on
mud or rubbish. Thus they continued to work,--and work, too, with a will, if any creatures
ever did,--till I had seen nearly the whole of the last layers plastered over.

"Thinking now I had seen all that would be new and useful to me, I noiselessly crept away and
returned to camp, to lay awake half the night, in my excitement, and to dream, the other half,
about this magnificent society of beavers, whose numbers I could not make less than three dozen.
I did not go to steal another view of the place for nearly a week, and then went in the daytime,
there now being no moon, till late,--when, to my surprise, I found the dam finished, and the
river flowed into a pond of several acres, while on each side, ranged along, one after another,
stood three family dwellings in different states of progress; some of them only rising to the
surface of the water, showing the nature of the structure, which, you know, is built up with
short, small logs, and mud, in a squarish form, of about the size of a large chimney; while
others, having been built up a foot or two above the water, and the windows fashioned, had
been arched over with mud and sticks, and were already nearly finished.

"Knowing that the establishment was now so nearly completed that the beavers would not relinquish
it without being disturbed by the presence of a human foe,--which they will sometimes detect,
I think, at nearly a quarter of a mile distance,--I concluded to keep entirely away from them
till the time of my contemplated onslaught, which I finally decided to begin on one of the
first days of the coming November.

"Well, what with hunting deer, bear, and so on, for food, and lynx, otter, and sable, for furs,
the next two months passed away, and the long anticipated November at length arrived; when,
one dark, cloudy day, having cut a lot of bits of green wood for bait, got out my vial of castor
to scent them with, and got my steel traps in order, with these equipments and my rifle I set
off, for the purpose of commencing operations, of some kind, on my community of beavers. On
reaching the spot, I crept to my old covert with the same precautions I had used on my former
visits, thinking it likely enough that, on so dark a day, some of the beavers might be out;
and, wishing to know how this was, before proceeding openly along, the banks to look out the
right places to set my traps, I listened a while, but could hear no splashing about the pond,
or detect any other sounds indicating that the creatures were astir; but, on peering out, I
saw a large, old beaver perched in a window of one of the beaver-houses on the opposite shore.
I instinctively drew up my rifle,--for it was a fair shot, and I knew I could draw him,--but
I forbore, and contented myself with watching his motions. I might have lain there ten minutes,
perhaps, when this leader, or judge in the beaver Israel, as he soon showed himself to be,
quietly slid out into the water, swam into a central part of the pond, and, after swimming
twice or three times round in a small circle, lifted his tail on high, and slowly and deliberately
gave three of those same old loud and startling raps on the water. He then swam back to his
cabin, and ascended an open flat on the bank, where all the underbrush had been cut and cleared
off in building the dam. In a few minutes more, a large number of beavers might be seen hastening
to the spot, where they ranged themselves in a sort of circle, so as just to inclose the old
beaver which came first, and which had now taken his stand on a little moss hillock, on the
farther side of the little opening, to which he had thus called them, and, evidently, for some
important public purpose. Soon another small band of the creatures made their appearance on
the bank above, seeming to have in custody two great, lubberly, cowed-down looking beavers,
that they were hunching and driving along, as legal officers sometimes have to do with their
prisoners, when taking them to some dreaded punishment. When this last band reached the place,
with these two culprit-looking fellows, they pushed them forward in front of the judge, as
we will call him, and then fell into the ranks, so as to close up the circle. There was then
a long, solemn pause, in which they all kept still in their places round the prisoners, which
had crouched sneaking down, without stirring an inch from the places where they had been put.
Soon, however, a great, fierce, gruff-appearing beaver left the ranks, and, advancing a few
steps within them, reared himself on his haunches, and began to sputter and gibber away at
a great rate, making his fore-paws go like the hands of some over-heated orator; now motioning
respectfully towards the judge, and now spitefully towards the prisoners, as if he was making
bitter accusations, and demanding judgment against them. After this old fellow had got through,
two or three others, in turn, came forward, and appeared also to be holding forth about the
matter, but in a far milder manner than the other, which I now began much to dislike for his
spitefulness, and in the same proportion to pity the two poor objects of his evident malice.
There was then another long and silent pause, after which, the judge proceeded to utter what
appeared to be his sentence; and, having brought it to a conclusion, he gave a rap with his
tail on the ground. At this signal, the beavers in the ranks advanced, one after another, in
rapid succession toward the prisoners, and, circling round them once, turned and gave each
one of them a tremendous blow with their tails over the head and shoulders; and so the heavy
blows rapidly fell, whack, whack, whack, till every beaver had taken his part in the punishment,
and till the poor prisoners keeled over, and lay nearly or quite dead on the ground. The judge
beaver then quietly left his stand and went off; and, following his example, all the rest scattered
and disappeared, except the spiteful old fellow that had so raised my dislike, by the rancor
he displayed in pressing his accusations, and, afterwards, by giving the culprits an extra
blow, when it came his turn to strike them. He now remained on the ground till all the rest
were out of sight, when,--as if to make sure of finishing what little remains of life the others,
in their compunction, might have left in the victims, so as to give them, if they were not
quite killed by the terrible bastinadoing they had received, a chance to revive and crawl off,--he
ran up, and began to belabor them with the greatest fury over the head. This mean and malicious
addition to the old fellow's previously unfair conduct was too much for me to witness, and
I instantly drew my rifle and laid him dead beside the bodies he was so rancorously beating.
Wading the stream below the dam, I hastened to my prizes, finished their last struggles with
a stick, seized them by their tails, and dragged them to the spot I had just left; and then,
after concealing my traps, with the view of waiting a few days before I set them, so as to
give the society a chance to get settled, I tugged the game I had so strangely come by, home
to camp, where a more particular examination showed them to be the three largest and best-furred
beavers I had ever taken.

"This brings me to the end of the unaccountable affair, and all I can say in explanation of
it; for how these creatures, ingenious and knowing as they are, should have the intelligence
to make laws,--as this case seems to pre-suppose,--get up a regular court, try, sentence, and
execute offenders; what these offenders had done,--whether they were thievish interlopers from
some other society, or whether they had committed some crime, such as burglary, bigamy, or
adultery, or high treason, or whether they had been dishonest office-holders in the society
and plundered the common treasury, is a mystery which you can solve as well as I. Certainly
you cannot be more puzzled than I have always been, in giving the matter a satisfactory explanation.

"And now, in conclusion, if you wish to know how I afterwards succeeded in taking more of this
notable society of beavers, I have only to say, that, having soon commenced operations anew,
I took, before I quit the ground that fall, by rifle, by traps, by digging or hooking them
out of their hiding places in the banks, and, finally, by breaking up their dwelling-houses,
twenty-one beavers in all; making the best lot which I ever had the pleasure of carrying out
of the woods, and for which, a month or two after, I was paid, in market, one hundred and sixty-eight
hard dollars."

  THE OLD HUNTER'S STORY.

