 In some instances the rabbit died within two hours.

It was also found that in the case of the patient in the Breslau
Hospital the pyrogallic acid had acted by its extreme avidity for
oxygen when in contact with alkaline fluids.

 II

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

TO

HARRIET ELIZABETH AND ROBERT

INTRODUCTION

For many years it has been my custom to give, every Sunday morning, a brief sermon to the boys
and girls of my congregation. This sermon is never more than six minutes, often only three.
As a result there has been a growing attendance of young people at our morning worship. They
are thus made to feel that they are wanted, and have a part in the Church which all too often
is looked upon as a Church solely for the grownups. No part of my ministry has given me greater
delight and satisfaction than the thought that I am helping to establish in the lives of many
boys and girls that habit so indispensable to a steady Christian experience, namely--the habit
of Sunday morning worship.

The Memory Texts and Memory Hymns, from the Methodist Episcopal Hymnal, suggested with each
sermon are given for the reason that girls and boys gladly do memory work if it is definitely
assigned them.

CONTENTS

HAPPY NEW YEAR                             12 GROWTH                                     14
SNOW                                       16 KINDNESS                                   18
GOD'S CALL                                 20 A HAPPY HOME                               22
SYSTEM                                     24 A BOY FROM THE COUNTRY                     26
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL THING IN THE WORLD      28 EASTER LIGHT                               30
APRIL                                      32 HELPING FINGERS                            34
TWO R'S AND AN A                           36 CANDLE CHILDREN                            38
ALAS, THE MARKS                            40 A BLIND MAN WHO SAW                        42
CHOOSING A KING                            44 WORSHIP AND TOIL                           46
GOD'S CLOCK                                48 THE HUMAN KODAK                            50
WATCH LESSONS                              52 WHAT DID YOU SEE?                          54
KNIFE LESSONS                              56 LETTERS                                    58
A UNIQUE PSALM                             60 THE FATHER'S CARE                          62
YOKES                                      64 GOOD ADVICE                                66
IF I WERE A BOY AGAIN                      68 ONE BY ONE                                 70
COME                                       72 LOVE AND LOYALTY                           74
KUMMOGOKDONATTOOTTAMMOCTITEAONGANNUNNONASH 76 WHAT THE TREES SAID TO ME                  78
BANKS                                      80 WORK                                       82
THE BIG STORE                              84 BREAD                                      86
GOD'S MEASURE                              88 SLEEP                                      90
ON TIME                                    92 DOORS                                      94
CHEAPEST AND BEST                          96 IN THE DARK                                98
THE STILL SMALL VOICE                     100 THANKSGIVING                              102
MARBLES IN THE POCKET                     104 THE FIRST MONTH                           106
HIM AND HYMN                              108 THE CHRISTMAS TREE                        110
THE BEST WORD                             112 LAST BUT NOT LEAST                        114

THE CHILDREN'S SIX MINUTES

HAPPY NEW YEAR

Happy New Year, Juniors!

The morning of the first day of every year we enter into a contest. We see who will be the
first to give that day's greeting. Before I was awake this morning my boy ran into my room
shouting, "Happy New Year! Happy New Year!" He won in the contest.

Now, however, you are in Church and it is not proper for you to speak out loud, so I am able
to get ahead of you. A Happy New Year to you, every one.

Well, what will make this year a happy year for you? I will tell you. Let us take this word
Happy, and instead of writing it across the page let us write it straight up and down.

H stands for Helpful. You cannot have a happy year unless you are helpful. He who does not
try to be helpful is never very happy.

A for Active. I published a short note upon the subject in the Journal of Medicine, etc., for
April last, and it may perhaps be useful to reproduce the facts here. Physicians who were unacquainted
with this energetic deoxidizing property of pyrogallic acid have
proposed it as a substitute for chrysophanic acid in the treatment
of skin diseases; but Dr. Neisser has made known a case of poisoning
by an ointment of pyrogallic acid, which at once shows that considerable
danger attends its use for this purpose.

 Two questions will help you
gain that purpose. 1st--What is it that I want to do? 2nd--What is it that God wants me to do?

Y for Youth.

    Helpful
    Active
    Playful
    Purposeful
    Youth.

MEMORY HYMN, [572]

    "Break, newborn year, on glad eyes break."

GROWTH

This second Sunday morning of the New Year I desire to talk to you about growth. The most important
holiday afterthought is the thought of growth. You are going to grow every day of this year.
Whenever I see a boy on his way to school, or on the field or gymnasium floor, running, romping,
playing, I say to myself, "Can it be possible that this restless, energetic lad was ever a
quiet, helpless little babe in the cradle!" Yes, he was, but he has grown, and he is going
to keep right on growing.

It was said of the boy Jesus, "He grew." His growth was natural. There was nothing of precociousness
in the childhood of Jesus. He grew, just as every boy grows.

    "A simple-hearted child was he,
    And he was nothing more;
    In summer days, like you and me,
    He played about the door,
    Or gathered, where the father toiled,
    The shavings from the floor."

His growth continued. It did not stop with childhood, but right on through boyhood, youth and
manhood he kept growing. Best of all his growth was balanced. He grew physically, mentally
and spiritually. He had a sound body. He loved the out-of-doors. He companionshiped much with
nature. Most of his graphic illustrations were taken from living, growing things. He talked,
almost chiefly, about seeds, grain, harvests, trees, birds and living waters. Boys and girls,
strive to grow. Be like your Master who grew inward, outward, and upward; selfward, manward,
and Godward. "How can I grow?" you ask. I will tell you by passing on to you the secret as
given by Maltbie Babcock.

MEMORY HYMN [681]

    "Brightly gleams our banner."

SNOW

"Goody, goody, it's snowing!" This is what I heard early yesterday morning. I think there were
many other homes in which this shout of joy ushered in the day. It being Saturday the day was
mostly free for playing in the snow. What did you do? You made a snow man. You built a snow
fort or house. You had a snowball battle. You slid down hill. You played fox and geese, tracking
one another across white fields and through the woods. You had a happy, wonderful day, I know
you did.

Have you ever thought how snow is made, and whence it comes? It is formed high in the air,
from vapor, and comes down from the clouds, just like rain. Snowdrops are like people in one
respect, no two are alike. If you will look at the snowflakes through a magnifying glass you
will see a great variety of shapes. And all of them are beautiful. We talk about the sparkling
beauty of diamonds and other precious gems; crystal snowflakes are more beautiful by far. If
only we could keep them from melting what a necklace or a setting for a ring a collection of
snowflakes would make!

God's love is shown to us in the snow. For a fall of snow is like a great blanket, covering
the tender roots and seeds, keeping them from freezing, assuring us of another harvest. Illustrated
with 30 fine full-length Engravings of the Costumes, &c. of the various
Orders of Knighthood in the World, with numerous other Illustrations,
1l.

11s. 6d. Venezen, 1692.

    

    JOURNAL OF THE LONDON GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, from its Commencement.

KINDNESS

One day last week I saw a huge pair of bobs, heavily loaded with coal, being pulled up the
street by two big, fine-looking horses. There were two men on the load. Their faces were black,
but it was the dirt of honest toil, it was coal dust. They stopped the horses in front of the
house directly across the street from me. I watched them with interest. The first thing one
of the men did was to get down, take a board, go around to the front of the horses, lift up
the heavy wagon tongue, place the board underneath it as a brace that the necks of the horses
might be relieved of the strain of the wagon tongue. At the same time the other man took two
warm blankets and covered the horses with them, tucking in the corners beneath the harness
to make them tight and warm. Then the men set to work to carry the coal, basket by basket,
into the cellar. That was kindness, was it not, to see that the horses were so well cared for
on a cold winter day!

To my mind one of the finest acts of our city government is the way we are taught kindness
to dumb animals and birds, by permitting them to make their homes and nests in the public park.
What a delight it is to walk through the park and have the squirrels come running up so close,
to eat from one's hand! That is kindness. 

He was treated by friction with chrysarobine (in the form of a pomade of alcoholic extract of rhubarb,
containing one-twentieth) on the one-half of the body, while the other half was treated in the
same manner by a pomade containing ten per cent. of pyrogallic acid.
 That is not kindness, is it?

MEMORY VERSE, Ephesians 4: 32

    "Be ye kind to one another."

MEMORY HYMN [554]

    "How sweet, how heavenly is the sight!"

GOD'S CALL

God calls each one of you. He asks you to give your life to him. He has a special work for
you to do. You have heard of Wendell Phillips who did so much to make slavery unlawful in America!
Once, when Wendell was a boy fourteen years of age, he heard Lyman Beecher preach. In the course
of his sermon the preacher said, "You belong to God." The boy Wendell thought that the preacher
looked straight at him when he said that. He went to his home at the close of the service,
climbed the stairs to his room, shut the door, knelt in prayer, saying, "O God, I belong to
thee, take what is thine own." He heard and answered God's call.

