The people had lost all its power since the assemblies (the Comitia) were suppressed in the
reign of Tiberius. The population of 2,000,000 souls crowded into Rome was composed only of
some thousands of great lords with their slaves and a mob of paupers. Already the state had
assumed the burden of feeding the latter; the emperors continued to distribute grain to them,
and supplemented this with donations of money (the congiarium). Augustus thus donated $140
apiece in nine different distributions, and Nero $50 in three. At the same time to amuse this
populace shows were presented. The number of days regularly appointed for the shows under the
republic had already amounted to 66 in the year; it had increased in a century and a half,
under Marcus Aurelius, to 135, and in the fourth century to 175 (without counting supplementary
days). These spectacles continued each day from sunrise to sunset; the spectators ate their
lunch in their places. This was a means used by the emperors for the occupation of the crowd.
"It is for your advantage, Cæsar," said an actor to Augustus, "that the people engage itself
with us." It was also a means for securing popularity. The worst emperors were among the most
popular; Nero was adored for his magnificent spectacles; the people refused to believe that
he was dead, and for thirty years they awaited his return.[146]

The multitude of Rome no longer sought to govern; it required only to be amused and fed: in
the forceful expression of Juvenal--to be provided with bread and the games of the circus (panem
et circenses). 

Every man and woman and most of the children in Sycamore Ridge knew who Philemon Ward was. He
had been driven out of Georgia in '58 for editing an abolition newspaper; he had been mobbed in
Ohio for delivering abolition lectures; he had been led out of Missouri with a rope around
his neck, and a reward was on his head in a half-dozen Southern states for inciting slaves to
rebellion. His picture had been in Harper's Weekly as a General Passenger Agent of the Underground
Railway. Naturally to Sycamore Ridge, where more than one night the town had sat up all night waiting
for the stage to bring the New York Tribune, Philemon R. Ward was
a hero, and his presence in the town was an event.

When the little Barclay boy heard it at the store that morning before sunrise, he ran down
the path toward home to tell his mother and had to go back to do the errand on which he was sent.
By sunrise every one in town had the news; men were shaken out of their morning naps to hear,
"Philemon Ward's in town--wake up, man; did you hear what I say? Philemon Ward came to town
last night on the stage." And before the last man was awake, the town was startled by the clatter
of horses' hoofs on the gravel road over the hill south of town, and Gabriel Carnine and Lycurgus
Mason of Minneola came dashing into the street and yelling, "The Missourians are coming, the Missourians
are coming!"

The little boy, who had just turned into Main Street for the second time, remembered all his life
how the news that the Minneola men brought, thrilled Sycamore Ridge. It seemed to the boy but
an instant till the town was in the street, and then he and a group of boys were running to
the swimming hole to call the Army of the Border. The horse weeds scratched his face as he
plunged through the timber cross-lots with his message. He was the first boy to reach the camp.
What they did or what he did, he never remembered.

He has heard men say many times that he whispered his message, grabbed
a carbine, and came tearing through the brush back to the town.

All that is important to know of the battle of Sycamore Ridge is that Philemon Ward, called out
of bed with the town to fight that summer morning, took command before he had dressed, and when the
town was threatened with a charge from a second division of the enemy, Bemis and Captain Lee
of the Red Legs, Watts McHurdie, Madison Hendricks, Oscar Fernald, and Gabriel Carnine, under
the command of Philemon Ward, ran to the top of the high bank of the Sycamore, and there held
a deep cut made for the stage road,--held it as a pass against a half-hundred horsemen, floundering
under the bank, in the underbrush below, who dared not file up the pass.

The little boy standing at the window of his mother's house saw this. But all the firing in the
town, all the forming and charging and skirmishing that was done that hot August day in '60, either
he did not see, or if he saw it, the memory faded under the great
terror that gripped his soul when he saw his mother in danger.

Ward in his undershirt was standing by a tree near the stage road above the bank. The firing in
the creek bed had stopped. His back was toward the town, and then,
out of some place dim in the child's mind--from the troop southwest
of town perhaps--came a charge of galloping horsemen, riding down
on Ward. The others with him had found cover, and he, seeing the enemy
before him and behind him, pistol in hand, alone charged into the
advancing horsemen. It was well known
that the world could not continue without a master, but no law nor usage determined who was
to be this master. The Senate alone had the right of nominating the emperor, but almost always
it would elect under pressure the one whom the preceding emperor had designated or the man
who was pleasing to the soldiers.

After the death of Caligula, some prætorians who were sacking the palace discovered, concealed
behind the tapestry, a poor man trembling with fear. This was a relative of Caligula; the prætorians
made him emperor (it was the emperor Claudius). After the death of Nero, the Senate had elected
Galba; the prætorians did not find him liberal enough and so they massacred him to set up in
his place Otho, a favorite of Nero. In their turn the soldiers on the frontier wished to make
an emperor: the legions of the Rhine entered Italy, met the prætorians at Bedriac near Cremona,
and overthrew them in so furious a battle that it lasted all night; then they compelled the
Senate to elect Vitellius, their general, as emperor. During this time the army of Syria had
elected its chief Vespasian, who in turn defeated Vitellius and was named in his place; thus
in two years three emperors had been created and three overthrown by the soldiers. The new
emperor often undid what his predecessor had done; imperial despotism had not even the advantage
of being stable.

=The Twelve Cæsars.=--This regime of oppression interrupted by violence endured for more than
a century (31 B.C. to 96 A.D.).

The twelve emperors who came to the throne during this time are called the Twelve Cæsars, although
only the first six were of the family of Augustus. It is difficult to judge them equitably.
Almost all of them persecuted the noble families of Rome of whom they were afraid, and it is
the writers of these families that have made their reputation. But it is quite possible that
in the provinces their government was mild and just, superior to that of the senators of the
republic.

THE CENTURY OF THE ANTONINES

=The Antonines.=--The five emperors succeeding the twelve Cæsars, Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus,
and Marcus Aurelius (96-180), have left a reputation for justice and wisdom. They were called
the Antonines, though this name properly belongs only to the last two. They were not descended
from the old families of Rome; Trajan and Hadrian were Spaniards, Antoninus was born at Nîmes
in Gaul. They were not princes of imperial family, destined from their birth to rule. Four
emperors came to the throne without sons and so the empire could not be transmitted by inheritance.
On each occasion the prince chose among his generals and his governors the man most capable
of succeeding him; he adopted him as his son and sought his confirmation by the Senate. Thus
there came to the empire only experienced men, who without confusion assumed the throne of
their adoptive fathers.

=Government of the Antonines.=--This century of the Antonines was the calmest that the ancient
world had ever known. Wars were relegated to the frontier of the empire. In the interior there
were still military seditions, tyranny, and arbitrary condemnations. The Antonines held the
army in check, organized a council of state of jurisconsults, established tribunals, and replaced
the freedmen who had so long irritated the Romans under the twelve Cæsars by regular functionaries
taken from among the men of the second class--that is, the knights. The emperor was no longer
a tyrant served by the soldiers; he was truly the first magistrate of the republic, using his
authority only for the good of the citizens. The last two Antonines especially, Antoninus and
Marcus Aurelius, honored the empire by their integrity. Both lived simply, like ordinary men,
although they were very rich, without anything that resembled a court or a palace, never giving
the impression that they were masters. Marcus Aurelius consulted the Senate on all state business
and regularly attended its sessions.

=Marcus Aurelius.=--Marcus Aurelius has been termed the Philosopher on the Throne. He governed
from a sense of duty, against his disposition, for he loved solitude; and yet he spent his
life in administration and the command of armies. His private journal (his "Thoughts") exhibits
the character of the Stoic--virtuous, austere, separated from the world, and yet mild and good.
"The best form of vengeance on the wicked is not to imitate them; the gods themselves do good
to evil men; it is your privilege to act like the gods."

=Conquests of the Antonines.=--The emperors of the first century had continued the course of
conquest; they had subjected the Britons of England, the Germans on the left bank of the Rhine,
and in the provinces had reduced several countries which till then had retained their kings--Mauretania,
Thrace, Cappadocia. The Rhine, the Danube, and the Euphrates were the limits of the empire.

The emperors of the second century were almost all generals; they had the opportunity of waging
numerous wars to repel the hostile peoples who sought to invade the empire. The enemies were
in two quarters especially:

  1. On the Danube were the Dacians, barbarous people, who occupied
  the country of mountains and forests now called Transylvania.

  2. On the Euphrates was the great military monarchy of the
  Parthians which had its capital at Ctesiphon, near the ruins of
  Babylon, and which extended over all Persia.

Trajan made several expeditions against the Dacians, crossed the Danube, won three great battles,
and took the capital of the Dacians (101-102). He offered them peace, but when they reopened
the war he resolved to end matters with them: he had a stone bridge built over the Danube,
invaded Dacia and reduced it to a Roman province (106). Colonies were transferred thither,
cities were built, and Dacia became a Roman province where Latin was spoken and Roman customs
were assimilated. When the Roman armies withdrew at the end of the third century, the Latin
language remained and continued throughout the Middle Ages, notwithstanding the invasions of
the barbarian Slavs. It is from Transylvania (ancient Dacia) that the peoples came from the
twelfth to the fourteenth century who now inhabit the plains to the north of the Danube. It
has preserved the name of Rome (Roumania) and speaks a language derived from the Latin, like
the French or Spanish. Trajan made war on the Parthians also. He crossed the Euphrates, took
Ctesiphon, the capital, and advanced into Persia, even to Susa, whence he took away the massive
gold throne of the kings of Persia. He constructed a fleet on the Tigris, descended the stream
to its mouth and sailed into the Persian Gulf; he would have delighted, like Alexander, in
the conquest of India. He took from the Parthians the country between the Euphrates and the
Tigris--Assyria and Mesopotamia--and erected there two Roman provinces.

To commemorate his conquests Trajan erected monuments which still remain. The Column of Trajan
on the Roman Forum is a shaft whose bas-reliefs represent the war against the Dacians. The
arch of triumph of Benevento recalls the victories over the Parthians.

Of these two conquests one alone was permanent, that of Dacia. The provinces conquered from
the Parthians revolted after the departure of the Roman army. The emperor Hadrian retained
Dacia, but returned their provinces to the Parthians, and the Roman empire again made the Euphrates
its eastern frontier. To escape further warfare with the highlanders of Scotland, Hadrian built
a wall in the north of England (the Wall of Hadrian) extending across the whole island. There
was no need of other wars save against the revolting Jews; these people were overthrown and
expelled from Jerusalem, the name of which was changed to obliterate the memory of the old
Jewish kingdom.

Marcus Aurelius, the last of the Antonines, had to resist the invasion of several barbarous
peoples of Germany who had crossed the Danube on the ice and had penetrated even to Aquileia,
in the north of Italy. In order to enroll a sufficient army he had to enlist slaves and barbarians
(172). The Germans retreated, but while Marcus was occupied with a general uprising in Syria,
they renewed their attacks on the empire, and the emperor died on the banks of the Danube (180).
This was the end of conquest.

IMPERIAL ADMINISTRATION

=Extent of the Empire in the Second Century.=--The Roman emperors were but little bent on conquest.
But to occupy their army and to secure frontiers which might be easily defended, they continued
to conquer barbarian peoples for more than a century. When the course of conquest was finally
arrested after Trajan, the empire extended over all the south of Europe, all the north of Africa
and the west of Asia; it was limited only by natural frontiers--the ocean to the west; the
mountains of Scotland, the Rhine, the Danube, and the Caucasus to the north; the deserts of
the Euphrates and of Arabia to the east; the cataracts of the Nile and the great desert to
the south. The empire, therefore, embraced the countries which now constitute England, Spain,
Italy, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, Hungary, European Turkey, Morocco, Algiers,
Tunis, Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and Asiatic Turkey. It was more than double the extent of the
empire of Alexander.

This immense territory was subdivided into forty-eight provinces,[147] unequal in size, but
the majority of them very large. Thus Gaul from the Pyrenees to the Rhine formed but seven
provinces.

=The Permanent Army.=--In the provinces of the interior there was no Roman army, for the peoples
of the empire had no desire to revolt. It was on the frontier that the empire had its enemies,
foreigners always ready to invade: behind the Rhine and the Danube the barbarian Germans; behind
the sands of Africa the nomads of the desert; behind the Euphrates the Persian army. On this
frontier which was constantly threatened it was necessary to have soldiers always in readiness.
Augustus had understood this, and so created a permanent army. The soldiers of the empire were
no longer proprietors transferred from their fields to serve during a few campaigns, but poor
men who made war a profession. They enlisted for sixteen or twenty years and often reënlisted.
There were, then, thirty legions of citizens--that is, 180,000 legionaries, and, according
to Roman usage, a slightly larger number of auxiliaries--in all about 400,000 men. This number
was small for so large a territory.

Each frontier province had its little army, garrisoned in a permanent camp similar to a fortress.
Merchants came to establish themselves in the vicinity, and the camp was transformed into a
city; but still the soldiers, encamped in the face of the enemy, preserved their valor and
their discipline. There were for three centuries severe wars, especially on the banks of the
Rhine and of the Danube, where Romans fought fierce barbarians in a swampy country, uncultivated,
covered with forests and bogs. The imperial army exhibited, perhaps, as much bravery and energy
in these obscure wars as the ancient Romans in the conquest of the world.

=Deputies and Agents of the Emperor.=--All the provinces belonged to the emperor[148] as the
representative of the Roman people. He is there the general of all the soldiers, master of
all persons, and proprietor of all lands.[149] But as the emperor could not be everywhere at
once, he sent deputies appointed by himself. To each province went a lieutenant (called a deputy
of Augustus with the function of prætor); this official governed the country, commanded the
army, and went on circuit through his province to judge important cases, for he, like the emperor,
had the right of life and death.

The emperor sent also a financial agent to levy the taxes and return the money to the imperial
chest. This official was called the "procurator of Augustus." These two men represented the
emperor, governing his subjects, commanding his soldiers, and exploiting his domain. The emperor
always chose them among the two nobilities of Rome, the prætors from the senators, the procurators
from the knights. For them, as for the magistrates of old Rome, there was a succession of offices:
they passed from one province to another, from one end of the empire to the other,[150] from
Syria to Spain, from Britain to Africa. In the epitaphs of officials of this time we always
find carefully inscribed all the posts which they have occupied; inscriptions on their tombs
are sufficient to construct their biographies.

=Municipal life.=--Under these omnipotent representatives of the emperor the smaller subject
peoples continued to administer their own government. The emperor had the right of interfering
in their local affairs, but ordinarily he did not exercise this right. He only demanded of
them that they keep the peace, pay their taxes regularly, and appear before the tribunal of
the governor. There were in every province several of these little subordinate governments;
they were called, just as at other times the Roman state was called, "cities," and sometimes
municipalities. A city in the empire was copied after the Roman city: it also had its assembly
of the people, its magistrates elected for a year and grouped into colleges of two members,
its senate called a curia, formed of the great proprietors, people rich and of old family.
There, as at Rome, the assembly of the people was hardly more than a form; it is the senate--that
is to say, the nobility, that governs.

The centre of the provincial city was always a town, a Rome in miniature, with its temples,
its triumphal arches, its public baths, its fountains, its theatres, and its arenas for the
combats. The life led there was that of Rome on a small scale: distributions of grain and money,
public banquets, grand religious ceremonies, and bloody spectacles. Only, in Rome, it was the
money of the provinces that paid the expenses; in the municipalities the nobility itself defrayed
the costs of government and fêtes. The tax levied for the treasury of the emperor went entirely
to the imperial chest; it was necessary, then, that the rich of the city should at their own
charges celebrate the games, heat the baths, pave the streets, construct the bridges, aqueducts,
and circuses. They did this for more than two centuries, and did it generously; monuments scattered
over the whole of the empire and thousands of inscriptions are a witness to this.

=The Imperial Régime.=--After the conquest three or four hundred families of the nobility of
Rome governed and exploited the rest of the world. The emperor deprived them of the government
and subjected them to his tyranny. The Roman writers could groan over their lost liberty. The
inhabitants of the provinces had nothing to regret; they remained subject, but in place of
several hundreds of masters, ceaselessly renewed and determined to enrich themselves, they
had now a single sovereign, the emperor, interested to spare them. Tiberius stated the imperial
policy in the following words: "A good shepherd shears his sheep, but does not flay them."
For more than two centuries the emperors contented themselves with shearing the people of the
empire; they took much of their money, but they protected them from the enemy without, and
even against their own agents. When the provincials had grounds of complaint on account of
the violence or the robbery of their governor, they could appeal to the emperor and secure
justice. It was known that the emperor received complaints against his subordinates; this was
sufficient to frighten bad governors and reassure subjects. Some emperors, like Marcus Aurelius,
came to recognize that they had duties to their subjects. The other emperors at least left
their subjects to govern themselves when they had no interest to prevent this.

The imperial régime was a loss for the Romans, but a deliverance for their subjects: it abased
the conquerors and raised the vanquished, reconciling them and preparing them for assimilation
in the empire.

SOCIAL LIFE UNDER THE EMPIRE

=Moral Decay Continues at Rome.=--Seneca in his Letters and Juvenal in his Satires have presented
portraits of the men and women of their time so striking that the corruption of the Rome of
the Cæsars has remained proverbial. They were not only the disorders left over from the republic--the
gross extravagance of the rich, the ferocity of masters against their slaves, the unbridled
frivolity of women. The evil did not arise with the imperial régime, but resulted from the
excessive accumulation of the riches of the world in the hands of some thousands of nobles
or upstarts, under whom lived some hundreds of free men in poverty, and slaves by millions
subjected to an unrestrained oppression. Each of these great proprietors lived in the midst
of his slaves like a petty prince, indolent and capricious. His house at Rome was like a palace;
every morning the hall of honor (the atrium) was filled with clients, citizens who came for
a meagre salary to salute the master[151] and escort him in the street. For fashion required
that a rich man should never appear in public unless surrounded by a crowd; Horace ridicules
a prætor who traversed the streets of Tibur with only five slaves in his following. Outside
Rome the great possessed magnificent villas at the sea-shore or in the mountains; they went
from one to the other, idle and bored.

These great families were rapidly extinguished. Alarmed at the diminishing number of free men,
Augustus had made laws to encourage marriage and to punish celibacy. As one might expect, his
laws did not remedy the evil. There were so many rich men who had not married that it had become
a lucrative trade to flatter them in order to be mentioned in their will; by having no children
one could surround himself with a crowd of flatterers. "In the city," says a Roman story-teller,
"all men divide themselves into two classes, those who fish, and those who are angled for."
"Losing his children augments the influence of a man."

=The Shows.=--In the life of this idle people of Rome the spectacles held a place that we are
now hardly able to conceive. They were, as in Greece, games, that is to say, religious ceremonies.
The games proceeded throughout the day and again on the following day, and this for a week
at least. The amphitheatre was, as it were, the rendezvous of the whole free population; it
was there that they manifested themselves. Thus in 196, during the civil wars, all the spectators
cried with one voice, "Peace!" The spectacle was the passion of the time. Three emperors appeared
in public, Caligula as a driver, Nero as an actor, Commodus as a gladiator.

=The Theatre.=--There were three sorts of spectacles: the theatre, the circus, and the amphitheatre.

The theatre was organized on Greek models. The actors were masked and presented plays imitated
from the Greek. The Romans had little taste for this recreation which was too delicate for
them. They preferred the mimes, comedies of gross character, and especially the pantomimes
in which the actor without speaking expressed by his attitudes the sentiments of the character.

=The Circus.=--Between the two hills of the Aventine and the Palatine extended a field filled
with race courses surrounded by arcades and tiers of seats rising above them. This was the
Circus Maximus. After Nero enlarged it it could accommodate 250,000 spectators; in the fourth
century its size was increased to provide sittings for 385,000 people.

Here was presented the favorite spectacle of the Roman people, the four-horse chariot race
(quadrigæ); in each race the chariot made a triple circuit of the circus and there were twenty-five
races in a single day. The drivers belonged to rival companies whose colors they wore; there
were at first four of these colors, but they were later reduced to two--the Blue and the Green,
notorious in the history of riots. At Rome there was the same passion for chariot-races that
there is now for horse-races; women and even children talked of them. Often the emperor participated
and the quarrel between the Blues and the Greens became an affair of state.

=The Amphitheatre.=--At the gates of Rome the emperor Vespasian had built the Colosseum, an
enormous structure of two stories, accommodating 87,000 spectators. It was a circus surrounding
an arena where hunts and combats were represented.

For the hunts the arena was transformed into a forest where wild beasts were released and men
armed with spears came into combat with them. Variety was sought in this spectacle by employing
the rarest animals--lions, panthers, elephants, bears, buffaloes, rhinoceroses, giraffes, tigers,
and crocodiles. In the games presented by Pompey had already appeared seventeen elephants and
five hundred lions; some of the emperors maintained a large menagerie. 

The crowd knew Lige and laughed and turned away. The men trudged slowly back to the cluster
of lights that marked the town, and the woman closed her door, and she and the child went to
bed. Instead of sleeping, they talked over their adventure.
 Thousands of persons of both sexes and of every age, and among them Christian martyrs,
were thus devoured by beasts under the eyes of the multitude.

=The Gladiators.=--But the national spectacle of the Romans was the fight of gladiators (men
armed with swords). Armed men descended into the arena and fought a duel to the death. From
the time of Cæsar[152] as many as 320 pairs of gladiators were fought at once; Augustus in
his whole life fought 10,000 of them, Trajan the same number in four months. The vanquished
was slain on the field unless the people wished to show him grace.

Sometimes the condemned were compelled to fight, but more often slaves and prisoners of war.
Each victory thus brought to the amphitheatre bands of barbarians who exterminated one another
for the delight of the spectators.[153] Gladiators were furnished by all countries--Gauls,
Germans, Thracians, and sometimes negroes. These peoples fought with various weapons, usually
with their national arms. The Romans loved to behold these battles in miniature. 

Thomas Pym Cope, a Philadelphia Quaker, did a brisk shipping trade, and founded the first regular
line of packets between Philadelphia and Baltimore; with the money thus made he went into canal
and railroad enterprises. And in New York and other ports there were a number of shippers who
made fortunes of several millions each.

THE WORKERS' MEAGER SHARE.

Obviously these millionaires created nothing except the enterprise of distributing products
made by the toil and skill of millions of workers the world over. But while the workers made these
products their sole share was meager wages, barely sufficient to sustain the ordinary demands
of life. Moreover, the workers of one country were compelled to pay exorbitant prices for the
goods turned out by the workers of other countries. The shippers who stood as middlemen between
the workers of the different countries reaped the great rewards. Nevertheless, it should not
be overlooked that the shippers played their distinct and useful part in their time and age,
the spirit of which was intensely ultra-competitive and individualistic in the most sordid
sense.

FOOTNOTES:

[40] "Hunt's Merchant's Magazine," 11:516-517.

[41] Allen's "Biographical
Dictionary," Edition of 1857:791.

[42] Hunt's "Lives of American
Merchants":382.

[43] Allen's "Biographical Dictionary," Edit. of
1857:227.

[44] Stryker's "American Register" for 1849:241.

[45]
"The American Almanac" for 1850:324.

[46] "An Economic and Social
History of New England," 11:825.

[47] Hunt's "Lives of American Merchants":139.

[48]
Life of Eli Whitney, "Our Great Benefactors":567.

CHAPTER V

THE
SHIPPERS AND THEIR TIMES

Unfortunately only the most general and
eulogistic accounts of the careers of most of the rich shippers have
appeared in such biographies as have been published. Thus was established
the Roman Peace which a Greek author describes in the following language: "Every man can go
where he will; the harbors are full of ships, the mountains are safe for travellers just as
the towns for their inhabitants. Fear has everywhere ceased. The land has put off its old armor
of iron and put on festal garments. You have realized the word of Homer, 'the earth is common
to all.'" For the first time, indeed, men of the Occident could build their houses, cultivate
their fields, enjoy their property and their leisure without fearing at every moment being
robbed, massacred, or thrown into slavery--a security which we can hardly appreciate since
we have enjoyed it from infancy, but which seemed very sweet to the men of antiquity.

=The Fusion of Peoples.=--In this empire now at peace travel became easy. The Romans had built
roads in every direction with stations and relays; they had also made road-maps of the empire.
Many people, artisans, traders, journeyed from one end of the empire to the other.[155] Rhetors
and philosophers penetrated all Europe, going from one city to another giving lectures. In
every province could be found men from the most remote provinces. Inscriptions show us in Spain
professors, painters, Greek sculptors; in Gaul, goldsmiths and Asiatic workmen. Everybody transported
and mingled customs, arts, and religion. Little by little they accustomed themselves to speak
the language of the Romans. From the third century the Latin had become the common language
of the West, as the Greek since the successors of Alexander had been the language of the Orient.
Thus, as in Alexandria, a common civilization was developed. This has been called by the name
Roman, though it was this hardly more than in name and in language. In reality, it was the
civilization of the ancient world united under the emperor's authority.

=Superstitions.=--Religious beliefs were everywhere blended. As the ancients did not believe
in a single God, it was easy for them to adopt new gods. All peoples, each of whom had its
own religion, far from rejecting the religions of others, adopted the gods of their neighbors
and fused them with their own. The Romans set the example by raising the Pantheon, a temple
to "all the gods," where each deity had his sanctuary.

Everywhere there was much credulity. Men believed in the divinity of the dead emperors; it
was believed that Vespasian had in Egypt healed a blind man and a paralytic. During the war
with the Dacians the Roman army was perishing of thirst; all at once it began to rain, and
the sudden storm appeared to all as a miracle; some said that an Egyptian magician had conjured
Hermes, others believed that Jupiter had taken pity on the soldiers; and on the column of Marcus
Aurelius Jupiter was represented, thunderbolt in hand, sending the rain which the soldiers
caught in their bucklers.

When the apostles Barnabas and Paul came to the city of Lystra in Asia Minor, the inhabitants
invoked Barnabas as Jupiter and Paul as Mercury; they were met by a procession, with priests
at the head leading a bull which they were about to sacrifice.

Cultured people were none the less credulous.[156] The Stoic philosophers admitted omens. The
emperor Augustus regarded it as a bad sign when he put on the wrong shoe. Suetonius wrote to
Pliny the Younger, begging him to transfer his case to another day on account of a dream which
he had had. Pliny the Younger believed in ghosts.

Among peoples ready to admit everything, different religions, instead of going to pieces, fused
into a common religion. This religion, at once Greek, Roman, Egyptian, and Asiatic, dominated
the world at the second century of our era; and so the Christians called it the religion of
the nations; down to the fourth century they gave the pagans the name of "gentiles" (men of
the nations); at the same time the common law was called the Law of Nations.

FOOTNOTES:

[145] Inscriptions have been found where the name of Domitian has thus been cut away.

[146] Suetonius ("Lives of the Twelve Cæsars," Nero, ch. lvii.) relates, that the king of the
Parthians, when he sent ambassadors to the Senate to renew his alliance with the Roman people,
earnestly requested that due honor should be paid to the memory of Nero. The historian continues,
"When, twenty years afterwards, at which time I was a young man, some person of obscure birth
gave himself out for Nero, that name secured him so favorable a reception from the Parthians
that he was very zealously supported, and it was with much difficulty that they were persuaded
to give him up."--ED.

[147] Italy was not included among the provinces.

[148] A few provinces, the less important, remained to the Senate, but the emperor was almost
always master in these as well.

[149] The jurisconsult Gaius says, "On provincial soil we can have possession only; the emperor
owns the property."

[150] "Great personages," says Epictetus, "cannot root themselves like plants; they must be
much on the move in obedience to the commands of the emperor."

[151] A client's task was a hard one; the poet Martial, who had served thus, groans about it.
He had to rise before day, put on his toga which was an inconvenient and cumbersome garment,
and wait a long time in the ante-room.

[152] Cæsar gave also a combat between two troops, each composed of 500 archers, 300 knights
(30 knights according to Suetonius; Julius, ch. 39), and 20 elephants.

[153] In an official discourse an orator thanks the emperor Constantine who had given to the
amphitheatre an entire army of barbarian captives, "to bring about the destruction of these
men for the amusement of the people. What triumph," he cried, "could have been more glorious?"

[154] St. Augustine in his "Confessions" describes the irresistible attraction of these sanguinary
spectacles.

[155] A Phrygian relates in an inscription that he had made seventy-two voyages from Asia to Italy.

[156] There were some sceptical writers, like Lucian, but they were isolated. They became so
very late and by imitating the Greeks. From Greece they took their models of tragedy, comedy,
the epic, the ode, the didactic poem, pastoral poetry, and history. Some writers limited themselves
to the free translation of a Greek original (as Horace in his Odes). All borrowed from the
Greeks at least their ideas and their forms. But they carried into this work of adaptation
their qualities of patience and vigor, and many came to a true originality.

=The Age of Augustus.=--There is common agreement in regarding the fifty years of the government
of Augustus as the most brilliant period in Latin literature. It is the time of Vergil, Horace,
Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, and Livy. The emperor, or rather his friend Mæcenas, personally
patronized some of these poets, especially Horace and Vergil, who sang the glory of Augustus
and of his time. But this Augustan Age was preceded and followed by two centuries that perhaps
equalled it. It was in the preceding century,[157] the first before Christ, that the most original
Roman poet[158] appeared, Cæsar the most elegant prose-writer, and Cicero the greatest orator.
It was in the following age that Seneca, Lucan, Tacitus, Pliny, and Juvenal wrote. Between
Lucretius and Tacitus there were for three centuries many great writers in Rome. One might
also add another century by recurring to the time of Plautus, the second century before Christ.

Of these great authors a few had their origin in Roman families; but the majority of them were
Italians. Many came from the provinces, Vergil from Mantua, Livy from Padua (in Cisalpine Gaul),
while Seneca was a Spaniard.

=Orators and Rhetors.=--The true national art at Rome was eloquence. Like the Italians of our
day, the Romans loved to speak in public. In the forum where they held the assemblies of the
people was the rostrum, the platform for addressing the people, so named from the prows of
captured ships that ornamented it like trophies of war. Thither the orators came in the last
epoch of the republic to declaim and to gesticulate before a tumultuous crowd.

The tribunals, often composed of a hundred judges, furnished another occasion for eloquent
advocates. The Roman law permitted the accused to have an advocate speak in his place.

There were orators in Rome from the second century. Here, as in Athens, the older orators,
such as Cato and the Gracchi, spoke simply, too simply for the taste of Cicero. Those who followed
them in the first century learned in the schools of the Greek rhetors the long oratorical periods
and pompous style. The greatest of all was Cicero, the only one whose works have come down
to us in anything but fragments; and yet we have his speeches as they were left by him and
not as they were delivered.[159]

With the fall of the republic the assemblies and the great political trials ceased. Eloquence
perished for the want of matter, and the Roman writers remarked this with bitterness.[160]
Then the rhetors commenced to multiply, who taught the art of speaking well.[161] Some of these
teachers had their pupils compose as exercises pleas on imaginary rhetorical subjects. The
rhetor Seneca has left us many of these oratorical themes; they discuss stolen children, brigands,
and romantic adventures.

Then came the mania for public lectures. Pollio, a favorite of Augustus, had set the example.
For a century it was the fashion to read poems, panegyrics, even tragedies before an audience
of friends assembled to applaud them. The taste for eloquence that had once produced great
orators exhibited in the later centuries only finished declaimers.

