On the date of the letter depends whether it signify doing to death, or grinding into obscurity.
It is endorsed in Cecil's hand, 'Sir Walter Ralegh,' and in a later hand, '1601.' That is hardly
a possible date. The civil, ecclesiastical, and legal year in England, by which a secretary
at Hatfield is likely to have reckoned, closed on March 24. Consequently '1601' had not begun
when Essex was already dead. The only question is, when in the legal year 1600 the letter was
written. If at the end, when judgment had been pronounced, its object would be the accomplishment
of the capital sentence. If it were written early in 1600 its more probable purpose would be
to induce Cecil to urge the Queen to strip Essex of all his dignities and offices. Ralegh's
apologists can adduce for the less bloodthirsty interpretation the passage: 'If her Majesty's
favour fail him, he will again decline to a common person.' The words naturally refer to disgrace,
not to death. It has been imagined that the plan was to incapacitate him by law for employment,
and to hold him a State prisoner. The remark, 'His son shall be the youngest Earl of England
but one,' remains equally puzzling on either construction. Advocates of that which treats the
letter as a plea for imprisonment and disqualification for office have to show how he could
have been kept a State prisoner for life for offences he had committed before the rising of
February, and, moreover, how the imprisoned living father was to make way in his peerage for
the son. On the other theory which presumes it to have been an argument for sending Essex to
the scaffold, it is as unintelligible how the father's fate, with its necessary attainder of
blood, could legally transmit his dignity.

The inherent inconsistencies of the document are scarcely more perplexing than the circumstances
of its origin. It has been suggested that the idea of the letter was Cecil's, and that he plotted
to deceive posterity by inducing Ralegh to hold the pen. In the crude shape, that is an incredible
hypothesis. But Cecil was of a nature to discuss questions of policy with his confidants, and
extract their views, while he revealed only half his own. Very possibly the letter may have
arisen out of a conversation in which the Minister had canvassed the question of acting with
prudent magnanimity towards the fallen favourite. He may have requested Ralegh to repeat in
writing objections urged orally by him to such a course for the exposition of the case on both
its sides. At all events, it would be convenient for Cecil to have the document if in future
it should be doubted which of the confederates had been the more vindictive. Ralegh could easily
be drawn to try his hand, between fancy and earnest, at an academic theme on the lines of fashionable
Italian state-craft. If the paper be indeed nothing but an exercise in pleading, the author
deserves to be applauded for the artistic assumption of an air of sincerity which chills the
reader's blood.

CHAPTER XV.

THE ZENITH (1601-1603).

[Sidenote: Lord Oxford.]

From Essex's execution to the death of Elizabeth, on March 24, 1603, is a period of two years
wanting a month. It constitutes another stage in Ralegh's career. The work is not to hardly any
degree analytical in its character; it is a vivid panorama of a most deeply and widely interesting
career. We are made familiar by means of these volumes with the daily life of Henry W. Longfellow.
 The jealousy he continued to arouse was a
tribute to his power. To this time belongs the story, contained in Bacon's Apophthegms, of
Lord Oxford's insolence. The malicious Earl had returned, the Mirror of Tuscanismo, from his
seven years' self-inflicted exile at Florence. He had gone thither to spite his father-in-law,
Burleigh, by deserting his wife, and squandering his estate. The Queen was playing on the virginals
before him and another nobleman, while Ralegh was on duty near at hand. The ledge in front
happened to have been taken away, so that the jacks were seen. Oxford and his companion smiled
and whispered. Elizabeth inquired the reason. They were amused, answered Oxford, to see that
when jacks went up heads went down. The point of the sarcasm is presumed to have been the connexion
of Ralegh's influence with the decapitation of Essex. That the reference was to Ralegh might
have seemed rather dubious had not Bacon taken it for granted. The fact of the favour of the
Queen is certain.

[Sidenote: Sully and Biron.]

Courtiers wrote to one another how 'good his credit with the Queen had lately grown.' He had
a multiplicity of Court duties thrown upon him. His acquaintance with other lands and their
languages brought him forward whenever intercourse had to be held with foreigners. As Sir John
Harington said of him, he was 'especially versed in foreign matters, his skill therein being
always estimable and praiseworthy.' When Prince Maurice was endeavouring to relieve Ostend,
which the Archduke and Infanta were besieging, Ralegh and Cobham paid his camp a visit. They
were stated by Cecil to have no charge, and to have 'stolen over, having obtained leave with
importunity to see this one action.' The English envoy wrote to Cecil that the two gallants
had been entertained with much honour and extraordinary respect, but had seen little. Sir Henry
Neville, however, told Winwood their journey was not for curiosity only. They 'carried some
message, which did no harm.' In March, 1601, Ralegh, by the Queen's order, had been escorting
a Spanish envoy, sent to negotiate a truce, round London. Later, during the Queen's summer
progress to Dover, he, with Cobham and Sidney, received Sully. As Captain of the Guard he playfully
took Sully into custody, and conducted him to the Queen. The great Minister had been privately
sent over by King Henry, who was at Calais. On September 5, the Duc de Biron arrived, to announce
to Elizabeth the marriage of Mary de Medici to Henry. Several noblemen had been directed by
the Council to provide for the Marshal's solemn reception in London. By some accident they
were absent. Ralegh, who had not been especially commissioned, happened to be in town. Apparently
Sir Arthur Savage and Sir Arthur Gorges, who spoke French fluently, came to his help. Among
them they amused the Frenchmen till horses were ready to convey them to Hampshire. The Queen
was at Basing House. Ralegh wrote to Cecil: 'We have carried them to Westminster to see the
monuments; and this Monday we entertained them at the Bear Garden, which they had great pleasure
to see. I sent to and fro, and have laboured like a mule.' On the Wednesday he rode with the
Marshal and his numerous company to the Vyne. The fair and large house of Lord Sandys has formed
the subject of an interesting volume by its present owner, Mr. Chaloner Chute. It had been
furnished from the royal apartments at the Tower, Hampton Court, and neighbouring country houses,
for the accommodation of the foreign visitors. The Hampshire gentry lent seven score beds.
Not when Ralegh had seen all housed were his cares over. He told Cobham, 'The French wear all
black, and no kind of bravery at all.' His wardrobe, plentiful as assuredly it was, had not
been equipped in unison with such demureness. So, 'this Saturday night, late,' he wrote on
September 12 to Cobham from Basing, 'I am now going to London to provide me a plain taffeta
suit, and a plain black saddle.' Elizabeth rewarded his exertions in rendering the stay of
the Frenchmen agreeable by knighting his brother, Carew Ralegh, on her departure from Basing
House. Mr. Benjamin Tichborne received the same honour.

[Sidenote: The Mermaid.]

