But he had an insatiable appetite, and except in relation to Mr. Cougham, considerable tolerance.
With Cougham, he was like a young hound in the leash.  They had to run as twins; but Beauchamp's
conjunct would not run, he would walk.  He imposed his experience on Beauchamp, with an assumption
that it must necessarily be taken for the law of Beauchamp's reason in electoral and in political
affairs, and this was hard on Beauchamp, who had faith in his reason.  Beauchamp's early canvassing
brought Cougham down to Bevisham earlier than usual in the days when he and Seymour Austin
divided the borough, and he inclined to administer correction to the Radically-disposed youngster.
'Yes, I have gone all over that,' he said, in speech sometimes, in manner perpetually, upon
the intrusion of an idea by his junior.  Cougham also, Cougham had passed through his Radical
phase, as one does on the road to wisdom. So the frog telleth tadpoles: he too has wriggled
most preposterous of tails; and he has shoved a circular flat head into corners unadapted to
its shape; and that the undeveloped one should dutifully listen to experience and accept guidance,
is devoutly to be hoped.  Alas! Beauchamp would not be taught that though they were yoked they
stood at the opposite ends of the process of evolution.

The oddly coupled pair deplored, among their respective friends, the disastrous Siamese twinship
created by a haphazard improvident Liberal camp.  Look at us!  they said:--Beauchamp is a young
demagogue; Cougham is chrysalis Tory.  Such Liberals are the ruin of Liberalism; but of such
must it be composed when there is no new cry to loosen floods.  It was too late to think of
an operation to divide them.  They held the heart of the cause between them, were bound fast
together, and had to go on. Beauchamp, with a furious tug of Radicalism, spoken or performed,
pulled Cougham on his beam-ends.  Cougham, to right himself, defined his Liberalism sharply
from the politics of the pit, pointed to France and her Revolutions, washed his hands of excesses,
and entirely overset Beauchamp.  Seeing that he stood in the Liberal interest, the junior could
not abandon the Liberal flag; so he seized it and bore it ahead of the time, there where Radicals
trip their phantom dances like shadows on a fog, and waved it as the very flag of our perfectible
race.  So great was the impetus that Cougham had no choice but to step out with him briskly--voluntarily
as a man propelled by a hand on his coat-collar. A word saved him: the word practical.  'Are
we practical?'  he inquired, and shivered Beauchamp's galloping frame with a violent application
of the stop abrupt; for that question, 'Are we practical?'  penetrates the bosom of an English
audience, and will surely elicit a response if not. plaudits.  Practical or not, the good people
affectingly wish to be thought practical.  It has been asked by them

If we're not practical, what are we?--Beauchamp, talking to Cougham apart, would argue that
the daring and the far-sighted course was often the most practical.  Cougham extended a deprecating
hand: 'Yes, I have gone over all that.'  Occasionally he was maddening.

The melancholy position of the senior and junior Liberals was known abroad and matter of derision.

It happened that the gay and good-humoured young Lord Palmet, heir to the earldom of Elsea,
walking up the High Street of Bevisham, met Beauchamp on Tuesday morning as he sallied out
of his hotel to canvass.  Lord Palmet was one of the numerous half-friends of Cecil Baskelett,
and it may be a revelation of his character to you, that he owned to liking Beauchamp because
of his having always been a favourite with the women. He began chattering, with Beauchamp's
hand in his: 'I've hit on you, have I?  My dear fellow, Miss Halkett was talking of you last
night. I slept at Mount Laurels; went on purpose to have a peep.  I'm bound for Itchincope.
They've some grand procession in view there; Lespel wrote for my team; I suspect he's for starting
some new October races. He talks of half-a-dozen drags.  He must have lots of women there.
I say, what a splendid creature Cissy Halkett has shot up!  She topped the season this year,
and will next.  You're for the darkies, Beauchamp. So am I, when I don't see a blonde; just
as a fellow admires a girl when there's no married woman or widow in sight.  And, I say, it
can't be true you've gone in for that crazy Radicalism?  There's nothing to be gained by it,
you know; the women hate it!  A married blonde of five-and- twenty's the Venus of them all.
Mind you, I don't forget that Mrs. Wardour-Devereux is a thorough-paced brunette; but, upon
my honour, I'd bet on Cissy Halkett at forty.  "A dark eye in woman," if you like, but blue
and auburn drive it into a corner.'

Lord Palmet concluded by asking Beauchamp what he was doing and whither going.

Beauchamp proposed to him maliciously, as one of our hereditary legislators, to come and see
something of canvassing.  Lord Palmet had no objection.  'Capital opportunity for a review
of their women,' he remarked.

'I map the places for pretty women in England; some parts of Norfolk, and a spot or two in
Cumberland and Wales, and the island over there, I know thoroughly.  Those Jutes have turned
out some splendid fair women. Devonshire's worth a tour.  My man Davis is in charge of my team,
and he drives to Itchincope from Washwater station.  I am independent; I 'll have an hour with
you.  Do you think much of the women here?'

Beauchamp had not noticed them.

Palmet observed that he should not have noticed anything else.

'But you are qualifying for the Upper House,' Beauchamp said in the tone of an encomium.

Palmet accepted the statement.  'Though I shall never care to figure before peeresses,' he
said.  'I can't tell you why.  There's a heavy sprinkling of the old bird among them.  It isn't
that.  There's too much plumage; I think it must be that.  A cloud of millinery shoots me off
a mile from a woman.  In my opinion, witches are the only ones for wearing jewels without chilling
the feminine atmosphere about them.  Fellows think differently.'  Lord Palmet waved a hand
expressive of purely amiable tolerance, for this question upon the most important topic of
human affairs was deep, and no judgement should be hasty in settling it. 'I'm peculiar,' he
resumed.  'A rose and a string of pearls: a woman who goes beyond that's in danger of petrifying
herself and her fellow man. Two women in Paris, last winter, set us on fire with pale thin
gold ornaments--neck, wrists, ears, ruche, skirts, all in a flutter, and so were you.  But
you felt witchcraft.  "The magical Orient," Vivian Ducie called the blonde, and the dark beauty,
"Young Endor."'

'Her name?'  said Beauchamp.

'A marquise; I forget her name.  The other was Countess Rastaglione; you must have heard of
her; a towering witch, an empress, Helen of Troy; though Ducie would have it the brunette was
Queen of Paris.  For French taste, if you like.'

Countess Rastaglione was a lady enamelled on the scroll of Fame.  'Did you see them together?'
said Beauchamp.  'They weren't together?'

Palmet looked at him and laughed.  'You're yourself again, are you?  Go to Paris in January,
and cut out the Frenchmen.'

'Answer me, Palmet: they weren't in couples?'

'I fancy not.  It was luck to meet them, so they couldn't have been.'

'Did you dance with either of them?'

Unable to state accurately that he had, Palmet cried, 'Oh!  for dancing, the Frenchwoman beat
the Italian.'

'Did you see her often--more than once?'

'My dear fellow, I went everywhere to see her: balls, theatres, promenades, rides, churches.'

'And you say she dressed up to the Italian, to challenge her, rival her?'

'Only one night; simple accident.  Everybody noticed it, for they stood for Night and Day,--both
hung with gold; the brunette Etruscan, and the blonde Asiatic; and every Frenchman present
was epigramizing up and down the rooms like mad.'

'Her husband 's Legitimist; he wouldn't be at the Tuileries?'  Beauchamp spoke half to himself.

'What, then, what?'  Palmet stared and chuckled.  'Her husband must have taken the Tuileries'
bait, if we mean the same woman.  My dear old Beauchamp, have I seen her, then?  She's a darling!
The Rastaglione was nothing to her.  When you do light on a grand smoky pearl, the milky ones
may go and decorate plaster.  That's what I say of the loveliest brunettes.  It must be the
same: there can't be a couple of dark beauties in Paris without a noise about them.  Marquise--?
I shall recollect her name presently.'

'Here's one of the houses I stop at,' said Beauchamp, 'and drop that subject.'

A scared servant-girl brought out her wizened mistress to confront the candidate, and to this
representative of the sex he addressed his arts of persuasion, requesting her to repeat his
words to her husband.  The contrast between Beauchamp palpably canvassing and the Beauchamp
who was the lover of the Marquise of the forgotten name, struck too powerfully on Palmet for
his gravity he retreated.

Beauchamp found him sauntering on the pavement, and would have dismissed him but for an agreeable
diversion that occurred at that moment.  A suavely smiling unctuous old gentleman advanced
to them, bowing, and presuming thus far, he said, under the supposition that he was accosting
the junior Liberal candidate for the borough.  He announced his name and his principles Tomlinson,
progressive Liberal.

'A true distinction from some Liberals I know,' said Beauchamp.

Mr. Tomlinson hoped so.  Never, he said, did he leave it to the man of his choice at an election
to knock at his door for the vote.

Beauchamp looked as if he had swallowed a cordial.  Votes falling into his lap are heavenly
gifts to the candidate sick of the knocker and the bell.  Mr. Tomlinson eulogized the manly
candour of the junior Liberal candidate's address, in which he professed to see ideas that
distinguished it from the address of the sound but otherwise conventional Liberal, Mr. Cougham.
He muttered of plumping for Beauchamp.  'Don't plump,' Beauchamp said; and a candidate, if
he would be an honourable twin, must say it.  Cougham had cautioned him against the heresy
of plumping.

They discoursed of the poor and their beverages, of pothouses, of the anti-liquorites, and
of the duties of parsons, and the value of a robust and right-minded body of the poor to the
country.  Palmet found himself following them into a tolerably spacious house that he took
to be the old gentleman's until some of the apparatus of an Institute for literary and scientific
instruction revealed itself to him, and he heard Mr. Tomlinson exalt the memory of one Wingham
for the blessing bequeathed by him to the town of Bevisham.  'For,' said Mr. Tomlinson, 'it
is open to both sexes, to all respectable classes, from ten in the morning up to ten at night.
Such a place affords us, I would venture to say, the advantages without the seductions of a
Club.  I rank it next--at a far remove, but next-the church.'

Lord Palmet brought his eyes down from the busts of certain worthies ranged along the top of
the book-shelves to the cushioned chairs, and murmured, 'Capital place for an appointment with
a woman.'

Mr. Tomlinson gazed up at him mildly, with a fallen countenance.  He turned sadly agape in
silence to the busts, the books, and the range of scientific instruments, and directed a gaze
under his eyebrows at Beauchamp.  'Does your friend canvass with you?'  he inquired.

'I want him to taste it,' Beauchamp replied, and immediately introduced the affable young lord--a
proceeding marked by some of the dexterity he had once been famous for, as was shown by a subsequent
observation of Mr. Tomlinson's:

'Yes,' he said, on the question of classes, 'yes, I fear we have classes in this country whose
habitual levity sharp experience will have to correct. Many happy days were spent at Spencer Wood by His Lordship and family,
whose private secretary, Denis Godley, Esq., occupied the picturesque
cottage "Bagatelle," facing the Holland Road, on the Spencer Grange
property.

If illustrious names on the Spencer Wood Visitor's Register could enhance the interest the
place may possess, foremost, one might point to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, visiting in 1860
the site probably more than once surveyed and admired, in 1791-4,
by his grand-father, Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, in his drives round
Quebec, with the fascinating Baroness de St. Laurent.

Conspicuous among all those familiar with the portals of Spencer Wood, may be mentioned other Royal
Princes--the Duke of Edinburgh and Prince Arthur, Princess Louise,
Prince Leopold; with Dukes and Earls--the Duke of Newcastle, Manchester,
Buckingham, Argyll, Athol.

Sutherland, Prince Napoleon, Generals Grant, Sherman, &c.

Since Confederation, Spencer Wood has been successively tenanted by
Sir.

N. F. Belleau, Lieutenant-Governor Caron, Lieutenant-Governor Letellier de St. Just, and Lieutenant-Governor
Robitaille, the present occupant of the seat.

To the late Lieut.-Governor Letellier is due the initiation of the soirees litteraires, which
united under his hospitable roof the literary talent of the Ancient
Capital, and his successor, Lieut.-Governor Robitaille, not only followed
this enlightened course, but also added soirees musicales and artistiques.

Spencer

Wood was not included in the schedule and division of property handed
over by the Dominion Government to the Province of Quebec--it was,
however, about that time presented as a gift to our province, solely
as a gubernatorial residence--as such to be held, and consequently
cannot be sold by the Government of the Province of Quebec.

HENRY WATSON POWELL was commissioned a Lieutenant in the 46th Foot,
March 10th, 1753.

He was promoted to a captaincy in the 2nd Battalion of the 11th Foot,
September 2nd, 1756, but upon that battalion's being detached from
the 11th and renumbered in 1758, his regimental number became the
64th.

He served in the expedition against the French West India Islands
in 1759, and went with his regiment to America in 1768.

June 2nd, 1770, he became Major of the 38th Foot, and July 23rd,
1771, Lieutenant-Colonel of the 53rd Foot, which was then stationed
at Minorca.

He accompanied his corps to Canada in the spring of 1776, and on
June 10th of that year, a few days after his arrival, Sir Guy Carleton
appointed him a Brigadier General and assigned him to the 2nd Brigade,
which consisted of the 34th, 53rd and 20th Regiments.

When Gen. Gordon's brigade was broken up on the death of that officer, August 1st, 1776, the
62nd was added to Powell's brigade, and in November of that year, upon General Nesbit's death, Gen. Powell
was transferred to the command of the 1st Brigade, consisting of the 9th, 47th, 31st and 21st
Regiments, save that the 53rd was substituted for the 21st. Gen. Powell served under Gen. Carleton
in 1776, and the next year accompanied Burgoyne.

In organizing the troops for Burgoyne's expedition in 1777, Gen. Powell was assigned to the
2nd Brigade, consisting of the 20th, 21st and 62nd Regiments. The 62nd was left at Ticonderoga,
however with Prince Frederick's (German) Regiment and a portion of Captain Borthwick's company
of the Royal Artillery July 5th when the Americans evacuated that fort, and August 10th Gen.
Powell was sent back to assume command of that post, his regiment, the 53rd, being also ordered
to relieve the 62nd. Though he successfully repelled the American Col. Brown's attack on Ticonderoga
and for four days maintained a gallant defence, the enemy retreating September 22nd, yet inasmuch
as a considerable part of four companies of the 53rd were surprised in the old French lines
and at the outposts by the American advance, and a number of American Prisoners were recaptured,
the affair was not one of unmixed satisfaction to either side

.
  'No woman can.  Upon my honour, it's a shame that she should be out alone.
What are her people?  I'll run--from you, you know --and see her safe home.  There's such an
infernal lot of fellows about; and a girl simply bewitching and unprotected!  I ought to be
after her.'

Beauchamp held him firmly to the task of canvassing.

'Then will you tell me where she lives?'  Palmet stipulated.  He reproached Beauchamp for a
notorious Grand Turk exclusiveness and greediness in regard to women, as well as a disposition
to run hard races for them out of a spirit of pure rivalry.

'It's no use contradicting, it's universally known of you,' reiterated Palmet.  'I could name
a dozen women, and dozens of fellows you deliberately set yourself to cut out, for the honour
of it.  What's that story they tell of you in one of the American cities or watering-places,
North or South?  You would dance at a ball a dozen times with a girl engaged to a man--who
drenched you with a tumbler at the hotel bar, and off you all marched to the sands and exchanged
shots from revolvers; and both of you, they say, saw the body of a drowned sailor in the water,
in the moonlight, heaving nearer and nearer, and you stretched your man just as the body was
flung up by a wave between you.  Picturesque, if you like!'

'Dramatic, certainly.  And I ran away with the bride next morning?'

'No!'  roared Palmet; 'you didn't.  There's the cruelty of the whole affair.'

Beauchamp laughed.  'An old messmate of mine, Lieutenant Jack Wilmore, can give you a different
version of the story.  I never have fought a duel, and never will.  Here we are at the shop
of a tough voter, Mr. Oggler.  So it says in my note-book.  Shall we put Lord Palmet to speak
to him first?'

'If his lordship will put his heart into what he says,' Mr. Oggler bowed. 'Are you for giving
the people recreation on a Sunday, my lord?'

'Trap-bat and ball, cricket, dancing, military bands, puppet-shows, theatres, merry-go-rounds,
bosky dells--anything to make them happy,' said Palmet.

'Oh, dear!  then I 'm afraid we cannot ask you to speak to this Mr. Carpendike.'  Oggler shook
his head.

'Does the fellow want the people to be miserable?'

'I'm afraid, my lord, he would rather see them miserable.'

They introduced themselves to Mr. Carpendike in his shop.  He was a flat- chested, sallow young
shoemaker, with a shelving forehead, who seeing three gentlemen enter to him recognized at
once with a practised resignation that they had not come to order shoe-leather, though he would
fain have shod them, being needy; but it was not the design of Providence that they should
so come as he in his blindness would have had them. Admitting this he wished for nothing.

The battle with Carpendike lasted three-quarters of an hour, during which he was chiefly and
most effectively silent.  Carpendike would not vote for a man that proposed to open museums
on the Sabbath day.  The striking simile of the thin end of the wedge was recurred to by him
for a damning illustration.  Captain Beauchamp might be honest in putting his mind on most
questions in his address, when there was no demand upon him to do it; but honesty was no antidote
to impiety.  Thus Carpendike.

As to Sunday museuming being an antidote to the pothouse--no.  For the people knew the frequenting
of the pothouse to be a vice; it was a temptation of Satan that often in overcoming them was
the cause of their flying back to grace: whereas museums and picture galleries were insidious
attractions cloaked by the name of virtue, whereby they were allured to abandon worship.

Beauchamp flew at this young monster of unreason: 'But the people are not worshipping; they
are idling and sotting, and if you carry your despotism farther still, and shut them out of
every shop on Sundays, do you suppose you promote the spirit of worship?  If you don't revolt
them you unman them, and I warn you we can't afford to destroy what manhood remains to us in
England.  Look at the facts.'

He flung the facts at Carpendike with the natural exaggeration of them which eloquence produces,
rather, as a rule, to assure itself in passing of the overwhelming justice of the cause it
pleads than to deceive the adversary.  Brewers' beer and publicans' beer, wife-beatings, the
homes and the blood of the people, were matters reviewed to the confusion of Sabbatarians.

Carpendike listened with a bent head, upraised eyes, and brows wrinkling far on to his poll:
a picture of a mind entrenched beyond the potentialities of mortal assault.  He signified that
he had spoken. Indeed Beauchamp's reply was vain to one whose argument was that he considered
the people nearer to holiness in the: indulging of an evil propensity than in satisfying a
harmless curiosity and getting a recreation.  The Sabbath claimed them; if they were disobedient,
Sin ultimately might scourge them back to the fold, but never if they were permitted to regard
themselves as innocent in their backsliding and rebelliousness.

Such language was quite new to Beauchamp.  The parsons he had spoken to were of one voice in
objecting to the pothouse.  He appealed to Carpendike's humanity.  Carpendike smote him with
a text from Scripture.

'Devilish cold in this shop,' muttered Palmet.

Two not flourishing little children of the emaciated Puritan burst into the shop, followed
by their mother, carrying a child in her arms.  She had a sad look, upon traces of a past fairness,
vaguely like a snow landscape in the thaw.  Palmet stooped to toss shillings with her young
ones, that he might avoid the woman's face.  It cramped his heart.

'Don't you see, Mr. Carpendike,' said fat Mr. Oggler, 'it's the happiness of the people we
want; that's what Captain Beauchamp works for--their happiness; that's the aim of life for
all of us.  Look at me!  I'm as happy as the day.  I pray every night, and I go to church every
Sunday, and I never know what it is to be unhappy.  The Lord has blessed me with a good digestion,
healthy pious children, and a prosperous shop that's a competency--a modest one, but I make
it satisfy me, because I know it's the Lord's gift.  Well, now, and I hate Sabbath-breakers;
I would punish them; and I'm against the public-houses on a Sunday; but aboard my little yacht,
say on a Sunday morning in the Channel, I don't forget I owe it to the Lord that he has been
good enough to put me in the way of keeping a yacht; no; I read prayers to my crew, and a chapter
in the Bible-Genesis, Deuteronomy, Kings, Acts, Paul, just as it comes.  All's good that's
there.  Then we're free for the day!  man, boy, and me; we cook our victuals, and we must look
to the yacht, do you see.  But we've made our peace with the Almighty.  We know that.  He don't
mind the working of the vessel so long as we've remembered him.  He put us in that situation,
exactly there, latitude and longitude, do you see, and work the vessel we must.  And a glass
of grog and a pipe after dinner, can't be any offence. And I tell you, honestly and sincerely,
I'm sure my conscience is good, and I really and truly don't know what it is not to know happiness.'

'Then you don't know God,' said Carpendike, like a voice from a cave.

'Or nature: or the state of the world,' said Beauchamp, singularly impressed to find himself
between two men, of whom--each perforce of his tenuity and the evident leaning of his appetites--one
was for the barren black view of existence, the other for the fantastically bright.  As to
the men personally, he chose Carpendike, for all his obstinacy and sourness.  Oggler's genial
piety made him shrink with nausea.

But Lord Palmet paid Mr. Oggler a memorable compliment, by assuring him that he was altogether
of his way of thinking about happiness.

The frank young nobleman did not withhold a reference to the two or three things essential
to his happiness; otherwise Mr. Oggler might have been pleased and flattered.

Before quitting the shop, Beauchamp warned Carpendike that he should come again.  'Vote or
no vote, you're worth the trial.  Texts as many as you like.  I'll make your faith active,
if it's alive at all.  You speak of the Lord loving his own; you make out the Lord to be your
own, and use your religion like a drug.  So it appears to me.  That Sunday tyranny of yours
has to be defended.

Remember that; for I for one shall combat it and expose it.  Good day.'

Beauchamp continued, in the street: 'Tyrannies like this fellow's have made the English the
dullest and wretchedest people in Europe.'

Palmet animadverted on Carpendike: 'The dog looks like a deadly fungus that has poisoned the
woman.'

'I'd trust him with a post of danger, though,' said Beauchamp.

Before the candidate had opened his mouth to the next elector he was beamed on.  M'Gilliper,
baker, a floured brick face, leaned on folded arms across his counter and said, in Scotch:
'My vote?  and he that asks me for my vote is the man who, when he was midshipman, saved the
life of a relation of mine from death by drowning! my wife's first cousin, Johnny Brownson--and
held him up four to five minutes in the water, and never left him till he was out of danger!
There 's my hand on it, I will, and a score of householders in Bevisham the same.'  He dictated
precious names and addresses to Beauchamp, and was curtly thanked for his pains.

Such treatment of a favourable voter seemed odd to Palmet.

'Oh, a vote given for reasons of sentiment!'  Beauchamp interjected.

Palmet reflected and said: 'Well, perhaps that's how it is women don't care uncommonly for
the men who love them, though they like precious well to be loved.  Opposition does it.'

'You have discovered my likeness to women,' said Beauchamp, eyeing him critically, and then
thinking, with a sudden warmth, that he had seen Renee: 'Look here, Palmet, you're too late
for Itchincope, to-day; come and eat fish and meat with me at my hotel, and come to a meeting
after it.  You can run by rail to Itchincope to breakfast in the morning, and I may come with
you.  You'll hear one or two men speak well to-night.'

'I suppose I shall have to be at this business myself some day,' sighed Palmet.  'Any women
on the platform?  Oh, but political women!  And the Tories get the pick of the women.  No,
I don't think I 'll stay.  Yes, I will; I'll go through with it.  I like to be learning something.
You wouldn't think it of me, Beauchamp, but I envy fellows at work.'

'You might make a speech for me, Palmet.'

'No man better, my dear fellow, if it were proposing a toast to the poor devils and asking
them to drink it.  But a dry speech, like leading them over the desert without a well to cheer
them--no oasis, as we used to call a five-pound note and a holiday--I haven't the heart for
that.  Is your Miss Denham a Radical?'

Beauchamp asserted that he had not yet met a woman at all inclining in the direction of Radicalism.
'I don't call furies Radicals.  There may be women who think as well as feel; I don't know them.'

'Lots of them, Beauchamp.  Take my word for it.  I do know women.  They haven't a shift, nor
a trick, I don't know.  They're as clear to me as glass.  I'll wager your Miss Denham goes
to the meetings.  Now, doesn't she?  Of course she does.  And there couldn't be a gallanter
way of spending an evening, so I'll try it.  Nothing to repent of next morning! That's to be
said for politics, Beauchamp, and I confess I'm rather jealous of you.  A thoroughly good-looking
girl who takes to a fellow for what he's doing in the world, must have ideas of him precious
different from the adoration of six feet three and a fine seat in the saddle.  I see that.
There's Baskelett in the Blues; and if I were he I should detest my cuirass and helmet, for
if he's half as successful as he boasts--it's the uniform.'

Two notorious Radicals, Peter Molyneux and Samuel Killick, were called on.  The first saw Beauchamp
and refused him; the second declined to see him.  He was amazed and staggered, but said little.

Among the remainder of the electors of Bevisham, roused that day to a sense of their independence
by the summons of the candidates, only one man made himself conspicuous, by premising that
he had two important questions to ask, and he trusted Commander Beauchamp to answer them unreservedly.
They were: first, What is a FRENCH MARQUEES?  arid second: Who was EURYDICEY?

Beauchamp referred him to the Tory camp, whence the placard alluding to those ladies had issued.

'Both of them 's ladies!  I guessed it,' said the elector.

'Did you guess that one of them is a mythological lady?'

'I'm not far wrong in guessing t'other's not much better, I reckon.  Now, sir, may I ask you,
is there any tale concerning your morals?'

'No: you may not ask; you take a liberty.'

'Then I'll take the liberty to postpone talking about my vote.  Look here, Mr. Commander; if
the upper classes want anything of me and come to me for it, I'll know what sort of an example
they're setting; now that's me.'

'You pay attention to a stupid Tory squib?'

'Where there's smoke there's fire, sir.'

Beauchamp glanced at his note-book for the name of this man, who was a ragman and dustman.

'My private character has nothing whatever to do with my politics,' he said, and had barely
said it when he remembered having spoken somewhat differently, upon the abstract consideration
of the case, to Mr. Tomlinson.

'You're quite welcome to examine my character for yourself, only I don't consent to be catechized.
Understand that.'

'You quite understand that, Mr. Tripehallow,' said Oggler, bolder in taking up the strange
name than Beauchamp had been.

'I understand that.  But you understand, there's never been a word against the morals of Mr.
Cougham.  Here's the point: Do we mean to be a moral country?  Very well, then so let our representatives
be, I say. And if I hear nothing against your morals, Mr. Commander, I don't say you shan't
have my vote.  I mean to deliberate.  You young nobs capering over our heads--I nail you down
to morals.  Politics secondary.  Adew, as the dying spirit remarked to weeping friends.'

'Au revoir--would have been kinder,' said Palmet.

Mr. Tripehallow smiled roguishly, to betoken comprehension.

Beauchamp asked Mr. Oggler whether that fellow was to be taken for a humourist or a five-pound-note
man.

'It may be both, sir.  I know he's called Morality Joseph.'

An all but acknowledged five-pound-note man was the last they visited. He cut short the preliminaries
of the interview by saying that he was a four-o'clock man; i.e.  the man who waited for the
final bids to him upon the closing hour of the election day.

'Not one farthing!'  said Beauchamp, having been warned beforehand of the signification of
the phrase by his canvassing lieutenant.

'Then you're nowhere,' the honest fellow replied in the mystic tongue of prophecy.

Palmet and Beauchamp went to their fish and meat; smoked a cigarette or two afterward, conjured
away the smell of tobacco from their persons as well as they could, and betook themselves to
the assembly-room of the Liberal party, where the young lord had an opportunity of beholding
Mr. Cougham, and of listening to him for an hour and forty minutes.  He heard Mr. Timothy Turbot
likewise.  And Miss Denham was present.  Lord Palmet applauded when she smiled.  When she looked
attentive he was deeply studious.  Her expression of fatigue under the sonorous ring of statistics
poured out from Cougham was translated by Palmet into yawns and sighs of a profoundly fraternal
sympathy.  Her face quickened on the rising of Beauchamp to speak.  She kept eye on him all
the while, as Palmet, with the skill of an adept in disguising his petty larceny of the optics,
did on her.  Twice or thrice she looked pained: Beauchamp was hesitating for the word.  Once
she looked startled and shut her eyes: a hiss had sounded; Beauchamp sprang on it as if enlivened
by hostility, and dominated the factious note.  Thereat she turned to a gentleman sitting beside
her; apparently they agreed that some incident had occurred characteristic of Nevil Beauchamp;
for whom, however, it was not a brilliant evening.  He was very well able to account for it,
and did so, after he had walked a few steps with Miss Denham on her homeward way.

'You heard Cougham, Palmet!  He's my senior, and I'm obliged to come second to him, and how
am I to have a chance when he has drenched the audience for close upon a couple of hours!'

Palmet mimicked the manner of Cougham.

'They cry for Turbot naturally; they want a relief,' Beauchamp groaned.

Palmet gave an imitation of Timothy Turbot.

He was an admirable mimic, perfectly spontaneous, without stressing any points, and Beauchamp
was provoked to laugh his discontentment with the evening out of recollection.

But a grave matter troubled Palmet's head.

'Who was that fellow who walked off with Miss Denham?'

'A married man,' said Beauchamp: 'badly married; more 's the pity; he has a wife in the madhouse.
His name is Lydiard.'

'Not her brother!  Where's her uncle?'

'She won't let him come to these meetings.  It's her idea; well- intended, but wrong, I think.
She's afraid that Dr. Shrapnel will alarm the moderate Liberals and damage Radical me.'

Palmet muttered between his teeth, 'What queer things they let their women do!'  He felt compelled
to say, 'Odd for her to be walking home at night with a fellow like that.'

It chimed too consonantly with a feeling of Beauchamp's, to repress which he replied: 'Your
ideas about women are simply barbarous, Palmet.  Why shouldn't she?  Her uncle places his confidence
in the man, and in her. Isn't that better--ten times more likely to call out the sense of honour
and loyalty, than the distrust and the scandal going on in your class?'

'Please to say yours too.'

'I've no class.  I say that the education for women is to teach them to rely on themselves.'

'Ah!  well, I don't object, if I'm the man.'

'Because you and your set are absolutely uncivilized in your views of women.'

'Common sense, Beauchamp!'

'Prey.  You eye them as prey.  And it comes of an idle aristocracy.  You have no faith in them,
and they repay you for your suspicion.'

'All the same, Beauchamp, she ought not to be allowed to go about at night with that fellow.
"Rich and rare were the gems she wore": but that was in Erin's isle, and if we knew the whole
history, she'd better have stopped at home.  She's marvellously pretty, to my mind.  She looks
a high-bred wench.  Odd it is, Beauchamp, to see a lady's-maid now and then catch the style
of my lady.  No, by Jove!  I've known one or two--you couldn't tell the difference!  Not till
you were intimate.  I know one would walk a minuet with a duchess.  Of course--all the worse
for her. If you see that uncle of Miss Denham's--upon my honour, I should advise him: I mean,
counsel him not to trust her with any fellow but you.'

Beauchamp asked Lord Palmet how old he was.

Palmet gave his age; correcting the figures from six-and-twenty to one year more.  'And never
did a stroke of work in my life,' he said, speaking genially out of an acute guess at the sentiments
of the man he walked with.

It seemed a farcical state of things.

There was a kind of contrition in Palmet's voice, and to put him at his ease, as well as to
stamp something in his own mind, Beauchamp said: 'It's common enough.'

CHAPTER XX

A DAY AT ITCHINCOPE

An election in Bevisham was always an exciting period at Itchincope, the large and influential
old estate of the Lespels, which at one time, with but a ceremonious drive through the town,
sent you two good Whig men to Parliament to sit at Reform banquets; two unswerving party men,
blest subscribers to the right Review, and personally proud of its trenchancy. Mr. Grancey
Lespel was the survivor of them, and well could he remember the happier day of his grandfather,
his father, and his own hot youth. He could be carried so far by affectionate regrets as to
think of the Tories of that day benignly:--when his champion Review of the orange and blue
livery waved a wondrous sharp knife, and stuck and bled them, proving to his party, by trenchancy
alone, that the Whig was the cause of Providence.  Then politics presented you a table whereat
two parties feasted, with no fear of the intrusion of a third, and your backs were turned on
the noisy lower world, your ears were deaf to it.

Apply we now the knocker to the door of venerable Quotation, and call the aged creature forth,
that he, half choked by his eheu!--

                    'A sound between a sigh and bray,'

may pronounce the familiar but respectable words, the burial-service of a time so happy!

Mr. Grancey Lespel would still have been sitting for Bevisham (or politely at this elective
moment bowing to resume the seat) had not those Manchester jugglers caught up his cry, appropriated
his colours, displaced and impersonated him, acting beneficent Whig on a scale approaching
treason to the Constitution; leaning on the people in earnest, instead of taking the popular
shoulder for a temporary lift, all in high party policy, for the clever manoeuvre, to oust
the Tory and sway the realm.  See the consequences.  For power, for no other consideration,
those manufacturing rascals have raised Radicalism from its primaeval mire--from its petty
backslum bookseller's shop and public-house back- parlour effluvia of oratory--to issue dictates
in England, and we, England, formerly the oak, are topsy-turvy, like onions, our heels in the air!

The language of party is eloquent, and famous for being grand at illustration; but it is equally
well known that much of it gives us humble ideas of the speaker, probably because of the naughty
temper party is prone to; which, while endowing it with vehemence, lessens the stout circumferential
view that should be taken, at least historically. Indeed, though we admit party to be the soundest
method for conducting us, party talk soon expends its attractiveness, as would a summer's afternoon
given up to the contemplation of an encounter of rams' heads. Let us be quit of Mr. Grancey
Lespel's lamentations.  The Whig gentleman had some reason to complain.  He had been trained
to expect no other attack than that of his hereditary adversary-ram in front, and a sham ram--no
honest animal, but a ramming engine rather--had attacked him in the rear.  Like Mr. Everard
Romfrey and other Whigs, he was profoundly chagrined by popular ingratitude: 'not the same
man,' his wife said of him.  It nipped him early.  He took to proverbs; sure sign of the sere
leaf in a man's mind.

His wife reproached the people for their behaviour to him bitterly.  The lady regarded politics
as a business that helped hunting-men a stage above sportsmen, for numbers of the politicians
she was acquainted with were hunting-men, yet something more by virtue of the variety they
could introduce into a conversation ordinarily treating of sport and the qualities of wines.
Her husband seemed to have lost in that Parliamentary seat the talisman which gave him notions
distinguishing him from country squires; he had sunk, and he no longer cared for the months
in London, nor for the speeches she read to him to re-awaken his mind and make him look out
of himself, as he had done when he was a younger man and not a suspended Whig. In the island of Morty
(north of Gilolo) there exists the Tropidorhynchus fuscicapillus, of a dark sooty brown colour,
especially on the head, while the under parts are rather lighter, and the characteristic ruff
of the nape is wanting. Now it is curious that in the adjacent island of Gilolo should be found
the Mimeta phæochromus, the upper surface of which is of exactly
the same dark sooty tint as the Tropidorhynchus, and is the only known
species that is of such a dark colour.

The under side is not quite light enough, but it is a good approximation.

This Mimeta is a rare bird, and may very probably exist in Morty, though not yet found there;
or, on the other hand, recent changes in physical geography may have led to the restriction of
the Tropidorhynchus to that island, where it is very common.

Here, then, we have two cases of perfect mimicry and two others of good approximation, occurring
between species of the same two genera of birds; and in three of these cases the pairs that resemble
each other are found together in the same island, and to which they are peculiar. In all these
cases the Tropidorhynchus is rather larger than the Mimeta, but the difference is not beyond
the limits of variation in species, and the two genera are somewhat
alike in form and proportion.

There are, no doubt, some special enemies by which many small birds are attacked, but which are afraid
of the Tropidorhynchus (probably some of the hawks), and thus it
becomes advantageous for the weak Mimeta to resemble the strong, pugnacious,
noisy, and very abundant Tropidorhynchus.

My friend, Mr. Osbert Salvin, has given me another interesting case
of bird mimicry.

In the neighbourhood of Rio Janeiro is found an insect-eating hawk (Harpagus diodon), and in
the same district a bird-eating hawk (Accipiter pileatus) which closely resembles it. Both are of
the same ashy tint beneath, with the thighs and under wing-coverts reddish brown, so that when
on the wing and seen from below they are undistinguishable. The curious point, however, is that
the Accipiter has a much wider range than the Harpagus, and in the regions where the insect-eating
species is not found it no longer resembles it, the under wing-coverts varying to white; thus
indicating that the red-brown colour is kept true by its being useful
to the Accipiter to be mistaken for the insect-eating species, which
birds have learnt not to be afraid of.

Mimicry among Mammals.

Among the Mammalia the only case which may be true mimicry is that of the insectivorous genus Cladobates,
found in the Malay countries, several species of which very closely resemble squirrels. The
size is about the same, the long bushy tail is carried in the same way, and the colours are
very similar. In this case the use of the resemblance must be to enable the Cladobates to approach
the insects or small birds on which it feeds, under the disguise
of the harmless fruit-eating squirrel.

Objections to Mr. Bates' Theory of Mimicry.

Having now completed our survey of the most prominent and remarkable cases of mimicry that have
yet been noticed, we must say something of the objections that have
been made to the theory of their production given by Mr. Bates, and
which we have endeavoured to illustrate and enforce in the preceding
pages.

Three counter explanations have been proposed. Professor Westwood admits the fact of the mimicry
and its probable use to the insect, but maintains that each species was created a mimic for
the purpose of the protection thus afforded it.

Mr. Andrew Murray, in his paper on the "Disguises of Nature," inclines to the opinion that similar
conditions of food and of surrounding circumstances have acted in some unknown way to produce
the resemblances; and when the subject was discussed before the Entomological Society of London,
a third objection was added--that heredity or the reversion to ancestral types of form and colouration,
might have produced many of the cases of mimicry.

Against the special creation of mimicking species there are all the objections and difficulties
in the way of special creation in other cases, with the addition of a few that are peculiar to it.
The most obvious is, that we have gradations of mimicry and of protective resemblance--a fact
which is strongly suggestive of a natural process having been at work. Another very serious objection
is, that as mimicry has been shown to be useful only to those species and groups which are rare
and probably dying out, and would cease to have any effect should the proportionate abundance
of the two species be reversed, it follows that on the special-creation theory the one species
must have been created plentiful, the other rare; and, notwithstanding
the many causes that continually tend to alter the proportions of
species, these two species must have always been specially maintained
at their respective proportions, or the very purpose for which they
each received their peculiar characteristics would have completely
failed.

A third difficulty is, that although it is very easy to understand how mimicry may be brought
about by variation and the survival of the fittest, it seems a very strange thing for a Creator
to protect an animal by making it imitate another, when the very assumption of a Creator implies
his power to create it so as to require no such circuitous protection. These appear to be fatal
objections to the application of the special-creation theory to this particular case.

The other two supposed explanations, which may be shortly expressed
as the theories of "similar conditions" and of "heredity," agree in
making mimicry, where it exists, an adventitious circumstance not
necessarily connected with the well-being of the mimicking species.

But several of the most striking and most constant facts which have been adduced, directly contradict
both those hypotheses. The law that mimicry is confined to a few groups only is one of these,
for "similar conditions" must act more or less on all groups in a limited region, and "heredity"
must influence all groups related to each other in an equal degree. Again, the general fact that
those species which mimic others are rare, while those which are
imitated are abundant, is in no way explained by either of these theories,
any more than is the frequent occurrence of some palpable mode of
protection in the imitated species.

"Reversion to an ancestral type" no way explains why the imitator
and the imitated always inhabit the very same district, whereas allied
forms of every degree of nearness and remoteness generally inhabit
different countries, and often different quarters of the globe; and
neither it, nor "similar conditions," will account for the likeness
between species of distinct groups being superficial only--a disguise,
not a true resemblance; for the imitation of bark, of leaves, of sticks,
of dung; for the resemblance between species in different orders,
and even different classes and sub-kingdoms; and finally, for the
graduated series of the phenomena, beginning with a general harmony
and adaptation of tint in autumn and winter moths and in arctic and
desert animals, and ending with those complete cases of detailed mimicry
which not only deceive predacious animals, but puzzle the most experienced
insect collectors and the most learned entomologists.

Mimicry by Female Insects only.

But there is yet another series of phenomena connected with this subject,
which considerably strengthens the view here adopted, while it seems
quite incompatible with either of the other hypotheses; namely, the
relation of protective colouring and mimicry to the sexual differences
of animals.

It will be clear to every one that if two animals, which as regards "external conditions" and
"hereditary descent," are exactly alike, yet differ remarkably in
colouration, one resembling a protected species and the other not,
the resemblance that exists in one only can hardly be imputed to the
influence of external conditions or as the effect of heredity.

And if, further, it can be proved that the one requires protection
more than the other, and that in several cases it is that one which
mimics the protected species, while the one that least requires protection
never does so, it will afford very strong corroborative evidence that
there is a real connexion between the necessity for protection and
the phenomenon of mimicry.

Now the sexes of insects offer us a test of the nature here indicated, and appear to furnish one of
the most conclusive arguments in favour of the theory that the phenomena
termed "mimicry" are produced by natural selection.

The comparative importance of the sexes varies much in different classes of animals. In the higher
vertebrates, where the number of young produced at a birth is small
and the same individuals breed many years in succession, the preservation
of both sexes is almost equally important.

In all the numerous cases in which the male protects the female and her offspring, or helps to supply
them with food, his importance in the economy of nature is proportionately increased, though
it is never perhaps quite equal to that of the female. In insects the case is very different; they
pair but once in their lives, and the prolonged existence of the male is in most cases quite
unnecessary for the continuance of the race. The female, however, must continue to exist long enough
to deposit her eggs in a place adapted for the development and growth of the progeny. Hence there
is a wide difference in the need for protection in the two sexes; and we should, therefore, expect
to find that in some cases the special protection given to the female was in the male less in amount
or altogether wanting. The facts entirely confirm this expectation. In the spectre insects (Phasmidæ)
it is often the females alone that so strikingly resemble leaves,
while the males show only a rude approximation.

The male Diadema misippus is a very handsome and conspicuous butterfly, without a sign of protective
or imitative colouring, while the female is entirely unlike her partner,
and is one of the most wonderful cases of mimicry on record, resembling
most accurately the common Danais chrysippus, in whose company it
is often found.

So in several species of South American Pieris, the males are white
and black, of a similar type of colouring to our own "cabbage" butterflies,
while the females are rich yellow and buff, spotted and marked so
as exactly to resemble species of Heliconidæ with which they associate
in the forest.

In the Malay archipelago is found a Diadema which had always been
considered a male insect on account of its glossy metallic-blue tints,
while its companion of sober brown was looked upon as the female.

I discovered, however, that the reverse is the case, and that the rich and glossy colours of the
female are imitative and protective, since they cause her exactly to resemble the common Euploea midamus
of the same regions, a species which has been already mentioned in this essay as mimicked
by another butterfly, Papilio paradoxa. I have since named this interesting species Diadema
anomala (see the Transactions of the Entomological Society, 1869, p. 285). In this case, and in
that of Diadema misippus, there is no difference in the habits of
the two sexes, which fly in similar localities; so that the influence
of "external conditions" cannot be invoked here as it has been in
the case of the South American Pieris pyrrha and allies, where the
white males frequent open sunny places, while the Heliconia-like females
haunt the shades of the forest.

We may impute to the same general cause (the greater need of protection
for the female, owing to her weaker flight, greater exposure to attack,
and supreme importance)--the fact of the colours of female insects
being so very generally duller and less conspicuous than those of
the other sex.

And that it is chiefly due to this cause rather than to what Mr. Darwin terms "sexual selection"
appears to be shown by the otherwise inexplicable fact, that in the groups which have a protection
of any kind independent of concealment, sexual differences of colour are either quite wanting
or slightly developed. The Heliconidæ and Danaidæ, protected by a disagreeable flavour, have
the females as bright and conspicuous as the males, and very rarely differing at all from them.
The stinging Hymenoptera have the two sexes equally well coloured.

The Carabidæ, the Coccinellidæ, Chrysomelidæ, and the Telephori have
both sexes equally conspicuous, and seldom differing in colours.

The brilliant Curculios, which are protected by their hardness, are brilliant in both sexes.
Lastly, the glittering Cetoniadæ and Buprestidæ, which seem to be protected by their hard and
polished coats, their rapid motions, and peculiar habits, present
few sexual differences of colour, while sexual selection has often
manifested itself by structural differences, such as horns, spines,
or other processes.

Cause of the dull Colours of Female Birds.

The same law manifests itself in Birds.

The female while sitting on her eggs requires protection by concealment
to a much greater extent than the male; and we accordingly find that
in a large majority of the cases in which the male birds are distinguished
by unusual brilliancy of plumage, the females are much more obscure,
and often remarkably plain-coloured.

The exceptions are such as eminently to prove the rule, for in most cases we can see a very good
reason for them. In particular, there are a few instances among wading and gallinaceous birds
in which the female has decidedly more brilliant colours than the
male; but it is a most curious and interesting fact that in most if
not all these cases the males sit upon the eggs; so that this exception
to the usual rule almost demonstrates that it is because the process
of incubation is at once very important and very dangerous, that the
protection of obscure colouring is developed.

The most striking example is that of the gray phalarope (Phalaropus fulicarius). When in winter
plumage, the sexes of this bird are alike in colouration, but in summer the female is much the most
conspicuous, having a black head, dark wings, and reddish-brown back, while the male is nearly uniform
brown, with dusky spots.

Mr. Gould in his "Birds of Great Britain" figures the two sexes in both winter and summer plumage,
and remarks on the strange peculiarity of the usual colours of the
two sexes being reversed, and also on the still more curious fact
that the "male alone sits on the eggs," which are deposited on the
bare ground.

In another British bird, the dotterell, the female is also larger
and more brightly-coloured than the male; and it seems to be proved
that the males assist in incubation even if they do not perform it
entirely, for Mr. Gould tells us, "that they have been shot with the
breast bare of feathers, caused by sitting on the eggs."

The small quail-like birds forming the genus Turnix have also generally large and bright-coloured
females, and we are told by Mr. Jerdon in his "Birds of India" that
"the natives report that during the breeding season the females desert
their eggs and associate in flocks while the males are employed in
hatching the eggs."

It is also an ascertained fact, that the females are more bold and pugnacious than the males. A
further confirmation of this view is to be found in the fact (not hitherto noticed) that in a
large majority of the cases in which bright colours exist in both
sexes incubation takes place in a dark hole or in a dome-shaped nest.

Female kingfishers are often equally brilliant with the male, and they build in holes in banks.
Bee-eaters, trogons, motmots, and toucans, all build in holes, and in none is there any difference
in the sexes, although they are, without exception, showy birds. Parrots build in holes in trees,
and in the majority of cases they present no marked sexual difference tending to concealment
of the female. Woodpeckers are in the same category, since though the sexes often differ in
colour, the female is not generally less conspicuous than the male.

Wagtails and titmice build concealed nests, and the females are nearly as gay as their mates.
The female of the pretty Australian bird Pardalotus punctatus, is
very conspicuously spotted on the upper surface, and it builds in
a hole in the ground.

The gay-coloured hang-nests (Icterinæ) and the equally brilliant
tanagers may be well contrasted; for the former, concealed in their
covered nests, present little or no sexual difference of colour--while
the open-nested tanagers have the females dull-coloured and sometimes
with almost protective tints.

No doubt there are many individual exceptions to the rule here indicated, because many and
various causes have combined to determine both the colouration and
the habits of birds.

These have no doubt acted and re-acted on each other; and when conditions
have changed one of these characters may often have become modified,
while the other, though useless, may continue by hereditary descent
an apparent exception to what otherwise seems a very general rule.

The facts presented by the sexual differences of colour in birds and their mode of nesting, are
on the whole in perfect harmony with that law of protective adaptation
of colour and form, which appears to have checked to some extent the
powerful action of sexual selection, and to have materially influenced
the colouring of female birds, as it has undoubtedly done that of
female insects.

Use of the gaudy Colours of many Caterpillars.

Since this essay was first published a very curious difficulty has
been cleared up by the application of the general principle of protective
colouring.

Great numbers of caterpillars are so brilliantly marked and coloured as to be very conspicuous
even at a considerable distance, and it has been noticed that such caterpillars seldom hide
themselves. Other species, however, are green or brown, closely resembling the colours of the substances
on which they feed, while others again imitate sticks, and stretch themselves out motionless from a
twig so as to look like one of its branches.

Now, as caterpillars form so large a part of the food of birds, it
was not easy to understand why any of them should have such bright
colours and markings as to make them specially visible.

Mr. Darwin had put the case to me as a difficulty from another point of view, for he had arrived
at the conclusion that brilliant colouration in the animal kingdom
is mainly due to sexual selection, and this could not have acted in
the case of sexless larvæ.

Applying here the analogy of other insects, I reasoned, that since
some caterpillars were evidently protected by their imitative colouring,
and others by their spiny or hairy bodies, the bright colours of the
rest must also be in some way useful to them.

I further thought that as some butterflies and moths were greedily eaten by birds while others
were distasteful to them, and these latter were mostly of conspicuous colours, so probably these brilliantly
coloured caterpillars were distasteful, and therefore never eaten
by birds.

Distastefulness alone would however be of little service to caterpillars,
because their soft and juicy bodies are so delicate, that if seized
and afterwards rejected by a bird they would almost certainly be killed.

Some constant and easily perceived signal was therefore necessary
to serve as a warning to birds never to touch these uneatable kinds,
and a very gaudy and conspicuous colouring with the habit of fully
exposing themselves to view becomes such a signal, being in strong
contrast with the green or brown tints and retiring habits of the
eatable kinds.

The subject was brought by me before the Entomological Society (see
Proceedings, March 4th, 1867), in order that those members having
opportunities for making observations might do so in the following
summer; and I also wrote a letter to the Field newspaper, begging
that some of its readers would co-operate in making observations on
what insects were rejected by birds, at the same time fully explaining
the great interest and scientific importance of the problem.

It is a curious example of how few of the country readers of that paper are at all interested
in questions of simple natural history, that I only obtained one
answer from a gentleman in Cumberland, who gave me some interesting
observations on the general dislike and abhorrence of all birds to
the "Gooseberry Caterpillar," probably that of the Magpie-moth (Abraxas
grossulariata).

Neither young pheasants, partridges, nor wild-ducks could be induced to eat it, sparrows and finches
never touched it, and all birds to whom he offered it rejected it with evident dread and abhorrence.
It will be seen that these observations are confirmed by those of two members of the Entomological
Society to whom we are indebted for more detailed information.

In March, 1869, Mr. J. Jenner Weir communicated a valuable series of observations made during
many years, but more especially in the two preceding summers, in his aviary, containing the
following birds of more or less insectivorous habits:--Robin, Yellow-Hammer,
Reed-bunting, Bullfinch, Chaffinch, Crossbill, Thrush, Tree-Pipit,
Siskin, and Redpoll.

He found that hairy caterpillars were uniformly rejected; five distinct
species were quite unnoticed by all his birds, and were allowed to
crawl about the aviary for days with impunity.

The spiny caterpillars of the Tortoiseshell and Peacock butterflies
were equally rejected; but in both these cases Mr. Weir thinks it
is the taste, not the hairs or spines, that are disagreeable, because
some very young caterpillars of a hairy species were rejected although
no hairs were developed, and the smooth pupæ of the above-named butterflies
were refused as persistently as the spined larvæ.

In these cases, then, both hairs and spines would seem to be mere
signs of uneatableness.

His next experiments were with those smooth gaily-coloured caterpillars
which never conceal themselves, but on the contrary appear to court
observation.

Such are those of the Magpie moth (Abraxas grossulariata), whose caterpillar is conspicuously
white and black spotted--the Diloba coeruleocephala, whose larvæ
is pale yellow with a broad blue or green lateral band--the Cucullia
verbasci, whose larvæ is greenish white with yellow bands and black
spots, and Anthrocera filipendulæ (the six spot Burnet moth), whose
caterpillar is yellow with black spots.



So they sat and lunched in the library, where Mrs. Devereux served unconsciously for an excellent
ally to Cecilia in chatting to Beauchamp, principally of the writings of Mr. Lydiard.

Had the blinds of the windows been drawn down and candles lighted, Beauchamp would have been
well contented to remain with these two ladies, and forget the outer world; sweeter society
could not have been offered him: but glancing carelessly on to the lawn, he exclaimed in some
wonderment that the man he particularly wished to see was there.  'It must be Dollikins, the
brewer.  I've had him pointed out to me in Bevisham, and I never can light on him at his brewery.'

No excuse for detaining the impetuous candidate struck Cecilia.  She betook herself to Mrs.
Lespel, to give and receive counsel in the emergency, while Beauchamp struck across the lawn
to Mr. Dollikins, who had the squire of Itchincope on the other side of him.

Late in the afternoon a report reached the ladies of a furious contest going on over Dollikins.
Mr. Algy Borolick was the first to give them intelligence of it, and he declared that Beauchamp
had wrested Dollikins from Grancey Lespel.  This was contradicted subsequently by Mr. Stukely
Culbrett.  'But there's heavy pulling between them,' he said.

'It will do all the good in the world to Grancey,' said Mrs. Lespel.

She sat in her little blue-room, with gentlemen congregating at the open window.

Presently Grancey Lespel rounded a projection of the house where the drawing-room stood out:
'The maddest folly ever talked!'  he delivered himself in wrath.  'The Whigs dead?  You may
as well say I'm dead.'

It was Beauchamp answering: 'Politically, you're dead, if you call yourself a Whig.  You couldn't
be a live one, for the party's in pieces, blown to the winds.  The country was once a chess-board
for Whig and Tory: but that game's at an end.  There's no doubt on earth that the Whigs are dead.'

'But if there's no doubt about it, how is it I have a doubt about it?'

'You know you're a Tory.  You tried to get that man Dollikins from me in the Tory interest.'

'I mean to keep him out of Radical clutches.  Now that 's the truth.'

They came up to the group by the open window, still conversing hotly, indifferent to listeners.

'You won't keep him from me; I have him,' said Beauchamp.

'You delude yourself; I have his promise, his pledged word,' said Grancey Lespel.

'The man himself told you his opinion of renegade Whigs.'

'Renegade!'

'Renegade Whig is an actionable phrase,' Mr. Culbrett observed.

He was unnoticed.

'If you don't like "renegade," take "dead,"' said Beauchamp.  'Dead Whig resurgent in the Tory.
You are dead.'

'It's the stupid conceit of your party thinks that.'

'Dead, my dear Mr. Lespel.  I'll say for the Whigs, they would not be seen touting for Tories
if they were not ghosts of Whigs.  You are dead. There is no doubt of it.'

'But,' Grancey Lespel repeated, 'if there's no doubt about it, how is it I have a doubt about it?'

'The Whigs preached finality in Reform.  It was their own funeral sermon.'

'Nonsensical talk!'

'I don't dispute your liberty of action to go over to the Tories, but you have no right to
attempt to take an honest Liberal with you.  And that I've stopped.'

'Aha!  Beauchamp; the man's mine.  Come, you'll own he swore he wouldn't vote for a Shrapnelite.'

'Don't you remember?--that's how the Tories used to fight you; they stuck an epithet to you,
and hooted to set the mob an example; you hit them off to the life,' said Beauchamp, brightening
with the fine ire of strife, and affecting a sadder indignation.  'You traded on the ignorance
of a man prejudiced by lying reports of one of the noblest of human creatures.'

'Shrapnel?  There!  I've had enough.'  Grancey Lespel bounced away with both hands outspread
on the level of his ears.

'Dead!'  Beauchamp sent the ghastly accusation after him.

Grancey faced round and said, 'Bo!' which was applauded for a smart retort.  And let none of
us be so exalted above the wit of daily life as to sneer at it.  Mrs. Lespel remarked to Mr.
Culbrett, 'Do you not see how much he is refreshed by the interest he takes in this election?
He is ten years younger.'

Beauchamp bent to her, saying mock-dolefully, 'I'm sorry to tell you that if ever he was a
sincere Whig, he has years of remorse before him.'

'Promise me, Captain Beauchamp,' she answered, 'promise you will give us no more politics to-day.'

'If none provoke me.'

'None shall.'

'And as to Bevisham,' said Mr. Culbrett, 'it's the identical borough for a Radical candidate,
for every voter there demands a division of his property, and he should be the last to complain
of an adoption of his principles.'

'Clever,' rejoined Beauchamp; 'but I am under government'; and he swept a bow to Mrs. Lespel.

As they were breaking up the group, Captain Baskelett appeared.

'Ah!  Nevil,' said he, passed him, saluted Miss Halkett through the window, then cordially
squeezed his cousin's hand.  'Having a holiday out of Bevisham?  The baron expects to meet
you at Mount Laurels to-morrow. He particularly wishes me to ask you whether you think all
is fair in war.'

'I don't,' said Nevil.

'Not?  The canvass goes on swimmingly.'

'Ask Palmet!

'Palmet gives you two-thirds of the borough.  The poor old Tory tortoise is nowhere.  They've
been writing about you, Nevil.'

'They have.  And if there 's a man of honour in the party I shall hold him responsible for it.'

'I allude to an article in the Bevisham Liberal paper; a magnificent eulogy, upon my honour.
I give you my word, I have rarely read an article so eloquent.  And what is the Conservative
misdemeanour which the man of honour in the party is to pay for?'

'I'll talk to you about it by-and-by,' said Nevil.

He seemed to Cecilia too trusting, too simple, considering his cousin's undisguised tone of
banter.  Yet she could not put him on his guard. She would have had Mr. Culbrett do so.  She
walked on the terrace with him near upon sunset, and said, 'The position Captain Beauchamp
is in here is most unfair to him.'

'There's nothing unfair in the lion's den,' said Stukely Culbrett; adding, 'Now, observe, Miss
Halkett; he talks for effect.  He discovers that Lespel is a Torified Whig; but that does not
make him a bit more alert.  It's to say smart things.  He speaks, but won't act, as if he were
among enemies.  He's getting too fond of his bow-wow.  Here he is, and he knows the den, and
he chooses to act the innocent.  You see how ridiculous?  That trick of the ingenu, or peculiarly
heavenly messenger, who pretends that he ought never to have any harm done to him, though he
carries the lighted match, is the way of young Radicals.  Otherwise Beauchamp would be a dear
boy.  We shall see how he takes his thrashing.'

'You feel sure he will be beaten?'

'He has too strong a dose of fool's honesty to succeed--stands for the game laws with Radicals,
for example.  He's loaded with scruples and crotchets, and thinks more of them than of his
winds and his tides.  No public man is to be made out of that.  His idea of the Whigs being
dead shows a head that can't read the country.  He means himself for mankind, and is preparing
to be the benefactor of a country parish.'

'But as a naval officer?'

'Excellent.'

Cecilia was convinced that Mr. Culbrett underestimated Beauchamp. Nevertheless the confidence
expressed in Beauchamp's defeat reassured and pleased her.  At midnight she was dancing with
him in the midst of great matronly country vessels that raised a wind when they launched on
the waltz, and exacted an anxious pilotage on the part of gentlemen careful of their partners;
and why I cannot say, but contrasts produce quaint ideas in excited spirits, and a dancing
politician appeared to her so absurd that at one moment she had to bite her lips not to laugh.
It will hardly be credited that the waltz with Nevil was delightful to Cecilia all the while,
and dancing with others a penance.  He danced with none other.  He led her to a three o'clock
morning supper: one of those triumphant subversions of the laws and customs of earth which
have the charm of a form of present deification for all young people; and she, while noting
how the poor man's advocate dealt with costly pasties and sparkling wines, was overjoyed at
his hearty comrade's manner with the gentlemen, and a leadership in fun that he seemed to have
established. Cecil Baskelett acknowledged it, and complimented him on it.  'I give you my word,
Nevil, I never heard you in finer trim.  Here's to our drive into Bevisham to-morrow!  Do you
drink it?  I beg; I entreat.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Nevil.

'Will you take a whip down there?'

'If you're all insured.'

'On my honour, old Nevil, driving a four-in-hand is easier than governing the country.'

'I'll accept your authority for what you know best,' said Nevil.

The toast of the Drive into Bevisham was drunk.

Cecilia left the supper-table, mortified, and feeling disgraced by her participation in a secret
that was being wantonly abused to humiliate Nevil, as she was made to think by her sensitiveness.
All the gentlemen were against him, excepting perhaps that chattering pie Lord Palmet, who
did him more mischief than his enemies.  She could not sleep.  She walked out on the terrace
with Mrs. Wardour-Devereux, in a dream, hearing that lady breathe remarks hardly less than
sentimental, and an unwearied succession of shouts from the smoking-room.

'They are not going to bed to-night,' said Mrs. Devereux.

'They are mystifying Captain Beauchamp,' said Cecilia.

'My husband tells me they are going to drive him into the town to- morrow.'

Cecilia flushed: she could scarcely get her breath.

'Is that their plot?'  she murmured.

Sleep was rejected by her, bed itself.  The drive into Bevisham had been fixed for nine A.M.
She wrote two lines on note-paper in her room: but found them overfervid and mysterious.  Besides,
how were they to be conveyed to Nevil's chamber

She walked in the passage for half an hour, thinking it possible she might meet him; not the
most lady-like of proceedings, but her head was bewildered.  An arm-chair in her room invited
her to rest and think--the mask of a natural desire for sleep.  At eight in the morning she
was awakened by her maid, and at a touch exclaimed, 'Have they gone?'  and her heart still
throbbed after hearing that most of the gentlemen were in and about the stables.  Cecilia was
down-stairs at a quarter to nine. The breakfast-room was empty of all but Lord Palmet and Mr.
Wardour- Devereux; one selecting a cigar to light out of doors, the other debating between
two pipes.  She beckoned to Palmet, and commissioned him to inform Beauchamp that she wished
him to drive her down to Bevisham in her pony-carriage.  Palmet brought back word from Beauchamp
that he had an appointment at ten o'clock in the town.  'I want to see him,' she said; so Palmet
ran out with the order.  Cecilia met Beauchamp in the entrance- hall.

'You must not go,' she said bluntly.

'I can't break an appointment,' said he--'for the sake of my own pleasure,' was implied.

'Will you not listen to me, Nevil, when I say you cannot go?'

A coachman's trumpet blew.

'I shall be late.  That's Colonel Millington's team.  He starts first, then Wardour-Devereux,
then Cecil, and I mount beside him; Palmet's at our heels.'

'But can't you even imagine a purpose for their driving into Bevisham so pompously?'

'Well, men with drags haven't commonly much purpose,' he said.

'But on this occasion!  At an Election time!  Surely, Nevil, you can guess at a reason.'

A second trumpet blew very martially.  Footmen came in search of Captain Beauchamp.  The alternative
of breaking her pledged word to her father, or of letting Nevil be burlesqued in the sight
of the town, could no longer be dallied with.

Cecilia said, 'Well, Nevil, then you shall hear it.'

Hereupon Captain Baskelett's groom informed Captain Beauchamp that he was off.

'Yes,' Nevil said to Cecilia, 'tell me on board the yacht.'

'Nevil, you will be driving into the town with the second Tory candidate of the borough.'

'Which?  who?'  Nevil 'asked.

'Your cousin Cecil.'

'Tell Captain Baskelett that I don't drive down till an hour later,' Nevil said to the groom.
'Cecilia, you're my friend; I wish you were more.  I wish we didn't differ.  I shall hope to
change you--make you come half-way out of that citadel of yours.  This is my uncle Everard!
I might have made sure there'd be a blow from him!  And Cecil!  of all men for a politician!
Cecilia, think of it!  Cecil Baskelett!  I beg Seymour Austin's pardon for having suspected
him .  .  .'

Now sounded Captain Baskelett's trumpet.

Angry though he was, Beauchamp laughed.  'Isn't it exactly like the baron to spring a mine
of this kind?'

There was decidedly humour in the plot, and it was a lusty quarterstaff blow into the bargain.
Beauchamp's head rang with it.  He could not conceal the stunning effect it had on him.  Gratitude
and tenderness toward Cecilia for saving him, at the cost of a partial breach of faith that
he quite understood, from the scandal of the public entry into Bevisham on the Tory coach-box,
alternated with his interjections regarding his uncle Everard.

At eleven, Cecilia sat in her pony-carriage giving final directions to Mrs. Devereux where
to look out for the Esperanza and the schooner's boat.  'Then I drive down alone,' Mrs. Devereux
said.

The gentlemen were all off, and every available maid with them on the coach-boxes, a brilliant
sight that had been missed by Nevil and Cecilia.

'Why, here's Lydiard!'  said Nevil, supposing that Lydiard must be approaching him with tidings
of the second Tory candidate.  But Lydiard knew nothing of it.  He was the bearer of a letter
on foreign paper-- marked urgent, in Rosamund's hand--and similarly worded in the well-known
hand which had inscribed the original address of the letter to Steynham.

Beauchamp opened it and read:

                              Chateau Tourdestelle
                                        '(Eure).

               'Come.  I give you three days--no more.

                                        'RENEE.'

The brevity was horrible.  Did it spring from childish imperiousness or tragic peril?

Beauchamp could imagine it to be this or that.  In moments of excited speculation we do not
dwell on the possibility that there may be a mixture of motives.

'I fear I must cross over to France this evening,' he said to Cecilia.

She replied, 'It is likely to be stormy to-night.  The steamboat may not run.'

'If there's a doubt of it, I shall find a French lugger.  You are tired, from not sleeping
last night.'

'No,' she answered, and nodded to Mrs. Devereux, beside whom Mr. Lydiard stood: 'You will not
drive down alone, you see.'

For a young lady threatened with a tempest in her heart, as disturbing to her as the one gathering
in the West for ships at sea, Miss Halkett bore herself well.

CHAPTER XXII

THE DRIVE INTO BEVISHAM

Beauchamp was requested by Cecilia to hold the reins.  His fair companion in the pony-carriage
preferred to lean back musing, and he had leisure to think over the blow dealt him by his uncle
Everard with so sure an aim so ringingly on the head.  And in the first place he made no attempt
to disdain it because it was nothing but artful and heavy-handed, after the mediaeval pattern.
Of old he himself had delighted in artfulness as well as boldness and the unmistakeable hit.
Highly to prize generalship was in his blood, though latterly the very forces propelling him
to his political warfare had forbidden the use of it to him.  He saw the patient veteran laying
his gun for a long shot--to give as good as he had received; and in realizing Everard Romfrey's
perfectly placid bearing under provocation, such as he certainly would have maintained while
preparing his reply to it, the raw fighting humour of the plot touched the sense of justice
in Beauchamp enough to make him own that he had been the first to offend.

He could reflect also on the likelihood that other offended men of his uncle's age and position
would have sulked or stormed, threatening the Parthian shot of the vindictive testator.  If
there was godlessness in turning to politics for a weapon to strike a domestic blow, manfulness
in some degree signalized it.  Beauchamp could fancy his uncle crying out, Who set the example?
and he was not at that instant inclined to dwell on the occult virtues of the example he had
set.  To be honest, this elevation of a political puppet like Cecil Baskelett, and the starting
him, out of the same family which Turbot, the journalist, had magnified, into Bevisham with
such pomp and flourish in opposition to the serious young champion of popular rights and the
Puritan style, was ludicrously effective.  Conscienceless of course.  But that was the way
of the Old School.

Beauchamp broke the silence by thanking Cecilia once more for saving him from the absurd exhibition
of the Radical candidate on the Tory coach- box, and laughing at the grimmish slyness of his
uncle Everard's conspiracy a something in it that was half-smile half-sneer; not exactly malignant,
and by no means innocent; something made up of the simplicity of a lighted match, and its proximity
to powder, yet neither deadly, in spite of a wicked twinkle, nor at all pretending to be harmless:
in short, a specimen of old English practical humour.

He laboured to express these or corresponding views of it, with tolerably natural laughter,
and Cecilia rallied her spirits at his pleasant manner of taking his blow.

'I shall compliment the baron when I meet him tonight,' he said.  'What can we compare him to?'

She suggested the Commander of the Faithful, the Lord Haroun, who likewise had a turn for buffooneries
to serve a purpose, and could direct them loftily and sovereignty.

'No: Everard Romfrey's a Northerner from the feet up,' said Beauchamp.

Cecilia compliantly offered him a sketch of the Scandinavian Troll: much nearer the mark, he
thought, and exclaimed: 'Baron Troll!  I'm afraid, Cecilia, you have robbed him of the best
part of his fun.  And you will owe it entirely to him if you should be represented in Parliament
by my cousin Basketett.'

'Promise me, Nevit, that you will, when you meet Captain Baskelett, not forget I did you some
service, and that I wish, I shall be so glad if you do not resent certain things .  .  .  .Very
objectionable, we all think.'

He released her from the embarrassing petition: 'Oh!  now I know my man, you may be sure I
won't waste a word on him.  The fact is, he would not understand a word, and would require
more--and that I don't do.  When I fancied Mr. Austin was the responsible person, I meant to
speak to him.'

Cecilia smiled gratefully.

The sweetness of a love-speech would not have been sweeter to her than this proof of civilized
chivalry in Nevil.

They came to the fir-heights overlooking Bevisham.  Here the breezy beginning of a South-western
autumnal gale tossed the ponies' manes and made threads of Cecilia's shorter locks of beautiful
auburn by the temples and the neck, blustering the curls that streamed in a thick involution
from the silken band gathering them off her uncovered clear- swept ears.

Beauchamp took an impression of her side face.  It seemed to offer him everything the world
could offer of cultivated purity, intelligent beauty and attractiveness; and 'Wilt thou?' 
said the winged minute.  Peace, a good repute in the mouths of men, home, and a trustworthy
woman for mate, an ideal English lady, the rarest growth of our country, and friends and fair
esteem, were offered.  Last night he had waltzed with her, and the manner of this tall graceful
girl in submitting to the union of the measure and reserving her individual distinction, had
exquisitely flattered his taste, giving him an auspicious image of her in partnership, through
the uses of life.

He looked ahead at the low dead-blue cloud swinging from across channel. What could be the
riddle of Renee's letter!  It chained him completely.

'At all events, I shall not be away longer than three days,' he said; paused, eyed Cecilia's
profile, and added, 'Do we differ so much?'

'It may not be so much as we think,' said she.

'But if we do!'

'Then, Nevil, there is a difference between us.'

'But if we keep our lips closed?'

'We should have to shut our eyes as well!'

A lovely melting image of her stole over him; all the warmer for her unwittingness in producing
it: and it awakened a tenderness toward the simple speaker.

Cecilia's delicate breeding saved her from running on figuratively.  She continued: 'Intellectual
differences do not cause wounds, except when very unintellectual sentiments are behind them:--my
conceit, or your impatience, Nevil?  "Noi veggiam come quei, che ha mala luce."  .  .  . I
can confess my sight to be imperfect: but will you ever do so?'

Her musical voice in Italian charmed his hearing.

'What poet was that you quoted?'

'The wisest: Dante.'

'Dr. Shrapnel's favourite!  I must try to read him.'

'He reads Dante?'  Cecilia threw a stress on the august name; and it was manifest that she
cared not for the answer.

Contemptuous exclusiveness could not go farther.

'He is a man of cultivation,' Beauchamp said cursorily, trying to avoid dissension, but in
vain.  'I wish I were half as well instructed, and the world half as charitable as he!--You
ask me if I shall admit my sight to be imperfect.  Yes; when you prove to me that priests and
landlords are willing to do their duty by the people in preference to their churches and their
property: but will you ever shake off prejudice?'

Here was opposition sounding again.  Cecilia mentally reproached Dr. Shrapnel for it.

'Indeed, Nevil, really, must not--may I not ask you this?--must not every one feel the evil
spell of some associations?  And Dante and Dr. Shrapnel!'

'You don't know him, Cecilia.'

'I saw him yesterday.'

'You thought him too tall?'

'I thought of his character.'

'How angry I should be with you if you were not so beautiful!'

'I am immensely indebted to my unconscious advocate.'

'You are clad in steel; you flash back; you won't answer me out of the heart.  I 'm convinced
it is pure wilfulness that makes you oppose me.'

'I fancy you must be convinced because you cannot imagine women to have any share of public
spirit, Nevil.'

A grain of truth in that remark set Nevil reflecting.

'I want them to have it,' he remarked, and glanced at a Tory placard, probably the puppet's
fresh-printed address to the electors, on one of the wayside fir-trees.  'Bevisham looks well
from here.  We might make a North-western Venice of it, if we liked.'

'Papa told you it would be money sunk in mud.'

'Did I mention it to him?--Thoroughly Conservative!--So he would leave the mud as it is.  They
insist on our not venturing anything--those Tories!  exactly as though we had gained the best
of human conditions, instead of counting crops of rogues, malefactors, egoists, noxious and
lumbersome creatures that deaden the country.  Your town down there is one of the ugliest and
dirtiest in the kingdom: it might be the fairest.'

'I have often thought that of Bevisham, Nevil.'

He drew a visionary sketch of quays, embankments, bridged islands, public buildings, magical
emanations of patriotic architecture, with a practical air, an absence of that enthusiasm which
struck her with suspicion when it was not applied to landscape or the Arts; and she accepted
it, and warmed, and even allowed herself to appear hesitating when he returned to the similarity
of the state of mud-begirt Bevisham and our great sluggish England.

Was he not perhaps to be pitied in his bondage to the Frenchwoman, who could have no ideas
in common with him?

The rare circumstance that she and Nevil Beauchamp had found a subject of agreement, partially
overcame the sentiment Cecilia entertained for the foreign lady; and having now one idea in
common with him, she conceived the possibility that there might be more.  There must be many,
for he loved England, and she no less.  She clung, however, to the topic of Bevisham, preferring
to dream of the many more, rather than run risks. Undoubtedly the town was of an ignoble aspect;
and it was declining in prosperity; and it was consequently over-populated.  And undoubtedly
(so she was induced to coincide for the moment) a Government, acting to any extent like a supervising
head, should aid and direct the energies of towns and ports and trades, and not leave everything
everywhere to chance: schools for the people, public morality, should be the charge of Government.
Cecilia had surrendered the lead to him, and was forced to subscribe to an equivalent of 'undoubtedly'
the Tories just as little as the Liberals had done these good offices.  Party against party,
neither of them had a forethoughtful head for the land at large.  They waited for the Press
to spur a great imperial country to be but defensively armed, and they accepted the so-called
volunteers, with a nominal one-month's drill per annum, as a guarantee of defence!

Beauchamp startled her, actually kindled her mind to an activity of wonder and regret, with
the statement of how much Government, acting with some degree of farsightedness, might have
won to pay the public debt and remit taxation, by originally retaining the lines of railway,
and fastening on the valuable land adjoining stations.  Hundreds of millions of pounds!

She dropped a sigh at the prodigious amount, but inquired, 'Who has calculated it?'

For though perfectly aware that this kind of conversation was a special compliment paid to
her by her friend Nevil, and dimly perceiving that it implied something beyond a compliment-in
fact, that it was his manner of probing her for sympathy, as other men would have conducted
the process preliminary to deadly flattery or to wooing, her wits fenced her heart about; the
exercise of shrewdness was an instinct of self-preservation. She had nothing but her poor wits,
daily growing fainter, to resist him with.  And he seemed to know it, and therefore assailed
them, never trying at the heart.

That vast army of figures might be but a phantom army conjured out of the Radical mists, might
it not?  she hinted.  And besides, we cannot surely require a Government to speculate in the
future, can we?

Possibly not, as Governments go, Beauchamp said.

But what think you of a Government of landowners decreeing the enclosure of millions of acres
of common land amongst themselves; taking the property of the people to add to their own! 
Say, is not that plunder? Public property, observe; decreed to them by their own law-making,
under the pretence that it was being reclaimed for cultivation, when in reality it has been
but an addition to their pleasure-grounds: a flat robbery of pasture from the poor man's cow
and goose, and his right of cutting furze for firing.  Consider that!  Beauchamp's eyes flashed
democratic in reciting this injury to the objects of his warm solicitude--the man, the cow,
and the goose.  But so must he have looked when fronting England's enemies, and his aspect
of fervour subdued Cecilia.  She confessed her inability to form an estimate of such conduct.

'Are they doing it still?'  she asked.

'We owe it to Dr. Shrapnel foremost that there is now a watch over them to stop them.  But
for him, Grancey Lespel would have enclosed half of Northeden Heath.  As it is, he has filched
bits here and there, and he will have to put back his palings.'

However, now let Cecilia understand that we English, calling ourselves free, are under morally
lawless rule.  Government is what we require, and our means of getting it must be through universal
suffrage.  At present we have no Government; only shifting Party Ministries, which are the
tools of divers interests, wealthy factions, to the sacrifice of the Commonwealth.

She listened, like Rosamund Culling overborne by Dr. Shrapnel, inwardly praying that she might
discover a man to reply to him.

'A Despotism, Nevil?'

He hoped not, declined the despot, was English enough to stand against the best of men in that
character; but he cast it on Tory, Whig, and Liberal, otherwise the Constitutionalists, if
we were to come upon the despot.

'They see we are close on universal suffrage; they've been bidding each in turn for "the people,"
and that has brought them to it, and now they're alarmed, and accuse one another of treason
to the Constitution, and they don't accept the situation: and there's a fear, that to carry
on their present system, they will be thwarting the people or corrupting them: and in that
case we shall have our despot in some shape or other, and we shall suffer.'

'Nevil,' said Cecilia, 'I am out of my depth.'

'I'll support you; I can swim for two,' said he.

'You are very self-confident, but I find I am not fit for battle; at least not in the front ranks.'

'Nerve me, then: will you?  Try to comprehend once for all what the battle is.'

'I am afraid I am too indifferent; I am too luxurious.  That reminds me: you want to meet your
uncle Everard and if you will sleep at Mount Laurels to-night, the Esperanza shall take you
to France to-morrow morning, and can wait to bring you back.'

As she spoke she perceived a flush mounting over Nevil's face.  Soon it was communicated to hers.

The strange secret of the blood electrified them both, and revealed the burning undercurrent
running between them from the hearts of each.  The light that showed how near they were to
one another was kindled at the barrier dividing them.  It remained as good as a secret, unchallenged
until they had separated, and after midnight Cecilia looked through her. chamber windows at
the driving moon of a hurricane scud, and read clearly his honourable reluctance to be wafted
over to his French love by her assistance; and Beauchamp on board the tossing steamboat perceived
in her sympathetic reddening that she had divined him.

This auroral light eclipsed the other events of the day.  He drove into a town royally decorated,
and still humming with the ravishment of the Tory entrance.  He sailed in the schooner to Mount
Laurels, in the society of Captain Baskelett and his friends, who, finding him tamer than they
expected, bantered him in the cheerfullest fashion.  He waited for his uncle Everard several
hours at Mount Laurels, perused the junior Tory's address to the Electors, throughout which
there was not an idea--safest of addresses to canvass upon!  perused likewise, at Captain Baskelett's
request, a broad sheet of an article introducing the new candidate to Bevisham with the battle-axe
Romfreys to back him, in high burlesque of Timothy Turbot upon Beauchamp: and Cecil hoped his
cousin would not object to his borrowing a Romfrey or two for so pressing an occasion. All
very funny, and no doubt the presence of Mr. Everard Romfrey would have heightened the fun
from the fountain-head; but he happened to be delayed, and Beauchamp had to leave directions
behind him in the town, besides the discussion of a whole plan of conduct with Dr. Shrapnel,
so he was under the necessity of departing without seeing his uncle, really to his regret.
He left word to that effect.

Taking leave of Cecilia, he talked of his return 'home' within three or four days as a certainty.

She said: 'Canvassing should not be neglected now.'

Her hostility was confused by what she had done to save him from annoyance, while his behaviour
to his cousin Cecil increased her respect for him.  She detected a pathetic meaning in his
mention of the word home; she mused on his having called her beautiful: whither was she hurrying?
Forgetful of her horror of his revolutionary ideas, forgetful of the elevation of her own,
she thrilled secretly on hearing it stated by the jubilant young Tories at Mount Laurels, as
a characteristic of Beauchamp, that he was clever in parrying political thrusts, and slipping
from the theme; he who with her gave out unguardedly the thoughts deepest in him.  And the
thoughts!--were they not of generous origin?  Where so true a helpmate for him as the one to
whom his mind appealed?  It could not be so with the Frenchwoman.  Cecilia divined a generous
nature by generosity, and set herself to believe that in honour he had not yet dared to speak
to her from the heart, not being at heart quite free.  She was at the same time in her remains
of pride cool enough to examine and rebuke the weakness she succumbed to in now clinging to
him by that which yesterday she hardly less than loathed, still deeply disliked.

CHAPTER XXIII

TOURDESTELLE

On the part of Beauchamp, his conversation with Cecilia during the drive into Bevisham opened
out for the first time in his life a prospect of home; he had felt the word in speaking it,
and it signified an end to the distractions produced by the sex, allegiance to one beloved
respected woman, and also a basis of operations against the world.  For she was evidently conquerable,
and once matched with him would be the very woman to nerve and sustain him.  Did she not listen
to him?  He liked her resistance.  That element of the barbarous which went largely to form
his emotional nature was overjoyed in wresting such a woman from the enemy, and subduing her
personally.  She was a prize.  She was a splendid prize, cut out from under the guns of the
fort.  He rendered all that was due to his eminently good cause for its part in so signal a
success, but individual satisfaction is not diminished by the thought that the individual's
discernment selected the cause thus beneficent to him.

Beauchamp's meditations were diverted by the sight of the coast of France dashed in rain-lines
across a weed-strewn sea.  The 'three days' granted him by Renee were over, and it scarcely
troubled him that he should be behind the time; he detested mystery, holding it to be a sign
of pretentious feebleness, often of imposture, it might be frivolity. Punctilious obedience
to the mysterious brevity of the summons, and not to chafe at it, appeared to him as much as
could be expected of a struggling man.  This was the state of the case with him, until he stood
on French earth, breathed French air, and chanced to hear the tongue of France twittered by
a lady on the quay.  The charm was instantaneous. He reminded himself that Renee, unlike her
countrywomen, had no gift for writing letters.  They had never corresponded since the hour
of her marriage.  They had met in Sicily, at Syracuse, in the presence of her father and her
husband, and so inanimate was she that the meeting seemed like the conclusion of their history.
Her brother Roland sent tidings of her by fits, and sometimes a conventional message from Tourdestelle.
Latterly her husband's name had been cited as among the wildfires of Parisian quays, in journals
more or less devoted to those unreclaimed spaces of the city.  Well, if she was unhappy, was
it not the fulfilment of his prophecy in Venice?

Renee's brevity became luminous.  She needed him urgently, and knowing him faithful to the
death, she, because she knew him, dispatched purely the words which said she needed him.  Why,
those brief words were the poetry of noble confidence!  But what could her distress be?  The
lover was able to read that, 'Come; I give you three days,' addressed to him, was not language
of a woman free of her yoke.

Excited to guess and guess, Beauchamp swept on to speculations of a madness that seized him
bodily at last.  Were you loved, Cecilia?  He thought little of politics in relation to Renee;
or of home, or of honour in the world's eye, or of labouring to pay the fee for his share of
life. This at least was one of the forms of love which precipitate men: the sole thought in
him was to be with her.  She was Renee, the girl of whom he had prophetically said that she
must come to regrets and tears.  His vision of her was not at Tourdestelle, though he assumed
her to be there awaiting him: she was under the sea-shadowing Alps, looking up to the red and
gold-rosed heights of a realm of morning that was hers inviolably, and under which Renee was
eternally his.

The interval between then and now was but the space of an unquiet sea traversed in the night,
sad in the passage of it, but featureless--and it had proved him right!  It was to Nevil Beauchamp
as if the spirit of his old passion woke up again to glorious hopeful morning when he stood
in Renee's France.

Tourdestelle enjoyed the aristocratic privilege of being twelve miles from the nearest railway
station.  Alighting here on an evening of clear sky, Beauchamp found an English groom ready
to dismount for him and bring on his portmanteau.  The man said that his mistress had been
twice to the station, and was now at the neighbouring Chateau Dianet.  Thither Beauchamp betook
himself on horseback.  He was informed at the gates that Madame la Marquise had left for Tourdestelle
in the saddle only ten minutes previously.  The lodge-keeper had been instructed to invite
him to stay at Chateau Dianet in the event of his arriving late, but it would be possible to
overtake madame by a cut across the heights at a turn of the valley.  Beauchamp pushed along
the valley for this visible projection; a towering mass of woodland, in the midst of which
a narrow roadway, worn like the track of a torrent with heavy rain, wound upward. On his descent
to the farther side, he was to spy directly below in the flat for Tourdestelle.  He crossed
the wooded neck above the valley, and began descending, peering into gulfs of the twilight
dusk.  Some paces down he was aided by a brilliant half-moon that divided the whole underlying
country into sharp outlines of dark and fair, and while endeavouring to distinguish the chateau
of Tourdestelle his eyes were attracted to an angle of the downward zigzag, where a pair of
horses emerged into broad light swiftly; apparently the riders were disputing, or one had overtaken
the other in pursuit.  Riding-habit and plumed hat signalized the sex of one.  Beauchamp sung
out a gondolier's cry.  He fancied it was answered.

He was heard, for the lady turned about, and as he rode down, still uncertain of her, she came
cantering up alone, and there could be no uncertainty.

Moonlight is friendless to eyes that would make sure of a face long unseen.  It was Renee whose
hand he clasped, but the story of the years on her, and whether she was in bloom, or wan as
the beams revealing her, he could not see.

Her tongue sounded to him as if it were loosened without a voice.  'You have come.  That storm!
You are safe!'

So phantom-like a sound of speech alarmed him.  'I lost no time.  But you?'

'I am well.'

'Nothing hangs over you?'

'Nothing.'

'Why give me just three days?'

'Pure impatience.  Have you forgotten me?'

Their horses walked on with them.  They unlocked their hands.

'You knew it was I?'  said he.

'Who else could it be?  I heard Venice,' she replied.

Her previous cavalier was on his feet, all but on his knees, it appeared, searching for something
that eluded him under the road-side bank.  He sprang at it and waved it, leapt in the saddle,
and remarked, as he drew up beside Renee: 'What one picks from the earth one may wear, I presume,
especially when we can protest it is our property.'

Beauchamp saw him planting a white substance most carefully at the breast buttonhole of his
coat.  It could hardly be a flower.  Some drooping exotic of the conservatory perhaps resembled it.

Renee pronounced his name: 'M. le Comte Henri d'Henriel.'

He bowed to Beauchamp with an extreme sweep of the hat.

'Last night, M. Beauchamp, we put up vows for you to the Marine God, beseeching an exemption
from that horrible mal de mer.  Thanks to the storm, I suppose, I have won.  I must maintain,
madame, that I won.'

'You wear your trophy,' said Renee, and her horse reared and darted ahead.

The gentleman on each side of her struck into a trot.  Beauchamp glanced at M. d'Henriel's
breast-decoration.  Renee pressed the pace, and threading dense covers of foliage they reached
the level of the valley, where for a couple of miles she led them, stretching away merrily,
now in shadow, now in moonlight, between high land and meadow land, and a line of poplars in
the meadows winding with the river that fed the vale and shot forth gleams of silvery disquiet
by rustic bridge and mill.

The strangeness of being beside her, not having yet scanned her face, marvelling at her voice--that
was like and unlike the Renee of old, full of her, but in another key, a mellow note, maturer--made
the ride magical to Beauchamp, planting the past in the present like a perceptible ghost.

Renee slackened speed, saying: 'Tourdestelle spans a branch of our little river.  This is our
gate.  Had it been daylight I would have taken you by another way, and you would have seen
the black tower burnt in the Revolution; an imposing monument, I am assured.  However, you
will think it pretty beside the stream.  Do you come with us, M. le Comte?'

His answer was inaudible to Beauchamp; he did not quit them.

The lamp at the lodge-gates presented the young man's face in full view, and Beauchamp thought
him supremely handsome.  He perceived it to be a lady's glove that M. d'Henriel wore at his breast.

Renee walked her horse up the park-drive, alongside the bright running water.  It seemed that
she was aware of the method of provoking or reproving M. d'Henriel.  He endured some minutes
of total speechlessness at this pace, and abruptly said adieu and turned back.

Renee bounded like a vessel free of her load.  'But why should we hurry?' said she, and checked
her course to the walk again.  'I hope you like our Normandy, and my valley.  You used to love
France, Nevil; and Normandy, they tell me, is cousin to the opposite coast of England, in climate,
soil, people, it may be in manners too.  A Beauchamp never can feel that he is a foreigner
in Normandy.  We claim you half French.  You have grander parks, they say.  We can give you
sunlight.'

'And it was really only the wish to see me?'  said Beauchamp.

'Only, and really.  One does not live for ever--on earth; and it becomes a question whether
friends should be shadows to one another before death. I wrote to you because I wished to see
you: I was impatient because I am Renee.'

'You relieve me!'

'Evidently you have forgotten my character, Nevil.'

'Not a feature of it.'

'Ah!'  she breathed involuntarily.

'Would you have me forget it?'

'When I think by myself, quite alone, yes, I would.  Otherwise how can one hope that one's
friend is friendship, supposing him to read us as we are--minutely, accurately?  And it is
in absence that we desire our friends to be friendship itself.  And .  .  .  and I am utterly
astray! I have not dealt in this language since I last thought of writing a diary, and stared
at the first line.  If I mistake not, you are fond of the picturesque.  If moonlight and water
will satisfy you, look yonder.'

The moon launched her fairy silver fleets on a double sweep of the little river round an island
of reeds and two tall poplars.

'I have wondered whether I should ever see you looking at that scene,' said Renee.

He looked from it to her, and asked if Roland was well, and her father; then alluded to her
husband; but the unlettering elusive moon, bright only in the extension of her beams, would
not tell him what story this face, once heaven to him, wore imprinted on it.  Her smile upon
a parted mouth struck him as two-edged in replying: 'I have good news to give you of them all:
Roland is in garrison at Rouen, and will come when I telegraph.  My father is in Touraine,
and greets you affectionately; he hopes to come.  They are both perfectly happy.  My husband
is travelling.'

Beauchamp was conscious of some bitter taste; unaware of what it was, though it led him to
say, undesigningly: 'How very handsome that M. d'Henriel is!--if I have his name correctly.'

Renee answered: 'He has the misfortune to be considered the handsomest young man in France.'

'He has an Italian look.'

'His mother was Provencale.'

She put her horse in motion, saying: 'I agree with you that handsome men are rarities.  And,
by the way, they do not set our world on fire quite as much as beautiful women do yours, my
friend.  Acknowledge so much in our favour.'

He assented indefinitely.  He could have wished himself away canvassing in Bevisham.  He had
only to imagine himself away from her, to feel the flood of joy in being with her.

'Your husband is travelling?'

'It is his pleasure.'

Could she have intended to say that this was good news to give of him as well as of the happiness
of her father and brother?

'Now look on Tourdestelle,' said Renee.  'You will avow that for an active man to be condemned
to seek repose in so dull a place, after the fatigues of the season in Paris, it is considerably
worse than for women, so I am here to dispense the hospitalities.  The right wing of the chateau,
on your left, is new.  The side abutting the river is inhabited by Dame Philiberte, whom her
husband imprisoned for attempting to take her pleasure in travel.  I hear upon authority that
she dresses in white, and wears a black crucifix.  She is many centuries old, and still she
lives to remind people that she married a Rouaillout.  Do you not think she should have come
to me to welcome me?  She never has; and possibly of ladies who are disembodied we may say
that they know best.  For me, I desire the interview--and I am a coward: I need not state it.'
She ceased; presently continuing: 'The other inhabitants are my sister, Agnes d'Auffray, wife
of a general officer serving in Afric--my sister by marriage, and my friend; the baronne d'Orbec,
a relation by marriage; M. d'Orbec, her son, a guest, and a sportsman; M. Livret, an erudite.
No young ladies: I can bear much, but not their presence; girls are odious to me.  I knew one
in Venice.'

They came within the rays of the lamp hanging above the unpretending entrance to the chateau.
Renee's broad grey Longueville hat curved low with its black plume on the side farthest from
him.  He was favoured by the gallant lift of the brim on the near side, but she had overshadowed
her eyes.

'He wears a glove at his breast,' said Beauchamp.

'You speak of M. d'Henriel.  He wears a glove at his breast; yes, it is mine,' said Renee.

She slipped from her horse and stood against his shoulder, as if waiting to be questioned before
she rang the bell of the chateau.

Beauchamp alighted, burning with his unutterable questions concerning that glove.

'Lift your hat, let me beg you; let me see you,' he said.

This was not what she had expected.  With one heave of her bosom, and murmuring: 'I made a
vow I would obey you absolutely if you came,' she raised the hat above her brows, and lightning
would not have surprised him more; for there had not been a single vibration of her voice to
tell him of tears running: nay, the absence of the usual French formalities in her manner of
addressing him, had seemed to him to indicate her intention to put him at once on an easy friendly
footing, such as would be natural to her, and not painful to him.  Now she said:

'You perceive, monsieur, that I have my sentimental fits like others; but in truth I am not
insensible to the picturesque or to gratitude, and I thank you sincerely for coming, considering
that I wrote like a Sphinx-- to evade writing comme une folle!'

She swept to the bell.

Standing in the arch of the entrance, she stretched her whip out to a black mass of prostrate
timber, saying:

'It fell in the storm at two o'clock after midnight, and you on the sea!'

CHAPTER XXIV

HIS HOLIDAY

A single day was to be the term of his holiday at Tourdestelle; but it stood forth as one of
those perfect days which are rounded by an evening before and a morning after, giving him two
nights under the same roof with Renee, something of a resemblance to three days of her; anticipation
and wonder filling the first, she the next, the adieu the last: every hour filled.  And the
first day was not over yet.  He forced himself to calmness, that he might not fritter it, and
walked up and down the room he was dressing in, examining its foreign decorations, and peering
through the window, to quiet his nerves.  He was in her own France with her!  The country borrowed
hues from Renee, and lent some.  This chivalrous France framed and interlaced her image, aided
in idealizing her, and was in turn transfigured.  Not half so well would his native land have
pleaded for the forgiveness of a British damsel who had wrecked a young man's immoderate first
love.  That glorified self-love requires the touch upon imagination of strangeness and an unaccustomed
grace, to subdue it and make it pardon an outrage to its temples and altars, and its happy
reading of the heavens, the earth too: earth foremost, we ought perhaps to say.  It is an exacting
heathen, best understood by a glance at what will appease it: beautiful, however, as everybody
has proved; and shall it be decried in a world where beauty is not overcommon, though it would
slaughter us for its angry satisfaction, yet can be soothed by a tone of colour, as it were
by a novel inscription on a sweetmeat?

The peculiarity of Beauchamp was that he knew the slenderness of the thread which was leading
him, and foresaw it twisting to a coil unless he should hold firm.  His work in life was much
above the love of a woman in his estimation, so he was not deluded by passion when he entered
the chateau; it is doubtful whether he would not hesitatingly have sacrificed one of the precious
votes in Bevisham for the pleasure of kissing her hand when they were on the steps.  She was
his first love and only love, married, and long ago forgiven:--married; that is to say, she
especially among women was interdicted to him by the lingering shadow of the reverential love
gone by; and if the anguish of the lover's worse than death survived in a shudder of memory
at the thought of her not solely lost to him but possessed by another, it did but quicken a
hunger that was three parts curiosity to see how she who had suffered this bore the change;
how like or unlike she might be to the extinct Renee; what traces she kept of the face he had
known.  Her tears were startling, but tears tell of a mood, they do not tell the story of the
years; and it was that story he had such eagerness to read in one brief revelation: an eagerness
born only of the last few hours, and broken by fears of a tarnished aspect; these again being
partly hopes of a coming disillusion that would restore him his independence and ask him only
for pity.  The slavery of the love of a woman chained like Renee was the most revolting of
prospects to a man who cherished his freedom that he might work to the end of his time.  Moreover,
it swung a thunder-cloud across his holiday. He recurred to the idea of the holiday repeatedly,
and the more he did so the thinner it waned.  He was exhausting the very air and spirit of
it with a mind that ran incessantly forward and back; and when he and the lady of so much speculation
were again together, an incapacity of observation seemed to have come over him.  In reality
it was the inability to reflect on his observations.  Her presence resembled those dark sunsets
throwing the spell of colour across the world; when there is no question with us of morning
or of night, but of that sole splendour only.

Owing to their arrival late at the chateau, covers were laid for them in the boudoir of Madame
la Marquise, where he had his hostess to himself, and certainly the opportunity of studying
her.  An English Navy List, solitary on a shelf, and laid within it an extract of a paper announcing
the return of the Ariadne to port, explained the mystery of her knowing that he was in England,
as well as the correctness of the superscription of her letter to him.  'You see, I follow
you,' she said.

Beauchamp asked if she read English now.

'A little; but the paper was dispatched to me by M. Vivian Ducie, of your embassy in Paris.
He is in the valley.'

The name of Ducie recalled Lord Palmet's description of the dark beauty of the fluttering pale
gold ornaments.  She was now dressed without one decoration of gold or jewel, with scarcely
a wave in the silk, a modesty of style eloquent of the pride of her form.

Could those eyes fronting him under the lamp have recently shed tears? They were the living
eyes of a brilliant unembarrassed lady; shields flinging light rather than well-depths inviting it.

Beauchamp tried to compare her with the Renee of Venice, and found himself thinking of the
glove she had surrendered to the handsomest young man in France.  The effort to recover the
younger face gave him a dead creature, with the eyelashes of Renee, the cast of her mouth and
throat, misty as a shape in a dream.

He could compare her with Cecilia, who never would have risked a glove, never have betrayed
a tear, and was the statelier lady, not without language: but how much less vivid in feature
and the gift of speech! It is unlikely any settlement of them will be made before peace is concluded.
My opinion is that nothing will be lost on the bills, which are registered, but I cannot say
the same of the exchange, which is not registered, since payment has been stopped.
  It is as rare an art as poetry, and in the mouths of women as enrapturing,
richer than their voices in music.

This was the fascination Beauchamp felt weaving round him.  Would you, that are separable from
boys and mobs, and the object malignly called the Briton, prefer the celestial singing of a
woman to her excellently talking?  But not if it were given you to run in unison with her genius
of the tongue, following her verbal ingenuities and feminine silk-flashes of meaning; not if
she led you to match her fine quick perceptions with more or less of the discreet concordance
of the violoncello accompanying the viol.  It is not high flying, which usually ends in heavy
falling. You quit the level of earth no more than two birds that chase from bush to bush to
bill in air, for mutual delight to make the concert heavenly. Language flowed from Renee in
affinity with the pleasure-giving laws that make the curves we recognize as beauty in sublimer
arts.  Accept companionship for the dearest of the good things we pray to have, and what equalled
her!  Who could be her rival!

Her girl's crown of irradiated Alps began to tremble over her dimly, as from moment to moment
their intimacy warmed, and Beauchamp saw the young face vanishing out of this flower of womanhood.
He did not see it appearing or present, but vanishing like the faint ray in the rosier. Nay,
the blot of her faithlessness underwent a transformation: it affected him somewhat as the patch
cunningly laid on near a liquid dimple in fair cheeks at once allures and evades a susceptible
attention.

Unused in his French of late, he stumbled at times, and she supplied the needed phrase, taking
no note of a blunder.  Now men of sweet blood cannot be secretly accusing or criticizing a
gracious lady.  Domestic men are charged with thinking instantly of dark death when an ordinary
illness befalls them; and it may be so or not: but it is positive that the gallant man of the
world, if he is in the sensitive condition, and not yet established as the lord of her, feels
paralyzed in his masculine sense of leadership the moment his lady assumes the initiative and
directs him: he gives up at once; and thus have many nimble-witted dames from one clear start
retained their advantage.

Concerning that glove: well! the handsomest young man in France wore the glove of the loveliest
woman.  The loveliest?  The very loveliest in the purity of her French style--the woman to
challenge England for a type of beauty to eclipse her.  It was possible to conceive her country
wagering her against all women.

If Renee had faults, Beauchamp thought of her as at sea breasting tempests, while Cecilia was
a vessel lying safe in harbour, untried, however promising: and if Cecilia raised a steady
light for him, it was over the shores he had left behind, while Renee had really nothing to
do with warning or rescuing, or with imperilling; she welcomed him simply to a holiday in her
society.  He associated Cecilia strangely with the political labours she would have had him
relinquish; and Renee with a pleasant state of indolence, that her lightest smile disturbed.
Shun comparisons.

It is the tricksy heart which sets up that balance, to jump into it on one side or the other.
Comparisons come of a secret leaning that is sure to play rogue under its mien of honest dealer:
so Beauchamp suffered himself to be unjust to graver England, and lost the strength she would
have given him to resist a bewitchment.  The case with him was, that his apprenticeship was
new; he had been trotting in harness as a veritable cab-horse of politics--he by blood a racer;
and his nature craved for diversions, against his will, against his moral sense and born tenacity
of spirit.

Not a word further of the glove.  But at night, in his bed, the glove was a principal actor
in events of extraordinary magnitude and inconsequence.

He was out in the grounds with the early morning light.  Coffee and sweet French bread were
brought out to him, and he was informed of the hours of reunion at the chateau, whose mistress
continued invisible.  She might be sleeping.  He strolled about, within view of the windows,
wondering at her subservience to sleep.  Tourdestelle lay in one of those Norman valleys where
the river is the mother of rich pasture, and runs hidden between double ranks of sallows, aspens
and poplars, that mark its winding line in the arms of trenched meadows.  The high land on
either side is an unwatered flat up to the horizon, little varied by dusty apple-trees planted
in the stubble here and there, and brown mud walls of hamlets; a church-top, a copse, an avenue
of dwarf limes leading to the three-parts farm, quarter residence of an enriched peasant striking
new roots, or decayed proprietor pinching not to be severed from ancient. Descending on the
deep green valley in Summer is like a change of climes. The chateau stood square at a branch
of the river, tossing three light bridges of pretty woodwork to park and garden.  Great bouquets
of swelling blue and pink hydrangia nestled at his feet on shaven grass.  An open window showed
a cloth of colour, as in a reminiscence of Italy.

Beauchamp heard himself addressed:--'You are looking for my sister-in- law, M. Beauchamp?'

The speaker was Madame d'Auffray, to whom he had been introduced overnight--a lady of the aquiline
French outline, not ungentle.

Renee had spoken affectionately of her, he remembered.  There was nothing to make him be on
his guard, and he stated that he was looking for Madame de Rouaillout, and did not conceal
surprise at the information that she was out on horseback.

'She is a tireless person,' Madame d'Auffray remarked.  'You will not miss her long.  We all
meet at twelve, as you know.'

'I grudge an hour, for I go to-morrow,' said Beauchamp.

The notification of so early a departure, or else his bluntness, astonished her.  She fell
to praising Renee's goodness.  He kept her to it with lively interrogations, in the manner
of a, guileless boy urging for eulogies of his dear absent friend.  Was it duplicity in him
or artlessness?

'Has she, do you think, increased in beauty?'  Madame d'Auffray inquired: an insidious question,
to which he replied:

'Once I thought it would be impossible.'

Not so bad an answer for an Englishman, in a country where speaking is fencing; the race being
little famous for dialectical alertness: but was it artful or simple?

They skirted the chateau, and Beauchamp had the history of Dame Philiberte recounted to him,
with a mixture of Gallic irony, innuendo, openness, touchingness, ridicule, and charity novel
to his ears.  Madame d'Auffray struck the note of intimacy earlier than is habitual.  She sounded
him in this way once or twice, carelessly perusing him, and waiting for the interesting edition
of the Book of Man to summarize its character by showing its pages or remaining shut.  It was
done delicately, like the tap of a finger-nail on a vase.  He rang clear; he had nothing to
conceal; and where he was reserved, that is, in speaking of the developed beauty and grace
of Renee, he was transparent.  She read the sort of man he was; she could also hazard a guess
as to the man's present state.  She ventured to think him comparatively harmless--for the hour:
for she was not the woman to be hoodwinked by man's dark nature because she inclined to think
well of a particular man; nor was she one to trust to any man subject to temptation.  The wisdom
of the Frenchwoman's fortieth year forbade it.  A land where the war between the sexes is honestly
acknowledged, and is full of instruction, abounds in precepts; but it ill becomes the veteran
to practise rigorously what she would prescribe to young women.  She may discriminate; as thus:--
Trust no man.  Still, this man may be better than that man; and it is bad policy to distrust
a reasonably guileless member of the preying sex entirely, and so to lose his good services.
Hawks have their uses in destroying vermin; and though we cannot rely upon the taming of hawks,
one tied by the leg in a garden preserves the fruit.

'There is a necessity for your leaving us to-morrow; M. Beauchamp?'

'I regret to say, it is imperative, madame.'

'My husband will congratulate me on the pleasure I have, and have long desired, of making your
acquaintance, and he will grieve that he has not been so fortunate; he is on service in Africa.
My brother, I need not say, will deplore the mischance which has prevented him from welcoming
you.  I have telegraphed to him; he is at one of the Baths in Germany, and will come assuredly,
if there is a prospect of finding you here. None?  Supposing my telegram not to fall short
of him, I may count on his being here within four days.'

Beauchamp begged her to convey the proper expressions of his regret to M. le Marquis.

'And M. de Croisnel? City Accountant--M. F. Walsh, Esq. City Legal Adviser-- L. G. Baillairge,
Esq. City Notary--A. G. Tourangeau, Esq.

Owen Murphy, Esq., ex-Mayor; Chas. Baillairge, Chevalier, City Engineer."

In the leaden box, placed within the stone, were laid mementoes of
the occasion, similar to those placed in the proper receptacle in
the stone laid in the morning at St. Louis Gate, with the addition
of beautifully executed portraits of Lord and Lady Dufferin, from
the studio of Messrs. Ellison & Co.

"His Excellency having given
the coup de grace to the foundation stone with the silver mallet,
the proceedings were closed."-- (Morning Chronicle, 19th Oct., 1878.)

The
new city gate erected on the site of the old St. Louis Gate, instead
of being called Dufferin Grate, as it had been contemplated, was allowed
to retain its time-honored name, St. Louis Gate; the public of Quebec,
however, were resolved that some conspicuous monument should recall
to Quebecers the fragrant memory of its benefactor, Lord Dufferin;
on the visit in June, 1879, of His Excellency Lord Lorne and H.R.H.
the Princess Louise, a request was made on them by the citizens, through
their chief executive officer, the Mayor of Quebec (R. Chambers),
to name and open to the public our world-famous Terrace.

On the 9th June, 1879, our distinguished visitors performed this
auspicious ceremony in presence of thousands, and in the following
words confirmed the name previously entered in the Corporation records:--

INAUGURATION
OF DUFFERIN TERRACE, 9th JUNE, 1879.

"According to notice previously given, the inauguration of Dufferin
Terrace occurred at half-past two o'clock in the afternoon.

When that hour arrived a mass of people variously estimated at from eight to fifteen thousand,
but probably containing about ten thousand, occupied the Terrace. The appearance from an elevated
place of this sea of humanity was indeed wonderful. The band pavilion in the centre of the
garden had been reserved for the Viceregal party, and was covered
in carpet and scarlet cloth, with two chairs of state.

The entrance to the pavilion was kept by the City Police, while "B"
Battery furnished the band and guard of honour, and played the National
Anthem as the distinguished party arrived on the field.

The Mayor and members of the City Council had previously walked in a body to the pavilion from
the City Hall, and now His Worship conducted His Excellency and Her Royal Highness to the dais,
and addressing himself to the Governor-General, said:--

"MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY.--On behalf of the Corporation and citizens of Quebec, permit
me to thank Your Excellency for acceding to our request that you would be pleased to open in
person this public promenade, and also Her Royal Highness for graciously
honouring us by her presence.

"The corner stone of this structure was laid by Your Excellency's predecessor, the Earl of
Dufferin (18th Oct., 1878).

"It will be gratifying to the noble Lord to learn that the work in which he took so lively an interest
has been inaugurated by Your Excellency, and that the ceremony was graced by the presence of
Her Royal Highness the Princess Louise.

"I have, therefore, respectfully to request that Your Excellency may
be pleased to give the name which the Terrace is henceforth to bear,
and to signify if it is the pleasure of Your Excellency that it be
opened to the public."

His Excellency replied:--"I am happy to accede to your request to
signify that this Terrace shall be called after your late Governor-
General, Dufferin, and that it is now open to the public."



Where am I?  thought Beauchamp--in what land, he would have phrased it, of whirlwinds catching
the wits, and whipping the passions?  Calmer than they, but unable to command them, and guessing
that Renee's errand of the morning, by which he had lost hours of her, pertained to the glove,
he said quiveringly, 'Madame la Marquise objects?'

'We,' replied Madame d'Auffray, 'contend that the glove was not loyally won.  The wager was
upon your coming to the invitation, not upon your conquering the elements.  As to his flaunting
the glove for a favour, I would ask you, whom does he advertize by that?  Gloves do not wear
white; which fact compromises none but the wearer.  He picked it up from the ground, and does
not restore it; that is all.  You see a boy who catches at anything to placard himself.  There
is a compatriot of yours, a M. Ducie, who assured us you must be with an uncle in your county
of Sussex.  Of course we ran the risk of the letter missing you, but the chance was worth a
glove.  Can you believe it, M. Beauchamp?  it was I, old woman as I am, I who provoked the
silly wager.  I have long desired to meet you; and we have little society here, we are desperate
with loneliness, half mad with our whims.  I said, that if you were what I had heard of you,
you would come to us at a word.  They dared Madame la Marquise to say the same.  I wished to
see the friend of Frenchmen, as M. Roland calls you; not merely to see him--to know him, whether
he is this perfect friend whose absolute devotion has impressed my dear sister Renee's mind.
She respects you: that is a sentiment scarcely complimentary to the ideas of young men.  She
places you above human creatures: possibly you may not dislike to be worshipped.  It is not
to be rejected when one's influence is powerful for good.  But you leave us to-morrow!'

'I' might stay .  .  .'  Beauchamp hesitated to name the number of hours. He stood divided
between a sense of the bubbling shallowness of the life about him, and a thought, grave as
an eye dwelling on blood, of sinister things below it.

'I may stay another day or two,' he said, 'if I can be of any earthly service.'

Madame d'Auffray bowed as to a friendly decision on his part, saying, 'It would be a thousand
pities to disappoint M. Roland; and it will be offering my brother an amicable chance.  I will
send him word that you await him; at least, that you defer your departure as long as possible.
Ah! now you perceive, M. Beauchamp, now you have become aware of our purely infantile plan
to bring you over to us, how very ostensible a punishment it would be were you to remain so
short a period.'

Having no designs, he was neither dupe nor sceptic; but he felt oddly entangled, and the dream
of his holiday had fled like morning's beams, as a self-deception will at a very gentle shaking.

CHAPTER XXV

THE ADVENTURE OF THE BOAT

Madame d'Auffray passed Renee, whispering on her way to take her seat at the breakfast-table.

Renee did not condescend to whisper.  'Roland will be glad,' she said aloud.

Her low eyelids challenged Beauchamp for a look of indifference.  There was more for her to
unbosom than Madame d'Auffray had revealed, but the comparative innocence of her position in
this new light prompted her to meet him defiantly, if he chose to feel injured.  He was attracted
by a happy contrast of colour between her dress and complexion, together with a cavalierly
charm in the sullen brows she lifted; and seeing the reverse of a look of indifference on his
face, after what he had heard of her frivolousness, she had a fear that it existed.

'Are we not to have M. d'Henriel to-day?  he amuses me,' the baronne d'Orbec remarked.

'If he would learn that he was fashioned for that purpose!'  exclaimed little M. Livret.

'Do not ask young men for too much head, my friend; he would cease to be amusing.'

'D'Henriel should have been up in the fields at ten this morning,' said M. d'Orbec.  'As to
his head, I back him for a clever shot.'

'Or a duelling-sword,' said Renee.  'It is a quality, count it for what we will. Though in the past,
as at present, attempts were occasionally made to stir up discord amongst our citizens, there appears
more than once, traces of enlarged patriotism and loyalty to the
mother country, animating all classes.



Ah!  what a delicate, what an exciting, how subtle a question!

Had M. d'Henriel the right to possess it? and, having that, had he the right to wear it at
his breast?

Beauchamp was dragged into the discussion of the case.

Renee waited curiously for his judgement.

Pleading an apology for the stormy weather, which had detained him, and for his ignorance that
so precious an article was at stake, he held, that by the terms of the wager, the glove was
lost; the claim to wear it was a matter of taste.

'Matters of taste, monsieur, are not, I think, decided by weapons in your country?'  said M.
d'Orbec.

'We have no duelling,' said Beauchamp.

The Frenchman imagined the confession to be somewhat humbling, and generously added, 'But you
have your volunteers--a magnificent spectacle of patriotism and national readiness for defence!'

A shrewd pang traversed Beauchamp's heart, as he looked back on his country from the outside
and the inside, thinking what amount of patriotic readiness the character of the volunteering
signified, in the face of all that England has to maintain.  Like a politic islander, he allowed
the patriotic spectacle to be imagined; reflecting that it did a sort of service abroad, and
had only to be unmasked at home.

'But you surrendered the glove, marquise!'  The baronne d'Orbec spoke judicially.

'I flung it to the ground: that made it neutral,' said Renee.

'Hum.  He wears it with the dust on it, certainly.'

'And for how long a time,' M. Livret wished to know, 'does this amusing young man proclaim
his intention of wearing the glove?'

'Until he can see with us that his Order of Merit is utter kid,' said Madame d'Auffray; and
as she had spoken more or less neatly, satisfaction was left residing in the ear of the assembly,
and the glove was permitted to be swept away on a fresh tide of dialogue.

The admirable candour of Renee in publicly alluding to M. d'Henriel's foolishness restored
a peep of his holiday to Beauchamp.  Madame d'Auffray took note of the effect it produced,
and quite excused her sister-in-law for intending to produce is; but that speaking out the
half-truth that we may put on the mask of the whole, is no new trick; and believing as she
did that Renee was in danger with the handsome Count Henri, the practice of such a kind of
honesty on her part appeared alarming.

Still it is imprudent to press for confidences when our friend's heart is manifestly trifling
with sincerity.  Who knows but that some foregone reckless act or word may have superinduced
the healthy shame which cannot speak, which must disguise itself, and is honesty in that form,
but roughly troubled would resolve to rank dishonesty?  So thought the patient lady, wiser
in that than in her perceptions.

Renee made a boast of not persuading her guest to stay, avowing that she would not willingly
have him go.  Praising him equably, she listened to praise of him with animation.  She was
dumb and statue-like when Count Henri's name was mentioned.  Did not this betray liking for
one, subjection to the other?  Indeed, there was an Asiatic splendour of animal beauty about
M. d'Henriel that would be serpent with most women, Madame d'Auffray conceived; why not with
the deserted Renee, who adored beauty of shape and colour, and was compassionate toward a rashness
of character that her own unnatural solitariness and quick spirit made her emulous of?

Meanwhile Beauchamp's day of adieu succeeded that of his holiday, and no adieu was uttered. It
is therefore clear that the difficulty of distinguishing the various classes of inventions which
claim to be new, is of the same nature as the difficulty of distinguishing varieties and species,
because neither are absolute new creations, but both are alike descendants of pre-existing
forms, from which and from each other they differ by varying and often imperceptible degrees.
It appears, then, that however plausible this writer's objections may seem, whenever he descends
from generalities to any specific statement, his supposed difficulties turn out to be in reality
strongly confirmatory of Mr. Darwin's view.

The "Times," on Natural Selection.

The extraordinary misconception of the whole subject by popular writers and reviewers, is well shown
by an article which appeared in the Times newspaper on "The Reign of Law." Alluding to the
supposed economy of nature, in the adaptation of each species to its own place and its special use,
the reviewer remarks: "To this universal law of the greatest economy, the law of natural selection
stands in direct antagonism as the law of 'greatest possible waste' of time and of creative
power. To conceive a duck with webbed feet and a spoon-shaped bill, living by suction, to pass naturally
into a gull with webbed feet and a knife-like bill, living on flesh, in the longest possible time
and in the most laborious possible way, we may conceive it to pass from the one to the other state
by natural selection.

The battle of life the ducks will have to fight will increase in peril continually as they cease
(with the change of their bill) to be ducks, and attain a maximum of danger in the condition
in which they begin to be gulls; and ages must elapse and whole generations must perish, and
countless generations of the one species be created and sacrificed, to arrive at one single
pair of the other."

In this passage the theory of natural selection
is so absurdly misrepresented that it would be amusing, did we not
consider the misleading effect likely to be produced by this kind
of teaching in so popular a journal. It is assumed that the duck and
the gull are essential parts of nature, each well fitted for its place,
and that if one had been produced from the other by a gradual metamorphosis,
the intermediate forms would have been useless, unmeaning, and unfitted
for any place, in the system of the universe.  Imagining himself in the France of brave ideas, he contrived to
strike out sparks of Legitimist ire around him, and found himself breathing the atmosphere
of the most primitive nursery of Toryism.  Again he encountered the shrug, and he would have
it a verbal matter.  M. d'Orbec gravely recited the programme of the country party in France.
M. Livret carried the war across Channel.  You English have retired from active life, like
the exhausted author, to turn critic--the critic that sneers: unless we copy you abjectly we
are execrable.  And what is that sneer?  Materially it is an acrid saliva, withering where
it drops; in the way of fellowship it is a corpse-emanation.  As to wit, the sneer is the cloak
of clumsiness; it is the Pharisee's incense, the hypocrite's pity, the post of exaltation of
the fat citizen, etc.; but, said M. Livret, the people using it should have a care that they
keep powerful: they make no friends.  He terminated with this warning to a nation not devoid
of superior merit.  M. d'Orbec said less, and was less consoled by his outburst.

In the opinion of Mr. Vivian Ducie, present at the discussion, Beauchamp provoked the lash;
for, in the first place, a beautiful woman's apparent favourite should be particularly discreet
in all that he says: and next, he should have known that the Gallic shrug over matters political
is volcanic--it is the heaving of the mountain, and, like the proverbial Russ, leaps up Tartarly
at a scratch.  Our newspapers also had been flea- biting M. Livret and his countrymen of late;
and, to conclude, over in old England you may fly out against what you will, and there is little
beyond a motherly smile, a nurse's rebuke, or a fool's rudeness to answer you.  In quick-blooded
France you have whip for whip, sneer, sarcasm, claw, fang, tussle, in a trice; and if you choose
to comport yourself according to your insular notion of freedom, you are bound to march out
to the measured ground at an invitation.  To begin by saying that your principles are opposed
to it, naturally excites a malicious propensity to try your temper.

A further cause, unknown to Mr. Ducie, of M. Livret's irritation was, that Beauchamp had vexed
him on a subject peculiarly dear to him.  The celebrated Chateau Dianet was about to be visited
by the guests at Tourdestelle.  In common with some French philosophers and English matrons,
he cherished a sentimental sad enthusiasm for royal concubines; and when dilating upon one
among them, the ruins of whose family's castle stood in the neighbourhood-Agrees, who was really
a kindly soul, though not virtuous--M. Livret had been traversed by Beauchamp with questions
as to the condition of the people, the peasantry, that were sweated in taxes to support these
lovely frailties.  They came oddly from a man in the fire of youth, and a little old gentleman
somewhat seduced by the melting image of his theme might well blink at him to ask, of what
flesh are you, then?  His historic harem was insulted.  Personally too, the fair creature picturesquely
soiled, intrepid in her amorousness, and ultimately absolved by repentance (a shuddering narrative
of her sins under showers of salt drops), cried to him to champion her.  Excited by the supposed
cold critical mind in Beauchamp, M. Livret painted and painted this lady, tricked her in casuistical
niceties, scenes of pomp and boudoir pathos, with many shifting sidelights and a risky word
or two, until Renee cried out, 'Spare us the esprit Gaulois, M. Livret!' There was much to
make him angry with this Englishman.

'The esprit Gaulois is the sparkle of crystal common sense, madame, and may we never abandon
it for a Puritanism that hides its face to conceal its filthiness, like a stagnant pond,' replied
M. Livret, flashing.

'It seems, then, that there are two ways of being objectionable,' said Renee.

'Ah! Madame la Marquise, your wit is French,' he breathed low; 'keep your heart so!'

Both M. Livret and M. d'Orbec had forgotten that when Count Henri d'Henriel was received at
Tourdestelle, the arrival of the Englishman was pleasantly anticipated by them as an eclipse
of the handsome boy; but a foreign interloper is quickly dispossessed of all means of pleasing
save that one of taking his departure; and they now talked of Count Henri's disgrace and banishment
in a very warm spirit of sympathy, not at all seeing why it should be made to depend upon the
movements of this M. Beauchamp, as it appeared to be.  Madame d'Auffray heard some of their
dialogue, and hurried with a mouth full of comedy to Renee, who did not reproach them for silly
beings, as would be done elsewhere.  On the contrary, she appreciated a scene of such absolute
comedy, recognizing it instantly as a situation plucked out of human nature.  She compared
them to republicans that regretted the sovereign they had deposed for a pretender to start
up and govern them.

'Who hurries them round to the legitimate king again!'  said Madame d'Auffray.

Renee cast her chin up.  'How, my dear?'

'Your husband.'

'What of him?'

'He is returning.'

'What brings him?'

'You should ask who, my Renee!  I was sure he would not hear of M. Beauchamp's being here,
without an effort to return and do the honours of the chateau.'

Renee looked hard at her, saying, 'How thoughtful of you!  You must have made use of the telegraph
wires to inform him that M. Beauchamp was with us.'

'More; I made use of them to inform him that M. Beauchamp was expected.'

'And that was enough to bring him!  He pays M. Beauchamp a wonderful compliment.'

'Such as he would pay to no other man, my Renee.  Virtually it is the highest of compliments
to you.  I say that to M. Beauchamp's credit; for Raoul has met him, and, whatever his personal
feeling may be, must know your friend is a man of honour.'

'My friend is .  .  .  yes, I have no reason to think otherwise,' Renee replied. It is probable,
that these primary facts or laws are but results of the very nature of life, and of the essential
properties of organized and unorganized matter. Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his "First Principles"
and his "Biology" has, I think, made us able to understand how this may be; but at present we may
accept these simple laws without going further back, and the question
then is--whether the variety, the harmony, the contrivance, and the
beauty we perceive in organic beings, can have been produced by the
action of these laws alone, or whether we are required to believe
in the incessant interference and direct action of the mind and will
of the Creator.

It is simply a question of how the Creator has worked.



Madame d'Auffray added, 'I do not say that he is other than a perfectly brave and chivalrous
gentleman.'

'Oh!'  cried Renee, 'do not say it, if ever you should imagine it. Bid Roland speak of him.
He is changed, oppressed: I did him a terrible wrong .  .  .  .'  She checked herself.  'But
the chief thing to do is to keep M. d'Henriel away from him.  I suspect M. d'Orbec of a design
to make them clash: and you, my dear, will explain why, to flatter me. Believe me, I thirst
for flattery; I have had none since M. Beauchamp came: and you, so acute, must have seen the
want of it in my face.  But you, so skilful, Agnes, will manage these men.  Do you know, Agnes,
that the pride of a woman so incredibly clever as you have shown me you are should resent their
intrigues and overthrow them.  As for me, I thought I could command M. d'Henriel, and I find
he has neither reason in him nor obedience.  Singular to say, I knew him just as well a week
back as I do now, and then I liked him for his qualities--or the absence of any.  But how shall
we avoid him on the road to Dianet?  He is aware that we are going.'

'Take M. Beauchamp by boat,' said Madame d'Auffray.

'The river winds to within a five minutes' walk of Dianet; we could go by boat,' Renee said
musingly.  'I thought of the boat.  But does it not give the man a triumph that we should seem
to try to elude him?  What matter!  Still, I do not like him to be the falcon, and Nevil Beauchamp
the .  .  .  little bird.  So it is, because we began badly, Agnes!'

'Was it my fault?'

'Mine.  Tell me: the legitimate king returns when?'

'In two days or three.'

'And his rebel subjects are to address him--how?'

Madame d'Auffray smote the point of a finger softly on her cheek.

'Will they be pardoned?'  said Renee.

'It is for him to kneel, my dearest.'

'Legitimacy kneeling for forgiveness is a painful picture, Agnes. Legitimacy jealous of a foreigner
is an odd one.  However, we are women, born to our lot.  If we could rise en masse!--but we
cannot.  Embrace me.'

Madame d'Auffray embraced her, without an idea that she assisted in performing the farewell
of their confidential intimacy.

When Renee trifled with Count Henri, it was playing with fire, and she knew it; and once or
twice she bemoaned to Agnes d'Auffray her abandoned state, which condemned her, for the sake
of the sensation of living, to have recourse to perilous pastimes; but she was revolted, as
at a piece of treachery, that Agnes should have suggested the invitation of Nevil Beauchamp
with the secret design of winning home her husband to protect her.  This, for one reason, was
because Beauchamp gave her no notion of danger; none, therefore, of requiring protection; and
the presence of her husband could not but be hateful to him, an undeserved infliction.  To
her it was intolerable that they should be brought into contact.  It seemed almost as hard
that she should have to dismiss Beauchamp to preclude their meeting.  She remembered, nevertheless,
a certain desperation of mind, scarce imaginable in the retrospect, by which, trembling, fever-smitten,
scorning herself, she had been reduced to hope for Nevil Beauchamp's coming as for a rescue.
The night of the storm had roused her heart.  Since then his perfect friendliness had lulled,
his air of thoughtfulness had interested it; and the fancy that he, who neither reproached
nor sentimentalized, was to be infinitely compassionated, stirred up remorse.  She could not
tell her friend Agnes of these feelings while her feelings were angered against her friend.
So she talked lightly of 'the legitimate king,' and they embraced: a situation of comedy quite
as true as that presented by the humble admirers of the brilliant chatelaine.

Beauchamp had the pleasure of rowing Madame la Marquise to the short shaded walk separating
the river from Chateau Dianet, whither M. d'Orbec went on horseback, and Madame d'Auffray and
M. Livret were driven. The portrait of Diane of Dianet was praised for the beauty of the dame,
a soft-fleshed acutely featured person, a fresh-of-the-toilette face, of the configuration
of head of the cat, relieved by a delicately aquiline nose; and it could only be the cat of
fairy metamorphosis which should stand for that illustration: brows and chin made an acceptable
triangle, and eyes and mouth could be what she pleased for mice or monarchs.  M. Livret did
not gainsay the impeachment of her by a great French historian, tender to women, to frailties
in particular--yes, she was cold, perhaps grasping: but dwell upon her in her character of
woman; conceive her existing, to estimate the charm of her graciousness.  Name the two countries
which alone have produced THE WOMAN, the ideal woman, the woman of art, whose beauty, grace,
and wit offer her to our contemplation in an atmosphere above the ordinary conditions of the
world: these two countries are France and Greece!  None other give you the perfect woman, the
woman who conquers time, as she conquers men, by virtue of the divinity in her blood; and she,
as little as illustrious heroes, is to be judged by the laws and standards of lesser creatures.
In fashioning her, nature and art have worked together: in her, poetry walks the earth.  The
question of good or bad is entirely to be put aside: it is a rustic's impertinence--a bourgeois'
vulgarity.  She is preeminent, voila tout.  Has she grace and beauty?  Then you are answered:
such possessions are an assurance that her influence in the aggregate must be for good.  Thunder,
destructive to insects, refreshes earth: so she.  So sang the rhapsodist.  Possibly a scholarly
little French gentleman, going down the grey slopes of sixty to second childishness, recovers
a second juvenility in these enthusiasms; though what it is that inspires our matrons to take
up with them is unimaginable.  M. Livret's ardour was a contrast to the young Englishman's
vacant gaze at Diane, and the symbols of her goddesship running along the walls, the bed, the
cabinets, everywhere that the chaste device could find frontage and a corner.

M. d'Orbec remained outside the chateau inspecting the fish-ponds.  When they rejoined him
he complimented Beauchamp semi-ironically on his choice of the river's quiet charms in preference
to the dusty roads.  Madame de Rouaillout said, 'Come, M. d'Orbec; what if you surrender your
horse to M. Beauchamp, and row me back?'  He changed colour, hesitated, and declined he had
an engagement to call on M. d'Henriel.

'When did you see him?'  said she.

He was confused.  'It is not long since, madame.'

'On the road?'

'Coming along-the road.'

'And our glove?'

'Madame la Marquise, if I may trust my memory, M. d'Henriel was not in official costume.'

Renee allowed herself to be reassured.

A ceremonious visit that M. Livret insisted on was paid to the chapel of Diane, where she had
worshipped and laid her widowed ashes, which, said M. Livret, the fiends of the Revolution
would not let rest.

He raised his voice to denounce them.

It was Roland de Croisnel that answered: 'The Revolution was our grandmother, monsieur, and
I cannot hear her abused.'

Renee caught her brother by the hand.  He stepped out of the chapel with Beauchamp to embrace
him; then kissed Renee, and, remarking that she was pale, fetched flooding colour to her cheeks. In
1785, the land passed by purchase to one of Fraser's Highlanders, Capt. Cameron. It was from
1841 to 1875, the cherished abode of a cultured English gentleman, the late John Porter, the able
secretary and treasurer of the Quebec Turnpike Trust. It did one good to see the courteous
old bachelor, cosily seated in his ample, well selected library,
surrounded by a few congenial friends, the toils of the day over--the
dust of St. Peter Street shaken off.

Mr. Porter was a fair type of the well-informed English country gentleman, well read in Debrett, with
a pedigree reaching as far back as William the Norman.

At his demise, he bequeathed this splendid farm to the son of a valued
old friend.

Andrew Chs.

Stuart, Esq., of the law firm of Ross, Stuart & Stuart, Quebec, now
Lt.-Col. Andrew Charles Stuart, of the 8th Batt.

"Royal Rifles," Quebec.

Col. Stuart, the possessor of ample means, having a taste for agricultural pursuits, has lately
become an active member of the Quebec Turf Club, as well as a successful breeder of prize cattle.
His stud is renowned all over Canada. Col. Stuart lately took up his residence at Meadowbank, since
which time a transformation seems to have come over the land; sprightly parterres of flowers,
dainty pavilions, trim hedges, rustic seats, hanging baskets of ferns,
are conspicuous, where formerly hay alone flourished.

A neighboring rill has been skilfully enlisted to do duty, dammed
up, bridged over, gently coaxed to meander, whimple and bubble, like
Tennyson's brook, here and there rippling over and rushing into cool
trout ponds, under the shade of moss and trees, until it leaps down
to the St. Lawrence.

A small race-course has been laid out, south of the house, in a declivity towards the St. Lawrence
to exercise the thoroughbreds and keep healthy the pet charger for parade days, as well as
ladies' palfreys, which are not forgotten at Meadowbank.

In an enclosure protected by stone pillars and chains, under the shade of a handsome tree,
may be read on a board, the following name, recently inscribed,

"ASTREA"

This marks the spot where a favourite saddle-horse, who died prematurely, now rests. All now wanting
to perfect this scene of rustic beauty is a cottage orne or a Chalet Suisse.

A RAID ON MEADOWBANK IN 1775, AND HOW KING GEORGE'S FRIENDS, THE "QUEBEC TORIES" WERE THEN PLUNDERED.

The
following extract from Judge Henry's Diary seems to refer to the country seat, now known as Meadowbank:

Arnold's
little army had retreated to Pointe aux Trembles on the 15th Nov. On the 2nd December, 1775, they
retraced their steps to Quebec and in the evening arrived at St. Foy. On the 12th of December,
Henry [253] says "The officers and men still wore nothing else than the remains of the summer
clothing, which being on their back, had escaped destruction in the
disaster of the wilderness."

At this time the snow lay three feet deep over the whole country. One fine morning a fellow addressed
Simpson who was the only officer in quarters and said "that about two miles up the St. Lawrence
lay a country seat of Governor Cromie's (Cramahe?) stocked with many
things they wanted and he would be our guide.

Carioles were immediately procured. The house, a neat box, was romantically situated on the steep
bank of the river, not very distant from a chapel. [254] Though in the midst of winter the
spot displayed the elegant taste and abundant wealth of the owner. The house was closed; knocking,
the hall door was opened to us by an Irishwoman who, of the fair sex, was the largest and most
brawny that ever came under my notice.

She was the stewardess of the house. Our questions were answered
with an apparent affability and frankness.

She introduced us into the kitchen, a large apartment, well filled
with these articles which good livers think necessary to the happy
enjoyment of life.

  Dust here, dust there!--if one could be like a silk-worm, and
live lying on the leaf one feeds on, it would be a sort of answer to the riddle--living out
of the dust, and in the present.  I find none in my religion.  No doubt, Madame de Breze did:
why did you call Diane so to M. Livret?'

She looked at him smiling as they came out of the shadow of the clipped trees.  He was glancing
about for the boat.

'The boat is across the river,' Renee said, in a voice that made him seek her eyes for an explanation
of the dead sound.  She was very pale.  'You have perfect command of yourself?  For my sake!'
she said.

He looked round.

Standing up in the boat, against the opposite bank, and leaning with crossed legs on one of
the sculls planted in the gravel of the river, Count Henri d'Henriel's handsome figure presented
itself to Beauchamp's gaze.

With a dryness that smacked of his uncle Everard Romfrey, Beauchamp said of the fantastical
posture of the young man, 'One can do that on fresh water.'

Renee did not comprehend the sailor-sarcasm of the remark; but she also commented on the statuesque
appearance of Count Henri: 'Is the pose for photography or for sculpture?'

Neither of them showed a sign of surprise or of impatience.

M. d'Henriel could not maintain the attitude.  He uncrossed his legs deliberately, drooped
hat in hand, and came paddling over; apologized indolently, and said, 'I am not, I believe,
trespassing on the grounds of Tourdestelle, Madame la Marquise!'

'You happen to be in my boat, M. le Comte,' said Renee.

'Permit me, madame.'  He had set one foot on shore, with his back to Beauchamp, and reached
a hand to assist her step into the boat.

Beauchamp caught fast hold of the bows while Renee laid a finger on Count Henri's shoulder
to steady herself.

The instant she had taken her seat, Count Henri dashed the scull's blade at the bank to push
off with her, but the boat was fast.  His manoeuvre had been foreseen.  Beauchamp swung on
board like the last seaman of a launch, and crouched as the boat rocked away to the stream;
and still Count Henri leaned on the scull, not in a chosen attitude, but for positive support.
He had thrown his force into the blow, to push off triumphantly, and leave his rival standing.
It occurred that the boat's brief resistance and rocking away agitated his artificial equipoise,
and, by the operation of inexorable laws, the longer he leaned across an extending surface
the more was he dependent; so that when the measure of the water exceeded the length of his
failing support on land, there was no help for it: he pitched in.  His grimace of chagrin at
the sight of Beauchamp securely established, had scarcely yielded to the grimness of feature
of the man who feels he must go, as he took the plunge; and these two emotions combined to
make an extraordinary countenance.

He went like a gallant gentleman; he threw up his heels to clear the boat, dropping into about
four feet of water, and his first remark on rising was, 'I trust, madame, I have not had the
misfortune to splash you.'

Then he waded to the bank, scrambled to his feet, and drew out his moustachios to their curving
ends.  Renee nodded sharply to Beauchamp to bid him row.  He, with less of wisdom, having seized
the floating scull abandoned by Count Henri, and got it ready for the stroke, said a word of
condolence to the dripping man.

Count Henri's shoulders and neck expressed a kind of negative that, like a wet dog's shake
of the head, ended in an involuntary whole length shudder, dog-like and deplorable to behold.
He must have been conscious of this miserable exhibition of himself; he turned to Beauchamp:
'You are, I am informed, a sailor, monsieur.  I compliment you on your naval tactics: our next
meeting will be on land.  Au revoir, monsieur.  Madame la Marquise, I have the honour to salute
you.'

With these words he retreated.

'Row quickly, I beg of you,' Renee said to Beauchamp.  Her desire was to see Roland, and open
her heart to her brother; for now it had to be opened.  Not a minute must be lost to prevent
further mischief.  And who was guilty? she.  Her heart clamoured of her guilt to waken a cry
of innocence.  A disdainful pity for the superb young savage just made ludicrous, relieved
him of blame, implacable though he was.  He was nothing; an accident--a fool.  But he might
become a terrible instrument of punishment.  The thought of that possibility gave it an aspect
of retribution, under which her cry of innocence was insufferable in its feebleness.  It would
have been different with her if Beauchamp had taken advantage of her fever of anxiety, suddenly
appeased by the sight of him on the evening of his arrival at Tourdestelle after the storm,
to attempt a renewal of their old broken love-bonds.  Then she would have seen only a conflict
between two men, neither of whom could claim a more secret right than the other to be called
her lover, and of whom both were on a common footing, and partly despicable.  But Nevil Beauchamp
had behaved as her perfect true friend, in the character she had hoped for when she summoned
him.  The sense of her guilt lay in the recognition that he had saved her.  From what?  From
the consequences of delirium rather than from love--surely delirium, founded on delusion; love
had not existed. She had said to Count Henri, 'You speak to me of love.  I was beloved when
I was a girl, before my marriage, and for years I have not seen or corresponded with the man
who loved me, and I have only to lift my finger now and he will come to me, and not once will
he speak to me of love.' Those were the words originating the wager of the glove.  But what
of her, if Nevil Beauchamp had not come?

Her heart jumped, and she blushed ungovernably in his face,--as if he were seeing her withdraw
her foot from the rock's edge, and had that instant rescued her.  But how came it she had been
so helpless?  She could ask; she could not answer.

Thinking, talking to her heart, was useless.  The deceiver simply feigned utter condemnation
to make partial comfort acceptable.  She burned to do some act of extreme self-abasement that
should bring an unwonted degree of wrath on her externally, and so re-entitle her to consideration
in her own eyes.  She burned to be interrogated, to have to weep, to be scorned, abused, and
forgiven, that she might say she did not deserve pardon. Beauchamp was too English, evidently
too blind, for the description of judge-accuser she required; one who would worry her without
mercy, until- disgraced by the excess of torture inflicted--he should reinstate her by as much
as he had overcharged his accusation, and a little more. Reasonably enough, instinctively in
fact, she shunned the hollow of an English ear.  A surprise was in reserve for her.

Beauchamp gave up rowing.  As he rested on the sculls, his head was bent and turned toward
the bank.  Renee perceived an over-swollen monster gourd that had strayed from a garden adjoining
the river, and hung sliding heavily down the bank on one greenish yellow cheek, in prolonged
contemplation of its image in the mirror below.  Apparently this obese Narcissus enchained
his attention.

She tapped her foot.  'Are you tired of rowing, monsieur?'

'It was exactly here,' said he, 'that you told me you expected your husband's return.'

She glanced at the gourd, bit her lip, and, colouring, said, 'At what point of the river did
I request you to congratulate me on it?'

She would not have said that, if she had known the thoughts at work within him. 

[238] Probably the four-gun battery mentioned in the account of the Battle of the Plains. We also
find in a diary of the siege operations on the same day, "A mortar and some l8-pounders were carried
to Samos, three quarters of a league from the town

.

Very strangely, the ridiculous thing, in the shape of an over-stretched likeness, that she
never would have seen had he indicated it directly, became transfused from his mind to hers
by his abstract, half-amused observation of the great dancing gourd--that capering antiquity,
lumbering volatility, wandering, self-adored, gross bald Cupid, elatest of nondescripts!  Her
senses imagined the impressions agitating Beauchamp's, and exaggerated them beyond limit; and
when he amazed her with a straight look into her eyes, and the words, 'Better let it be a youth--and
live, than fall back to that!' she understood him immediately; and, together with her old fear
of his impetuosity and downrightness, came the vivid recollection, like a bright finger pointing
upon darkness, of what foul destiny, magnified by her present abhorrence of it, he would have
saved her from in the days of Venice and Touraine, and unto what loathly example of the hideous
grotesque she, in spite of her lover's foresight on her behalf, had become allied.

Face to face as they sat, she had no defence for her scarlet cheeks; her eyes wavered.

'We will land here; the cottagers shall row the boat up,' she said.

'Somewhere--anywhere,' said Beauchamp.  'But I must speak.  I will tell you now.  I do not
think you to blame--barely; not in my sight; though no man living would have suffered as I
should.  Probably some days more and you would have been lost.  You looked for me!  Trust your
instinct now I'm with you as well as when I'm absent.  Have you courage?  that 's the question.
You have years to live.  Can you live them in this place--with honour? and alive really?'

Renee's eyes grew wide; she tried to frown, and her brows merely twitched; to speak, and she
was inarticulate.  His madness, miraculous penetration, and the super-masculine charity in
him, unknown to the world of young men in their treatment of women, excited, awed, and melted
her. He had seen the whole truth of her relations with M. d'Henriel!--the wickedness of them
in one light, the innocence in another; and without prompting a confession he forgave her.
Could she believe it?  This was love, and manly love.

She yearned to be on her feet, to feel the possibility of an escape from him.

She pointed to a landing.  He sprang to the bank.  'It could end in nothing else,' he said,
'unless you beat cold to me.  And now I have your hand, Renee!  It's the hand of a living woman,
you have no need to tell me that; but faithful to her comrade!  I can swear it for her--faithful
to a true alliance!  You are not married, you are simply chained: and you are terrorized. 
What a perversion of you it is!  It wrecks you.  But with me?  Am I not your lover?  You and
I are one life.  What have we suffered for but to find this out and act on it?  Do I not know
that a woman lives, and is not the rooted piece of vegetation hypocrites and tyrants expect
her to be?  Act on it, I say; own me, break the chains, come to me; say, Nevil Beauchamp or
death!  And death for you? It is not known how long Bishop Dosquet occupied his estate.

"Soon after the cession of Canada to the British Crown, this property passed into the hands
of Judge Mabane, [236] by purchase, from the reverend proprietors of the seigniory. Mr. Mabane
changed the name to Woodfield, and made extensive alterations to
the house, adding to it a second story, giving it by other additions
a more imposing appearance from the river, and adding two pavillion
wings, connected with the house by corridors.

In 1775-6 it was converted into an hospital for American soldiers.

"About the year 1807, the late Honorable Matthew Bell purchased Woodfield from Miss Mabane, the
Judge's sister.  He did not speak
so much to win as to help her to see with her own orbs.  Nor was it roughly or chidingly, though
it was absolutely, that he stripped her of the veil a wavering woman will keep to herself from
her heart's lord if she can.

They arrived long after the boat at Tourdestelle, and Beauchamp might believe he had prevailed
with her, but for her forlorn repetition of the question he had put to her idly and as a new
idea, instead of significantly, with a recollection and a doubt 'Have I courage, Nevil?'

The grain of common sense in cowardice caused her to repeat it when her reason was bedimmed,
and passion assumed the right to show the way of right and wrong.

