When Ann came back to the gate, and saw that John was not there, she ran into the lane to look
for him, and to call him. But John could not hear her call him, for you know he was a long
way off. Then Ann ran back into the house, and told John's papa and mamma that he was lost.
As soon as his papa heard this, he laid down his book, and put on his hat to go and seek him.
The man also went to seek him. And his mamma said, "Pray make haste and bring my dear boy home
again." As for Ann, she took the dog with her down the lane to help to find him, for he was
very fond of John. Dash was the dog's name, and a good dog he was.

It was not long till Ann and Dash came to the turn of the lane, and then they both saw John,
who sat upon the bank, very sad. The dog gave a bark, as if he had said, "There he is! I am
glad we have found him!" Then Dash ran up to him as fast as he could, and John was very glad
to see him come along the lane; and he said, "Good Dash! dear Dash! you are come to take me home."

So John and Dash went to meet Ann, for she did not run as fast as the dog had done. John told
her that he had been a bad boy and was very sorry. When Ann saw that he was sorry, she gave
him a kiss, and said that he must not do so any more. Then they went back home, and John soon
saw his papa in the lane. But he did not run to him, and look glad, as he did at other times.
Why did not John run to his papa? Can you guess? Yes, it was that he had not done as he was
bid, and he knew his papa did not like to hear that he had been a bad boy.

His papa stood still; and when John, and Ann, and Dash came up to him, John said, "Papa, I
have not been good. I am very sorry, I will try to be good next time." So his papa said, "I
hope you will;" and he took hold of his hand, and led him back to the house. And his mamma
was very glad to see him, safe and well.

John said that it was his wish to be good, and his papa told him that he must pray to God to
help him. I hope you will pray to God. No one can make you good but God. I cannot make you
good. Your papa cannot make you good. No one can do this for you, but God. Then pray to him.
Say, "Lord, help me to be good, for the sake of Jesus, thy dear Son, who died upon the cross
to take away my sins." God can see you now; and if you pray to him, he will hear you.

THE LOVE OF JESUS.

   What a strange and wondrous story,
     From the Book of God is read,
   How the Lord of life and glory
     Had not where to lay his head;

   How he left his throne in heaven,
     Here to suffer, bleed, and die,
   That my soul might be forgiven,
     And ascend to God on high.

   Father, let thy Holy Spirit
     Still reveal a Saviour's love,
   And prepare me to inherit
     Glory, where he reigns above.

   There, with saints and angels dwelling,
     May I that great love proclaim,
   And with them be ever telling
     All the wonders of his name.

LONDON: BENJAMIN PARDON, PRINTER, PATERNOSTER ROW.