I have wandered a little, while noting down the details of Alice Merivale's fashionable wedding,
and though I feel that it is doing Mr. Sylvester Davenport Clyde a cruel injustice to bring
him to the front again, beside such pictures of exalted humanity as we have just been contemplating,
I owe it, in amendment, for my trespass upon the reader's patience, to proceed with the interrupted
thread of my story, and can therefore only trust to the generosity of his disposition not to
dwell at any length upon the compromising nature of the contrast, but to remember Mr. Clyde,
in his more interesting character of bridegroom, at a very showy and stylish wedding ceremony.

When the great event had come and gone, no one could tell exactly whether half his or her sanguine
expectations had been fulfilled or not. I had an uneasy suspicion, at the time, that the soundness
of the family's mental organization had become temporarily suspended, from Mrs. Merivale down--they
seemed to have gone stark mad.

It was six weeks after the ceremony of pelting a glittering carriage with white slippers and
rice, as it rolled away from their festive-looking mansion, that Mrs. Merivale dropped down
into an easy-chair one afternoon with the greatest languor and physical depression, and declaring
that "those fashionable weddings were enough to knock a body up for a month," quietly fell
asleep among her comfortable cushions.

CHAPTER XVII.

There is only a little more labor for my long-used wheel, and the threads of my uneven life
will have run on to the crisis. I cannot console myself with the thought that it has been watched
through its tedious progress, by loving or partial glances: the bobbin was faulty and stiff
at times, and the worker grew pensive and weary. Sometimes, the sunlight broke over my toil,
and I sang to the wheel as it was rolling; but sometimes again there were shadows, and the
wheel was then heavy and slower. Sometimes, the threads grew so tangled, that I sighed with
impatience and worry, the weft bears the marks in the weaving--they are plain, in unwinding
the pirns--and still, 'twas a labor of love, this patchwork of sunlight and shadow, this discord
of sorrow and song.

"The fragment of a life, however typical, is not the sample of an even web" said George Eliot,
and who knew the nature of the warp and weft of our human fabric better than she! We pass from
our joy to our sorrow, as the night passes into the day, it is part and parcel of the mechanism
of our daily lives, smiling and sighing, we spin and we weave till the twilight's gray dusk
overtakes us--then our tired hands are folded together, and the Master takes care of the rest.

From Alice Merivale's wedding, I was called to Hortense de Beaumont's bedside. In the comparatively
short interval of our separation, she had wasted almost beyond recognition. We were mistaken
when we persuaded ourselves, that she had baffled her former attack, she had never quite rallied,
and when the March winds began to blow, her frail constitution gave way anew. She drooped so
quickly, that it was too late when real danger was apprehended, to take her to a warmer refuge.
Madame de Beaumont looked little better than her invalid daughter from weeping and worrying,
when I arrived.

On the second day, only, was I allowed to see Hortense, and what a change I saw! There was
death in every feature, every curve of her once beautiful face. She revived as usual, when
I was announced, and wanted to sit up and talk a great deal more than the attending physician
would allow, or than she was really able to do. They took advantage of this desire of hers,
to coax her to nourish herself more than she was wont.

"If you take your prescriptions and obey orders, I shall let you have a half-hour's conversation
with your friend every day," said the doctor one morning, in a bargaining tone; "if not" he
added, pausing, and looking at her seriously--after which he shook his head slowly and emphatically,
and said no more.

"Very well then, I will try to take them doubled if you like" she answered faintly, directing
a playful glance towards me, and breaking into one of her old smiles. "I must talk to her!"

She could not "take them doubled," poor child, but she made heroic efforts to swallow them
as prescribed, in order that she might have her talk with me. My poor Hortense! She never had
but the one half-hour's conversation with me, for she passed into a better world, before the
birds had learned their summer songs.

"Put away that book, and come here, my Amey" she said faintly one afternoon, as I sat by her
bedside watching with her. I closed the volume and going nearer to her, sat on the margin of
her bed, and took her delicate hands in mine.

"I have something to tell you now--my big secret--that I wrote you about, you know."

She began in broken sentences, her breath was weak and short, and her voice like an echo.

"It would not be so long if you knew about--about Bayard, poor--Bayard, and that dreadful--"
she stopped, and a crimson spot appeared on each pallid cheek. I leaned over her gently, and
said in a soothing whisper:

"May be I do know it, my little woman. Is it about Bayard's unfortunate marriage? If so, they
have told me the whole sad story."

She bowed her head, in answer to my question and muttered feebly:

"I am so glad because I hate to speak of it, but my secret is not that. Do you know where Inez
is now?"

I nodded affirmatively. "Well, first when she went there, Bayard had a dreadful sickness, and
he wanted to die--called out to death at every moment to come and rescue him, though he was
not prepared; he would not hear of forgiving Inez, he declared he hated her, and was glad of
her affliction, and still, with these sentiments he wanted to die! Oh, how I prayed against
his prayer!" she exclaimed, with an effort of enthusiasm, "how I begged of God, to turn a deaf
ear to his mad supplication, and lend a willing one to mine. I suffered an agony of suspense,
and at last, the crisis came, he struggled with it, conquered it, and got better. So far my
prayer was heard, but my trouble was not over, he regained his health and his strength, but
he was a changed man otherwise. He hated his past life and the woman who was so intimately
associated with it; he became gloomy and reckless, gave up his religion with all its practices
of piety, and abandoned himself to books of science, such as are the ruin of human souls all
over the world. I remonstrated with him hourly, but without avail--" a slight coughing interrupted
her here, I gave her a drink and shook up her pillows, and feeling somewhat refreshed, she
lay back again and continued:

"Mamma thought that his solitude was perhaps his great enemy and wrote to his college chum,
Mr. Dalton, to come and visit us for a little while." At the mention of Ernest Dalton's name
a faint pink colour rose steadily into her face. "He came and spent three months with us, but
did little good in the way we had hoped he could, but he was kind and consoling in another
way. He gave poor mamma great comfort while he remained; when he left they sent me to Notre
Dame, I don't know why, although it proved a great blessing in the end.

