To punish a body of men, for offenses committed by two or three of their number, even though
the offense is obnoxious and it is impossible to put the finger on the culprits, is the act
of a sadist, and is no more excusable within military organization than in civilian society.
Any officer who resorts to this stupid practice will forfeit the loyalty of the best men in
his command. There is no reason why it should be otherwise.

As a general rule, it is a serious error to reprimand a subordinate in the presence of any
other person, because of the unnecessary hurt to his pride. But circumstances moderate the
rule. If the offense for which he is being reprimanded involves injury of any sort to some
other person, or persons, it may be wholly proper to apply the treatment in their presence.
For example, the bully or the smart-aleck who wantonly humiliates his own subordinates is not
entitled to have his own feelings spared. However, in the presence of his own superior, an
officer is always ill-advised to administer oral punishment to one of his own juniors, since
the effect is to destroy confidence both up and down the line.

It is always the duty of an officer to intervene, toward the protection of his own men against
any manifest injustice, whatever its source. In fact, this trust is so implicit that he should
be ready to risk his professional reputation upon it, when he is convinced beyond doubt that
the man is being unfairly assailed, or that due process is not being followed. Both higher
authority and civil authority occasionally overreach; an officer stands as a shield protecting
his men against unfair treatment from any quarter. But it is decidedly not his duty to attempt
to cheat law or thwart justice for the sake of his men simply because they are his men. His
job, as Shakespeare puts it, is "to unmask falsehood and bring truth to light, to wrong the
wronger till he render right."

Finally, the best policy on punishments is to eliminate the frictions which are the cause of
most transgressions. When a ship is happy, men do their duty. Scarcely anything will cross
them up more quickly than to see rewards given with an uneven hand. Even the stinker who has
no ambition but to duck work can recognize a deserving man, and will burn if that man is bypassed
in favor of a bootlicker or some other lightweight.

Nothing is more vain than to give a promotion, or any reward, in the hope, or on the promise,
that the character who receives it will hit the sawdust trail and suddenly reform.

Duty is the only sure proving ground. Men, like motors, should be judged on their all-around
performance. Crowds gathered on corners to watch the flapping posters aloft on
the kite lines.

The afternoon newspapers issued specials which were all about the
coming flood, and everywhere one heard the cry of the newsboys: "Extra-a-a!
Drowning of a Thousand Million people!

Cosmo Versal predicts the End of the World!"

On their editorial pages the papers were careful to discount the scare lines, and terrific
pictures, that covered the front sheets, with humorous jibes at the author of the formidable
prediction.


Therefore if all men could become rightly placed, we would have Utopia tomorrow.

This theory of what humanity mainly cries for is perforce rejected by the military establishment,
for several eminently practical as well as ideal reasons.

It discounts man, his plastic and impressionable nature, his response to all that goes on around
him and his marked ability to adjust to any environment. He is not like a bolt fitted into
a hole by a riveter, nor merely clay in the hands of the potter. What he becomes is mainly
of his own making.

Further, the theory does not meet the needs of the situation, since in the services, as elsewhere,
there are not enough better holes to go around, and no man is ready to say that he is good
for nothing but life as a file-closer.

