ACTION FRONT

BY

BOYD CABLE

1916

TO

MR. J. A. SPENDER

to whose recognition and appreciation of my work, and to whose instant and eager hospitality
in the "Westminster Gazette" so much of these war writings is due, this book is very gratefully
dedicated by

THE AUTHOR

FOREWORD

I make no apology for having followed in this book the same plan as in my other one, "Between
the Lines," of taking extracts from the official despatches as "texts" and endeavoring to show
something of what these brief messages cover, because so many of my own friends, and so many
more unknown friends amongst the reviewers, expressed themselves so pleased with the plan that
I feel its repetition is justified.

There were some who complained that my last book was in parts too grim and too terrible, and
no doubt the same complaint may lie against this one. To that I can only reply that I have
found it impossible to write with any truth of the Front without the writing being grim, and
in writing my other book I felt it would be no bad thing if Home realized the grimness a little
better.

But now there are so many at Home whose nearest and dearest are in the trenches, and who require
no telling of the horrors of the war, that I have tried here to show there is a lighter side
to war, to let them know that we have our relaxations, and even find occasion for jests, in
the course of our business.

I believe, or at least hope, that in showing both sides of the picture I am doing what the
Front would wish me to do. And I don't ask for any greater satisfaction than that.

BOYD CABLE.

May, 1916.

CONTENTS

IN ENEMY HANDS A BENEVOLENT NEUTRAL DRILL A NIGHT PATROL AS OTHERS SEE THE FEAR OF FEAR ANTI-AIRCRAFT
A FRAGMENT AN OPEN TOWN THE SIGNALERS CONSCRIPT COURAGE SMASHING THE COUNTER-ATTACK A GENERAL
ACTION AT LAST

IN ENEMY HANDS

The last conscious thought in the mind of Private Jock Macalister as he reached the German
trench was to get down into it; his next conscious thought to get out of it. Up there on the
level there were uncomfortably many bullets, and even as he leaped on the low parapet one of
these struck the top of his forehead, ran deflecting over the crown of his head, and away.
He dropped limp as a pole-axed bullock, slid and rolled helplessly down into the trench.

When he came to his senses he found himself huddled in a corner against the traverse, his head
smarting and a bruised elbow aching abominably. He lifted his head and groaned, and as the
mists cleared from his dazed eyes he found himself looking into a fat and very dirty face and
the ring of a rifle muzzle about a foot from his head. The German said something which Macalister
could not understand, but which he rightly interpreted as a command not to move. But he could
hear no sound of Scottish voices or of the uproar of hand-to-hand fighting in the trench. When
he saw the Germans duck down hastily and squeeze close up against the wall of the trench, while
overhead a string of shells crashed angrily and the shrapnel beat down in gusts across the
trench, he diagnosed correctly that the assault had failed, and that the British gunners were
again searching the German trench with shrapnel. His German guard said something to the other
men, and while one of them remained at the loophole and fired an occasional shot, the others
drew close to their prisoner. The first thing they did was to search him, to turn each pocket
outside-in, and when they had emptied these, carefully feel all over his body for any concealed
article. Macalister bore it all with great philosophy, mildly satisfied that he had no money
to lose and no personal property of any value.

Their search concluded, the Germans held a short consultation, then one of them slipped round
the corner of the traverse, and, returning a moment later, pointed the direction to Macalister
and signed to him to go.

The trench was boxed into small compartments by the traverses, and in the next section Macalister
found three Germans waiting for him. One of them asked him something in German, and on Macalister
shaking his head to show that he did not understand, he was signaled to approach, and a German
ran deftly through his pockets, fingering his waist, and, searching for a money-belt, made
a short exclamation of disgust, and signed to the prisoner to move on round the next traverse,
at the same time shouting to the Germans there, and passing Macalister on at the bayonet point.
This performance was repeated exactly in all its details through the next half-dozen traverses,
the only exception being that in one an excitable German, making violent motions with a bayonet
as he appeared round the corner, insisted on his holding his hands over his head.

At about the sixth traverse a German spoke to him in fairly good, although strongly accented,
English. He asked Macalister his rank and regiment, and Macalister, knowing that the name on
his shoulder-straps would expose any attempt at deceit, gave these. Another man asked something
in German, which apparently he requested the English speaker to translate.

"He say," interpreted the other, "Why you English war have made?" Macalister stared at him.
"I'm no English," he returned composedly. "I'm a Scot."

"That the worse is," said the interpreter angrily. "Why have it your business of the Scot?"

Macalister knitted his brows over this. "You mean, I suppose, what business is it of ours!
Well, it's just Scotland's a bit of Britain, so when Britain's at war, we are at war."

A demand for an interpretation of this delayed the proceedings a little, and then the English
speaker returned to the attack.

"For why haf Britain this war made!" he demanded.

"We didna' make it," returned Macalister. "Germany began it." Excited comment on the translation.

"If you'll just listen to me a minute," said Macalister deliberately, "I can prove I am right.
Sir Edward Grey----" Bursts of exclamation greeted the name, and Macalister grinned slightly.

"You'll no be likin' him," he said. "An' I can weel understan' it."

The questioner went off on a different line. "Haf your soldiers know," he asked, "that the
German fleet every day a town of England bombard?"

Macalister stared at him. "Havers!" he said abruptly.

The German went on to impart a great deal of astonishing information--of the German advance
on Petrograd, the invasion of Egypt, the extermination of the Balkan Expedition, the complete
blockade of England, the decimation of the British fleet by submarines.

After some vain attempts to argue the matter and disprove the statements, Macalister resigned
himself to contemptuous silence, only rousing when the German spoke of England and English,
to correct him to Britain and British.

When at last their interest flagged, the Germans ordered him to move on. Macalister asked where
he was going and what was to be done with him, and received the scant comfort that he was being
sent along to an officer who would send him back as a prisoner, if he did not have him killed--as
German prisoners were killed by the English.

"British, you mean," Macalister corrected again. "And, besides that, it's a lie."

He was told to go on; but as he moved be saw a foot-long piece of barbed wire lying in the
trench bottom. He asked gravely whether he would be allowed to take it, and, receiving a somewhat
puzzled and grudging assent, picked it up, carefully rolled it in a small coil, and placed
it in a side jacket pocket. He derived immense gratification and enjoyment at the ensuing searches
he had to undergo, and the explosive German that followed the diving of a hand into the barbed-wire
pocket.

He arrived at last at an officer and at a point where a communication trench entered the firing
trench. The officer in very mangled English was attempting to extract some information, when
he was interrupted by the arrival from the communication trench of a small party led by an
officer, a person evidently of some importance, since the other officer sprang to attention,
clicked his heels, saluted stiffly, and spoke in a tone of respectful humility. The new arrival
was a young man in a surprisingly clean and beautifully fitting uniform, and wearing a helmet
instead of the cloth cap commonly worn in the trenches. His face was not a particularly pleasant
one, the eyes close set, hard, and cruel, the jaw thin and sharp, the mouth thin-lipped and
shrewish. He spoke to Macalister in the most perfect English.

"Well, swine-hound," he said, "have you any reason to give why I should not shoot you?" Macalister
made no reply. He disliked exceedingly the look of the new-comer, and had no wish to give an
excuse for the punishment he suspected would result from the officer's displeasure. But his
silence did not save him.

"Sulky, eh, my swine-hound!" said the officer. "But I think we can improve those manners."

He gave an order in German, and a couple of men stepped forward and placed their bayonets with
the points touching Macalister's chest.

"If you do not answer next time I speak," he said smoothly, "I will give one word that will
pin you to the trench wall and leave you there. Do you understand!" he snapped suddenly and
savagely. "You English dog."

"I understand," said Macalister. "But I'm no English. I'm a Scot"

The crashing of a shell and the whistling of the bullets overhead moved the officer, as it
had the others, to a more sheltered place. He seated himself upon an ammunition-box, and pointed
to the wall of the trench opposite him.

"You," he said to Macalister, "will stand there, where you can get the benefit of any bullets
that come over. I suppose you would just as soon be killed by an English bullet as by a German
one."

Macalister moved to the place indicated.

"I'm no anxious," he said calmly, "to be killed by either a British or a German bullet."

"Say 'sir' when you speak to me," roared the officer. "Say 'sir.'"

Macalister looked at him and said "Sir"--no more and no less.

"Have you no discipline in your English army?" he demanded, and Macalister's lips silently
formed the words "British Army." "Are you not taught to say 'sir' to an officer?"

"Yes--sir; we say 'sir' to any officer and any gentleman."

"So," said the officer, an evil smile upon his thin lips. "You hint, I suppose, that I am not
a gentleman? We shall see. But first, as you appear to be an insubordinate dog, we had better
tie your hands up."

He gave an order, and after some little trouble to find a cord, Macalister's hands were lashed
behind his back with the bandage from a field-dressing. The officer inspected the tying when
it was completed, spoke angrily to the cringing men, and made them unfasten and re-tie the
lashing as tightly as they could draw it.

"And now," said the officer, "we shall continue our little conversation; but first you shall
beg my pardon for that hint about a gentleman. Do you hear me--beg," he snarled, as Macalister
made no reply.

"If I've said anything you're no likin' and that I'm sorry for masel', I apologize," he said.

The officer glared at him with narrowed eyes. "That'll not do," he said coldly. "When I say
'beg' you'll beg, and you will go on your knees to beg. Do you hear? Kneel!"

Macalister stood rigid. The Doctor told him, adding, "I wouldn't call until harvest is over,
if I were you. He really wouldn't have time to give you and he'd
probably tell you so."

Which advice Dan received in silence.

The sun was just up the next morning when John Gardner was hitching his team to the big hay
wagon.

Already the smoke was coming from the stack of the threshing engine, that stood with the machine
in the center of the field, and the crew was coming from the cook-wagon.

Two hired men, with another team and wagon, were already gathering a load of sheaves to haul to
the threshers.

The house dog barked fiercely and the farmer paused with a trace in his hand when he saw a
big man turning into the barn lot from the road.

"Good morning!" called Dan cheerily, "I feared I was going to be late." He swung up to the young
fellow who stood looking at him--too astonished to speak--the unhooked
trace still in his hand.

"I understand that you need a hand," said Dan briefly. And the farmer noticed that the minister
was dressed in a rough suit of clothes, a worn flannel shirt and
an old slouch hat--Dan's fishing rig.

With a slow smile John turned, hooked his trace, and gathered his lines. "Do you mean to say that
you walked out here from town this morning to work in the harvest
field--a good eight miles?"

"That is exactly what I mean," returned the other.

"What for?" asked the farmer bluntly.

"For the regular wages, with one condition."

"And the condition?"

"That no one on the place shall be told that I am a preacher, and that--for today at least--I
pitch against you. If, by tonight, you are not satisfied with my work you can discharge me,"
he added meaningly. As Dan spoke he faced the rugged farmer with a look that made him understand
that his challenge of the night before was accepted.

The blue eyes gleamed. "I'll take you," he said curtly. Calling to his wife, "Mary give this
man his breakfast." Then to Dan, "When you get through come out to the machine." He sprang on
his wagon and Dan turned toward the kitchen.
"Hold on a minute," John shouted, as the wagon began to move, "what'll
I call you?"

The other answered over his shoulder, "My name is Dan."

All
that day they worked, each grimly determined to handle more grain
than the other. Before noon the spirit of the contest had infected
the whole force. Every hand on the place worked as if on a wager.
The threshing crew were all from distant parts of the country, and
no one knew who it was that had so recklessly matched his strength
and staying power against John Gardner, the acknowledged champion
for miles around. Bets were freely laid; rough, but good natured chaff
flew from mouth to mouth; and now and then a hearty yell echoed over
the field, but the two men in the contest were silent; they scarcely
exchanged a word.

In the afternoon the stranger slowly but surely
forged ahead. John rallied every ounce of his strength but his giant
opponent gained steadily. When the last load came in the farmer threw
down his fork before the whole crowd and held out his hand to Dan.

"I'll
give it up," he said heartily. "You're a better man than I am, stranger,
wherever you come from." Dan took the offered hand while the men cheered
lustily.

But the light of battle still shone in the minister's eyes.

"Perhaps,"
he said, "pitching is not your game. I'll match you now, tonight,
for anything you want--wrestling, running, jumping, or I'll go you
at any time for any work you can name." Your minute is almost up ... you can watch my finger pressing on the trigger."

The last coil slipped off Macalister's wrist; he was free, but with a curse he knew it to be
too late. A movement of his hands from behind his back would finish the pressure of that finger,
and finish him. Desperately he sought for a fighting chance.

"I would like to ask," he muttered hoarsely, licking his dry lips, "will ye no kill me if I
say what ye wanted?"

Keenly he watched that finger about the trigger, breathed silent relief as he saw it slacken,
and watched the muzzle drop slowly from level of his eyes. But it was still held pointed at
him, and that barely gave him the chance he longed for. Only let the muzzle leave him for an
instant, and he would ask no more. The officer was a small and slightly made man, Macalister,
tall and broadly built, big almost to hugeness and strong as a Highland bull.

"So," said the officer softly, "your Scottish courage flinches then, from dying?"

While he spoke, and in the interval before answering him, Macalister's mind was running feverishly
over the quickest and surest plan of action. If he could get one hand on the officer's wrist,
and the other on his pistol, he could finish the officer and perhaps get off another round
or two before he was done himself. But the pistol hand might evade his grasp, and there would
be brief time to struggle for it with those bayonets within arm's length. A straight blow from
the shoulder would stun, but it might not kill. Plan after plan flashed through his mind, and
was in turn set aside in search of a better. But he had to speak.

"It's no just that I'm afraid," he said very slowly. "But it was just somethin' I thought I
might tell ye."

The pistol muzzle dropped another inch or two, with Macalister's eye watching its every quiver.
His words brought to the officer's mind something that in his rage he had quite overlooked.

"If there is anything you can tell me," he said, "any useful information you can give of where
your regiment's headquarters are in the trenches, or where there are any batteries placed,
I might still spare your life. But you must be quick," he added "for it sounds as if another
attack is coming."

It was true that the fire of the British artillery had increased heavily during the last few
minutes. It was booming and bellowing now in a deep, thunderous roar, the shells were streaming
and rushing overhead, and shrapnel was crashing and hailing and pattering down along the parapet
of the forward trench; the heavy boom of big shells bursting somewhere behind the forward line
and the roaring explosion of trench mortar bombs about the forward trench set the ground quivering
and shaking. A shell burst close overhead, and involuntarily Macalister glanced up, only to
curse himself next moment for missing a chance that his captor offered by a similar momentary
lifting of his eyes. Macalister set his eyes on the other, determined that no such chance should
be missed again.

But now, above the thunder of the artillery and of the bursting shells, they could hear the
sound of rising rifle-fire. The officer must have glimpsed the hope in Macalister's face, and,
with an oath, he brought the pistol up level again.

"Do not cheat yourself," he said. "You cannot escape. If a charge comes I shall shoot you first."

With a sinking heart Macalister saw that his last slender hope was gone. He could only pray
that for the moment no attack was to be launched; but then, just when it seemed that the tide
of hope was at its lowest ebb, the fates flung him another chance--a chance that for the moment
looked like no chance; looked, indeed, like a certainty of sudden death. A soft, whistling
hiss sounded in the air above them, a note different from the shrill whine and buzz of bullets,
the harsh rush and shriek of the shells. The next instant a dark object fell with a swoosh
and thump in the bottom of the trench, rolled a little and lay still, spitting a jet of fizzing
sparks and wreathing smoke.

When a live bomb falls in a narrow trench it is almost certain that everyone in that immediate
section will at the worst die suddenly, at the best be badly wounded. Sometimes a bomb may
be picked up and thrown clear before it can burst, but the man who picks it up is throwing
away such chance as he has of being only wounded for the smaller chance of having time to pitch
the bomb clear. The first instinct of every man is to remove himself from that particular traverse;
the teaching of experience ought to make him throw himself flat on the ground, since by far
the greater part of the force and fragments from the explosion clear the ground by a foot or
two. Of the Germans in this particular section of trench some followed one plan, some the other.
Of the two men guarding the prisoner the one who was near the corner of the traverse leapt
round it, the other whirled himself round behind Macalister and crouched sheltering behind
his body. Two men near the corner of the other traverse disappeared round it, two more flung
themselves violently on their faces, and another leapt into the opening of the communication
trench. The officer, without hesitation, dropped on his face, his head pressed close behind
the sandbag on which he had been sitting.

The whole of these movements happened, of course, in the twinkling of an eye. Macalister's
thoughts had been so full of his plans for the destruction of the officer that the advent of
the bomb merely switched these plans in a new direction. His first realized thought was of
the man crouching beside and clinging to him, the quick following instinct to free himself
of this check to his movements. He was still on his knees, with the man on his left side; without
attempting to rise he twisted round and backwards, and drove his fist full force in the other's
face; the man's head crashed back against the trench wall, and his limp body collapsed and
rolled sideways. His mind still running in the groove of his set purpose, before his captor's
relaxed fingers had well loosed their grip, Macalister hurled himself across the trench and
fastened his ferocious grip on the body of the officer. He rose to his feet, lifting the man
with a jerking wrench, and swung him round. The swift idea had come to him that by hurling
the officer's body on top of the bomb, and holding him there, he would at least make sure of
his vengeance, might even escape himself the fragments and full force of the shock. Even in
the midst of the swing he checked, glanced once at the spitting fuse, and with a stoop and
a heave flung the officer out over the front parapet, leaped on the firing step, and hurled
himself over after him.

It must be remembered that the burning fuse of a bomb gives no indication of the length that
remains to burn before it explodes the charge. The fuse looks like a short length of thin black
rope, its outer cover does not burn and the same stream of sparks and smoke pours from its
end in the burning of the first inch and of the last. There was nothing, then, to show Macalister
whether the explosion would come before his quick muscles could complete their movement, or
whether long seconds would elapse before the bomb burst. It was an even chance either way,
so he took the one that gave him most. Fortune favored him, and the roar of the explosion followed
his flying heels over the parapet.

The officer, dazed, shaken, and not yet realizing what had happened, had gathered neither his
wits nor his limbs to rise when Macalister leaped down almost on top of him. The officer's
hand still clung to the pistol he had held, but Macalister's grasp swooped and clutched and
wrenched the weapon away.

"Get up, my man," he said grimly. "Get up, or I'll blow a hole in ye as ye lie."

He added emphasis with the point of the pistol in the other's ribs, and the officer staggered
to his feet.

"Now," said Macalister, "you'll quick mairch--that way." He waved the pistol towards the British
trench.

The officer hesitated.

"It is no good," he said sullenly. "I should be killed a dozen times before I got across."

"That's as may be," said Macalister coolly.

"But if you don't go you'll get your first killing here, and say naething o' the rest o' the
dizen."

A shell cracked overhead, and the shrapnel ripped down along the trench behind them with a
storm of bullets thudding into the ground about their feet.

"I will make you an offer," said the officer hurriedly. "You can go your way and leave me to
go mine."

"You'll mak' an offer!" said Macalister contemptuously. "Here"--and he waved the pistol across
the open again. "Get along there."

"I will give you--" the officer began, when Macalister broke in abruptly.

"This is no a debatin' society," he said. "But ye'll no walk ye maun just drive."

Without further words he thrust the pistol in his pocket, grabbed and took one handful of coat
at the back of the officer's neck and another at the skirt, and commenced to thrust him before
him across the open ground. But the officer refused to walk, and would have thrown himself
down if Macalister's grasp had not prevented it.

"Ye would, would ye?" growled the Scot, and seized his captive by the shoulders and shook him
till his teeth rattled. "Now," he said angrily, "ye'll come wi' me or--" he broke off to fling
a gigantic arm about the officer's neck--"or I'll pull the heid aff ye."

So it was that the occupants of the British trench viewed presently the figure of a huge Highlander
appearing through the drifting haze and smoke at a trot, a head clutched close to his side
by a circling arm, a struggling German half-running, half-dragging behind his captor.

Arrived at the parapet, "Here," shouted Macalister. "Catch, some o' ye." He jerked his prisoner
forward and thrust him over and into the trench, and leaped in after him.

It was purely on impulse that Private Macalister flung his prisoner out of the German trench,
but it was a set and reasoned purpose that made him drag his struggling captive back over the
open to the British trench. He knew that the British line would not shoot at an obvious kilted
Highlander, and he supposed that the Germans would hesitate to fire on one dragging an equally
obvious German officer behind him. Either his reasoning or his blind luck held true, and both
he and his captive tumbled over into the British trench unhurt. An officer appeared, and Macalister
explained briefly to him what had happened.

"You'd better take him back with you," said the officer when he had finished, and glanced at
the German. "He's not likely to make trouble, I suppose, but there are plenty of spare rifles,
and you had better take one. What's left of your battalion has withdrawn to the support trench."

"I am an officer," said the German suddenly to the British subaltern? "I surrender myself to
you, and demand to be treated as an honorable prisoner of war. I do not wish to be left in
this man's hands."

"Wish this and wish that," said Macalister, "and much good may your wishing do. Ye've heard
what this officer said, so rise and mairch, unless ye wad raither I took ye further like I
brocht ye here." And he moved as if to scoop the German's head under his arm again.

"I will not," said the German furiously, and turned again to the subaltern. "I tell you I surrender----"

"There's no need for you to surrender," said the subaltern quietly. "I might remind you that
you are already a prisoner; and I am not here to look after prisoners."

The German yielded with a very bad grace, and moved ahead of Macalister and his threatening
bayonet, along the line and down the communication trench to the support trench. Here the Scot
found his fellows, and introduced his prisoner, made his report to an officer, and asked and
received permission to remain on guard over his captive. Then he returned to the corner of
the trench where the remains of his own company were. He told them how he had fallen into the
German trench and what had happened up to the moment the German officer came into the proceedings.

"This is the man," he said, nodding his head towards the officer, "and I wad just like to tell
you carefully and exactly what happened between him an' me. Ye'll understaun' better if a'
show ye as weel as tell ye. Weel, now, he made twa men tie ma' hands behind ma' back first--if
ony o' ye will lend me a first field dressing I'll show ye how they did it."

A field dressing was promptly forthcoming, and Macalister bound the German's hands behind his
back, overcoming a slight attempt at resistance by a warning word and an accompanying sharp
twist on his arms.

"It's maybe no just as tight as mine was," said Macalister when he had finished, and stood
the prisoner back against the wall. "But it'll dae. Then he made twa men stand wi' fixed bayonets
against ma' breast, and when I hinted what was true, that he was no gentleman, he said I was
to kneel and beg his pardon. And now you," he said, nodding to the prisoner, "will go down
on your marrow-bones and beg mine."

"That is sufficient of this fooling," said the officer, with an attempt at bravado. "It's your
turn, I'll admit; but I will pay you well--"

Macalister interrupted him-"Ye'll maybe think it's a bit mair than fooling ere I'm done wi'
ye," he said. "But speakin' o' pay... and thank ye for reminding me. Ower there they riped
ma pooches, an' took a'thing I had."

He stepped over to the prisoner, went expeditiously through his pockets, removed the contents,
and transferred them to his own.

"I'm no saying but what I've got mair than I lost," he admitted to the others, who stood round
gravely watching and thoroughly enjoying the proceedings. "But then they took all I had, an'
I'm only taking all he has."

He pulled a couple of sandbags off the parapet and seated himself on them.

"To go on wi' this begging pardon business," he said, "If a couple o' ye will just stand ower
him wi' your fixed bayonets.... Thank ye. I wouldna' kneel," he continued, "so one o' them
put his weight on my shoulders----" He looked at one of the guards, who, entering promptly
into the spirit of the play, put his massive weight on the German's shoulders, and looked to
Macalister for further instructions.

"Then," said Macalister, "the ither guard gave me a swipe across the back o' the knees."

The "swipe" followed quickly and neatly, and the German went down with a jerk.

"That's it exactly," said Macalister, with a pleasantly reminiscent smile. The German's temper
broke, and he spat forth a torrent of abuse in mixed English and German.

Macalister listened a moment. "I said nothing; so I think he shouldna' be allowed to say anything,"
he remarked judicially. His comment met with emphatic approval from his listeners.

"I think I could gag him," said one of his guards; "or if ye preferred it I could just throttle
his windpipe a wee bit, just enough to stop his tongue and no to hurt him much."

With an effort the German regained his control. "There is no need," he said sullenly; "I shall
be silent."

"Weel," resumed Macalister, "there was a bit o' chaff back and forrit between us, and next
thing he did was to slap me across the face wi' his hand. Do ye think," he appealed to his
audience, "it would brak' his jaw if I gave him a bit lick across it?"

He advanced a huge hand for inspection, and listened to the free advice given to try it, and
the earnest assurances that it did not matter much if the jaw did break.

"Ye'll feenish him off presently onyway, I suppose?" said one, and winked at Macalister.

"Just bide a wee," answered Macalister, "I'm coming to that. I think maybe I'll no brak his
jaw, for fair's fair, and I want to give as near as I can to what I got."

He leant forward and dealt a mild but tingling slap on the German's cheek.

"I think," he went on, "the next thing I got was a slash wi' a bit switch he pulled out from
the trench wall. We've no sticks like it here, so I maun just do the best I can instead."

He leant forward and fastened a huge hand on the prisoner's coat-collar, jerked him to him,
and, despite his frantic struggles and raging tongue, placed him face down across his knees
and administered punishment.

"I think that's about enough," he said, and returned the choking and spluttering prisoner to
his place between the guards.

"He kept me," he said, "on my knees, so I think he ought ... thank ye," as the German went
down again none too gently. "After that he went on saying some things it would be waste o'
time to repeat. Swine dog was about the prettiest name he had any use for. But there was another
thing he did; ye'll see some muck on my face and on my jacket. It came there like this; he
took hold o' me by the hair--this way." And Macalister proceeded to demonstrate as he explained.

"Then--my hands being tied behind my back you will remember, like this--it was easy enough
for him to pull me over on my face--like this... and rub my face in the mud.... The bottom
o' this trench is in no such a state a' filth as theirs, but it'll just have to do." He hoisted
the German back to his knees. "Then I think it was after that the pistol and the killing bit
came in." And Macalister put his hand to his pocket and drew out the officer's pistol which
he had thrust there.

"He gave me five minutes, so I'll give him the same. Has ony o' ye a watch?"

A timekeeper stepped forward out of the little knot of spectators that crowded the trench,
and Macalister requested him to notify them when only one minute of the five was left.

"My manny here was good enough," said Macalister, "to tell me he wouldna' bandage my eyes,
because he wanted me to look down the muzzle of his pistol; so now," turning to the prisoner,
"you can watch my finger pulling the trigger."

As the four minutes ebbed, the German's courage ran out with them. The jokes and laughter about
him had ceased. Macalister's face was set and savage, and there was a cold, hard look in his
eye, a stern ferocity on his mud and bloodstained face that convinced the German the end of
the five minutes would also surely see his end.

"One minute to go," said the timekeeper. A sigh of indrawn breaths ran round the circle, and
then tense silence. Outside the trench they were in the roar of the guns boomed unceasingly,
the shells whooped and screwed overhead, and from oat in front came the crackle and roar of
rifle-fire; and yet, despite the noise, the trench appeared still and silent. The Prince, like most
Germans, was fond of the play, and had a great admiration of Shakespeare,
whose plays were revived at Covent Garden in 1840, Charles Kemble
giving a last glimpse of the glory of the early Kemble performances.

The couple presided over many little balls and dances which became a Court where the sovereigns
were in the heyday of their youth and happiness. Lady Bloomfield, who as the Hon. Miss Liddell
was one of the Queen's Maids of Honour a little later, gives a pleasant
account of an episode at one of these dances.

"One lovely summer's morning we had danced till dawn, and the quadrangle being then open to the
east, her Majesty went out on the roof of the portico to see the sun rise, which was one of the
most beautiful sights I ever remember. It rose behind St. Paul's, which we saw quite distinctly;
Westminster Abbey and the trees in the Green Park stood out against a golden sky."

All this innocent gaiety was consecrated by the faithful discharge of duty and the reverent observance
of sacred obligations. At Easter, which was spent at Windsor, the Queen and the Prince took
the Sacrament together for the first time. "The Prince," the Queen has said, "had a very strong
feeling about the solemnity of the act, and did not like to appear in company either the evening
before or on the day on which, he took it, and he and the Queen almost
always dined alone on these occasions."

Her Majesty has supplied a brief record, in the "Early Years of the Prince Consort," of one
such peaceful evening. "We two dined together. Albert likes being quite alone before he takes
the Sacrament; we played part of Mozart's Requiem, and then he read to me out of Stunden den
Andacht (Hours of Devotion) the article on Selbster Kentniss (Self-knowledge.)" The whole sounds
like a sweet, solemn, blessed pause in the crowded busy life.

A sudden shock, which was only that of a great danger happily averted,
broke in on the flush of all that was best worth having and doing
in existence, and seemed to utter a warning against the instability
of life at its brightest and fairest.

There was stag-hunting on Ascot Heath, at which the Queen and the Prince were to be present.
He was to join in the hunt and she was to follow with Prince Ernest in a pony phaeton. As she
stood by a window in Windsor Castle, she saw Prince Albert canter past on a restless and excited
horse. In vain the rider turned the animal round several times, he got the bit between his
teeth and started at the top of his speed among the trees of the Park; very soon he brushed against
a branch and unseated the Prince, who fell, without, however, sustaining any serious injury. The
Queen saw the beginning but not the end of the misadventure, and her alarm was only relieved
by the return of one of the grooms in waiting, who told the extent of the accident. Noblesse
oblige. The Prince mounted a fresh horse and proceeded to the hunt, and the Queen joined him.
"Albert received me on the terrace of the large stand and led me up," the Queen wrote in her Journal.
"He looked very pale, and said he had been much alarmed lest I should have been frightened by
his accident.... He told me he had scraped the skin off his poor arm, had bruised his hip and
knee, and his coat was torn and dirty. It was a frightful fall."

On the 20th of April, an event took place in France which at this time naturally was particularly
interesting both to the Queen and the Prince. The Duc de Nemours, second son of Louis Philippe
and brother to the Queen of the Belgians, married Princess Victoire of Saxe-Coburg, only daughter of
the head of the Catholic branch of the family, sister of the King
Consort of Portugal, and first cousin both to the Queen and Prince
Albert.

This marriage drew many intertwined family ties still more closely together. Princess Victoire
was a pretty golden-haired girl, and is described afterwards as a singularly sweet, affectionate,
reasonable woman. She had spent much of her youth at Coburg, and been a favourite playmate of
Prince Albert, whose junior she was by three years. She was the friend of the Queen from girlhood.
"We were like sisters," wrote her Majesty, "bore the same name, married the same year....
There was in short a similarity between us, which, since 1839, united
us closely and tenderly."

The Duc de Nemours, without the intellectual gifts of some of his
brothers, resembled his good mother, Queen Amelie, in many respects.

He had quiet, domestic tastes, and was affectionately attached to his wife.

CHAPTER X. ROYAL OCCUPATIONS.--AN ATTEMPT ON THE QUEEN'S LIFE.

The family arrangements in the marriage of the Queen and Prince Albert appear to have been
made with the kindest, most judicious consideration for what was due to former ties, that all the
relations of life might be settled gradually and naturally, on the footing which it was desirable
they should assume. The connection between the Queen and the Duchess of Kent was very close.
It was that of a mother and child who had been nearly all in all to each other, who, till
Queen Victoria's marriage, had not been separated for a day. Since the Duchess of Kent's arrival
in England, she had never dwelt alone.

It was now deemed advisable that she should have a separate house, which was, however, to be in
constant communication with the Queen's, the intercourse between the two continuing to be of
the most intimate character, mother and daughter meeting daily and sharing the most of their
pleasures. In April, two months after the marriage, the Duchess removed to Ingestrie House,
Belgrave Square.

In another month, on the 7th of May, Prince Ernest left England. The parting between the brothers
was a severe trial to both. They bade farewell, German student fashion, singing together beforehand
the parting song Abschied.

The young couple were now left in a greater measure to themselves to form their life, and lead
it to noble conclusions. They spent the Queen's birthday in private at Claremont--a place
endeared to her by the happiest associations of her childhood, and very pleasant to him because
of its country attractions.

There the pair could wander about the beautiful grounds and neighbourhood, as another royal
pair had wandered before them, and do much as they pleased, like simple citizens or great folks
living in villeggiatura. The custom was then established of thus keeping the real birthday together
in retirement, while another day was set apart for public rejoicing.

There is a story told of the Queen and Prince Albert's early visits to Claremont--a story certainly
not without its parallel in the lives of other popular young sovereigns
in their honeymoons, but probable enough in this case.

The couple were caught in a shower, during one of their longer rambles, and took refuge in a
cottage--the old mistress of which was totally unacquainted with
the high rank of her guests.

She entertained them with many extraordinary anecdotes of Princess
Charlotte and Prince Leopold, the original heroine and hero of Claremont.

At last the dame volunteered to give her visitors the loan of her umbrella, with many charges to
Prince Albert that it should be taken care of and returned to its
owner.

The Queen and the Prince started on their homeward way under the borrowed shelter, and it was not
for some time that the donor knew with whom she had gossipped, and
to whom she had dealt her favours.

The Prince's first appearance as an art patron took place in connection with the Ancient Music
Concerts. He had already been named one of the directors who arrange in turn each concert.
He made the selections for his concert on the 29th of April, and
both he and the Queen appeared at the rehearsal on the 27th.

Perhaps the gentle science was what he loved above every other, being a true German in that
as in all else. At this time he played and sang much with the Queen; the two played together often
on the organ in one of his rooms. Lady Lyttelton has described the effect of his music. "Yesterday
evening, as I was sitting here comfortably after the drive by candlelight,
reading M. Guizot, suddenly there arose from the room beneath, oh,
such sounds!

It was Prince Albert, dear Prince Albert, playing on the organ; and with such master skill,
as it appeared to me, modulating so learnedly, winding through every kind of bass and chord,
till he wound up with the most perfect cadence, and then off again, louder and then softer. No
tune, as I was too distant to perceive the execution or small touches
so I only heard the harmony, but I never listened with much more pleasure
to any music.

I ventured at dinner to ask him what I had heard. 'Oh! my organ, a new possession of mine.
I am so fond of the organ! It is the first of instruments; the only instrument for expressing
one's feelings' (I thought, are they not good feelings that the organ
expresses?), 'and it teaches to play; for on the organ a mistake,
oh! such misery;' and he quite shuddered at the thought of the sostenuto
discord."

But while the Prince was an enthusiastic musician, he was likewise
fond of painting; his taste and talent in this respect also having
been carefully cultivated.

In these sunshiny early days, sunshiny in spite of their occasional clouds, he still possessed
a moderate amount of leisure, notwithstanding the late hours night and morning, of which the
Queen took the blame, declaring it was her fault that they breakfasted at ten, getting out
very little--a practice quite different from their later habits. He seized the opportunity
of starting various pursuits which formed afterwards the chief recreation of his and the Queen's
laborious days. He tried etching, which afforded the two much entertainment, and he began his
essays in landscape gardening, developing a delightful faculty with
which she had the utmost sympathy.

On the 1st of June the Prince took the initiatory step in identifying
himself with moral and social progress, and in placing himself, as
the Queen's representative, at the head of those humane and civilising
movements which recommended themselves to his good judgment and philanthropic
spirit.

He complied with the request that he should be chairman at a meeting
to promote the abolition of the slave trade, and made his first public
speech in advocacy of justice between man and man.

This speech was no small effort to a young foreigner, who, however accomplished, was certainly
not accustomed to public speaking in a foreign tongue. It was like delivering a maiden speech
under great difficulties, and as it was of importance that he should
produce a good impression, he spared no preparation for the task.

He composed the speech himself, learnt it by heart, and repeated it to the Queen in the first
instance.

Among the crowd present was the young Quaker lady, Caroline Fox, whose "Memories" have been given
to the world. She wrote at the time: "The acclamations attending his (the Prince's) entrance
were perfectly deafening, and he bore them all with calm, modest dignity, repeatedly bowing
with considerable grace. He certainly is a very beautiful young man, a thorough German, and a
fine poetic specimen of the race. He uttered his speech in a rather low tone and with the prettiest
foreign accent."

On the 18th of the same month great horror and indignation were excited by the report of an
attempt to assassinate the Queen.

About six o'clock on the June evening, her Majesty was driving, according
to her usual custom, with Prince Albert.

The low open phaeton, attended by two equeries, was proceeding up Constitution Hill, on its
way first to the house of the Duchess of Kent in Belgrave Square and afterwards to Hyde Park. Suddenly
a little man leaning against the park railing drew a pistol from under his coat and fired at her
Majesty, who was sitting at the farther side from him. He was within six yards of the phaeton--so
near, in fact, that the Queen, who was looking another way, neither saw him nor comprehended
for a moment the cause of the loud noise ringing in her ears. But Prince Albert had seen the
man hold something towards them, and was aware of what had occurred. The horses started and
the carriage stopped. The Prince called to the postillions to drive on, while he caught the
Queen's hands and asked if the fright had not shaken her, but the
brave royal heart only made light of his alarm.

He looked again, and saw the same man still standing in a theatrical attitude, a pistol in each
hand. The next instant the fellow pointed the second pistol and fired once more. Both the Queen and
the Prince saw the aim, as well as heard the shot, on this occasion,
and she stooped, he pulling her down that the ball might pass over
her head.

In another moment the man, who still leant against the railing, pistols in hand, with much
bravado and without any attempt to escape, was seized by a bystander. In the middle of the
consternation and wrath of the gathering crowd, the Queen and the
Prince went on to the Duchess of Kent that they might be the first
to tell her what had happened and assure her of the safety of her
daughter.

A little later, in order to show the people that the Queen had not
lost her confidence in them, the couple carried out their original
intention of taking a drive in Hyde Park.

There they were received with a perfect ovation, a crowd of nobility and gentry in carriages
and on horseback forming a volunteer escort on the way back to Buckingham Palace, where another
multitude awaited them, vehemently cheering, as the Queen, pale but smiling and bowing, re-entered
her palace. The wretched lad who was the author of the attack did not deny it, but seemed
rather sorry that it had failed to inflict any injury, though he had no motive to allege for such
a crime. In spite of the strictest search no ball could be found, which left the question doubtful
whether or not the pistols had been loaded. On further examination it proved that the lad, Edward
Oxford--not above eighteen years of age, was a discharged barman from a public-house in Oxford
Street. His father, who was dead, had been a working jeweller in Birmingham.

"It would be difficult to describe the state of loyal excitement into which the Metropolis has
been thrown by this event," says the Annual Register. "It seems as if only the dastardly deed
had been wanted to bring out the full love and devotion of the people to their young Queen," the
happy wife and expectant mother, whose precious life might have been cut short by the unlooked-for
shot of an assassin. At the different theatres and concerts that evening "God save the Queen" was
sung with passionate fervour. When the Queen and Prince Albert drove out the next afternoon in
the same phaeton, at the same hour, in Hyde Park, the demonstration of the previous day was repeated
with effusion. The crowd was immense, the cheering was again vociferous. An improvised body-guard
of hundreds of gentlemen on horseback surrounded the couple. "The line of carriages (calling
at Buckingham Palace to make inquiries) extended a considerable way
down the Mall."

The calls were incessant till the procession from the Houses of Parliament
arrived.

Thousands of people assembled to witness it. The Sheriffs of London came first in four carriages.
Then the Grenadier Guards with their band marched through the gateway, on which the royal
standard was hoisted, and took up their position in the entrance court. The Cabinet Ministers
and chief Officers of the Household followed.
 But I might as well have tried to break
into Heaven an' steal the choir's harps. I was turned back about ten ways I tried, and wound
up by being arrested as a spy an' darn near gettin' shot. I got mad at last and I told some
fellows, stuck all over with red tabs and cap-bands and armlets, that they could keep their
old trenches, and I didn't believe they were worth looking at anyway."

Courtenay was laughing again. "I fancy I see the faces of the staff," he choked.

"Oh, they ante-d up all right later on," admitted the sergeant, "when they'd discovered this
column and roped in my captain to identify me. One old leather-face, 'specially--they told
me after he was a General--was as nice as pie, an' had me in an' fed me a fresh meat and canned
asparagus lunch and near chuckled himself into a choking fit when I told him about dad, an'
my being booked up as a Benevolent Neutral. He was so mighty pleasant that I told him I'd like
to have my dad make him a present of as dandy an auto as rolls in France. I would have, too,
but he simply wouldn't listen to me; told me he'd send it back freight if I did; and I had
to believe him, though, it seemed unnatural. But they wouldn't let me go look at their blame
trenches. I tried to get this General joker to pass me in, but he wouldn't fall for it. 'No,
no,' he gurgles and splutters. 'A Benevolent Neutral in the trenches! Never do, never do. We'll
have to put some new initials on the Mechanical Transport,' he says, 'B.N.M.T. Benevolent Neutral!
I must tell Dallas of the Transport that.' And he shooed me off with that."

The sergeant had worked busily as he talked, and now, as he commenced to replace the repaired
fork, he was thoughtfully silent a moment.

"I suppose there's some dandy sna-aps up in those trenches, Loo-tenant?" he said at last.

"Oh, well, I dunno," said Courtenay. "Sort of thing you see in the picture papers, of course."

"Them!" said the sergeant contemptuously. "I could make better sna-aps posin' some of the transport
crowd in these emergency trenches dug twenty miles back from the front. I mean real pictures
of the real thing--fellows knee-deep in mud, and a shell lobbing in, and such like--real dandy
snaps. It makes my mouth water to think of 'em. But I suppose I'll go through this darn war
and never see enough to let me hold up my head when I get back home and they ask me what was
the war really like and to tell 'em about the trenches. I could have made out if I'd even seen
those blame trenches and got some good snaps of 'em."

Courtenay was moved to a rash compassion and a still more rash promise.

"Look here, sergeant," he said, "I'm dashed if I don't have a try to get you a look at the
trenches. We go in again in two days and it might be managed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days later Sergeant Rawbon, mounted on the motor-cycle which he had repaired and which
had been sent over to him, found all his obstacles to the trenches melt and vanish before a
couple of passes with which he was provided--one readily granted by his captain on hearing
the reason for its request, and one signed by Second Lieutenant Courtenay to pass the bearer,
Sergeant Rawbon, on his way to the headquarters of the 1st Footsloggers with motor-cycle belonging
to that battalion. The last quarter mile of the run to the headquarters introduced Sergeant
Rawbon to the sensation of being under fire, and, as he afterwards informed Courtenay, he did
not find the sensation in any way pleasant.

"Loo-tenant," he said gravely, "I've had some of this under fire performance already, and I
tell you I finds it no ways nice. Coming along that last bit of road I heard something whistling
every now an' then like the top note of a tin whistle, and something else goin' whisk like
a cane switched past your ear, and another lot saying smack like a whip-lash snapping. I was
riding slow and careful, because that road ain't exactly--well, it would take a lot of sandpapering
to make it really smooth. But when I realized that those sounds spelt bullets with a capital
B, I decided that road wasn't as bad as I'd thought, and that anything up to thirty knots wasn't
outside its limits."

"Oh, you were all right," said Courtenay carelessly, "bullets can't touch you there, except
a few long-distance ones that fall in enfilade over the village. From the front they go over
your head, or hit that parapet along the side of the road."

"Which is comforting, so far," said the sergeant, "though, personally, I've just about as much
objection to be hit by a bullet that comes over a village as any other kind."

They were outside the remains of a house in the cellar of which was headquarters, Courtenay
having timed the sergeant to arrive at an hour when he, Courtenay, could arrange to be waiting
at headquarters.

"Now we'll shove along down and round the trenches. I spoke to the O.C. and explained the situation--partly.
He didn't raise any trouble so just follow me, and leave me to do any talking there is to do.
You must keep your eyes open and ask any questions about things after. It would look a bit
odd and raise remarks if the men saw me showing you round and doing the Cook's Tour guide business.
And if you've brought that camera, keep it out of sight till I give you the word. When we get
along to my own company's bit of trench I'll tell you, and you can take some snaps--when I'm
not looking at you. Just tip the wink to any men about and they'll be quite pleased to pose
or anything you like."

"Loo-tenant," said Sergeant Rawbon earnestly, "you're doin' this thing real handsome, and I
won't forget it. If ever you hit the U-nited States----"

"Oh, that's all right," said Courtenay, "come along now."

"When we find your bunch," said Rawbon as they moved off, "if you could make some sort of excuse
out loud, and fade from the scene a minute and leave me there with the men, I'll sure get some
of the dandiest snaps I'd wish. I reckon it'll satisfy the crowd if I promise to send 'em copies.
It will if they're anything like my lot in the Mechanical Transport."

They slid down into a deep and narrow and very muddy ditch that ran twistingly through the
wrecked village. Courtenay explained that usually they could walk this part above ground, sheltered
from bullets by the broken-down houses and walls, but that a good few shells had been coming
over all day, and that in the communication trench they were safe from all shells but those
which burst directly over or in the part they were in.

"You want to run across this bit," he said presently. "A high explosive broke that in this
morning, and it can't be repaired properly till dark. You go first and wait the other side
for me. Now--jump lively!"

Rawbon took one quick jumping stride to the middle of the gap, and another and very much quicker
one beyond it, as a bullet smacked venomously into the broken side of the trench. Another threw
a spurt of mud at Courtenay's heels as he made the rush. "A sniper watches the gap and pots
at anyone passing," he explained to Rawbon. "It's fairly safe, because at the range he's firing
a bullet takes just a shade longer to reach here than you take to run across. But it doesn't
do to walk."

"No," said Rawbon, "and going back somehow I don't think I will walk. I can see without any
more explainin' that it's no spot for a pleasant, easy little saunter." He stopped suddenly
as a succession of whooping rushes passed overhead. "Gee! What's that?"

"Shells from our own guns," said Courtenay, and took the lead again. In his turn he stopped
and crouched, calling to Rawbon to keek down. They heard a long screaming whistle rising to
a tempestuous roar and breaking off in a crash which made the ground shake. Next moment a shower
of mud and earth and stones fell rattling and thumping about and into the trench.

"Coal-box," said Courtenay hurriedly. "Come on. They're apt to drop some more about the same spot."

"I'm with you," said Rawbon. "The same spot is a good one to quit, I reckon."

They hurried, slipping and floundering, along the wet trench, and turned at last into another
zig-zag one where a step ran along one side, and men muffled in wet coats stood behind a loopholed
parapet. Along the trench was a series of tiny shelters scooped out of the bank, built up with
sand-bags, covered ineffectually with wet, shiny, waterproof ground-sheets. In these, men were
crouched over scantily filled braziers, or huddled, curled up like homeless dogs on a doorstep.
At intervals along the parapet men watched through periscopes hoisted over the top edge, and
every now and then one fired through a loophole. The trench bottom where they walked was anything
from ankle- to knee-deep in evil-looking watery mud of the consistency of very thin porridge.
The whole scene, the picture of wet misery, the dirt and squalor and discomfort made Rawbon
shiver as much from disgust as from the raw cold that clung about the oozing clay walls and
began to bite through to his soaking feet and legs. Courtenay stopped near a group of men,
and telling the sergeant to wait there a moment, moved on and left him. A puff of cold wet
wind blew over the parapet, and the sergeant wrinkled his nose disgustedly. "Some odorous,"
he commented to a mud-caked private hunkered down on his heels on the fire-step with his back
against the trench wall. "Does, the Boche run a glue factory or a fertilizer works around here?"

"The last about fits it," said the private grimly. "They made an attack here about a week back,
and there's a tidy few fertilizin' out there now--to say nothin' of some of ours we can't get in."

Rawbon squirmed uneasily to think he should, however unwittingly, have jested about their dead,
but nobody there seemed in any way shocked or resentful. The sergeant suddenly remembered his
camera, and had thrust his hand under his coat to his pocket when the warning screech of an
approaching shell and the example of the other men in the traverse sent him crouching low in
the trench bottom. The trench there was almost knee-deep in thin mud, but everyone apparently
took that as a matter of course. The shell burst well behind them, but it was followed immediately
by about a dozen rounds from a light gun. They came uncomfortably close, crashing overhead
and just in front of the parapet. A splinter from one lifted a man's cap from his head and
sent it flying. The splinter's whirr and the man's sharp exclamation brought all eyes in his
direction. His look of comical surprise and the half-dazed fashion of his lifting a hand to
fumble cautiously at his head raised some laughter and a good deal of chaff.

"Orright," he said angrily. "Orright, go on; laugh, dash yer. Fat lot t' laugh at, seein' a
man's good cap pitched in the mud."

"No use you feelin' that 'ead o' yours," said his neighbor, grinning. "You can't even raise
a sick 'eadache out o' that squeak. 'Arf an inch lower now an' you might 'ave 'ad a nice little
trip 'ome in an 'orspital ship."

"You're wrong there, Jack," said another solemnly. "That splinter hit fair on top of his nut,
an' glanced off. You don't think a pifflin' little Pip-Squeak shell could go through his head?"
He stepped up on the firing-step as he spoke, and on the instant, with a rush and crash, another
"Pip-Squeak" struck the parapet immediately in front of him, blowing the top edge off it, filling
the air with a volcano of mud, dirt, smoke, and shrieking splinters, and, either from the shock
of the explosion or in an attempt to escape it, throwing the man off his balance on the ledge
of the firing-step to sprawl full length in the mud. In the swirl of noise and smoke and flying
earth Rawbon just glimpsed the plunging fall of a man's body, and felt a curious sickly feeling
at the pit of his stomach. He was relieved beyond words to see the figure rise to his knees
and stagger to his feet, dripping mud and filth, and swearing at the pitch of his voice. He
paid no attention to the stutter of laughter round him as he retrieved his mud-encrusted rifle,
and looked about him for his cap. The laughter rose as he groped in the thin mud for it, still
cursing wildly; and then the sergeant noticed that the man who had lost his cap a minute before
had quietly snatched up the other one from the firing-step, clapped it on his own head and
pretended to help the loser to search.

"It was blame funny, I suppose," Rawbon told the lieutenant a few minutes after, as they moved
from the spot. "Him chasin' round in the mud cussin' all blue about his 'blarsted cap'; and
t'other fellow wi' the cap on his head and pretending to hunt for it, and callin' the rest
to come help. I dessay I'll laugh some myself, if I remember it when I'm safe back about ten
mile from here. Just at the moment my funny bone hasn't got goin' right after me expectin'
to see that feller blowed to ribbons an' remnants. But them others--say, I've seen men sittin'
comfortable in an armchair seat at a roof-garden vaudeville that couldn't raise as hearty a
laugh at the prize antics of the thousand dollar star comedian, as them fellers riz on that
cap episode."

"Well, it was rather funny, you know," said Courtenay, grinning a little himself.

"Mebbe, mebbe," said Rawbon. "But me--well, if you'll excuse it, I'll keep that laugh in pickle
till I feel more like usin' it."

"You wanted to come, you know," said Courtenay. "But I won't blame you if you say you've had
enough and head for home. As I told you before, this 'joy-riding' game is rather silly. It's
bad enough us taking risks we have to, but----"

"Yes, you spoke that piece, Loo-tenant," said Rawbon, "but I want to see all there is on show
now I'm here. Only don't expect me to shriek with hilarious mirth every time a shell busts
six inches off my nose."

They had halted for a moment, and now another crackling string of light shells burst along
the trench.

"There's another bunch o' humor arriving," said Rawbon. "But I don't feel yet like encoring
the turn any;"

They moved on to a steady accompaniment of shell bursts and Courtenay looked round uneasily.

"I don't half like this," he said. "They don't usually shell us so at this time of day. Hope
there's no attack coming."

"I agree with all you say, Loo-tenant, and then some. Especially about not liking it."

"I'm beginning to think you'd be better off these premises," said Courtenay. "I ought to be
with my company if any trouble is coming off. And it might lead to questions and unpleasantness
if you were found here--especially if you're a casualty, or I am."

"Nuff sed, Loo-tenant," said Rawbon promptly. "I don't want that sort o' trouble for various
reasons. I'd have an everlastin' job explaining to my dad what I was doin' in the front seats
o' the firing line. It wouldn't just fit wi' my bein' a Benevolent Neutral, not anyhow."

"We're only about thirty or forty yards from the Germ trench in this bit," said Courtenay.
"Here, carry my periscope, and when I'm talking to some of the men just take a look quietly."

But Rawbon was not able to see much when, a little later, he had a chance to use the periscope.
For one thing the short winter day was fading and the light was already poor; for another any
attempt to keep the periscope above the parapet for more than a few seconds brought a series
of bullets hissing and zipping over, and periscope glasses in those days were too precious
to risk for mere curiosity's sake.

"We'll just have a look at the Frying Pan," said Courtenay, "and then you'll have seen about
the lot. We hold a bit of the trench running out beyond the Pan and the Germs are holding the
same trench a little further along. We've both got the trench plugged up with sandbag barricades."

They floundered along the twisting trench till it turned sharply to the right and ran out into
the shallow hollow of the Frying Pan. It was swimming in greasy mud, and across the far side
from where they stood Rawbon could see a breastwork of sandbags.

"We call this entrance trench the Handle, and the trench that runs out from behind that barricade
the Leak. There's always more or less bombing going on in the Leak, and I don't know if it's
very wise of you to go up there. We call this the Frying Pan because--well, 'into the fire,'
you know. Will you chance it?"

"Why, sure; if you don't mind, Loo-tenant," said Rawbon, "I might as well see--" He was interrupted
by a sudden crash and roar, running bursts of flaring light, hoarse yells and shouts, and a
few rifle shots from somewhere beyond the barricade across the Leak. The work of the next minute
was too fast and furious for Rawbon to follow or understand. The uproar beyond the barricade
swelled and clamored, and the earth shook to the roar of bursting bombs. In the Frying Pan
there was a sudden vision of confused figures, dimly seen through the swirling smoke, swaying
and struggling, threshing and splashing in the liquid mud. He was just conscious of Courtenay
shouting something about "Get back," of his being thrust violently back into the wide trench,
of two or three figures crowding in after him, cursing and staggering and shooting back into
the Frying Pan, of Courtenay's voice shouting again to "Stand clear," of a knot of men scrambling
and heaving at something, and then of a deafening "Rat-tat-tat-tat," and the streaming flashes
of a machine-gun. It stopped firing after a minute, and Rawbon, flattened back against a corner
of the trench wall, heard an explanation given by a gasping private to Courtenay and another
mud-bedaubed officer who appeared mysteriously from somewhere.

"Flung a shower o' bombs an' rushed us, sir," said the private. "They was over a-top o' us
'fore you could say 'knife.' Only two or three o' us that wasn't downed and was able to get
back out o' the Leak an' across the Pan to here."

"We stopped them with the maxim," said Courtenay, "but I suppose they'll rush again in a minute."

He and the other officer conferred hastily. Rawbon caught a few words about "counterattack"
and "quicker the better" and "all the men I can find," and then the other officer moved hurriedly
down the trench and men came jostling and crowding to the end of the Handle, just clear of
the corner where it turned into the Pan. A few sandbags were pulled down off the parapet and
heaped across the end of the trench, the machine-gun was run close up to them and a couple
of men posted, one to watch with a periscope, and the other to keep Verey pistol lights flaring
into the Frying Pan.

Two minutes later the other officer returned, spoke hastily to Courtenay, and then calling
to the men to follow, jumped the low barricade and ran splashing out into the open hollow with
the men streaming after him. A burst of rifle fire and the shattering crash of bombs met them,
and continued fiercely for a few minutes after the last of the counter-attacking party had
swarmed out. But the attack broke down, never reached the barricade beyond the Pan, was, in
fact, cut down almost as fast as it emerged into the open. A handful of men came limping and
floundering back, and Courtenay, waiting by the machine-gun in case of another German rush,
caught sight of the face of the last man in.

"Rawbon!" he said sharply. "Good Lord, man! I'd forgotten--What took you out there?"

"Say, Loo-tenant," said Rawbon, panting hard. "There's no crossin' that mud puddle Fry-Pan.
They're holding the barricade 'cross there; got loopholes an' shootin' through 'em. Can't we
climb out an' over the open an' on top of 'em?"

"No good," said Courtenay. "They're sweeping it with maxims. Listen!"

Up to then Rawbon had heeded nothing above the level of the trench and the hollow but now he
could hear the steady roar of rifle and maxim fire, and the constant whistle of bullets streaming
overhead.

"I must rally another crowd and try'n' rush it," said Courtenay. "Stand ready with that maxim
there. I won't be long."

"I've got a box of bombs here, sir," said a man behind him.

Courtenay turned sharply. "Good," he said. "But no--it's too far to throw them."

"I think I could just about fetch it, sir," said the man.

"All right," said Courtenay. "Try it while I get some men together."

"Here y' are, chum," said the man, "you light 'em an' I'll chuck 'em. This way for the milky
coco-nuts!"

Rawbon watched curiously. The bomb was round shaped and rather larger than a cricket ball.
A black tube affair an inch or two long projected from it and emitted, when lit, a jet of hissing,
spitting sparks. The bomb-thrower seized the missile quickly, stepped clear of the sheltering
corner of the trench, threw the bomb, and jumped back under cover. A couple of bullets slapped
into the wall of the trench, and next moment the bomb burst.

"Just short," said the thrower, who had peeped out at sound of the report. "Let's 'ave another go."

This time a shower of bullets greeted him as he stepped out, but he hurled his bomb and stepped
back in safety. A third he threw, but this time a bullet caught him and he reeled back with
blood staining the shoulder of his tunic.

"You'll 'ave to excuse me," he remarked gravely to the man with the match. "Can't stay now.
I 'ave an urgent appointment in Blighty.[Footnote: England. A soldier's corruption of the Hindustani
word "Belati."] But I'll drink your 'ealth when I gets to Lunnon."

Rawbon had watched the throwing impatiently. "Look here," he said suddenly. "Just lemme have
a whale at this pitching. I'll show 'em some curves that'll dazzle 'em."

The wounded man peered at him and then at his cap badge. "Now 'oo the blank is this?" he demanded.
"Blimey, Joe, if 'ere ain't a blooming Universal Plum-an'-Apple Provider. 'Ere, 'oo stole the
strawberry jam?"

"You let me in on this ball game," said Rawbon. "Light 'em and pass 'em quick, and see me put
the Indian sign on that bunch."

A minute later Courtenay came back and stared in amazement at the scene. Two men were lighting
and passing up bombs to the sergeant, who, standing clear out in the opening, grabbed and hurled
the balls with an extraordinary prancing and dancing and arm-swinging series of contortions,
while the crowded trench laughed and applauded.

"Some pitchin', Loo-tenant," he panted beamingly, stepping back into shelter. "Hark at 'em.
And every darn one right over the plate. Say, step out here an' watch this next lot."

"No time now," said Courtenay hurriedly.

"They're strengthening their defense every minute. Are you all ready there, lads?"

"I don't know who this man is, sir," said a sergeant quickly. "But he's doing great work. Every
bomb has gone in behind the parado there. He might try a few more to shake them before we advance."

"Behind the parakeet," snorted Rawbon. "I should smile. You watch! I'll put some through the
darn loopholes for you. Didn't know I was pitcher to the Purple Socks, the year we whipped
the League, did you? Gimme thirty seconds, Loo-tenant, and I'll put thirty o' these balls right
where they live."

As he spoke he picked up two of the bombs from a fresh box and held them to the lighter. As
he plunged out a shower of bullets spattered the trench wall about him, but without heeding
these he began to throw. As the roar of the bursting bombs began, the bullets slowed down and
ceased. "Keep the lights blazing," Rawbon paused to shout to the man with the pistol flares.
"You slide out for the home base, Loo-tenant, and I'll keep 'em too busy to shoot their nasty
little guns." He commenced to hurl the bombs again. Courtenay stepped out and watched a moment.
Bomb after bomb whizzed true and hard across the hollow, just skimmed the breastwork, struck
on the trench wall that showed beyond and a foot above it, and fell behind the barricade. Billowing
smoke-clouds and gusts of flame leaped and flashed above the parapet. Courtenay saw the chance
and took it. He plunged out into the lake of mud and plowed through it towards the barricade,
the men swarming behind him, and the sergeant's bombs hurtling with trailing streams of sparks
over their heads.

"Come on, son," said the sergeant. "You carry that box and gimme the slow match. I pitch better
with a little run."

Courtenay reached the barricade and led his men over and round it without a casualty. The space
behind the barricade was deserted--deserted, that is, except by the dead, and by some unutterable
things that would have been better dead.

The lost portion of trench was recaptured, and more, the defense, demoralized by that tornado
of explosions, was pushed a good fifty yards further back before the counter-attack was stayed.

At daybreak next morning Courtenay and the sergeant stood together on the road leading to the
communication trench. Both were crusted to the shoulders in thick mud; Rawbon's cap was gone,
and his hair hung plastered in a wet mop over his ears and forehead, and Courtenay showed a
red-stained bandage under his cap.

"Rawbon," he said, "I feel rotten over this business. Here you've done some real good work--I
don't believe we'd ever have got across without your bombing--and you won't let me say a word
about it. I'm dashed if I like it. Dash it, you ought to get a V.C., or a D.C.M. at least, for it."

"Now lookahere, Loo-tenant," said Rawbon soothingly. "There's no need for you to feel peaked--not
any. It was darn good of you to let me in on these sacred no-admittance-'cept-on-business trenches,
and I'm plumb glad I landed in the mix-up. It would probably raise trouble for you if your
boss knew you'd slipped me in; and it sure would raise everlasting trouble for me at home if
my name was flourishin' in the papers gettin' an A.B.C. or D.A.M.N. or whatever the fixin'
is. And I'd sooner have this"--slapping the German helmet that dangled at his belt--"than your
whole darn alphabet o' initials. Don't forget what I told you about the dad an' those Schwartzeheimer
friends o' his, the cousins o' which same friends I've been blowin' off the earth with bomb
base-balls. Let it go at that, and never forget it, friend--I'm a Benevolent Neutral."

"I won't forget it," said Courtenay, laughing and shaking hands. He watched the sergeant as
he bestrode the motor-cycle, pushed off, and swung off warily down the wet road into the morning
mist.

"What was it that despatch said a while back!" he mused. "Something about 'There are few who
appreciate or even understand the value of the varied work of the Army Service Corps.' Well,
this lot was a bit more varied than usual, and I fancy it might astonish even the fellow who
wrote that line."

DRILL

"Yesterday one of the enemy's heavy guns was put out of action by our artillery."--EXTRACT
FROM DESPATCH.

"Stand fast!" the instructor bellowed, and while the detachment stiffened to immobility he
went on, without stopping to draw breath, bellowing other and less printable remarks. After
he had finished these he ordered "Detachment rear!" and taking more time and adding even more
point to his remarks, he repeated some of them and added others, addressing abruptly and virulently
the "Number" whose bungling had aroused his wrath.

"You've learnt your gun drill," he said, "learned it like a sulphur-crested cockatoo learns
to gabble 'Pretty Polly scratch a poll'; why in the name of Moses you can't make your hands
do what your tongue says 'as me beat. You, Donovan, that's Number Three, let me hear you repeat
the drill for Action Front."

Donovan, standing strictly to attention, and with his eyes fixed straight to his front, drew
a deep breath and rattled off:

"At the order or signal from the battery leader or section commander, 'Halt action front!'
One orders 'Halt action front!'--At the order from One, the detachment dismounts, Three unkeys,
and with Two lifts the trail; when the trail is clear of the hook, Three orders 'Limber drive on.'"

The instructor interrupted explosively.

"You see," he growled, "you know it. Three orders 'Limber drive on.' You're Three! but did
you order limber drive on, or limber drive off, or drive anywhere at all? Did you expect drivers
that would be sitting up there on their horses, with their backs turned to you, to have eyes
in the backs of their heads to see when you had the trail lifted, or did you be expectin' them
to thought-read that you wanted them to drive on!"

Three, goaded at last to a sufficiency of daring, ventured to mutter something about "was going
to order it."

The instructor caught up the phrase and flayed him again with it. "'Was going to,'" he repeated,
"'was going to order it.' Perhaps some day, when a bullet comes along and drills a hole in
your thick head, you will want to tell it you 'was going to' get out of the way. You maybe
expect the detachment to halt and stand easy, and light a cigarette, and have a chat while
you wait to make up your mind what you're going to say, and when you're going to say it! And
if ever you get past recruit drill in the barracks square, my lad, and smell powder burnt in
action, you'll learn that there's no such thing as 'going to' in your gun drill. If you're
slow at it, if you fumble your fingers, and tie knots in your tongue, and stop to think about
your 'going to,' you'll find maybe that 'going to' has gone before you make up your mind, and
the only thing 'going to' will be you and your detachment; and its Kingdom Come you'll be 'going
to' at that. And now we'll try it again, and if I find any more 'going to' about it this time
it's an hour's extra drill a day you'll be 'going to' for the next week."

He kept the detachment grilling and grinding for another hour before he let them go, and at
the end of it he spent another five minutes pointing out the manifold faults and failings of
each individual in the detachment, reminding them that they belonged to the Royal Regiment
of Artillery that is "The right of the line, the terror of the world, and the pride of the
British Army," and that any man who wasn't a shining credit to the Royal Regiment was no less
than a black disgrace to it.

When the detachment dismissed, and for the most part gravitated to the canteen, they passed
some remarks upon their instructor almost pungent enough to have been worthy of his utterance.
"Him an' his everlastin' 'Cut the Time!'"

"I'm just about fed up with him," said Gunner Donovan bitterly, "and I'd like to know where's
all the sense doing this drill against a stop-watch. You'd think from the way he talks that
a man's life was hanging on the whiskers of a half-second. Blanky rot, I call it."

"I wouldn't mind so much," said another gunner, "if ever he thought to say we done it good,
but not 'im. The better we does it and the faster, the better and the faster he wants it done.
It's my belief that if he had a gun detachment picked from the angels above he'd tell 'em their
buttons and their gold crowns was a disgrace to Heaven, that they was too slow to catch worms
or catch a cold, and that they'd 'ave to cut the time it took 'em to fly into column o' route
from the right down the Golden Stairs, or to bring their 'arps to the 'Alt action front."

These were the mildest of the remarks that passed between the smarting Numbers of the gun detachment,
but they would have been astonished beyond words if they could have heard what their instructor
Sergeant "Cut-the-Time" was saying at that moment to a fellow-sergeant in the sergeants' mess.

"They're good lads," he said, "and it's me, that in my time has seen the making and the breaking
and the handling and the hammering of gun detachments enough to man every gun in the Army,
that's saying it. I had them on the 'Halt action front' this morning, and I tell you they've
come on amazing since I took 'em in hand. We cut three solid seconds this morning off the time
we have been taking to get the gun into action, and a second a round off the firing of ten
rounds. They'll make gunners yet if they keep at it."

"Three seconds is good enough," said the other mildly.

"It isn't good enough," returned the instructor, "if they can make it four, and four's not
good enough if they can make it five. It's when they can't cut the time down by another split
fraction of a second that I'll be calling them good enough. They won't be blessing me for it
now, but come the day maybe they will."

       *       *       *       *       *

The battery was moving slowly down a muddy road that ran along the edge of a thick wood. It
had been marching most of the night, and, since the night had been wet and dark, the battery
was splashed and muddy to the gun-muzzles and the tops of the drivers' caps. It was early morning,
and very cold. Gunners and drivers were muffled in coats and woolen scarves, and sat half-asleep
on their horses and wagons. A thick and chilly mist had delayed the coming of light, but now
the mist had lifted suddenly, blown clear by a quickly risen chill wind. When the mist had
been swept away sufficiently for something to be seen of the surrounding country, the Major,
riding at the head of the battery, passed the word to halt and dismount, and proceeded to "find
himself on the map." Glancing about him, he picked out a church steeple in the distance, a
wayside shrine, and a cross-road near at hand, a curve of the wood beside the road, and by
locating these on the squared map, which he took from its mud-splashed leather case, he was
enabled to place his finger on the exact spot on the map where his battery stood at that moment.
Satisfied on this, he was just about to give the order to mount when he heard the sound of
breaking brushwood and saw an infantry officer emerge from the trees close at hand.

The officer was a young man, and was evidently on an errand of haste. He slithered down the
steep bank at the edge of the wood, leaped the roadside ditch, asked a question of the nearest
man, and, getting an answer from him, came at the double past the guns and teams towards the
Major. He saluted hastily, said "Mornin', sir," and went on breathlessly: "My colonel sent
me across to catch you. We are in a ditch along the edge of the far side of this wood, and
could just see enough of you between the trees to make out your battery. From where we are
we can see a German gun, one of their big brutes, with a team of about twenty horses pulling
it, plain and fair out in the open. The Colonel thinks you could knock 'em to glory before
they could reach cover."

"Where can I see them from!" said the Major quickly.

"I'll show you," said the subaltern, "if you'll leave your horse and come with me through this
wood. It's only a narrow belt of trees here."

The Major turned to one of his subalterns who was with him at the head of the battery.

"Send back word to the captain to come up here and wait for me!" he said rapidly. "Tell him
what you have just heard this officer say, and tell him to give the word, 'Prepare for action.'
And now," he said, turning to the infantryman, "go ahead."

The two of them jumped the ditch, scrambled up the bank, and disappeared amongst the trees.

A message back to the captain who was at the rear of the battery brought him up at a canter.
The subaltern explained briefly what he had heard, and the captain, after interrupting him
to shout an order to "Prepare for action," heard the finish of the story, pulled out his map,
and pointing out on it a road shown as running through the trees, sent the subaltern off to
reconnoiter it.

The men were stripping off their coats, rolling them and strapping them to the saddles and
the wagon seats; the Numbers One, the sergeants in charge of each gun, bustling their gunners,
and seeing everything about the guns made ready: the gunners examining the mechanism and gears
of the gun, opening and closing the hinged flaps of the wagons, and tearing the thin metal
cover off the fuses.

It was all done smartly and handily, and one after another the sergeants reported their subsections
as ready. Immediately the captain gave the order to mount, drivers swung themselves to their
saddles, and the gunners to their seats on the wagons, and all sat quietly waiting for whatever
order might come next.

The lifting of the mist had shown a target to the gunners on both sides apparently, and the
roar and boom of near and distant guns beat and throbbed quicker and at closer intervals.

In three minutes the Major came running back through the wood, and the captain moved to meet him.

"We've got a fair chance!" said the Major exultingly. "One of their big guns clear in the open,
and moving at a crawl. I want you to take the battery along the road here, sharp to the right
at the cross-road, and through the wood. The Inf. tell me there is just a passable road through.
Take guns and firing battery wagons only; leave the others here. When you get through the wood,
turn to the right again, and along its edge until you come to where I'll be waiting for you.
I'll take the range-taker with me. The order will be 'open sights'; it's the only way--not
time to hunt a covered position! Now, is all that clear?"

"Quite clear," said the captain tersely.

"Off you go, then," said the Major; "remember, it's quick work. Trumpeter, come with me, and
the range-taker. Sergeant-major, leave the battery staff under cover with the first line."

He swung into the saddle, set his horse at the ditch, and with a leap and scramble was over
and up the bank and crashing into the undergrowth, followed by his trumpeter and a man with
the six-foot tube of a range-finder strapped to the saddle.

Before he was well off the road the captain shouted the order to walk march, and as the battery
did so the subaltern who had been sent out to reconnoiter the road came back at a canter.

"We can just do it," he reported; "it's greasy going, and the road is narrow and rather twisty,
but we can do it all right."

The captain sent back word to section commanders, and the other two subalterns spurred forward
and joined him.

"We go through the wood," he explained, "and come into action on the other side. The order
is 'open sights,' so I expect we'll be in an exposed position. You know what that means. There's
a gun to knock out, and if we can do it and get back quick before they get our range we may
get off light. If we can't----" and he broke off significantly. "Get back and tell your Numbers
One, and be ready for quick moving."

Immediately they had fallen back the order was given to trot, and the battery commenced to
bump and rumble rapidly over the rough road. As they neared the cross-roads they were halted
a moment, and then the guns and their attendant ammunition wagons only went on, turned into
the wood, and recommenced to trot.

They jolted and swayed and slid over the rough, wet road, the gunners clinging fiercely to
the handrails, the drivers picking a way as best they could over bowlders and between ruts.
They emerged on the far side of the wood, found themselves in an open field, turned sharply
to the right, and kept on at a fast trot. A line of infantry were entrenched amongst the trees
on the edge of the wood, but their shouted remarks were drowned in the clatter and rattle and
jingle of wheels and harness. Out on their left the ground rose very gently, and far beyond
a low crest could be seen clumps of trees, patches of fields, and a few scattered farm? houses.
At several points on this distant slope the White smoke-clouds of bursting shells were puffing
and breaking, but so far there was no sign to be seen of any man or of any gun. When they came
to where the Major was waiting he rode out from the trees, blew sharply on a whistle, and made
a rapid signal with hand and arm. The guns and wagons had been moving along the edge of the
wood in single file, but now at the shouted order each team swung abruptly to its left and
commenced to move in a long line out from the wood towards the low crest, the whole movement
being performed neatly and cleanly and still at a trot. The Major rode to his place in the
center of the line, and the battery, keeping its place close on his heels, steadily increased
its pace almost to a canter. The Major's whistle screamed again, and at another signal and
the shouted orders the battery dropped to a walk. Every man could see now over the crest and
into the shallow valley that fell away from it and rose again in gentle folds and slopes. At
first they could see nothing of the gun against which they had expected to be brought into
action, but presently some one discovered a string of tiny black dots that told of the long
team and heavy gun it drew. Another sharp whistle and the Major's signal brought the battery
up with a jerk.

"Halt! action front!" The shouted order rang hoarsely along the line. For a moment there was
wild commotion; a seething chaos, a swirl of bobbing heads and plunging horses. But in the
apparent chaos there was nothing but the most smooth and ordered movement, the quick but most
exact following of a routine drill so well ground in that its motions were almost mechanical. The
scene was so gruesome that I had Belni shut up again, and we watched all night, for Macao was determined
to take the murderer's life. It was a dry, moonlit night; one of the boys was writhing with a
pain in his stomach, and we could do nothing to help him, so they were all convinced it was
caused by Belni's relatives, and wanted to sail immediately. A warm breeze had driven mosquitoes
to the cutter; it was a most unpleasant night.

Next noon the natives appeared, about twenty strong, but without the second murderer. They said the
shot had hit him, and that he had died during the night. This might have been true, and as we
could do nothing against the village anyway, we let the matter drop,
especially as they had brought us Bourbaki's rifle and two tusked
pigs.

The chief said he hoped we were satisfied with him, and would not
trouble anyone but the murderers.

We returned to the cutter, and the pigs were put in the hold, where
they seem to have kept good company with Belni, after a little preliminary
squealing and shrieking.

Then we sailed northward, with a breeze that carried us in four hours over the same distance
for which we had taken twenty-four last time. It was a bitterly cold night. We decided to return home,
fearing the boys would murder Belni in an unwatched moment, as they had asked several times,
when the sea was high, whether we would not throw Belni into the water now. The passage to Santo
was very rough. The waves thundered against the little old cutter, and we had a nasty tide-rip.
We were quite soaked, and looking in through the portholes, we could see everything floating
about in the cabin--blankets, saucepans, tins and pistols. We did not mind much, as we hoped
to be at home by evening.

Rest, cleanliness and a little comfort were very tempting after a
fortnight in the filthy narrowness of the little craft.

We had no reason to be vain of our success; but such trips are part of the game, and we planned
a second visit to Big Nambas to reconcile the chief. We were glad to greet the cloud-hung coast
of Santo, and soon entered the Segond Channel. There we discovered that the old boat had leaked
to such an extent that we could have kept afloat for only a few hours longer, and had every reason
to be glad the voyage was at an end. It was just as well that we had not noticed the leak
during the passage.

We brought Belni ashore; the thin, flabby fellow was a poor compensation for vigorous Bourbaki.
He was set to work on the plantation, and as the Government was never
informed of the affair, he is probably there to this day, and will
stay until he dies.

CHAPTER V

VAO

I had not yet solved the problem of how to get away from the Segond Channel and find a good field
of labour, when, happily, the French priest from Port Olry came to
stay a few days with his colleague at the channel, on his way to Vao,
and he obligingly granted me a passage on his cutter.

I left most of my luggage behind, and the schooner of the French survey party was to bring
it to Port Olry later on.

After a passage considerably prolonged by contrary winds, we arrived at Vao, a small island north-east
of Malekula. When one has sailed along the lifeless, greyish-green shores of Malekula, Vao
is like a sunbeam breaking through the mist. This change of mood comes gradually, as one notices
the warm air of spring, and dry souls, weather-beaten captains and old pirates may hardly be
aware of anything beyond a better appetite and greater thirst.

And it is not easy to define what lends the little spot such a charm that the traveller feels
revived as if escaped from some oppression. From a distance Vao looks like all the other islands
and islets of the archipelago--a green froth floating on the white line of breakers; from near
by we see, as everywhere else, the bright beach in front of the thick forest. But what impresses
the traveller mournfully elsewhere,--the eternal loneliness and lifelessness of a country where
nature has poured all its power into the vegetation, and seems to have forgotten man and beast,--is
softened here, and an easy joy of living penetrates everything like
a delicate scent, and lifts whatever meets the eye to greater significance
and beauty.

The celestial charm of the South Sea Islands, celebrated by the first discoverers, seems to be preserved
here, warming the soul like the sweet remembrance of a happy dream. Hardly anyone who feels these
impressions will wonder about their origin, but he will hasten ashore and dive into the forest,
driven by a vague idea of finding some marvel. Later he will understand that the charm of Vao lies
in the rich, busy human life that fills the island. It is probably the most thickly populated
of the group, with about five hundred souls living in a space one
mile long and three-fourths of a mile wide; and it is their happy,
careless, lazy existence that makes Vao seem to the stranger like
a friendly home.

Here there are houses and fires, lively people who shout and play
merrily, and after the loneliness which blows chill from the bush,
the traveller is glad to rest and feel at home among cheerful fellow-men.

About

seventy outrigger boats of all sizes lie on the beach. On their bows they carry a carved heron,
probably some half-forgotten totem. The bird is more or less richly carved, according to the social
standing of the owner, and a severe watch is kept to prevent people from carrying carvings
too fine for their degree.

Similarly, we find little sticks like small seats fastened to the
canoes, their number indicating the caste of the owner.

Under big sheds, in the shade of the tall trees, lie large whale-boats
of European manufacture, belonging to the different clans, in which
the men undertake long cruises to the other islands, Santo, Aoba,
Ambrym, to visit "sing-sings" and trade in pigs.

Formerly they used large canoes composed of several trees fastened
together with ropes of cocoa-nut fibre, and caulked with rosin, driven
by sails of cocoa-nut sheaths; these would hold thirty to forty men,
and were used for many murderous expeditions.

For the inhabitants of Vao were regular pirates, dreaded all along the coast; they would land unexpectedly
in the morning near a village, kill the men and children, steal the
women and start for home with rich booty.

European influences have put a stop to this sport, and with the introduction of whale-boats the
picturesque canoes have disappeared from the water, and now lie rotting
on the beach.

Their successors (though according to old tradition, women may not enter them) are only used
for peaceful purposes.

In the early morning the beach is deserted, but a few hours after
sunrise it is full of life.

The different clans come down from their villages by narrow paths which divide near the shore
into one path for the men and another for the women, leading to separate places. The men squat
down near one of the boat-houses and stretch out comfortably in the
warm sand, smoking and chatting.

The women, loaded with children and baskets, sit in the shade of the knobby trees which stretch
their trunk-like branches horizontally over the beach, forming a natural roof against sun and rain.
The half-grown boys are too lively to enjoy contemplative laziness; gossip and important deliberations
about pigs and sacrifices do not interest them, and they play about between the canoes, wade
in the water, look for shells on the sand, or hunt crabs or fish
in the reef.

Thus an hour passes. The sun has warmed the sand; after the cool night this is doubly agreeable,
and a light breeze cools the air. Some mothers bathe their babies in the sea, washing and rubbing
them carefully, until the coppery skin shines in the sun; the little creatures enjoy the bath
immensely, and splash gaily in the element that will be their second home in days to come.
Everyone on the beach is in the easiest undress: the men wear nothing but a bark belt, and
the women a little apron of braided grass; the children are quite naked, unless bracelets, necklaces
and ear-rings can count as dress. Having rested and amply fortified themselves for the painful
resolution to take up the day's work, people begin to prepare for departure to the fields.
They have to cross the channel, about a mile wide, to reach the big
island where the yam gardens lie, sheltered by the forest from the
trade-winds; and this sail is the occasion for the prettiest sight
Vao can offer.

The tides drive the sea through the narrow channel so hard as to start a current which is almost
a stream.

The head-wind raises short, sharp, white-capped waves; shallow banks shine yellow through the
clear water, and the coral reefs are patches of violet and crimson,
and we are delighted by constant changes, new shades and various colourings,
never without harmony and loveliness.

A cloudless sky bends over the whole picture and shines on the red-brown bodies of the people,
who bustle about their canoes, adding the bright red of their mats
and dresses to the splendour of the landscape.

With sudden energy the women have grabbed the boats and pushed them into the water. The girls
are slim, supple and strong as the young men, the mothers and older
women rather stiff, and usually hampered by at least one child, which
they carry on their backs or on their hips, while another holds on
to the garment which replaces our skirts.

There is plenty of laughter and banter with the men, who look on unmoved at the efforts of the weaker
sex, only rarely offering a helping hand.

From the trees and hiding-places the paddles and the pretty triangular
sails are fetched and fastened on the canoes; then the boats are pushed
off and the whole crowd jumps in.

The babies sit in their mothers' laps or hang on their backs, perilously close to the water,
into which they stare with big, dark eyes. By twos and threes the canoes push off, driven by vigorous
paddling along the shore, against the current. Sometimes a young man wades after a canoe and
joins some fair friends, sitting in front of them, as etiquette demands. The fresh breeze catches
the sails, and the ten or fifteen canoes glide swiftly across the
bright water, the spread sails looking like great red butterflies.

The spray splashes from the bows, one woman steers, and the others bale out the water with
cocoa-nuts,--a labour worthy of the Danaides; sometimes the outrigger lifts up and the canoe
threatens to capsize, but, quick as thought, the women lean on the poles joining outrigger and
canoe, and the accident is averted. In a few minutes the canoes enter the landings between
the torn cliffs on the large island, the passengers jump out and carry the boats up the beach.

A
few stragglers, men of importance who have been detained by politics, and bachelors, who have nothing
and nobody to care for but themselves, follow later on, and only a crowd of boys stays in Vao,
to enjoy themselves on the beach and get into all sorts of mischief.

Obliging as people sometimes are when the fancy strikes them, a youth took us over to the other
island in his canoe, and was even skilful enough to keep us from capsizing. Narrow paths, bordered with
impenetrable bush, led us from the beach across coral boulders up to the plantations on top
of the tableland. Under some cocoa-nut palms our guide stopped, climbed nimbly up a slim trunk,
as if mounting a ladder, and three green nuts dropped to the ground at our feet. Three clever
strokes of the knife opened them, and we enjoyed the refreshing drink in its natural bowl. Sidepaths
branched off to the gardens, where every individual or family had
its piece of ground.

We saw big bananas, taro, with large, juicy leaves, yams, trained on a pretty basket-shaped trellis-work;
when in bloom this looks like a huge bouquet. There were pine-apples, cabbages, cocoa-nut and bread-fruit
trees, bright croton bushes and highly scented shrubs. In this green and confused abundance
the native spends his day, working a little, loafing a great deal. He shoots big pigeons and
little parakeets, roasts them on an improvised fire and eats them as a welcome addition to his
regular meals. From sun and rain he is sheltered by simple roofs, under which everybody assembles
at noon to gossip, eat and laugh.

Long ago there were villages here. An enormous monolith, now broken, but once 5 mètres high,
speaks for the energy of bygone generations, when this rock was carried
up from the coast, probably for a monument to some great chief.

While the women were gathering food for the evening meal we returned to Vao. The breeze had
stiffened in the midst of the channel, and one old woman's canoe had capsized. She clung to
the boat, calling pitifully for help, which amused all the men on the shore immensely, until
at last, none too soon, they went to her rescue. Such adventures are by no means harmless, as
the channel swarms with sharks.

We explored the interior of Vao, going first through the thicket on
the shore, then through reed-grass over 6 feet high, then between
low walls surrounding little plantations.

Soon the path widened, and on both sides we saw stone slabs, set several rows deep; presently
we found ourselves under the wide vault of one of those immense fig trees whose branches are like
trunks, and the glare of the sun gave way to deep shadow, the heat of noonday to soft coolness.

Gradually
our eyes grow accustomed to the dimness, and we distinguish our surroundings.

We are in a wide square, roofed by the long branches of the giant tree. At our left is its trunk,
mighty enough in itself, but increased by the numerous air-roots that stretch like cables from
the crown to the earth, covering the trunk entirely in some spots, or dangling softly in the
wind, ending in large tassels of smaller roots. Lianas wind in distorted curves through the
branches, like giant snakes stiffened while fighting. This square is one of the dancing-grounds
of Vao. The rows of stones surround the square on three sides--two, three or more deep. Near the
trunk of the great tree is a big altar of large slabs of rock; around it are stone tables of
smaller size, and one or two immense coral plates, which cover the buried skull of some mighty
chief. A large rock lies in the middle of the road on a primitive slide half covered by stones and
earth. Long ago the islanders tried to bring it up from the beach; a strong vine served as a
rope, and more than fifty men must have helped to drag the heavy rock up from the coast to the
square. Half-way they got tired of the job and left the stone where it lies now, and will lie
for ever.

On the other side of the altar are the drums, hollow trunks, whose upper end is carved to represent
a human face with wide, grinning mouth, and deep, round and hollow eyes. Rammed in aslant, leaning
in all directions, they stand like clumsy, malicious demons, spiteful
and brutal, as if holding their bellies with rude, immoderate laughter
at their own hugeness and the puniness of mankind, at his miserable
humanity, compared to the solemn repose of the great tree.

In front of these are figures cut roughly out of logs, short-legged, with long bodies and exaggeratedly
long faces; often they are nothing but a head, with the same smiling mouth, a long nose and
narrow, oblique eyes. They are painted red, white and blue, and are hardly discernible in the
dimness. On their forked heads they carry giant birds with outstretched wings,--herons,--floating
as if they had just dropped through the branches on to the square.

This is all we can see, but it is enough to make a deep impression. Outside, the sun is glaring,
the leaves quiver, and the clouds are drifting across the sky, but here it is dim and cool as
in a cathedral, not a breeze blows, everything is lapped in a holy calm. Abandonment, repose,
sublime thoughtlessness drop down on us in the shadow of the giant tree; as if in a dream we breathe
the damp, soft, mouldy air, feel the smooth earth and the green moss that covers everything
like a velvet pall, and gaze at the altars, the drums and the statues.

In a small clearing behind the square, surrounded by gaily coloured croton bushes, stands the
men's house--the "gamal." Strong pillars support its gabled roof, that reaches down to the ground;
the entrance is flanked by great stone slabs. Oddly branched dead trees form a hedge around the
house, and on one side, on a sort of shelf, hang hundreds of boars' jaws with curved tusks.
 But the lights flared and burned out, leaped afresh
and died out again, and there was no sign that he had been seen. For the moment he felt reasonably
secure. The earth on the crater's rim was broken and irregular, the surface an eye-deceiving
patchwork of broken light and black heavy shadow under the glare of the flying lights. The
mackintosh he wore was caked and plastered with mud, and blended well with the background on
which he lay. He took care to keep his arms in, to sink his head well into his rounded shoulders,
to curl his feet and legs up under the skirt of his mackintosh, knowing well from his own experience
that where the outline of a body is vague and easily escapes notice, a head or an arm, or especially
and particularly a booted foot and leg, will stand out glaringly distinct. As he lay, he placed
his ear to the muddy ground, but could hear no sound of mining operations beneath him. Foot
by foot he hitched himself upward to the rim of the crater's edge, and again lay and listened
for thrilling long-drawn minute after minute.

Suddenly his heart jumped and his flesh went cold. Unmistakingly he heard the scuffle and swish
of footsteps on the wet ground, the murmur of voices apparently within a yard or two of his
head. There were men in the mine-crater, and, from the sound of their movements, they were
creeping out on a patrol similar to his own, perhaps, and, as near as he could judge, on a
line that would bring them directly on top of him. The scuffing passed slowly in front of him
and for a few yards along the inside of the crater. The sound of the murmuring voices passed
suddenly from confused dullness to a sharp clearer-edged speech, telling Ainsley, as plainly
as if he could see, that the speaker had risen from behind the sound-deadening ridge of earth
and was looking clear over its top, Ainsley lay as still as one of the clods of earth about
him, lay scarcely daring to breathe, and with his skin pringling. There was a pause that may
have been seconds, but that felt like hours. He did not dare move his head to look; he could
only wait in an agony of apprehension with his flesh shrinking from the blow of a bullet that
he knew would be the first announcement of his discovery. But the stillness was unbroken, and
presently, to his infinite relief, he heard again the guttural voices and the sliding footsteps
pass back across his front, and gradually diminish. But he would not let his impatience risk
the success of his enterprise; he lay without moving a muscle for many long and nervous minutes.
At last he began to hitch himself slowly, an inch at a time, along the edge of the crater away
from the point to which the German lookout had moved. He halted and lay still again when his
ear caught a fresh murmur of guttural voices, the trampling of many footsteps, and once or
twice the low but clear clink of an iron tool in the crater beneath him.

It seemed fairly certain that the Germans were occupying the crater, were either making it
the starting-point of a mine tunnel, or were fortifying it as a defensive point. But it was
not enough to surmise these things; he must make sure, and, if possible, bomb the working party
or the entrance to the mine tunnel. He continued to work his way along the rim of the crater's
edge. Arrived at a position where he expected to be able to see the likeliest point of the
crater for a mine working to commence, he took the final and greatest chance. Moving only in
the intervals of darkness between the lights, he dragged the mackintosh up on his shoulders
until the edge of its deep collar came above the top of his head, opened the throat and spread
it wide to disguise any outline of his head and neck, found a suitable hollow on the edge of
the ridge, and boldly thrust his head over to look downwards into the hole.

When the next light flared, he found that he could see the opposite wall and perhaps a third
of the bottom of the hole, with the head and shoulders of two or three men moving about it.
When the light died, he hitched forward and again lay still. This time the light showed him
what he had come to seek: the black opening of a tunnel mouth in the wall of the crater nearest
the British line, a dozen men busily engaged dragging sacks-full of earth from the opening,
and emptying them outside the shaft. He waited while several lights burned, marking as carefully
as possible the outline of the ridge immediately above the mine shaft, endeavoring to pick
a mark that would locate its position from above it. It had begun to rain in a thin drizzling
mist, and although this obscured the outline of the crater to some extent, its edge stood out
well against the glow of such lights as were thrown up from the British side.

It was now well after midnight, and the firing on both sides had slackened considerably, although
there was still an irregular rattle of rifle fire, the distant boom of a gun and the scream
of its shell passing overhead. A good deal emboldened by his freedom from discovery and by
the misty rain, Ainsley slid backwards, moved round the crater, crept back to the barbed wire
and under it, ran across the opening on the other side and dropped into the hole where he had
left his men. He found them waiting patiently, stretched full length in the wet discomfort
of the soaking ground, but enduring it philosophically and concerned, apparently, only for
his welfare.

His sergeant puffed a huge sigh of relief at his return. "I was just about beginning to think
you had 'gone west,' sir," he said, "and wondering whether I oughtn't to come and 'ave a look
for you."

Ainsley explained what had happened and what he had seen. "I'm going back, and I want you all
to come with me," he said. "I'm going to shove every bomb we've got down that mine shaft. If
we meet with any luck, we should wreck it up pretty well."

"I suppose, sir," said the sergeant, "if we can plant a bomb or two in the right spot, it will
bottle up any Germans working inside?"

"Sure to!" said Ainsley. "It will cave in the entrance completely; and then as soon as we get
back, we'll give the gunners the tip, and leave them to keep on lobbing some shells in and
breaking up any attempt to reopen the shaft and dig out the mining party."

"Billy!" said one of the men, in an audible aside, "don't you wish you was a merry little German
down that blinkin' tunnel, to-night!"

"Imphim," answered Billy, "I don't think!"

Ainsley explained his plan of campaign, saw that everything was in readiness, and led his party
out. The misty rain was still falling, and, counting on this to hide them sufficiently from
observation if they lay still while any lights were burning, they crawled rapidly across the
open, wriggled underneath the wires, cut one or two of them--especially any which were low
enough to interfere with free movement under them--and crawled along to the crater.

Ainsley left the party sprawling flat at the foot of the rim, while he crept up to locate the
position over the mine shaft. Each man had brought about a dozen small bombs and one large
one packed with high explosive. Before leaving the ditch, on Ainsley's directions, each man
tied his own lot in one bundle, bringing the ends of the fuses together and tying them securely
with their ends as nearly as possible level, so that they could be lit at the same time. Each
man had with him one of those tinder pipe-lighters which are ignited by the sparks of a little
twirled wheel. When Ainsley had placed the men on the edge of the crater, he gave the word,
and each man lit his tinder, holding it so as to be sheltered from sight from the German trench,
behind the flap of his mackintosh. Then each took a separate piece of fuse about a foot long,
and, at a whispered word from Ainsley, pressed the end into the glowing tinder. Almost at the
same instant the four fuses began to burn, throwing out a fizzing jet of sparks. Each man knew
that, shelter them as they would from observation, the sparks were almost certain to betray
them; but although some rifles began at once to crack spasmodically and the bullets to whistle
overhead, each man went on with the allotted program steadily, without haste and without fluster,
devoting all their attention to the proper igniting of the bomb-fuses, and leaving what might
follow to take care of itself. As his length of fuse caught, each man said "Ready" in a low
tone; Ainsley immediately said "Light!" and each instantly directed the jet of sparks as from
a tiny hose into the tied bundle of the bomb-fuses' ends. The instant each man saw his own
bundle well ignited, he reported "Lit!" and thrust the fuse ends well into the soft mud. Being
so waterproofed as to burn if necessary completely under water, this made no difference to
the fuses, except that it smothered the sparks and showed only a curling smoke-wreath. But
the first sparks had evidently been seen, for the bomb party heard shoutings and a rapidly
increasing fire from the German lines. A light flamed upward near the mine-crater. Ainsley
said, "Now!--, and take good aim." The men scrambled to their knees and, leaning well over
until they could see the black entrance of the mine shaft, tossed their bundles of bombs as
nearly as they could into and around it. In the pit below, Ainsley had a momentary glimpse
of half a dozen faces, gleaming white in the strong light, upturned, and staring at him; from
somewhere down there a pistol snapped twice, and the bullets hissed past over their heads.
The party ducked back below the ridge of earth, and as a rattle of rifle fire commenced to
break out along the whole length of the German line, they lit from their tinder the fuses of
a couple of bombs specially reserved for the purpose, and tossed them as nearly as they could
into the German trench, a score of paces away. Their fuses being cut much shorter than the
others, the bombs exploded almost instantly, and Ainsley and his party leapt down to the level
ground and raced across to the wire.

By now the whole line had caught the alarm; the rifle fire had swelled to a crackling roar,
the bullets were whistling and storming across the open. In desperate haste they threw themselves
down and wriggled under the wire, and as they did so they felt the earth beneath them jar and
quiver, heard a double and triple roar from behind them, saw the wet ground in front of them
and the wires overhead glow for an instant with rosy light as the fire of the explosion flamed
upwards from the crater.

At the crashing blast of the discharge, the rifle fire was hushed for a moment; Ainsley saw
the chance and shouted to his men, and, as they scrambled clear of the wire, they jumped to
their feet, rushed back over the flat, and dropped panting in the shelter of the ditch. The
rifle fire opened again more heavily than ever, and the bullets were hailing and splashing
and thudding into the wet earth around them, but the bank protected them well, and they took
the fullest advantage of its cover. Because the depression they were in shallowed and afforded
less cover as it ran towards the British lines, it was safer for the party to stay where they
were until the fire slackened enough to give them a fair sporting chance of crawling back in
safety.

They lay there for fully two hours before Ainsley considered it safe enough to move. They were,
of course, long since wet through, and by now were chilled and numbed to the bone. Two of the
men had been wounded, but only very slightly in clean flesh wounds: one through the arm and
one in the flesh over the upper ribs. Ainsley himself bandaged both men as well as he could
in the darkness and the cramped position necessary to keep below the level of the flying ballets,
and both men, when he had finished, assured him that they were quite comfortable and entirely
free from pain. Ainsley doubted this, and because of it was the more impatient to get back
to their own lines; but he restrained his impatience, lest it should result in any of his party
suffering another and more serious wound. At last the rifle fire had died down to about the
normal night rate, had indeed dropped at the finish so rapidly in the space of two or three
minutes that Ainsley concluded fresh orders for the slower rate must have been passed along
the German lines. He gave the word, and they began to creep slowly back, moving again only
when no lights were burning.

There were some gaspings and groanings as the men commenced to move their stiffened limbs.

"I never knew," gasped one, "as I'd so many joints in my backbone, and that each one of them
could hold so many aches."

"Same like!" said another. "If you'll listen, you can hear my knees and hips creaking like
the rusty hinges of an old barn-door."

Although the men spoke in low tones, Ainsley whispered a stern command for silence.

"We're not so far away," he said, "but that a voice might carry; and you can bet they're jumpy
enough for the rest of the night to shoot at the shadow of a whisper. Now come along, and keep
low, and drop the instant a light flares."

They crawled back a score or so of yards that brought them to the elbow-turn of the depression.
The bank of the turn was practically the last cover they could count upon, because here the
ditch shallowed and widened and was, in addition, more or less open to enfilading fire from
the German side.

Ainsley halted the men and whispered to them that as soon as they cleared the ditch they were
to crawl out into open order, starting as soon as darkness fell after the next light. Next
moment they commenced to move, and as they did so Ainsley fancied he heard a stealthy rustling
in the grass immediately in front of him. It occurred to him that their long delay might have
led to the sending out of a search party, and he was on the point of whispering an order back
to the men to halt, while he investigated, when a couple of pistol lights flared upwards, lighting
the ground immediately about them. To his surprise--surprise was his only feeling for the moment--he
found himself staring into a bearded face not six feet from his own, and above the face was
the little round flat cap that marked the man a German.

Both he and the German saw each other at the same instant; but because the same imminent peril
was over each, each instinctively dropped flat to the wet ground. Ainsley had just time to
glimpse the movement of other three or four gray-coated figures as they also fell flat. Next
instant, he heard his sergeant's voice, hurried and sharp with warning, but still low toned.

"Look out, sir! There's a big Boche just in front of you."

Ainsley "sh-sh-shed" him to silence, and at the same time was a little amused and a great deal
relieved to hear the German in front of him similarly hush down the few low exclamations of
his party. The flare was still burning, and Ainsley, twisting his head, was able to look across
the muddy grass at the German eyes staring anxiously into his own.

"Do not move!" said Ainsley, wondering to himself if the man understood English, and fumbling
in vain in his mind for the German phrase that would express his meaning.

"Kamarade--eh?" grunted the German, with a note of interrogation that left no doubt as to his
meaning.

"Nein, nein!" answered Ainsley. "You kamarade--sie kamarade."

The other, in somewhat voluble gutturals, insisted that Ainsley must "kamarade," otherwise
surrender. He spoke too fast for Ainsley's very limited knowledge of German to follow, but
at least, to Ainsley's relief, there was for the moment no motion towards hostilities on either
side. The Germans recognized, no doubt as he did, that the first sign of a shot, the first
wink of a rifle flash out there in the open, would bring upon them a blaze of light and a storm
of rifle and maxim bullets. Even although his party had slightly the advantage of position
in the scanty cover of the ditch, he was not at all inclined to bring about another burst of
firing, particularly as he was not sure that some excitable individuals in his own trench would
not forget about his party being in the open and hail indiscriminate bullets in the direction
of a rifle flash, or even the sound of indiscreetly loud talking.

Painfully, in very broken German, and a word or two at a time, he tried to make his enemy understand
that it was his, the German party, that must surrender, pointing out as an argument that they
were nearer to the British than to the German lines. The German, however, discounted this argument
by stating that he had one more man in his party than Ainsley had, and must therefore claim
the privilege of being captor.

The voice of his own sergeant close behind him spoke in a hoarse undertone: "Shall I blow a
blinkin' 'ole in 'im, sir? I could do 'im in acrost your shoulder, as easy as kiss my 'and."

"No, no!" said Ainsley hurriedly; "a shot here would raise the mischief."

At the same time he heard some of the other Germans speak to the man in front of him and discovered
that they were addressing him as "Sergeant."

"Sie ein sergeant?" he questioned, and on the German admitting that he was a sergeant, Ainsley,
with more fumbling after German words and phrases, explained that he was an officer, and that
therefore his, an officer's patrol, took precedence over that of a mere sergeant. He had a
good deal of difficulty in making this clear to the German--either because the sergeant was
particularly thick-witted or possibly because Ainsley's German was particularly bad. Ainsley
inclined to put it down to the German's stupidity, and he began to grow exceedingly wroth over
the business. Naturally it never occurred to him that he should surrender to the German, but
it annoyed him exceedingly that the German should have any similar feelings about surrendering
to him. Once more he bent his persuasive powers and indifferent German to the task of over-persuading
the sergeant, and in return had to wait and slowly unravel some meaning from the odd words
he could catch here and there in the sergeant's endeavor to over-persuade him.

He began to think at last that there was no way out of it but that suggested by his own sergeant--namely,
to "blow a blinkin' 'ole in 'im," and his sergeant spoke again with the rattle of his chattering
teeth playing a castanet accompaniment to his words.

"If you don't mind, sir, we'd all like to fight it out and make a run for it. We're all about
froze stiff."

"I'm just about fed up with this fool, too," said Ainsley disgustedly. "Look here, all of you!
Watch me when the next light goes up. If you see me grab my pistol, pick your man and shoot."

The voice of the German sergeant broke in:--

"Nein, nein!" and then in English: "You no shoot! You shoot, and uns shoot alzo!"

Ainsley listened to the stammering English in an amazement that gave way to overwhelming anger.
"Here," he said angrily, "can you speak English?"

"Ein leetle, just ein leetle," replied the German.

But at that and at the memory of the long minutes spent there lying in the mud with chilled
and frozen limbs trying to talk in German, at the time wasted, at his own stumbling German
and the probable amusement his grammatical mistakes had given the others--the last, the Englishman's
dislike to being laughed at, being perhaps the strongest factor--Ainsley's anger overcame him.

"You miserable blighter!" he said wrathfully. "You have the blazing cheek to keep me lying
here in this filthy muck, mumbling and bungling over your beastly German, and then calmly tell
me that you understand English all the time.

"Why couldn't you say you spoke English? What! D'you think I've nothing better to do than lie
out here in a puddle of mud listening to you jabbering your beastly lingo? Silly ass! You saw
that I didn't know German properly, to begin with--why couldn't you say you spoke English?"

But in his anger he had raised his voice a good deal above the safety limit, and the quick
crackle of rifle fire and the soaring lights told that his voice had been heard, that the party
or parties were discovered or suspected.

The rest followed so quickly, the action was so rapid and unpremeditated, that Ainsley never
quite remembered its sequence. He has a confused memory of seeing the wet ground illumined
by many lights, of drumming rifle fire and hissing bullets, and then, immediately after, the
rush and crash of a couple of German "Fizz-Bang" shells. Probably it was the wet plop of some
of the backward-flung bullets about him, possibly it was the movement of the German sergeant
that wiped out the instinctive desire to flatten himself close to ground that drove him to
instant action. The sergeant half lurched to his knees, thrusting forward the muzzle of his
rifle. Ainsley clutched at the revolver in his holster, but before he could free it another
shell crashed, the German jerked forward as if struck by a battering-ram between the shoulders,
lay with white fingers clawing and clutching at the muddy grass. A momentary darkness fell,
and Ainsley just had a glimpse of a knot of struggling figures, of the knot's falling apart
with a clash of steel, of a rifle spouting a long tongue of flame ... and then a group of lights
blazed again and disclosed the figures of his own three men crouching and glancing about them.

Of all these happenings Ainsley retains only a very jumbled recollection, but he remembers
very distinctly his savage satisfaction at seeing "that fool sergeant" downed and the unappeased
anger he still felt with him. He carried that anger back to his own trench; it still burned
hot in him as they floundered and wallowed for interminable seconds over the greasy mud with
the bullets slapping and smacking about them, as they wrenched and struggled over their own
wire--where Ainsley, as it happened, had to wait to help his sergeant, who for all the advantage
of their initiative in the attack and in the Germans being barely risen to meet it, had been
caught by a bayonet-thrust in the thigh--the scramble across the parapet and hurried roll over
into the waterlogged trench.

He arrived there wet to the skin and chilled to the bone, with his shoulder stinging abominably
from the ragged tear of a ricochet bullet that had caught him in the last second on the parapet,
and, above all, still filled with a consuming anger against the German sergeant. Five minutes
later, in the Battalion H.Q. dugout, in making his report to the O.C. while the Medical dressed
his arm, he only gave the barest and briefest account of his successful patrol and bombing
work, but descanted at full length and with lurid wrath on the incident of the German patrol.

"When I think of that ignorant beast of a sergeant keeping me out there," he concluded disgustedly,
"mumbling and spluttering over his confounded 'yaw, yaw' and 'nein, nein,' trying to scrape
up odd German words--which I probably got all wrong--to make him understand, and him all the
time quite well able to speak good enough English--that's what beats me--why couldn't he say
he spoke English?"

"Well, anyhow," said the O.C. consolingly, "from what you tell me, he's dead now."

"I hope so," said Ainsley viciously, "and serve him jolly well right. But just think of the
trouble it might have saved if he'd only said at first that he spoke English!" He sputtered
wrathfully again: "Silly ass! Why couldn't he just say so?"

AS OTHERS SEE

"It may now be divulged that, some time ago, the British lines were extended for a considerable
distance to the South."--EXTRACT FROM OFFICIAL DISPATCH.

The first notice that the men of the Tower Bridge Foot had that they were to move outside the
territory they had learned so well in many weary marches and wanderings in networks and mazes
of trenches, was when they crossed a road which had for long marked the boundary line between
the grounds occupied by the British and French forces.

"Do you suppose the O.C. is drunk, or that the guide has lost his way?" said Private Robinson.
"Somebody ought to tell him we're off our beat and that trespassers will be prosecuted. Not
but what he don't know that, seeing he prosecuted me cruel six months ago for roving off into
the French lines--said if I did it again I might be took for a spy and shot. Anyhow, I'd be
took for being where I was out o' bounds and get a dose of Field Punishment. Wonder where we're
bound for?"

"Don't see as it matters much," said his next file. "I suppose one wet field's as good as another
to sleep in, so why worry?"

A little farther on, the battalion met a French Infantry Regiment on the march. The French
regiment's road discipline was rather more lax than the British, and many tolerantly amused
criticisms were passed on the loose formation, the lack of keeping step, and the straggling
lines of the French. The criticisms, curiously enough, came in a great many cases from the
very men in the Towers' ranks who had often "groused" most at the silliness of themselves being
kept up to the mark in these matters. The marching Frenchmen were singing--but singing in a
fashion quite novel to the British. Throughout their column there were anything up to a dozen
songs in progress, some as choruses and some as solos, and the effect was certainly rather
weird. The Tower Bridge officers, knowing their own men's fondness for swinging march songs,
expected, and, to tell truth, half hoped that they would give a display of their harmonious
powers. They did, but hardly in the expected fashion. One man demanded in a growling bass that
the "Home Fires be kept Burning," while another bade farewell to Leicester Square in a high
falsetto. The giggling Towers caught the idea instantly, and a confused medley of hymns, music-hall
ditties, and patriotic songs in every key, from the deepest bellowing bass to the shrillest
wailing treble, arose from the Towers' ranks, mixed with whistles and cat-calls and Corporal
Flannigan's famous imitation of "Life on a Farm." The joke lasted the Towers for the rest of
that march, and as sure as any Frenchman met or overtook them on the road he was treated to
a vocal entertainment that must have left him forever convinced of the rumored potency of British
rum.

By now word had passed round the Towers that they were to take over a portion of the trenches
hitherto occupied by the French. Many were the doubts, and many were the arguments, as to whether
this would or would not be to the personal advantage and comfort of themselves; but at least
it made a change of scene and surroundings from those they had learned for months past, and
since such a change is as the breath of life to the British soldier, they were on the whole
highly pleased with it.

The morning was well advanced when they were met by guides and interpreters from the French
regiment which they were relieving, and commenced to move into the new trenches. Although at
first there were some who were inclined to criticize, and reluctant to believe that a Frenchman,
or any other foreigner, could do or make anything better than an Englishman, the Towers had
to admit, even before they reached the forward firing trench, that the work of making communication
trenches had been done in a manner beyond British praise. The trenches were narrow and very
deep, neatly paved throughout their length with brick, spaced at regular intervals with sunk
traps for draining off rain-water, and with bays and niches cut deep in the side to permit
the passing of any one meeting a line of pack-burdened men in the shoulder-wide alley-way.

When they reached the forward firing trench, their admiration became unbounded; they were as
full of eager curiosity as children on a school picnic. They fraternized instantly and warmly
with the outgoing Frenchmen, and the Frenchmen for their part were equally eager to express
friendship, to show the English the dugouts, the handy little contrivances for comfort and
safety, to bequeath to their successors all sorts of stoves and pots and cooking utensils,
and generally to give an impression, which was put into words by Private Robinson: "Strike
me if this ain't the most cordiawl bloomin' ongtongt I've ever met!"

The Towers had never realized, or regretted, their lack of the French as deeply as they came
to do now. Hitherto dealings in the language had been entirely with the women in the villages
and billets of the reserve lines, where there was plenty of time to find means of expressing
the two things that for the most part were all they had to express--their wants and their thanks.
And because by now they had no slightest difficulty in making these billet inhabitants understand
what they required--a fire for cooking, stretching space on a floor, the location of the nearest
estaminets, whether eggs, butter, and bread were obtainable, and how much was the price--they
had fondly imagined in their hearts, and boasted loudly in their home letters, that they were
quite satisfactorily conversant with the French language. Now they were to discover that their
knowledge was not quite so extensive as they had imagined, although it never occurred to them
that the French women in the billets were learning English a great deal more rapidly and efficiently
than they were learning French, that it was not altogether their mastery of the language which
instantly produced soap and water, for instance, when they made motions of washing their hands
and said slowly and loudly: "Soap--you compree, soap and l'eau; you savvy--l'eau, wa-ter."
But now, when it came to the technicalities of their professional business, they found their
command of the language completely inadequate. There were many of them who could ask, "What
is the time?" but that helped them little to discover at what time the Germans made a practice
of shelling the trenches; they could have asked with ease, "Have you any eggs?" but they could
not twist this into a sentence to ask whether there were any egg-selling farms in the vicinity;
could have asked "how much" was the bread, but not how many yards it was to the German trench.

A few Frenchmen, who spoke more or less English, found themselves in enormous French and English
demand, while Private 'Enery Irving, who had hitherto borne some reputation as a French speaker--a
reputation, it may be mentioned, largely due to his artful knack of helping out spoken words
by imitation and explanatory acting--found his bubble reputation suddenly and disastrously
pricked. He made some attempt to clutch at its remains by listening to the remarks addressed
to him by a Frenchman, with a most potently intelligent and understanding expression, by ejaculating
"Nong, nong!" and a profoundly understanding "Ah, wee!" at intervals in the one-sided conversation.
He tried this method when called upon by a puzzled private to interpret the torrential speech
of a Frenchman, who wished to know whether the Towers had any jam to spare, or whether they
would exchange a rum ration for some French wine. 'Enery interjected a few "Ah, wee's!" and
then at the finish explained to the private.

"He speaks a bit fast," he said, "but he's trying to tell me something about him coming from
a place called Conserve, and that we can have his 'room' here--meaning, I suppose, his dug-out."
He turned to the Frenchman, spread out his hands, shrugged his shoulders, and gesticulated
after the most approved fashion of the stage Frenchman, bowed deeply, and said, "Merci, Monsieur,"
many times. The Frenchman naturally looked a good deal puzzled, but bowed politely in reply
and repeated his question at length. This producing no effect except further stage shrugs,
he seized upon one of the interpreters who was passing and explained rapidly. "He asks," said
the interpreter, turning to 'Enery and the other men, "whether you have any conserve et rhum--jam
and rum--you wish to exchange for his wine." After that 'Enery Irving collapsed in the public
estimation as a French speaker.

When the Towers were properly installed, and the French regiment commenced to move out, a Tower
Bridge officer came along and told his men that they were to be careful to keep out of sight,
as the orders were to deceive the Germans opposite and to keep them ignorant as long as possible
of the British-French exchange. Private Robinson promptly improved upon this idea. He found
a discarded French képi, put it on his head, and looked over the parapet. He only stayed up
for a second or two and ducked again, just as a bullet whizzed over the parapet. He repeated
the performance at intervals from different parts of the trench, but finding that his challenge
drew quicker and quicker replies was obliged at last to lift the cap no more than into sight
on the point of a bayonet. He was rather pleased with the applause of his fellows and the half-dozen
prompt bullets which each appearance of the cap at last drew, until one bullet, piercing the
cap and striking the point of the bayonet, jarred his fingers unpleasantly and deflected the
bullet dangerously and noisily close to his ear. Some of the Frenchmen who were filing out
had paused to watch this performance, laughing and bravo-ing at its finish. Robinson bowed
with a magnificent flourish, then replaced the képi on the point of the bayonet, raised the
képi, and made the bayonet bow to the audience. A French officer came bustling along the trench
urging his men to move on. He stood there to keep the file passing along without check, and
Robinson turned presently to some of the others and asked if they knew what was the meaning
of this "Mays ongfong" that the officer kept repeating to his men. "Ongfong," said 'Enery Irving
briskly, seizing the opportunity to reëstablish himself as a French speaker, "means 'children';
spelled e-n-f-a-n-t-s, pronounced ongfong."

"Children!" said Robinson. "Infants, eh? 'ealthy lookin' lot o' infants. There's one now--that
six-foot chap with the Father Christmas whiskers; 'ow's that for a' infant?"

As the Frenchmen filed out some of them smiled and nodded and called cheery good-bys to our
men, and 'Enery Irving turned to a man beside him. "This," he said, "is about where some appropriate
music should come in the book. Exit to triumphant strains of martial music Buck up, Snapper!
Can't you mouth-organ 'em the Mar-shall-aise?"

Snapper promptly produced his instrument and mouth-organed the opening bars, and the Towers
joined in and sang the tune with vociferous "la-la-las." When they had finished, two or three
of the Frenchmen, after a quick word together struck up "God Save the King." Instantly the
others commenced to pick it up, but before they had sung three words 'Enery Irving, in tones
of horror, demanded "The Mar-shall-aise again; quick, you idiot!" from Snapper, and himself
swung off into a falsetto rendering of "Three Blind Mice." In a moment the Towers had in full
swing their medley caricature of the French march singing, under which "God Save the King"
was very completely drowned.

"What the devil d'you mean? Are you all mad?" demanded a wrathful subaltern, plunging round
the traverse to where Snapper mouth-organed the "Marseillaise," 'Enery Irving lustily intoned
his anthem of the Blind Mice, and Corporal Flannigan passed from the deep lowing of a cow to
the clarion calls of the farmyard rooster.

"Beg pardon, sir," said 'Enery Irving with lofty dignity, "but if I 'adn't started this row
the 'ole trenchful o' Frenchies would 'ave been 'owling our 'Gawd Save.' I saw that 'ud be
a clean give-away, an' the order bein' to act so as to deceive----"

"Quite right," said the officer, "and a smart idea of yours to block it. But who was the crazy
ass who started it by singing the 'Marseillaise'?" On this point, however, 'Enery was discreetly
silent.

Before the French had cleared the trench the Germans opened a leisurely bombardment with a
trench mortar. This delayed the proceeding somewhat, because it was reckoned wiser to halt
the men and clear them from the crowded trench into the dug-outs. "With the double company
of French and British, there was rather a tight squeeze in the shelters, wonderfully commodious
as they were.

"Now this," said Corporal Flannigan, "is what I call something like a dug-out." He looked appreciatively
round the square, smooth-walled chamber and up the steps to the small opening which gave admittance
to it. "Good dodge, too, this sinking it deep underground. Even if a bomb dropped in the trench
just outside, and pieces blew in the door, they'd only go over our heads. Something like, this is."

"I wonder," said another reflectively, "why we don't have dug-outs like this in our line?"
He spoke in a slightly aggrieved tone, as if dugouts were things that were issued from the
Quarter-Master's store, and therefore a legitimate cause for free complaint. He and his fellows
would certainly have felt a good deal more aggrieved, however, if they had been set the labor
of making such dug-outs.

Up above, such of the French and British as had been left in the trench were having quite a
busy time with the bombs. The Frenchmen had rather a unique way of dodging these, which the
Towers were quick to adopt. The whole length of the trench was divided up into compartments
by strong traverses running back at right angles from the forward parapet, and in each of these
compartments there were anything from four or five to a dozen men, all crowded to the backward
end of the traverse, waiting and watching there to see the bomb come twirling slowly and clumsily
over. As it reached the highest point of its curve and began to fall down towards the trench,
it was as a rule fairly easy to say whether it would fall to right or left of the traverse.
If it fell in the trench to the right, the men hurriedly plunged round the corner of the traverse
to the left, and waited there till the bomb exploded. The crushing together at the angle of
the traverse, the confused cries of warning or advice, or speculation as to which side a bomb
would fall, the scuffling, tumbling rush to one side or the other, the cries of derision which
greeted the ineffective explosion--all made up a sort of game. The Towers had had a good many
unhappy experiences with bombs, and at first played the unknown game carefully and anxiously,
and with some doubts as to its results. But they soon picked it up, and presently made quite
merry at it, laughing and shouting noisily, tumbling and picking themselves up and laughing
again like children.

They lost three men, who were wounded through their slowness in escaping from the compartment
where the bomb exploded, and this rather put the Towers on their mettle. As Private Robinson
remarked, it wasn't the cheese that a Frenchman should beat an Englishman at any blooming game.

"If we could only get a little bit of a stake on it," he said wistfully, "we could take 'em
on, the winners being them that loses least men."

It being impossible, however, to convey to the Frenchmen that interest would be added by the
addition of a little bet, the Towers had to content themselves with playing platoon against
platoon amongst themselves, the losing platoon pay, what they could conveniently afford, the
day's rations of the men who were casualtied. The subsequent task of dividing one and a quarter
pots of jam, five portions of cheese, bacon and a meat-and-potato stew was only settled eventually
by resource to a set of dice.

As the bombing continued methodically, the French artillery, who were still covering this portion
of the trench, set to work to silence the mortar, and the Towers thoroughly enjoyed the ensuing
performance, and the generous, not to say extravagant, fashion in which the French battery,
after the usual custom of French batteries, lavished its shells upon the task. For five minutes
the battery spoke in four-tongued emphatic tones, and the shells screamed over the forward
trench, crackled and crashed above the German line, dotted the German parapet along its length,
played up and down it in long bursts of fire, and deluged the suspected hiding-place of the
mortar with a torrent of high explosive. When it stopped, the bombing also had stopped for
that day.

The French infantry did not wait for the ceasing of the artillery fire. They gathered themselves
and their belongings and recommenced to move as soon as the guns began to speak.

"Feenish!" as one of them said, placing a finger on the ground, lifting it in a long curve,
twirling it over and over and downward again in imitation of a falling bomb. "Ze soixante-quinze
speak, bang-bang-bang!" and his fist jerked out four blows in a row. "Feenish!" he concluded,
holding a hand out towards the German lines and making a motion of rubbing something off the
slate. Plainly they were very proud of their artillery, and the Towers caught that word "soixante-quinze"
in every tone of pleasure, pride, and satisfaction. But as Private Robinson said, "I don't
wonder at it. Cans is a good name, but can-an'-does would be a better."

When the last of the Frenchmen had gone, the Towers completed their settling in and making
themselves comfortable in the vacated quarters. The greatest care was taken to avoid any man
showing a British cap or uniform. "Snapper" Brown, urged by the public-spirited 'Enery Irving,
exhausted himself in playing the "Marseillaise" at the fullest pitch of his lungs and mouth-organ.
His artistic soul revolted at last at the repetition, but since the only other French tune
that was suggested was the Blue Danube Waltz, and there appeared to be divergent opinions as
to its nationality, "Snapper" at last struck, and refused to play the "Marseillaise" a single
time more. 'Enery Irving enthusiastically took up this matter of "acting so as to deceive the
Germans."

"Act!" he said. "If I'd a make-up box and a false mustache 'ere, I'd act so as to cheat the
French President 'imself, much less a parcel of beer-swilling Germs."

The German trenches were too far away to allow of any conversation, but 'Enery secured a board,
wrote on it in large letters "Veev la France," and displayed it over the parapet. After the
Germans had signified their notice of the sentiment by firing a dozen shots at it, 'Enery replaced
it by a fresh one, "A baa la Bosh." This notice was left standing, but to 'Enery's annoyance
the Germans displayed in return a board which said in plain English, "Good morning." "Ain't
that a knock out," said 'Enery disgustedly. "Much use me acting to deceive the Germans if some
silly blighter in another bit o' the line goes and gives the game away."

Throughout the rest of the day he endeavored to confuse the German's evident information by
the display of the French cap and of French sentences on the board like "Bong jewr," "Bong
nwee," and "Mercridi," which he told the others was the French for a day of the week, the spelling
being correct as he knew because he had seen it written down, and the day indicated, he believed,
being Wednesday--or Thursday. "And that's near enough," he said, "because to-day is Wednesday,
and if Mercridi means Wednesday, they'll think I'm signaling 'to-day'; and if it means Thursday,
they'll think I'm talking about to-morrow." All doubts of the German's knowledge appeared to
be removed, however, by their next notice, which stated plainly, "You are Englander." To that
'Enery, his French having failed him, could only retort by a drawing of outstretched fingers
and a thumb placed against a prominent nose on an obviously French face, with pointed mustache
and imperial, and a French cap. But clearly even this failed, and the German's next message
read, "WELL DONE, WALES!" The Towers were annoyed, intensely annoyed, because shortly before
that time the strikes of the Welsh miners had been prominent in the English papers, and as
the Towers guessed from this notice at least equally prominent in the German journals.

"And I only 'opes," said Robinson, "they sticks that notice up in front of some of the Taffy
regiments."

"I don't see that a bit," said 'Enery Irving. "The Taffys out 'ere 'ave done their bit along
with the best, and they're just as mad as us, and maybe madder, at these ha'penny-grabbing
loafers on strike."

"True enough," said Robinson, "but maybe they'll write 'ome and tell their pals 'ow pleased
the Bosche is with them, and 'ave a kind word in passing to say when any of them goes 'ome
casualtied or on leave, 'Well done, Wales!' Well, I 'ope Wales likes that smack in the eye,"
and he spat contemptuously. Presently he had the pleasure of expressing his mind more freely
to a French signaler of artillery who was on duty at an observing post in this forward fire
trench. The Frenchman had a sufficient smattering of English to ask awkward questions as to
why men were allowed to strike in England in war time, but unfortunately not enough to follow
Robinson's lengthy and agonized explanations that these men were not English but--a very different
thing--Welsh, and, more than that, unpatriotic swine, who ought to be shot. He was reduced
at last to turning the unpleasant subject aside by asking what the Frenchman was doing there
now the British had taken over. And presently the matter was shelved by a French observing
officer, who was on duty there, calling his signalers to attention. The German guns had opened
a slow and casual fire about half an hour before on the forward British trench, and now they
quickened their fire and commenced methodically to bombard the trench. At his captain's order
a signaler called up a battery by telephone. The telephone instrument was in a tall narrow
box with a handle at the side, and the signaler ground the handle vigorously for a minute and
shouted a long string of hello's into the instrument, rapidly twirled the handle again and
shouted, twirled and shouted.

The Towers watched him in some amusement. "'Ere, chum," said Robinson, "you 'aven't put your
tuppence in the slot," and 'Enery Irving in a falsetto imitation of a telephone girl's metallic
voice drawled: "Put two pennies in, please, and turn the handle after each--one--two--thank
you! You're through." The signaler revolved the handle again. "You're mistook, 'Enery," said
Robinson, "'e ain't through. Chum, you ought to get your tuppence back."

"Ask to be put through to the inquiry office," said another. "Make a complaint and tell 'em
to come and take the blanky thing away if it can't be kept in order. That's what I used to
'ear my governor say every other day."

From his lookout corner the captain called down in rapid French to his signaler.

"D 'ye 'ear that," said Robinson. "Garsong he called him. He's a bloomin' waiter! Well, well,
and me thought he was a signaler."

The captain at last was forced to descend from his place, and with the signaler endeavored
to rectify the faulty instrument. They got through at last, and the captain spoke to his battery.

"'Ear that," said Robinson. "'Mes on-fong,' he says. He's got a lot o' bloomin' infants too."

"Queer crowd!" said Flannigan. "What with infants for soldiers and a waiter for a signaler,
and a butcher or a baker or candlestick-maker for a President, as I'm told they have, they're
a rum crush altogether."

The captain ascended to his place again. A German shell, soaring over, burst with a loud crump
behind the trench. The French signaler laughed and waved derisively towards the shell. He leaned
his head and body far to one side, straightened slowly, bent his head on a curve to the other
side, and brought it up with a jerk, imitating, as he did so, the sound of the falling and
bursting shell, "sss-eee-aaa-ahah-aow-Wump." Another shell fell, and "aow-Wump," he cried again,
shuffling his feet and laughing gayly. The Towers laughed with him, and when the next shell
fell there was a general chorus of imitation.

The captain called again, the signaler ground the handle and spoke into the telephone. "Fire!"
he said, nodding delightedly to the Towers; "boom-boom-boom-boom." Immediately after they heard
the loud, harsh, crackling reports of the battery to their rear, and the shells rushed whistling
overhead.

The signaler mimicked the whistling sound, and clicked his heels together. "Ha!" he said, "soixante-quinze--good,
eh?" The captain called to him, and again he revolved the handle and called to the battery.

"Garsong," said Robinson, "a plate of swa-song-canned beans, si voo play--and serve 'em hot"

A German shell dropped again, and again the chorused howls and laughter of the Towers marked
its fall. The captain called for high explosive, and the signaler shouted on the order.

"Exploseef," repeated 'Enery Irving, again airing his French. "That's high explosive."

"Garsong, twopennorth of exploseef soup," chanted Robinson.

Then the order was sent down for rapid fire, and a moment later the battery burst out in running
quadruple reports, and the shells streamed whistling overhead. The Towers peered through periscopes
and over the parapet to watch the tossing plumes of smoke and dust that leaped and twisted
in the German lines. "Good old cans!" said Robinson appreciatively.

When the fire stopped, the captain came to the telephone and spoke to the battery in praise
of their shooting. The Towers listened carefully to catch a word here and there. "There he
goes again," said Robinson, "with 'is bloomin' infants," and later he asked the signaler the
meaning of "mes braves" that was so often in the captain's mouth.

"'Ear that," he said to the other Towers when the signaler explained it meant "my braves."
"Bloomin' braves he's calling his battery now. Infants was bad enough, but 'braves' is about
the limit. I'm open to admit they're brave enough; that bombing didn't seem to worry them,
and shell-fire pleases them like a call for dinner; and you remember that time we was in action
one side of the La Bassée road and they was in it on the other? Strewth! When I remember the
wiping they got crossing the open, and the way they stuck it and plugged through that mud,
and tore the barbed wire up by the roots, and sailed over into the German trench, I'm not going
to contradict anybody that calls 'em brave. But it sounds rum to 'ear 'em call each other it."

Robinson was busy surveying in a periscope the ground between the trenches. "I dunno if I'm
seein' things," he remarked suddenly, "but I could 've swore a man's 'and waved out o' the
grass over there." With the utmost caution half a dozen men peered out through loopholes and
with periscopes in the direction indicated, and presently a chorus of exclamations told that
the hand had again been seen. Robinson was just about to wave in reply when 'Enery grabbed his arm.

"You're a nice one to 'act so as to deceive,' you are," he said warmly. "I s'pose a khaki sleeve
is likely to make the 'Uns believe we're French. Now, you watch me."

He pulled back his tunic sleeve, held his shirtsleeved arm up the moment the next wave came,
and motioned a reply.

"He's in a hole o' some sort," said 'Enery. "Now I wonder who it is. A Frenchie by his tunic
sleeve."

"Yes; there's 'is cap," said Robinson suddenly. "Just up--and gone."

"Make the same motion wi' this cap on a bayonet," said 'Enery; "then knock off, case the Boshies
spot 'im."

The matter was reported, and presently a couple of officers came along, made a careful examination,
and waved the cap. A cautious reply, and a couple of bullets whistling past their cap came
at the same moment.

Later, 'Enery sought the sergeant. "Mind you this, sergeant," he said, "if there's any volunteerin'
for the job o' fetchin' that chap in, he belongs to me. I found 'im." The sergeant grinned.

"Robinson was here two minutes ago wi' the same tale," he said. "Seems you're all in a great
hurry to get shot."

"Like his bloomin' cheek!" said the indignant 'Enery. "I know why he wants to go out; he's
after those German helmets the interpreter told us was lyin' out there."

The difficulty was solved presently by the announcement that an officer was going out and would
take two volunteers--B Company to have first offer. 'Enery and Robinson secured the post, and
'Enery immediately sought the officer. Reminding him of the order to "act so as to deceive,"
he unfolded a plan which was favorably considered.

"Those Boshies thought they was bloomin' clever to twig we was English," he told the others
of B Company; "but you wait till the lime-light's on me. I'll puzzle 'em."

The two French artillery signalers were sleeping in the forward trench, and after some explanation
readily lent their long-skirted coats. The officer and Robinson donned one each, and 'Enery
carefully arrayed himself in a torn and discarded pair of old French baggy red breeches and
the damaged French cap, and discarded his own jacket. His gray shirt might have been of any
nationality, so that on the whole he made quite a passable Frenchman. While they waited for
darkness he paraded the trench, shrugging his shoulders, and gesticulating. "Bon joor, mays
ong-fong," he remarked with a careless hand-wave. "Hey, gar-song! Donney-moi du pang eh du
beurre, si voo play--and donnay-moi swoy-song cans--rapeed--exploseef! Merci, mes braves, mes
bloomin' 'eroes ... mes noble warriors, merci. Snapper, strike up the 'Conkerin' 'Ero,' if
you please."

Before the time came to go he added to his make-up by marking on his face with a burnt stick
huge black mustachios and an imperial, and although the officer stared a little when he came
along he ended by laughing, and leaving 'Enery his "make-up" disguise.

An hour after dark the three slipped quietly over the parapet and out through the barbed wire,
dragging a stretcher after them. It was a fairly quiet night, with only an occasional rifle
cracking and no artillery fire. A bright moon floated behind scudding clouds, and perhaps helped
the adventure by the alternate minutes of light and dark and the difficulty of focusing eyes
to the differences of moonlight and dark and the blaze of an occasional flare when the moon
was obscured. Behind the parapet the Towers waited with rifles ready, and stared out through
the loopholes; and behind them the French artillery officer, and his signalers standing by
their telephone, also waited with the loaded guns and ready gunners at the other end of the
wire. The watchers saw the dark blot of men and stretcher slip under the wires, and slowly,
very slowly, creep on through the long grass. Half-way across, the watchers lost them amidst
the other black blots and shadows, and it was a full half-hour after when a private exclaimed
suddenly: "I see them," he said. "There, close where we saw the hand."

The moon vanished a moment, then sailed clear, throwing a strong silvery light across the open
ground, and showing plainly the German wire entanglements and the black-and-white patchwork
of their barricade. There were no visible signs of the rescue party, for the good reason that
they had slipped into and lay prone in the wide shell crater that held the wounded Frenchman.
Far spent the man was when they found him, for he had lain there three nights and two days
with a bullet-smashed thigh and the scrape across his skull that had led the rest of his night
patrol to count him dead and so abandon him.

Now the moon slid again behind the racing clouds, and patches of light and shadow in turn chased
across the open ground.

"Here they come," said the captain of B Company a few minutes later. "At least I think it's
them, altho' I can only see two men and no stretcher."

"Do you see them?" said an eager voice in French at his ear, and when he turned and found the
gunner captain and explained to him, the captain made a gesture of despair. "Perhaps it is
that they cannot move him," he said. "Or would they, do you think, return for more help? I
should go myself but that I may be needed to talk with the battery. Perhaps one of my signalers----"

But the Englishman assured him it was better to wait; they could not be returning for help;
that the three could do all a dozen could.

Again they waited and watched in eager suspense, glimpsing the crawling figures now and then,
losing them again, in doubts and certainty in swift turns as to the whereabouts and identity
of the crawling figures.

"There is one of them," said the captain quickly; "there, by himself, in those cursed red breeches.
They show up in the flarelight like a blood-spot on a clean collar. Dashed idiot! And I was
a fool, too, to let him go like that."

But it was plain now that 'Enery Irving was dragging his red breeches well clear of the others,
although it was not plain, what the others had done with the stretcher. There were two of them
at the length of a stretcher apart, and yet no visible stretcher lay between them. It was the
sergeant who solved the mystery.

"I'm blowed!" he said, in admiring wonder; "they've covered the stretcher over with cut grass.
They've got their man too--see his head this end."

Now that they knew it, all could see the outline of the man's body covered over with grass,
the thick tufts waving upright from his hands and nodding between his legs.

They were three-quarters of the way across now, but still with a dangerous slope to cross.
It was ever so slight, but, tilted as it was towards the enemy's line, it was enough to show
much more plainly anything that moved or lay upon its face. They crawled on with a slowness
that was an agony to watch, crawled an inch at a time, lying dead and still when a light flared,
hitching themselves and the dragging stretcher onwards as the dullness of hazed moonlight fell.

The French captain was consumed with impatience, muttering exhortations to caution, whispering
excited urgings to move, as if his lips were at the creepers' ears, his fingers twitching and
jerking, his body hitching and holding still, exactly as if he too crawled out there and dragged
at the stretcher.

And then when it seemed that the worst was over, when there was no more than a score of feet
to cover to the barbed wire, when they were actually crawling over the brow of the gentle rise,
discovery came. There were quick shots from one spot of the German parapet, confused shouting,
the upward soaring of half a dozen blazing flares.

And then before the two dragging the stretcher could move in a last desperate rush for safety,
before they could rise from their prone position, they heard the rattle of fire increase swiftly
to a trembling staccato roar. But, miraculously, no bullets came near them, no whistling was
about their ears, no ping and smack of impacting lead hailed about them--except, yes, just
the fire of one rifle or two that sent aimed bullet after bullet hissing over them. They could
not understand it, but without waiting to understand they half rose, thrust and hauled at the
stretcher, dragged it under the wires, heaved it over to where eager hands tore down the sandbags
to gap a passage for them. A handful of bullets whipped and rapped about them as they tumbled
over, and the stretcher was hoisted in, but nothing worth mention, nothing certainly of that
volume of fire that drammed and rolled out over there. They did not understand; but the others
in the trench understood, and laughed a little and swore a deal, then shut their teeth and
set themselves to pump bullets in a covering fire upon the German parapet.

The stretcher party drew little or no fire, simply and solely because just one second after
those first shots and loud shouts had declared the game up, a figure sprang from the grass
fifty yards along the trench and twice as far out in the open, sprang up and ran out, and stood
in the glare of light, the baggy scarlet breeches and gray shirt making a flaring mark that
no eye, called suddenly to see, could miss, that no rifle brought sliding through the loophole
and searching for a target could fail to mark. The bullets began to patter about 'Enery Irving's
feet, to whine and whimper and buzz about his ears. And 'Enery--this was where the trench,
despite themselves, laughed--'Enery placed his hand on his heart, swept off his cap in a magnificent
arm's length gesture, and bowed low; then swiftly he rose upright, struck an attitude that
would have graced the hero of the highest class Adelphi drama, and in a shrill voice that rang
clear above the hammering tumult of the rifles, screamed "Veev la France! A baa la Bosh!" The
rifles by this time were pelting a storm of lead at him, and now that the haste and flurry
of the urgent call had passed and the shooters had steadied to their task, the storm was perilously
close. 'Enery stayed a moment even then to spread his hands and raise his shoulders ear-high
in a magnificent stage shrug; but a bullet snatched the cap from his head, and 'Enery ducked
hastily, turned, and ran his hardest, with the bullets snapping at his heels.

Back in the trench a frantic French captain was raving at the telephone, whirling the handle
round, screaming for "Fire, fire, fire!"

Private Flannigan looked over his shoulder at him, "Mong capitaine," he said, "you ought, you
reely ought, to ring up your telephone; turn the handle round an' say something." 

"I only wished to be sure that you understood some things clearly."

At her rather vague words, he said, "I am beginning to understand a good many things."

"And understanding, you will still come to--" she smiled, "to work in Denny's garden?"

"Yes," he answered with a boyish laugh, "just as if there were no
other place in all the world where I could get a job."

She watched him as he swung down the walk, through the gate and away
up the street under the big trees.

And as she watched him, she recalled his words, "I need you;--just
as though there were no other place in all the world."

The words repeated themselves in her mind.

How much did they mean, she wondered.

CHAPTER XXV.

A LABORER AND HIS HIRE

"But it was a reaching out in the dark, a blind groping for something--Dan
knew not exactly what: a restless but cautious feeling about for a
place whereon to set his feet."

It was the Sunday evening following the incidents just related that Dan was challenged.

His sermon was on "Fellowship of Service," a theme very different from the subjects he had chosen
at the beginning of his preaching in Corinth.

The Doctor smiled as he listened, telling himself that the boy was already beginning to "reach
out." As usual the Doctor was right.

With the sublime confidence of the newly-graduated, this young shepherd had come from the denominational
granary to feed his flock with a goodly armful of theological husks;
and very good husks they were too.

It should be remembered that--while Dan had been so raised under
the teachings of his home that, to an unusual degree his ideals and
ambitions were most truly Christian--he knew nothing of life other
than the simple life of the country neighborhood where he was born;
he knew as little of churches.

So that--while it was natural and easy for him to accept the husks from his church teachers at
their valuation, being wholly without the fixed prejudice that comes from family church traditions--it
was just as natural and easy for him to discover quickly, when once
he was face to face with his hungry flock, that the husks were husks.

From the charm of the historical glories of the church as pictured
by the church historians, and from the equally captivating theories
of speculative religion as presented by teachers of schools of theology,
Dan had been brought suddenly in contact with actual conditions. In
his experience of the past weeks there was no charm, no glory, no
historical greatness, no theoretical perfection. There was meanness,
shameful littleness--actual, repulsive, shocking. He was compelled
to recognize the real need that his husks could not satisfy. It had
been forced upon his attention by living arguments that refused to
be put aside. And Big Dan was big enough to see that the husks did
not suffice--consistent enough to cease giving them out. But the young
minister felt pitifully empty handed.

The Doctor had foreseen that
Dan would very soon reach the point in his ministerial journey where
he was now standing--the point where he must decide which of the two
courses open to him he should choose.

Before him, on the one hand,
lay the easy, well-worn path of obedience to the traditions, policies
and doctrines of Memorial Church and its denominational leaders.

"That's it," said 'Enery, "business-like is the word for 'em. I noticed them 'airy-faces shootin'
to-day. They did it like they was sent there to kill somebody, and they meant doin' their job
thorough an' competent. Afore I come this trip on the Continong I used to think a Frenchman
was good for nothing but fiddlin' an' dancin' an' makin' love. But since I've seen 'em settin'
to Bosh partners an' dancin' across the neutral ground an' love-makin' wi' Rosalie,[Footnote:
Rosalie--the French nickname for the bayonet.] I've learned better. 'Ere's luck to 'im," and
he drained the mess-tin.

And the French, if one might judge from the story mon capitaine had to tell his major, had
also revised some ancient opinions of their Allies.

"Cold!" he said scornfully; "never again tell me these English are cold. Children--perhaps.
Foolish--but yes, a little. They try to kill a man between jests; they laugh if a bullet wounds
a comrade so that he grimaces with pain--it is true; I saw it." It was true, and had reference
to a sight scrape of a bullet across the tip of the nose of a Towers private, and the ribald
jests and laughter thereat. "They make jokes, and say a man 'stopped one,' meaning a shell
had been stopped in its flight by exploding on him--this the interpreter has explained to me.
But cold--no, no, no! If you had seen this man--ah, sublime, magnificent! With the whistling
balls all round him he stands, so brave, so noble, so fine, stands--so! 'Vive la France!' he
cried aloud, with a tongue of trumpets; 'Vive la France! A bas les Boches!'"

The captain, as he declaimed "with a tongue of trumpets," leaped to his feet and struck an
attitude that was really quite a good imitation of 'Enery's own mock-tragedian one. But the
officers listening breathed awe and admiration; they did not, as the Towers did, laugh, because
here, unlike the Towers, they saw nothing to laugh at.

The captain dropped to his chair amid a murmur of applause. "Sublime!" he said. "That posture,
that cry! Indeed, it was worthy of a Frenchman. But certainly we must recommend him for a Cross
of France, eh, my major?"

'Enery Irving got the Cross of the Legion of Honor. But I doubt if it ever gave him such pure
and legitimate joy as did a notice stuck up in the German trench next day. Certainly it insulted
the English by stating that their workers stayed at home and went on strike while Frenchmen
fought and died. But it was headed "Frenchman!" and it was written in French.

THE FEAR OF FEAR

"At ---- we recaptured the portion of front line trench lost by us some days ago."--EXTRACT
FROM DISPATCH.

"In a charge," said the Sergeant, "the 'Hotwater Guards' don't think about going back till
there's none of them left to go back; and you can always remember this: if you go forward you
may die, if you go back you will die."

The memory of that phrase came back to Private Everton, tramping down the dark road to the
firing-line. Just because he had no knowledge of how he himself would behave in this his baptism
of fire, just because he was in deadly fear that he would feel fear, or, still worse, show
it, he strove to fix that phrase firmly in front of his mind. "If I can remember that," he
thought, "it will stop me going back, anyway," and he repeated: "If you go back you will die,
if you go back you will die," over and over.

It is true that, for all his repetition, when a field battery, hidden close by the side of
the road on which they marched, roared in a sudden and ear-splitting salvo of six guns, for
the instant he thought he was under fire and that a huge shell had burst somewhere desperately
close to them. He had jumped, his comrades assured him afterwards, a clear foot and a half
off the ground, and he himself remembered that his first involuntary glance and thought flashed
to the deep ditch that ran alongside the road.

When he came to the trenches, at last, and filed down the narrow communication-trench and into
his Company's appointed position in the deep ditch with a narrow platform along its front that
was the forward fire-trench, he remembered with unpleasant clearness that instinctive start
and thought of taking cover. By that time he had actually been under fire, had heard the shells
rush over him and the shattering noise of their burst; had heard the bullets piping and humming
and hissing over the communication- and firing-trenches. He took a little comfort from the
fact that he had not felt any great fear then, but he had to temper that by the admission that
there was little to be afraid of there in the shelter of the deep trench. It was what he would
do and feel when he climbed out of cover on to the exposed and bullet-swept flat before the
trench that he was in doubt about; for the Hotwaters had been told that at nine o'clock there
was to be a brief but intense bombardment on a section of trench in front of them which had
been captured from us the day before, and which, after several counter-attacks had failed,
was to be taken that morning by this battalion of Hotwaters.

At half-past eight, nobody entering their trench would have dreamed that the Hotwaters were
going into a serious action in half an hour. The men were lounging about, squatting on the
firing-step, chaffing and talking--laughing even--quite easily and naturally; some were smoking,
and others had produced biscuits and bully beef from their haversacks and were calmly eating
their breakfast.

Everton felt a glow of pride as he looked at them. These men were his friends, his fellows,
his comrades: they were of the Hotwater Guards--his regiment, and his battalion. He had heard
often enough that the Guards Brigades were the finest brigades in the Army, that this particular
brigade was the best of all the Guards, that his battalion was the best of the Brigade. Hitherto
he had rather deprecated these remarks as savoring of pride and self-conceit, but now he began
to believe that they must be true; and so believing, if he had but known it, he had taken another
long step on the way to becoming the perfect soldier, who firmly believes his regiment the
finest in the world and is ready to die in proof of the belief.

"Dusty Miller," the next file on his left, who was eating bread and cheese, spoke to him.

"Why don't you eat some grab, Toffee?" he mumbled cheerfully, with his mouth full. "In a game
like this you never know when you'll get the next chance of a bite."

"Don't feel particularly hungry," answered Toffee with an attempt to appear as off-handed and
casual and at ease as his questioner. "So I think I'd better save my ration until I'm hungry."

Dusty Miller sliced off a wedge of bread with the knife edge against his thumb, popped it in
his mouth, and followed it with a corner of cheese.

"A-ah!" he said profoundly, and still munching; "there's no sense in saving rations when you're
going into action. I'd a chum once that always did that; said he got more satisfaction out
of a meal when the job was over and he was real hungry, and had a chance to eat in comfort--more
or less comfort. And one day we was for it he saved a tin o' sardines and a big chunk of cake
and a bottle of pickled onions that had just come to him from home the day before; said he
was looking forward to a good feed that night after the show was over. And--and he was killed
that day!"

Dusty Miller halted there with the inborn artistry that left his climax to speak for itself.

"Hard luck!" said Toffee sympathetically. "So his feed was wasted!"

"Not to say wasted exactly," said Dusty, resuming bread and cheese. "Because I remembers to
this day how good them onions was. Still it was wasted, far as he was concerned--and he was
particular fond o' pickled onions."

But even the prospect of wasting his rations did nothing to induce Toffee to eat a meal. The
man on Toffee's right was crouched back on the firing-step apparently asleep or near it. Dusty
Miller had turned and opened a low-toned conversation with the next man, the frequent repetition
of "I says" and "she says" affording some clew to the thread of his story and inclining Toffee
to believe it not meant for him to hear. He felt he must speak to some one, and it was with
relief that he saw Halliday, the man on his other side, rouse himself and look up. Something
about Toffee's face caught his attention.

"How are you feeling?" he asked, leaning forward and speaking quietly. "This is your first
charge, isn't it!"

"Yes," said Toffee, "I'm all right. I--I think I'm all right."

The other moved slightly on the firing-step, leaving a little room, and Toffee took this as
an invitation to sit down. Halliday continued to speak in low tones that were not likely to
pass beyond his listener's ear.

"Don't you get scared," he said. "You've nothing much to be scared about."

He threw a little emphasis, and Toffee fancied a little envy, into the "you."

"I'm not scared exactly," said Toffee. "I'm sort of wondering what it will be like."

"I know," said Halliday, "I know; and who should, if I didn't? But I can tell you this--you
don't need to be afraid of shells, you don't need to be afraid of bullets, and least of all
is there any need to be afraid of the cold iron when the Hotwaters get into the trench. You
don't need to be afraid of being wounded, because that only means home and a hospital and a
warm dry bed; you don't need to be afraid of dying, because you've got to die some day, anyhow.
There's only one thing in this game to be afraid of, and there isn't many finds that in their
first engagement. It's the ones like me that get it."

Toffee glanced at him curiously and in some amazement. Now that he looked closely, he could
see that, despite his easy loungeful attitude and steady voice, and apparently indifferent
look, there was something odd and unexplainable about Halliday: some faintest twitching of
his lips, a shade of pallor on his cheek, a hunted look deep at the back of his eyes. Everton
tried to speak lightly.

"And what is it, then, that the likes o' you get?"

Halliday's voice sank to little more than a whisper. "It's the fear o' fear," he said steadily.
"Maybe, you think you know what that is, that you feel it yourself. You know what I mean, I
suppose?"

Toffee nodded. "I think so," he said. "What I fear myself is that I'll be afraid and show that
I'm afraid, that I'll do something rotten when we get out up there."

He jerked his head up and back towards the open where the rifles sputtered and the bullets
whistled querulously. 

Palm Sunday Wind.--It is a common idea among many of the farmers and labourers of this immediate
neighbourhood, that, from whatever quarter the wind blows for the most part on Palm Sunday,
it will continue to blow from the same quarter for the most part during the ensuing summer.

Is this notion prevalent in other parts of the country, as a piece
of "Folk-Lore?"

R.V.

Winchester, March 26.

Curious Symbolical Custom.--On Saturday
last I married a couple in the parish church. Why, I've heard said often that you're one of the coolest
under fire, and that you don't know what fear is!"

"It's a good reputation to have if you can keep it," said Halliday. "But it makes it worse
if you can't."

"I wish," said Toffee enviously, "I was as sure of keeping it as you are to-day."

Halliday pulled his hand from his pocket and held it beside him where only Toffee could see
it. It was quivering like a flag-halliard in a stiff breeze. He thrust it back in his pocket.

"Doesn't look too sure, does it?" he said grimly. "And my heart is shaking a sight worse than
my hand."

He was interrupted by the arrival of a group of German shells on and about the section of trench
they were in. One burst on the rear lip of the trench, spattering earth and bullets about them
and leaving a choking reek swirling and eddying along the trench. There was silence for an
instant, and then an officer's voice called from the near traverse. "Is anybody hit there!"
A sergeant shouted back "No, sir," and was immediately remonstrated with by an indignant private
busily engaged in scraping the remains of a mud clod from his eye.

"You might wait a minute, Sergeant," he said, "afore you reports no casualties, just to give
us time to look round and count if all our limbs is left on. And I've serious doubts at this
minute whether my eye is in its right place or bulging out the back o' my head; anyway, it
feels as if an eight-inch Krupp had bumped fair into it."

When the explosion came, Toffee Everton had instinctively ducked and crouched, but he noticed
that Halliday never moved or gave a sign of the nearness of any danger. Toffee remarked this
to him.

"And I don't see," he confessed, "where that fits in with this hand- and heart-shaking o' yours."

Halliday looked at him curiously.

"If that was the worst," he said, "I could stand it. It isn't. It isn't the beginning of the
least of the worst. If it had fell in the trench, now, and mucked up half a dozen men, there'd
have been something to squeal about. That's the sort o' thing that breaks a man up--your own
mates that was talking to you a minute afore, ripped to bits and torn to ribbons. I've seen
nothing left of a whole live man but a pair o' burnt boots. I've seen--" He stopped abruptly
and shivered a little. "I'm not going to talk about it," he said. "I think about it and see
it too often in my dreams as it is. And, besides," he went on, "I didn't duck that time, because
I've learnt enough to know it's too late to duck when the shell bursts a dozen yards from you.
I'm not so much afraid of dying, either. I've got to die, I've little doubt, before this war
is out; I don't think there's a dozen men in this battalion that came out with it in the beginning
and haven't been home sick or wounded since. I've seen one-half the battalion wiped out in
one engagement and built up with drafts, and the other half wiped out in the next scrap. We've
lost fifty and sixty and seventy per cent. of our strength at different times, and I've come
through it all without a scratch. Do you suppose I don't know it's against reason for me to
last out much longer? But I'm not afraid o' that. I'm not afraid of the worst death I've seen
a man die--and that's something pretty bad, believe me. What I'm afraid of is myself, of my
nerve cracking, of my doing something that will disgrace the Regiment."

The man's nerves were working now; there was a quiver of excitement in his voice, a grayer
shade on his cheek, a narrowing and a restless movement of his eyes, a stronger twitching of
his lips. More shells crashed sharply; a little along the line a gust of rifle-bullets swept
over and into the parapet; a Maxim rap-rap-rapped and its bullets spat hailing along the parapet
above their heads.

Halliday caught his breath and shivered again.

"That," he said--"that is one of the devils we've got to face presently." His eyes glanced
furtively about him. "God!" he muttered, "if I could only get out of this! 'Tisn't fair, I
tell ye, it isn't fair to ask a man that's been through what I have to take it on again, knowing
that if I do come through, 'twill be the same thing to go through over and over until they
get me; or until my own sergeant shoots me for refusing to face it."

Everton had listened in amazed silence--an understanding utterly beyond him. He knew the name
that Halliday bore in the regiment, knew that he was seeing and hearing more than Halliday
perhaps had ever shown or told to anyone. Shamefacedly and self-consciously, he tried to say
something to console and hearten the other man, but Halliday interrupted him roughly.

"That's it!" he said bitterly. "Go on! Pat me on the back and tell me to be a good boy and
not to be frightened. I'm coming to it at last: old Bob Halliday that's been through it from
the beginning, one o' the Old Contemptibles, come down to be mothered and hushaby-baby'd by
a blanky recruit, with the first polish hardly off his new buttons."

He broke off and into bitter cursing, reviling the Germans, the war, himself and Everton, his
sergeant and platoon commander, the O.C., and at last the regiment itself. But at that the
torrent of his oaths broke off, and he sat silent and shaking for a minute. He glanced sideways
at last at the embarrassed Everton.

"Don't take no notice o' me, chum," he said. "I wasn't speaking too loud, was I? The others
haven't noticed, do you think? I don't want to look round for a minute."

Everton assured him that he had not spoken too loud, that nobody appeared to have noticed anything,
and that none were looking their way. He added a feeble question as to whether Halliday, if
he felt so bad, could not report himself as sick or something and escape having to leave the
trench.

Halliday's lips twisted in a bitter grin.

"That would be a pretty tale," he said. "No, boy, I'll try and pull through once more, and
if my heart fails me--look here, I've often thought o' this, and some day, maybe, it will come
to it."

He lifted his rifle and put the butt down in the trench bottom, slipped his bayonet out, and
holding the rifle near the muzzle with one hand, with the other placed the point of the bayonet
to the trigger of the rifle. He removed it instantly and returned it to its place.

"There's always that," he said. "It can be done in a second, and no matter how a man's hand
shakes, he can steady the point of the bayonet against the trigger-guard, push it down till
the point pushes the trigger home."

"Do you mean," stammered Everton in amazement--"do you mean--shoot yourself?"

"Ssh! not so loud," cautioned Halliday. "Yes, it's better than being shot by my own officer,
isn't it?"

Everton's mind was floundering hopelessly round this strange problem. He could understand a
man being afraid; he was not sure that he wasn't afraid himself; but that a man afraid that
he could not face death could yet contemplate certain death by his own hand, was completely
beyond him.

Halliday drew his breath in a deep sigh.

"We'll say no more about it," he said. "I feel better now; it's something to know I always
have that to fall back on at the worst. I'll be all right now--until it comes the minute to
climb over the parapet."

It was nearly nine o'clock, and word was passed down the line for every man to get down as
low as he could in the bottom of the trench. The trench they were about to attack was only
forty or fifty yards away, and since the Heavies as well as the Field guns were to bombard,
there was quite a large possibility of splinters and fragments being thrown by the lyddite
back as far as the British trench. At nine, sharp to the tick of the clock, the rush, rush,
rush of a field battery's shells passed overhead. Because the target was so close, the passing
shells seemed desperately near to the British parapet, as indeed they actually were. The rush
of shells and the crash of their explosion sounded in the forward trench before the boom of
the guns which fired them traveled to the British trench. Before the first round of this opening
battery had finished, another and another joined in, and then, in a deluge of noise, the intense
bombardment commenced.

Crouching low in the bottom of the trench, half deafened by the uproar, the men waited for
the word to move. The concentrated fire on this portion of front indicated clearly to the Germans
that an attack was coming, and where it was to be expected. The obviously correct procedure
for the gunners was of course to have bombarded many sections of front so that no certain clew
would be given as to the point of the coming attack. But this was in the days when shells were
very, very precious things, and gunners had to grit their teeth helplessly, doling out round
by round, while the German gun- and rifle-fire did its worst. The Germans, then, could see
now where the attack was concentrated, and promptly proceeded to break it up before it was
launched. Shells began to sweep the trench where the Hotwater Guards lay, to batter at their
parapet, and to prepare a curtain of fire along their front.

Everton lay and listened to the appalling clamor; but when the word was passed round to get
ready, he rose to his feet and climbed to the firing-step without any overpowering sense of
fear. A sentence from the man on his left had done a good deal to hearten him.

"Gostrewth! 'ark at our guns!" he said. "They ain't 'arf pitchin' it in. W'y, this ain't goin'
to be no charge; it's going to be a sort of merry picnic, a game of ''Ere we go gatherin' nuts
in May.' There won't be any Germans left in them trenches, and we'll 'ave nothin' to do but
collect the 'elmets and sooveneers and make ourselves at 'ome."

"Did you hear that!" Everton asked Halliday. "Is it anyways true, do you think?"

"A good bit," said Halliday. "I've never seen a bit of German front smothered up by our guns
the way this seems to be now, though I've often enough seen it the other way. The trench in
front should be smashed past any shape for stopping our charge if the gunners are making any
straight shooting at all."

It was evident that the whole trench shared his opinion, and expressions of amazed delight
ran up and down the length of the Hotwaters. When the order came to leave the trench, the men
were up and out of it with a bound.

Everton was too busy with his own scramble put to pay much heed to Halliday; but as they worked
out through their own barbed wire, he was relieved to find him at his side. He caught Everton's
look, and although his teeth were gripped tight, he nodded cheerfully. Presently, when they
were forming into line again beyond the wire, Halliday spoke.

"Not too bad," he said. "The guns has done it for us this time. Come on, now, and keep your
wits when you get across."

In the ensuing rush across the open, Everton was conscious of no sensation of fear. The guns
had lifted their fire farther back as the Hotwaters emerged from their trench, and the rush
and rumble of their shells was still passing overhead as the line advanced. The German artillery
hardly dared drop their range to sweep the advance, because of its proximity to their own trench.
A fairly heavy rifle-fire was coming from the flanks, but to a certain extent that was kept
down by some of our batteries spreading their fire over those portions of the German trench
which were not being attacked, and by a heavy rifle- and machine-gun fire which was pelted
across from the opposite parts of the British line.

From the immediate front, which was the Hotwaters' objective, there was practically no attempt
at resistance until the advance was half-way across the short distance between the trenches,
and even then it was no more than a spasmodic attempt and the feeble resistance of a few rifles
and a machine-gun. The Hotwaters reached the trench with comparatively slight loss, pushed
into it, and over it, and pressed on to the next line, the object being to threaten the continuance
of the attack, to take the next trench if the resistance was not too severe, and so to give
time for the reorganization of the first captured trench to resist the German counter-attack.

Everton was one of the first to reach the forward trench. It had been roughly handled by the
artillery fire, and the men in it made little show of resistance. The Hotwaters swarmed into
the broken ditch, shooting and stabbing the few who fought back, disarming the prisoners who
had surrendered with hands over their heads and quavering cries of "Kamerad." Everton rushed
one man who appeared to be in two minds whether to surrender or not, fingering and half lifting
his rifle and lowering it again, looking round over his shoulder, once more raising his rifle
muzzle. Everton killed him with the bayonet. Afterwards he climbed out and ran on, after the
line had pushed forward to the next trench. There was an awe, and a thrill of satisfaction
in his heart as he looked at his stained bayonet, but, as he suddenly recognized with a tremendous
joy, not the faintest sensation of being afraid. He looked round grinning to the man next him,
and was on the point of shouting some jest to him, when he saw the man stumble and pitch heavily
on his face. It flashed into Everton's mind that he had tripped over a hidden wire, and he
was about to shout some chaffing remark, when he saw the back of the man's head as he lay face
down. But even that unpleasant sight brought no fear to him.

There was a stout barricade of wire in front of the next trench, and an order was shouted along
to halt and lie down in front of it. The line dropped, and while some lay prone and fired as
fast as they could at any loophole or bobbing head they could see, others lit bombs and tossed
them into the trench. This trench also had been badly mauled by the shells, and the fire from
it was feeble. Everton lay firing for a few minutes, casting side glances on an officer close
in front of him, and on two or three men along the line who were coolly cutting through the
barbed wire with heavy nippers. Everton saw the officer spin round and drop to his knees, his
left hand nursing his hanging right arm. Everton jumped up and went over to him.

"Let me go on with it, sir," he said eagerly, and without waiting for any consent stooped and
picked up the fallen wire-cutters and set to work. He and the others, standing erect and working
on the wire, naturally drew a heavy proportion of the aimed fire; but Everton was only conscious
of an uplifting exhilaration, a delight that he should have had the chance at such a prominent
position. Many bullets came very close to him, but none touched him, and he went on cutting
wire after wire, quickly and methodically, grasping the strand well in the jaws of the nippers,
gripping till the wire parted and the severed ends sprang loose, calmly fitting the nippers
to the next strand.

Even when he had cut a clear path through, he went on working, widening the breach, cutting
more wires, dragging the trailing ends clear. Then he ran back to the line and to the officer
who had lain watching him.

"Your wire-nippers, sir," he said. "Shall I put them in your case for you?"

"Stick them in your pocket, Everton," said the youngster; "you've done good work with them.
Now lie down here."

All this was a matter of no more than three or four minutes' work. When the other gaps were
completed--the men in them being less fortunate than Everton and having several wounded during
the task--the line rose, rushed streaming through the gaps and down into the trench. If anything,
the damage done by the shells was greater there than in the first line, mainly perhaps because
the heavier guns had not hesitated to fire on the second line where the closeness of the first
line to the British would have made risky shooting. There were a good many dead and wounded
Germans in this second trench, and of the remainder many were hidden away in their dug-outs,
their nerves shaken beyond the sticking-point of courage by the artillery fire first, and later
by the close-quarter bombing and the rush of the cold steel.

The Hotwaters held that trench for some fifteen minutes. Then a weak counter-attack attempted
to emerge from another line of trenches a good two hundred yards back, but was instantly fallen
upon by our artillery and scourged by the accurate fire of the Hotwaters. The attack broke
before it was well under way, and scrambled back under cover.

Shortly afterwards the first captured trench having been put into some shape for defense, the
advance line of the Hotwaters retired. A small covering party stayed and kept up a rapid fire
till most of the others had gone, and then climbed through the trench and doubled back after them.

The officer, whose wire-cutters Everton had used, had been hit rather badly in the arm. He
had made light of the wound, and remained in the trench with the covering party; but when he
came to retire, he found that the pain and loss of blood had left him shaky and dizzy. Everton
helped him to climb from the trench; but as they ran back he saw from the corner of his eye
that the officer had slowed to a walk. He turned back and, ignoring the officer's advice to
push on, urged him to lean on him. It ended up by Everton and the officer being the last men
in, Everton half supporting, half carrying the other. Once more he felt a childish pleasure
at this opportunity to distinguish himself. He was half intoxicated with the heady wine of
excitement and success, he asked only for other and greater and riskier opportunities. "Risk,"
he thought contemptuously, "is only a pleasant excitement, danger the spice to the risk." He
asked his sergeant to be allowed to go out and help the stretcher-bearers who were clearing
the wounded from the ground over which the first advance had been made.

"No," said the Sergeant shortly. "The stretcher-bearers have their job, and they've got to
do it. Your job is here, and you can stop and do that. You've done enough for one day." Then,
conscious perhaps that he had spoken with unnecessary sharpness, he added a word. "You've made
a good beginning, lad, and done good work for your first show; don't spoil it with rank gallery
play."

But now that the German gunners knew the British line had advanced and held the captured trench,
they pelted it, the open ground behind it, and the trench that had been the British front line,
with a storm of shell-fire. The rifle-fire was hotter, too, and the rallied defense was pouring
in whistling stream of bullets. But the captured trench, which it will be remembered was a
recaptured British one, ran back and joined up with the British lines. It was possible therefore
to bring up plenty of ammunition, sandbags, and reinforcements, and by now the defense had
been sufficiently made good to have every prospect of resisting any counter-attack and of withstanding
the bombardment to which it was being subjected. But the heavy fire drove the stretcher-bearers
off the open ground, while there still remained some dead and wounded to be brought in.

Everton had missed Halliday, and his anxious inquiries failed to find him or any word of him,
until at last one man said he believed Halliday had been dropped in the rush on the first trench.
Everton stood up and peered back over the ground behind them. Thirty yards away he saw a man
lying prone and busily at work with his trenching-tool, endeavoring to build up a scanty cover.
Everton shouted at the pitch of his voice, "Halliday!" The digging figure paused, lifted the
trenching-tool and waved it, and then fell to work again. Everton pressed along the crowded
trench to the sergeant.

"Sergeant," he said breathlessly, "Halliday's lying out there wounded, he's a good pal o' mine
and I'd like to fetch him in."

The Sergeant was rather doubtful. He made Everton point out the digging figure, and was calculating
the distance from the nearest point of the trench, and the bullets that drummed between.

"It's almost a cert you get hit," he said, "even if you crawl out. He's got a bit of cover
and he's making more, fast. I think--"

A voice behind interrupted, and Everton and the Sergeant turned to find the Captain looking
up at them.

"What's this?" he repeated, and the Sergeant explained the position.

"Go ahead!" said the Captain. "Get him in if you can, and good luck to you."

Everton wanted no more. Two minutes later he was out of the trench and racing back across the open.

"Come on, Halliday," he said. "I'll give you a hoist in. Where are you hit?"

"Leg and arm," said Halliday briefly; and then, rather ungraciously, "You're a fool to be out
here; but I suppose now you're here, you might as well give me a hand in."

But he spoke differently after Everton had given him a hand, had lifted him and carried him,
and so brought him back to the trench and lowered him into waiting hands. His wounds were bandaged
and, before he was carried off, he spoke to Everton.

"Good-by, Toffee," he said and held out his left hand, "I owe you a heap. And look here---"
He hesitated a moment and then spoke in tones so low that Everton had to bend over the stretcher
to hear him. "My leg's smashed bad, and I'm done for the Front and the old Hotwaters. I wouldn't
like it to get about--I don't want the others to think--to know about me feeling--well, like
I told you back there before the charge."

Toffee grabbed the uninjured-hand hard. "You old frost!" he said gayly, "there's no need to
keep it up any longer now; but I don't mind telling you, old man, you fairly hoaxed me that
time, and actually I believed what you were saying. 'Course, I know better now; but I'll punch
the head off any man that ever whispers a word against you."

Halliday looked at him queerly. "Good-by, Toffee," he said again, "and thank ye."

ANTI-AIRCRAFT

"Enemy airmen appearing over our lines have been turned hack or driven off by shell fire."--EXTRACT
FROM DESPATCH.

Gardening is a hobby which does not exist under very favorable conditions at the front, its
greatest drawback being that when the gardener's unit is moved from one place to another his
garden cannot accompany him. Its devotees appear to derive a certain amount of satisfaction
from the mere making of a garden, the laying-out and digging and planting; but it can be imagined
that the most enthusiastic gardener would in time become discouraged by a long series of beginnings
without any endings to his labors, to a frequent sowing and an entire absence of reaping.

There are, however, some units which, from the nature of their business, are stationary in
one place for months on end, and here the gardener as a rule has an opportunity for the indulgence
of his pursuit. In clearing-hospitals, ammunition-parks, and Army Service Corps supply points,
there are, I believe, many such fixed abodes; but the manners and customs of the inhabitants
of such happy resting-places are practically unknown to the men who live month in month out
in a narrow territory, bounded on the east by the forward firing line and on the west by the
line of the battery positions, or at farthest the villages of the reserve billets. In any case
these places are rather outside the scope of tales dealing with what may be called the "Under
Fire Front," and it was this front which I had in mind when I said that gardening did not receive
much encouragement at the front. But during the first spring of the War I know of at least
one enthusiast who did his utmost, metaphorically speaking, to beat his sword into a plowshare,
and to turn aside at every opportunity from the duty of killing Germans to the pleasures of
growing potatoes. He was a gunner in the detachment of the Blue Marines, which ran a couple
of armored motor-cars carrying anti-aircraft guns.

It is one of the advantages of this branch of the air-war that when a suitable position is
fixed on for defense of any other position, the detachment may stay there for some considerable
time. There are other advantages which will unfold themselves to those initiated in the ways
of the trench zone, although those outside of it may miss them; but everyone will see that
prolonged stays in the one position give the gardener his opportunity. In this particular unit
of the Blue Marines was a gunner who intensely loved the potting and planting, the turning
over of yielding earth, the bedding-out and transplanting, the watering and weeding and tending
of a garden, possibly because the greater part of his life had been lived at sea in touch with
nothing more yielding than a steel plate or a hard plank.

The gunner was known throughout the unit by no other name than Mary, fittingly taken from the
nursery rhyme which inquires, "Mary, Mary, quite contrary, how does your garden grow?" The
similarity between Mary of the Blue Marines and Mary of the nursery rhyme ends, however, with
the first line, since Blue Marine Mary made no attempt to rear "silver bells and cockle shells"
(whatever they may be) all in a row. His whole energies were devoted to the raising of much
more practical things, like lettuces, radishes, carrots, spring onions, and any other vegetable
which has the commendable reputation of arriving reasonably early at maturity.

Twice that spring Mary's labors had been wasted because the section had moved before the time
was ripe from a gardener's point of view, and although Mary strove to transplant his garden
by uprooting the vegetables, packing them away in a box in the motor, and planting them out
in the new position, the vegetables failed to survive the breaking of their home ties, and
languished and died in spite of Mary's tender care. After the first failure he tried to lay
out a portable garden, enlisting the aid of "Chips" the carpenter in the manufacture of a number
of boxes, in which he placed earth and his new seedlings. This attempt, however, failed even
more disastrously than the first, the O.C. having made a most unpleasant fuss on the discovery
of two large boxes of mustard and cress "cluttering up," as he called it, the gun-mountings
on one of the armored cars, and, when the section moved suddenly in the dead of night, refusing
point-blank to allow any available space to be loaded up with Mary's budding garden. Mary's
plaintive inquiry as to what he was to do with the boxes was met by the brutal order to "chuck
the lot overboard," and the counter-inquiry as to whether he thought this show was a perambulating
botanical gardens.

So Mary lost his second garden complete, even unto the box of spring onions which were the
apple of his gardening eye. But he brisked up when the new position was established and he
learned through the officer's servant that the selected spot was considered an excellent one,
and offered every prospect of being held by the section for a considerable time. He selected
a favorable spot and proceeded once more to lay out a garden and to plant out a new lot of
vegetables.

The section's new position was only some fifteen hundred yards from the forward trench; but,
being at the bottom of a gently sloping ridge which ran between the position and the German
lines, it was covered from all except air observation. The two armored cars, containing guns,
were hidden away amongst the shattered ruins of a little hamlet; their armor-plated bodies,
already rendered as inconspicuous as possible by erratic daubs of bright colors laid on after
the most approved Futurist style, were further hidden by untidy wisps of straw, a few casual
beams, and any other of the broken rubbish which had once been a village. The men had their
quarters in the cellars of one of the broken houses, and the two officers inhabited the corner
of a house with a more or less remaining roof.

Mary's garden was in a sunny corner of what had been in happier days the back garden of one
of the cottages. The selection, as it turned out, was not altogether a happy one, because the
garden, when abandoned by its former owner, had run to seed most liberally, and the whole of
its area appeared to be impregnated with a variety of those seeds which give the most trouble
to the new possessor of an old garden. Anyone with the real gardening instinct appears to have
no difficulty in distinguishing between weeds and otherwise, even on their first appearance
in shape of a microscopic green shoot; but flowers are not weeds, and Mary had a good deal
of trouble to distinguish between the self-planted growths of nasturtiums, foxgloves, marigolds,
forget-me-nots, and other flowers, and the more prosaic but useful carrots and spring onions
which Mary had introduced. Probably a good many onions suffered the penalty of bad company,
and were sacrificed in the belief that they were flowers; but on the whole the new garden did
well, and began to show the trim rows of green shoots which afford such joy to the gardening
soul. The shoots grew rapidly, and as time passed uneventfully and the section remained unmoved,
the garden flourished and the vegetables drew near to the day when they would be fit for consumption.

Mary gloated over that garden; he went to a world of trouble with it, he bent over it and weeded
it for hours on end; he watered it religiously every night, he even erected miniature forcing
frames over some of the vegetable rows, ransacking the remains of the broken-down hamlet for
squares of glass or for any pieces large enough for his purpose. He built these cunningly with
frameworks of wood and untwisted strands of barbed wire, and there is no doubt they helped
the growth of his garden immensely.

Although they have not been torched upon, it must not be supposed that Mary had no other duties.
Despite our frequently announced "Supremacy of the Air," the anti-aircraft guns were in action
rather frequently. The German aeroplanes in this part of the line appeared to ignore the repeated
assurances in our Press that the German 'plane invariably makes off on the appearance of a
British one; and although it is true that in almost every case the German was "turned back,"
he very frequently postponed the turning until he had sailed up and down the line a few times
and seen, it may be supposed, all that there was to see.

At such times--and they happened as a rule at least once a day and occasionally two, three,
or four times a day--Mary had to run from his gardening and help man the guns.

In the course of a month the section shot away many thousands of shells, and, it is to be hoped,
severely frightened many German pilots, although at that time they could only claim to have
brought down one 'plane, and that in a descent so far behind the German lines that its fate
was uncertain.

It must be admitted that the gunners on the whole made excellent shooting, and if they did
not destroy their target, or even make him turn back, they fulfilled the almost equally useful
object of making him keep so high that he could do little useful observing. But the short periods
of time spent by the section in shooting were no more than enough to add a pleasant flavor
of sport to life, and on the whole, since the weather was good and the German gunnery was not--or
at least not good enough to be troublesome to the section--life during that month moved very
pleasantly.

But at last there came a day when it looked as if some of the inconveniences of war were due
to arrive. The German aeroplane appeared as usual one morning just after the section had completed
breakfast. The methodical regularity of hours kept by the German pilots added considerably
to the comfort and convenience of the section by allowing them to time their hours of sleep,
their meals, or an afternoon run by the O.C. on the motor into the near-by town, so as to fit
in nicely with the duty of anti-aircraft guns.

On this morning at the usual hour the aeroplane appeared, and the gunners, who were waiting
in handy proximity to the cars, jumped to their stations. The muzzles of the two-pounder pom-poms
moved slowly after their target, and when the range-indicator told that it was within reach
of their shells the first gun opened with a trial beltful. "Bang--bang--bang--bang!" it shouted,
a string of shells singing and sighing on their way into silence. In a few seconds, "Puff--puff--puff--puff!"
four pretty little white balls broke out and floated solid against the sky. They appeared well
below their target, and both the muzzles tilted a little and barked off another flight of shells.
This time they appeared to burst in beautiful proximity to the racing aeroplane, and immediately
the two-pounders opened a steady and accurate bombardment. The shells were evidently dangerously
close to the 'plane, for it tilted sharply and commenced to climb steadily; but it still held
on its way over the British lines, and the course it was taking it was evident would bring
it almost directly over the Blue Marines and their guns. The pom-poms continued their steady
yap-yap, jerking and springing between each, round, like eager terriers jumping the length
of their chain, recoiling and jumping, and yelping at every jump. But although the shells were
dead in line the range was too great, and the guns slowed down their rate of fire, merely rapping
off an occasional few rounds to keep the observer at a respectful distance, without an unnecessary
waste of ammunition.

Arrived above them, the aeroplane banked steeply and swung round in a complete circle.

"Dash his impudence," growled the captain. "Slap at him again, just for luck." The only effect
the resulting slap at him had, however, was to show the 'plane pilot that he was well out of
range and to bring him spiraling steeply down a good thousand feet. This brought him within
reach of the shells again, and both guns opened rapidly, dotting the sky thickly with beautiful
white puffs of smoke, through which the enemy sailed swiftly. Then suddenly another shape and
color of smoke appeared beneath him, and a red light burst from it flaring and floating slowly
downwards. Another followed, and then another, and the 'plane straightened out its course,
swerved, and flashed swiftly off down-wind, pursued to the limit of their range by the raving
pom-poms. "Which it seems to me," said the Blue Marine sergeant reflectively, "that our Tauby
had us spotted and was signaling his guns to call and leave a card on us."

That afternoon showed some proof of the correctness of the sergeant's supposition; a heavy
shell soared over and dropped with a crash in an open field some two hundred yards beyond the
outermost house of the hamlet. In five minutes another followed, and in the same field blew
out a hole about twenty yards from the first. A third made another hole another twenty yards
off, and a fourth again at the same interval.

When the performance ceased, the captain and his lieutenant held a conference over the matter.
"It looks as if we'd have to shift," said the captain. "That fellow has got us marked down
right enough."

"If he doesn't come any nearer," said the lieutenant, "we're all right. We won't need to take
cover when the shelling starts, and even if the guns are shooting when the German is shelling,
the armor-plate will easily stand off splinters from that distance."

"Yes," said the captain. "But do you suppose our friend the Flighty Hun won't have a peep at
us to-morrow morning to see where those shells landed? If he does, or if he takes a photograph,
those holes will show up like a chalk-mark on a blackboard; then he has only to tell his gun
to step this way a couple of hundred yards and we get it in the neck. I'm inclined to think
we'd better up anchor and away."

"We're pretty comfortable here, you know," urged the lieutenant, "and it's a pity to get out.
It might be that those shots were blind chance. I vote for waiting another day, anyhow, and
seeing what happens. At the worst we can pack up and stand by with steam up; then if the shells
pitch too near we can slip the cable and run for it"

"Right-oh!" said the captain.

Next morning the enemy aeroplane appeared again at its appointed hour and sailed overhead,
leaving behind it a long wake of smoke-puffs; and at the same hour in the afternoon as the
previous shelling the German gun opened fire, dropping its first shell neatly fifty yards further
from the shell-holes of the day before. The aeroplane, of course, had reported, or its photograph
had shown, the previous day's shells to have dropped apparently fifty yards to the left of
the hamlet. The gun accordingly corrected its aim and opened fire on a spot fifty yards more
to the right. For hours it bombarded that suffering field energetically, and at the end of
that time, when they were satisfied the shelling was over, the Blue Marines climbed from their
cellar. Next morning the aeroplane appeared again, and the Blue Marines allowed it this time
to approach unattacked. Convinced probably by this and the appearance of the numerous shell-pits
scattered round the gun position, the aeroplane swooped lower to verify its observations. Unfortunately
another anti-aircraft gun a mile further along the line thought this too good an opportunity
to miss, and opened rapid fire. The 'plane leaped upward and away, and the Blue Marines sped
on its way with a stream of following shells.

"If the Huns' minds work on the fixed and appointed path, one would expect the same old field
will get a strafing this afternoon," said the captain afterwards. "The airman will have seen
the village knocked about, and if he knew that those last shells came from here he'll just
conclude that yesterday's shooting missed us, and the gunners will have another whale at us
this afternoon."

He was right; the gun had "another whale" at them, and again dug many holes in the old field.

But next morning the Germans played a new and disconcerting game. The aeroplane hovered high
above and dropped a light, and a minute later the Blue Marines heard a shrill whistle, that
grew and changed to a whoop, and ended with the same old crash in the same old field.

"Now," said the captain. "Stand by for trouble. That brute is spotting for his gun."

The aeroplane dropped a light, turned, and circled round to the left. Five minutes later another
shell screamed over, and this time fell crashing into the hamlet. The hit was palpable and
unmistakable; a huge dense cloud of smoke and mortar-, lime-, and red brick-dust leapt and
billowed and hung heavily over the village.

"This," said the captain rapidly, "is where we do the rabbit act. Get to cover, all of you,
and lie low."

They did the rabbit act, scuttling amongst the broken houses to the shelter of their cellar
and diving hastily into it. Another shell arrived, shrieking wrathfully, smashed into another
broken house, and scattered its ruins in a whirlwind of flying fragments.

Now Mary, of course, was in the cellar with the rest, and Mary's garden was in full view from
the cellar entrance, and twenty or twenty-five yards from it. The rest of the party were surprised
to see Mary, as the loud clatter of falling stones subsided, leap for the cellar steps, run
up them, and disappear out into the open. He was back in a couple of minutes. "I just wondered,"
he said breathlessly, "if those blighters had done any damage to my vegetables." When another
shell came he popped up again for another look, and this time he dodged back and said many
unprintable things until the next shell landed. He looked a little relieved when he came back
this time. "This one was farther away," he said, "but that one afore dropped somebody's hearth-stone
inside a dozen paces from my onion bed." For the next half-hour the big shells pounded the
village, tearing the ruins apart, battering down the walls, blasting huge holes in the road
and between the houses, re-destroying all that had already been destroyed, and completing the
destruction of some of the few parts that had hitherto escaped.

Between rounds Mary ran up and looked out. Once he rushed across to his garden and came back
cursing impotently, to report a shell fallen close to the garden, his carefully erected forcing
frames shattered to splinters by the shock, and a hail of small stones and the ruins of an
iron stove dropped obliteratingly across his carrots.

"If only they'd left this crazy shooting for another week," said Mary, "a whole lot of those
things would have been ready for pulling up. The onions is pretty near big enough to eat now,
and I've half a mind to pull some o' them before that cock-eyed Hun lands a shell in me garden
and blows it to glory."

Later he ran out, pulled an onion, a carrot, and a lettuce, brought them back to the cellar,
proudly passed them round, and anxiously demanded an opinion as to whether they were ready
for pulling, and counsel as to whether he ought to strip his garden.

"Now look here!" said the sergeant at last; "you let your bloomin' garden alone; I'm not going
to have you running out there plucking carrot and onion nosegays under fire. If a shell blows
your garden half-way through to Australia, I can't help it, and neither can you. I'll be quite
happy to split a dish of spuds with you if so be your garden offers them up; but I'm not going
to have you casualtied rescuing your perishing radishes under fire. Nothing'll be said to me
if your garden is strafed off the earth; but there's a whole lot going to be said if you are
strafed along with it, and I have to report that you had disobeyed orders and not kept under
cover, and that I had looked on while you broke ship and was blown to blazes with a boo-kay
of onions in your hand. So just you anchor down there till the owner pipes to carry on."

Mary had no choice but to obey, and when at last the shelling was over he rushed to the garden
and examined it with anxious care. He was in a more cheerful mood when he rejoined the others.
"It ain't so bad," he said. "Total casualties, half the carrots killed, the radish-bed severely
wounded (half a chimney-pot did that), and some o' the onions slightly wounded by bits of gravel.
But what do you reckon the owner's going to do now? Has he given any orders yet?"

No orders had been given, but the betting amongst the Blue Marines was about ninety-seven to
one in favor of their moving. Sure enough, orders were given to pack up and prepare to move
as soon as it was dark, and the captain went off with a working party to reconnoiter a new
position and prepare places for the cars. Mary was sent off in "the shore boat" (otherwise
the light runabout which carried them on duty or pleasure to and from the ten-mile-distant
town) with orders to draw the day's rations, collect the day's mail, buy the day's papers,
and return to the village, being back not later than five o'clock.

It was made known that the position to which the captain contemplated moving was one in a clump
of trees within half a mile of the position they were leaving. Mary was hugely satisfied. "That
ain't half bad," he said when he heard. "I can walk over and water the garden at night, and
pop across any time between the Tauby's usual promenade hours and do a bit o' weeding, and
just keep an eye on things generally. And inside a week we're going to have carrots for dinner
every day, and spring onions. Hey, my lads! what about bread and cheese and spring onions, wot?"

He climbed aboard the run-about, drove out of the yard, and rattled off down the road. He executed
his commissions, and was sailing happily back to the village, when about a mile short of it
a sitting figure rose from the roadside, stepped forward, and waved an arresting hand. To his
surprise, Mary saw that it was one of the Blue Marines.

"What's up?" he said, as the Marine came round to the side and proceeded to step on board.

"Orders," said the Marine briefly. "I was looking out for you. Change course and direction
and steer for the new anchorage."

"The idea being wot!" asked Mary.

"We've been in action again," said the Marine gloomily. "Only two shells this time, but they
did more damage than all the rest put together this morning."

"More damage?" gasped Mary. "Wot--wot have they damaged?"

The Marine ticked off the damages on his fingers one by one.

"Car hit, badly damaged, and down by the stern; gun out of action--mounting smashed; the sergeant
hit, piece of his starboard leg carried away; and five men slightly wounded."

He dropped his hands, which Mary took as a sign that the tally was finished. "Is that all?"
he said, and breathed a sigh of relief. "Strewth! I thought you was going to tell me that my
garden had been gott-straffed."

A FRAGMENT

This is not a story, it is rather a fragment, beginning where usually a battle story ends,
with a man being "casualtied," showing the principal character only in a passive part--a very
passive part--and ending, I am afraid, with a lot of unsatisfactory loose ends ungathered up.
I only tell it because I fancy that at the back of it you may find some hint of the spirit
that has helped the British Army in many a tight corner.

Private Wally Ruthven was knocked out by the bursting of a couple of bombs in his battalion's
charge on the front line German trenches. Any account of the charge need not be given here,
except that it failed, and the battalion making it, or what was left of them, beaten back.
Private Wally knew nothing of this, knew nothing of the renewed British bombardment, the renewed
British attack half a dozen hours later, and again its renewed failure. All this time he was
lying where the force of the bomb's explosion had thrown him, in a hole blasted out of the
ground by a bursting shell. During all that time he was unconscious of anything except pain,
although certainly he had enough of that to keep his mind very fully occupied. He was brought
back to an agonizing consciousness by the hurried grip of strong hands and a wrenching lift
that poured liquid flames of pain through every nerve in his mangled body. To say that he was
badly wounded hardly describes the case; an R.A.M.C. orderly afterwards described his appearance
with painful picturesqueness as "raw meat on a butcher's block," and indeed it is doubtful
if the stretcher-bearers who lifted him from the shell-hole would not rather have left him
lying there and given their brief time and badly needed services to a casualty more promising
of recovery, if they had seen at first Private Ruthven's serious condition. As it was, one
stretcher-bearer thought and said the man was dead, and was for tipping him off the stretcher
again. Ruthven heard that and opened his eyes to look at the speaker, although at the moment
it would not have troubled him much if he had been tipped off again. But the other stretcher-bearer
said there was still life in him; and partly because the ground about them was pattering with
bullets, and the air about them clamant and reverberating with the rush and roar of passing
and exploding shells and bombs, and that particular spot, therefore, no place or time for argument;
partly because stretcher-bearers have a stubborn conviction and fundamental belief--which,
by the way, has saved many a life even against their own momentary judgment--that while there
is life there is hope, that a man "isn't dead till he's buried," and finally that a stretcher
must always be brought in with a load, a live one if possible, and the nearest thing to alive
if not, they brought him in.

The stretcher-bearers carried their burden into the front trench and there attempted to set
about the first bandaging of their casualty. The job, however, was quite beyond them, but one
of them succeeded in finding a doctor, who in all the uproar of a desperate battle was playing
Mahomet to the mountain of such cases as could not come to him in the field dressing station.
The orderly requested the doctor to come to the casualty, who was so badly wounded that "he
near came to bits when we lifted him." The doctor, who had several urgent cases within arm's
length of him as he worked at the moment, said that he would come as soon as he could, and
told the orderly in the meantime to go and bandage any minor wounds his casualty might have.
The bearer replied that there were no minor wounds, that the man was "just nothing but one
big wound all over"; and as for bandaging, that he "might as well try to do first aid on a
pound of meat that had run through a mincing machine." The doctor at last, hobbling painfully
and leaning on the stretcher-bearer--for he himself had been twice wounded, once in the foot
by a piece of shrapnel, and once through the tip of the shoulder by a rifle bullet--came to
Private Ruthven. He spent a good deal of time and innumerable yards of bandages on him, so
that when the stretcher-bearers brought him into the dressing station there was little but
bandages to be seen of him. The stretcher-bearer delivered a message from the doctor that there
was very little hope, so that Ruthven for the time being was merely given an injection of morphia
and put aside.

The approaches to the dressing station and the station itself were under so severe a fire for
some hours afterwards that it was impossible for any ambulance to be brought near it. Such
casualties as could walk back walked, others were carried slowly and painfully to a point which
the ambulances had a fair sporting chance of reaching intact. One way and another a good many
hours passed before Ruthven's turn came to be removed. The doctor who had bandaged him in the
firing-line had by then returned to the dressing station, mainly because his foot had become
too painful to allow him to use it at all. Merely as an aside, and although it has nothing
to do with Private Ruthven's case, it may be worth mentioning that the same doctor, having
cleaned, sterilized, and bandaged his wounds, remained in the dressing station for another
twelve hours, doing such work as could be accomplished sitting in a chair and with one sound
and one unsound arm. He saw Private Ruthven for a moment as he was being started on his journey
to the ambulance; he remembered the case, as indeed everyone who handled or saw that case remembered
it for many days, and, moved by professional interest and some amazement that the man was still
alive, he hobbled from his chair to look at him. He found Private Ruthven returning his look;
for the passing of time and the excess of pain had by now overcome the effects of the morphia
injection. There was a hauntingly appealing look in the eyes that looked up at him, and the
doctor tried to answer the question he imagined those eyes would have conveyed.

"I don't know, my boy," he said, "whether you'll pull through, but we'll do the best we can
for you. And now we have you here we'll have you back in hospital in no time, and there you'll
get every chance there is."

He imagined the question remained in those eyes still unsatisfied, and that Ruthven gave just
the suggestion of a slow head-shake.

"Don't give up, my boy," he said briskly. "We might save you yet. Now I'm going to take away
the pain for you," and he called an orderly to bring a hypodermic injection. While he was finding
a place among the bandages to make the injection, the orderly who was waiting spoke: "I believe,
sir, he's trying to ask something or say something."

It has to be told here that Private Ruthven could say nothing in the terms of ordinary speech,
and would never be able to do so again. Without going into details it will be enough to say
that the whole lower part of--well, his face--was tightly bound about with bandages, leaving
little more than his nostrils, part of his cheeks, and his eyes clear. He was frowning now
and again, just shaking his head to denote a negative, and his left hand, bound to the bigness
of a football in bandages, moved slowly in an endeavor to push aside the doctor's hands.

"It's all right, my lad," the doctor said soothingly. "I'm not going to hurt you."

The frown cleared for an instant and the eloquent eyes appeared to smile, as indeed the lad
might well have smiled at the thought that anyone could "hurt" such a bundle of pain. But although
it appeared quite evident that Ruthven did not want morphia, the doctor in his wisdom decreed
otherwise, and the jolting journey down the rough shell-torn road, and the longer but smoother
journey in the sweetly-sprung motor ambulance, were accomplished in sleep.

When he wakened again to consciousness he lay for some time looking about him, moving only
his eyes and very slowly his head. He took in the canvas walls and roof of the big hospital
marquee, the scarlet-blanketed beds, the flitting figures of a couple of silent-footed Sisters,
the screens about two of the beds; the little clump of figures, doctor, orderlies, and Sister,
stooped over another bed. Presently he caught the eye of a Sister as she passed swiftly the
foot of his bed, and she, seeing the appealing look, the barely perceptible upward twitch of
his head that was all he could do to beckon, stopped and turned, and moved quickly to his side.
She smoothed the pillow about his head and the sheets across his shoulders, and spoke softly.

"I wonder if there is anything you want?" she said. "You can't tell me, can you? just close
your eyes a minute if there is anything I can do. Shut them for yes--keep them open for no."

The eyes closed instantly, opened, and stared upward at her.

"Is it the pain?" she said. "Is it very dreadful?"

The eyes held steady and unflickering upon hers. She knew well that there they did not speak
truth, and that the pain must indeed be very dreadful.

"We can stop the pain, you know," she said "Is that what you want?"

The steady unwinking eyes answered "No" again, and to add emphasis to it the bandaged head
shook slowly from side to side on the pillow.

The Sister was puzzled; she could find out what he wanted, of course, she was confident of
that; but it might take some time and many questions, and time just then was something that
she or no one else in the big clearing hospital could find enough of for the work in their
hands. Even then urgent work was calling her; so she left him, promising to come again as soon
as she could.

She spoke to the doctor, and presently he came back with her to the bedside. "It's marvelous,"
he said in a low tone to the Sister, "that he has held on to life so long."

Private Ruthven's wounds had been dressed there on arrival, before he woke out of the morphia
sleep, and the doctor had seen and knew.

"There is nothing we can do for him," he said, "except morphia again, to ease him out of his pain."

But again the boy, his brow wrinkling with the effort, attempted with his bandaged hand to
stay the needle in the doctor's fingers.

"I'm sure," said the Sister, "he doesn't want the morphia; he told me so, didn't you?" appealing
to the boy.

The eyes shut and gripped tight in an emphatic answer, and the Sister explained their code.

"Listen!" she said gently. "The doctor will only give you enough to make you sleep for two
or three hours, and then I shall have time to come and talk to you. Will that do!"

The unmoving eyes answered "No" again, and the doctor stood up.

"If he can bear it, Sister," he said, "we may as well leave him. I can't understand it, though.
I know how those wounds must hurt."

They left him then, and he lay for another couple of hours, his eyes set on the canvas roof
above his head, dropped for an instant to any passing figure, lifting again to their fixed
position. The eyes and the mute appeal in them haunted the Sister, and half a dozen times,
as she moved about the beds, she flitted over to him, just to drop a word that she had not
forgotten and she was coming presently.

"You want me to talk to you, don't you?" she said. "There is something you want me to find out?"

"Yes--yes--yes," said the quickly flickering eyelids.

The Sister read the label that was tied to him when he was brought in. She asked questions
round the ward of those who were able to answer them, and sent an orderly to make inquiries
in the other tents. He came back presently and reported the finding of another man who belonged
to Ruthven's regiment and who knew him. So presently, when she was relieved from duty--the
first relief for thirty-six solid hours of physical stress and heart-tearing strain--she went
straight to the other tent and questioned the man who knew Private Ruthven. He had a hopelessly
shattered arm, but appeared mightily content and amazingly cheerful. He knew Wally, he said,
was in the same platoon with him; didn't know much about him except that he was a very decent
sort; no, knew nothing about his people or his home, although he remembered--yes, there was
a girl. Wally had shown him her photograph once, "and a real ripper she is too." Didn't know
if Wally was engaged to her, or anything more about her, and certainly not her name.

The Sister went back to Wally. His wrinkled brow cleared at the sight of her, but she could
see that the eyes were sunk more deeply in his head, that they were dulled, no doubt with his
suffering.

"I'm going to ask you a lot of questions," she said, "and you'll just close your eyes again
if I speak of what you want to tell me. You do want to tell me something, don't you?"

To her surprise, the "Yes" was not signaled back to her. She was puzzled a moment. "You want
to ask me something?" she said.

"Yes," the eyelids flicked back.

"Is it about a girl?" she asked. ("No.")

"Is it about money of any sort?" ("No.")

"Is it about your mother, or your people, or your home? Is it about yourself?"

She had paused after each question and went on to the next, but seeing no sign of answering
"Yes" she was baffled for a moment. But she felt that she could not go to her own bed to which
she had been dismissed, could not go to the sleep she so badly needed, until she had found
and answered the question in those pitiful eyes. She tried again.

"Is it about your regiment?" she asked, and the eyes snapped "Yes," and "Yes," and "Yes" again.
She puzzled over that, and then went back to the doctor in charge of the other ward and brought
back with her the man who "knew Wally." Mentally she clapped her hands at the light that leaped
to the boy's eyes. She had told the man that it was something about the regiment he wanted
to know; told him, too, his method of answering "Yes" and "No," and to put his questions in
such, a form that they could be so answered.

The friend advanced to the bedside with clumsy caution.

"Hello, Wally!" he said cheerfully. "They've pretty well chewed you up and spit you out again,
'aven't they? But you're all right, old son, you're going to pull through, 'cause the O.C.
o' the Linseed Lancers[Footnote: Medical Service.] here told me so. But Sister here tells me
you want to ask something about someone in the old crush." He hesitated a moment. "I can't
think who it would be," he confessed. "It can't be his own chum, 'cause he 'stopped one,' and
Wally saw it and knew he was dead hours before. 6d. as a donation. Thus we had 3l. 9s. 5d.--The
day before yesterday I had asked the Lord that He would be pleased to send us some potatoes,
as we have no means to lay in a stock. This morning I was informed that the same brother who
had sent 20 sacks last year, had again ordered 20 sacks to be sent,
and 6 sacks have also been given by another individual.

Oct. 30. As this is Saturday, the money which came in yesterday was
not quite enough for today.

But this morning’s post brought, in answer to prayer, from Clapham
10s. and anonymously from Plymouth 10s.

Nov. 1. Yesterday was received altogether 2l. 10s. 3d.

Nov. 2. At a time of the greatest poverty 1l. was sent by a lady from Birmingham. About half an hour afterwards
I received 10l. from a brother who had saved up 150l. and put it
into a savings’ bank, but who now sees that, to devote this money
to the promotion of the work of God tends more to the glory of the
name of Jesus, than to retain it in a savings’ bank upon interest
for a time of sickness or old age; for he is assured that should such
times come, the same Lord, who has hitherto cared for him whilst in
health and strength, and able to work, will also care for him then.

The same brother gave me 3l. a fortnight since. This 10l. came in very seasonably; for though
we had been able to provide for the absolute necessities of today,
yet there was want in many respects, especially as a boy is just going
out as an apprentice, who needs tools and an outfit.

Nov. 3. This afternoon two little boys were received, with whom three little girls sent 13s. 6d.

Nov. 4 and 5. 2l. 5s. ld. more was given.

Nov. 7. When there was now again nothing at all in hand, there came in 2l., being the profit of
the sale of ladies’ baskets; and also 3l. 1s. 10d.

Nov. 8-11. 4l. 9s. 4d. was received during these four days.

Nov. 12.

This morning after the exposition of the Scriptures to the children, 10s. was given to me, at
a time when there was not only nothing at all in hand, but when without some help we should
not have had every thing that was really needed for today.

Nov. 13. Saturday. This morning I took 1s. out of the box in my house. This one shilling was
all there was towards the need of today.--Pause, dear reader, for
a few moments!

Consider that there are more than a hundred persons to be provided
with every thing they require; consider that there is no money in
hand; and consider also that this is the case not once nor twice in
the course of the year but very frequently.

Is it not precious, under such circumstances, to have the living God as a father to go to, who
is ever able and ever willing to help as it may be really needed? And to this privilege every
one has a title who believes in the Lord Jesus, being as such a child
of God.

Galatians iii.

26. Under these circumstances of need, a silver watch, which only yesterday afternoon had
become the property of the Orphan-Fund, was disposed of, whereby
we were helped through the expenses of today.

The coals are almost gone in each of the houses. Every article of provision, etc., is likewise
much reduced. Truly, we are exceedingly poor; nevertheless there are the necessary provisions
till Monday morning, and thus we were brought to the close of another week. This afternoon all the
labourers met for prayer.

Nov. 14. When we met again this afternoon for prayer, we had reason to praise, for the Lord had
sent in means. This morning was given to me 5l., and 6s. had come
in by sale of articles.

There came also by post a small parcel from Wales, containing a few little articles, which are
not to be mentioned, and 2s. 6d.

Nov. 15. Last Friday brother Craik and I had a meeting for inquirers and candidates for fellowship.
We saw eight and had to send away ten whom we could not see, our
strength being quite gone after we had seen the eight, one after another.

This evening we saw seven and had to send away three.

Nov. 16. The last four days we have daily met for prayer, there being no means to pay the teachers
in the Day Schools. Besides this, we need a stove in one of the school rooms; also some Bibles
and Tracts. Today I received 2l. from a brother at Exmouth.

As only 2s. had been given yesterday for the Orphans, there was this morning again only 4s. 6d.,
in hand, which between ten and eleven o’clock I was on the point of sending to the Orphan-Houses,
having been called on for money.

While I was writing the note to that effect, I received a post-office order for 3l. from a brother
at Barnstaple, which was again a most precious deliverance, as our
stores had been in every way so much reduced.

About two hours later I received 4l. more from a brother at Exmouth,
the half of which was for the Orphans, and the other half for the
other objects.

Through the same brother also was sent with Luke xxii. 32. 1l. for the Orphans. There came in
still further today 2l. for stockings, which were bought by two ladies
who visited the Orphan-Houses.

They also gave 3s. 9d. Also an individual who had removed at four different times the furniture of
the Orphan-Houses to and from Westbury, where the children had been,
in turn, from Aug. 10 to Nov. 12, while the houses were coloured down
and painted inside, charged only 1l.

1s. 10 1/2d., instead of 4l. 2s. 10 1/2d., which would have been the regular charge, and stated
that he had long wished to do something for the Orphans, and that
he should not have charged even this 1l.

1s. 10 1/2d. had he not had to lay it out in money. Thus the Lord in various ways helps us,
and all without our asking any human being, but only in simplicity telling Him day by day our
need.

Nov. 18. To day we had again a meeting with inquirers, and saw seven.

Nov. 21. Only 1l.

11s. 4d. came in since the 16th for the Orphans, on account of which there was today again no
money at all in hand, and the stores were very much exhausted. How kind, therefore, of the Lord
to send in again at this time 2l. 10s.

Nov. 23. Yesterday came in 5s. for stockings, which provided today the means for the breakfast
in the Boys’-Orphan-House. A sister sent also a gammon and some peas. Now we are very poor indeed.
One of the labourers was able to provide a dinner in the Girls’-Orphan-House
out of his own means.

In this our great need came in 17s. 6d. by sale of Reports, which money had been expected for
some months past, but which the Lord sent just now most seasonably. Besides this, 2s. 6d. was also
received for the children’s needlework. Thus we were provided for this day also. In the afternoon
the Lord gave us a still further proof of the continuance of His loving care over us, now that
we are so poor; for a box arrived from Plymouth, containing clothes, trinkets, etc.

Nov. 24. We have been daily meeting for prayer the last twelve days. Today, just before I was going
to the meeting, one of the articles, which came in the box from Plymouth yesterday afternoon,
was sold for 2l. 2s., which sum supplies us with means for this day. The donors may not have
thought, perhaps, that their bounty would so soon be needed.--When I came to the prayer-meeting,
I heard of a little circumstance which is worthy of notice.

The Infant Orphans took a walk this morning with their teacher. A poor woman came to her, whilst
they were walking, and gave her two pence for the benefit of the
Orphans, adding "It is but a trifle, but I must give it you."

Now, one of these two pence had been needed, by the time I came, to make up the little sum
which was required for the bread.--This afternoon was received still further 9d., and also
12s. by the sale of some of the articles which came from Plymouth.

Nov. 25. With 12s. ld. we began the day, which was not sufficient for all that was required.
In the afternoon came in 11s. for knitting. Thus we had enough for this day also.

Nov. 26. One of the labourers gave 5s.; 11s. came in by sale of articles, and 6d. was taken out
of the box in my house. Little as this was, yet we were able to procure with it all that was
really needful; but now our provision stock is very much reduced.

Nov. 27. This is Saturday, and nothing at all was in hand when the day commenced. My especial prayer
had been, that the Lord would, be pleased early in the morning to send us supplies, as otherwise
there would not be sufficient for dinner. Accordingly, about 10 o’clock, a parcel came from Clapham,
containing 11s. and the following articles: 12 yards of calico, a frock, a chemise, 2 petticoats,
a flannel ditto, 2 handkerchiefs, 2 pinafores, a furnished workbag, an old silver thimble, and
half a franc. Thus the Lord kindly provided us with means for the dinner, and we took it as
a token for good that He would send what else might be needed this day. There came in still further
in the course of the afternoon, by sale of an article, given by one of the labourers, 5s.;
by sale of some lithographic sketches, given by one of the labourers, 4s. 6d.; by sale of articles
given some time since, 16s.; by sale of stockings, 2s. 9d.; and by a donation, 2s. Thus the
Lord was pleased to give us in the course of this day 2l. 1s. 3d., while we were in the greatest
need in the morning, and without any natural prospect of having the
means which were required for the day.

Nov. 29. The Lord has kindly sent in supplies. Yesterday was given altogether 5l. 19s. 7d. These
two weeks we have been likewise in the greatest poverty in reference to the Day Schools; but
the Lord has almost daily sent in a little to supply the absolute necessities of the brethren and
sisters, who are engaged in that part of the work.

Nov. 30. Though 5l. 19s. 7d. had been given, yet, as the stores had been previously so reduced,
there was again some more money needed today.

5s. came in by sale of articles, and one of the labourers gave some money of his own. In this time
of great need there arrived a parcel, sent anonymously, which contained
the following articles: 3 combs, 6 shells, 5 pairs of gilt bracelets,
4 single bracelets, a pair of ditto, a gilt chain, a gilt necklace,
a cornelian ditto, a bead ditto, a brooch, a buckle, 2 pairs of earrings,
3 rings, 3 pairs of drops, and a single ear-ring.

Dec. 1. Again there were many shillings needed for this day. At the Boys’-Orphan-House matters
stood so in the morning, that, with an addition of eight pence, the dinner could be provided;
but there was only seven pence in hand. Brother B. having heard that something had been put last
evening into the box at the Girls’-Orphan-House, went, and it was found to be one penny, which
an aged sister had put in, whereby the present need was supplied. Even the gift of this one
penny was thus evidently under the ordering of our kind Father, who not in anger, but for the
trial of our faith, keeps us so poor. About ten o’clock this morning was sent by post, half a sovereign.
In the letter was written: "From the wife of a clergyman, for the Orphan-Houses, Nov. 30 1841." This
donation was truly sweet, as coming from our faithful Lord, though
it was not nearly enough.

But He had pity on us, and sent in still further today by the sale of stockings 5s., and by
the sale of other articles 12s.

Dec. 2. In the course of this morning was sold a part of the trinkets which came on Nov. 30th,
for 1l. 4s. 10d. Besides this came in by sale of articles 1s. 6d. Thus was our present need supplied
in the afternoon 3l. was sent by a sister from Plymouth, and by a sister in Bristol was given
to me 2s.

Dec. 3 and 4. 1l. 10s. 6d. has been received during these two days.

Dec. 6.

Yesterday the Lord again, in His faithful love, sent in means for the need of today. A gentleman
from Devonshire came to me after the meeting, introduced himself as a brother, and gave me 5l.
for the work of the Lord, as it might be needed. I had pleasant brotherly communion with him, but
he preferred not to give me his name. Besides this, came in 18s. 11 1/2d. by sale of articles.
As this 18s. 11 1/2d. was not enough for the supply of the Orphans for this day, there being
nothing at all in hand besides, and 1l. more needed, I took 1l. of
the 5l. for the Orphans, and 4l. for the other objects.

Through the same stranger I received also 2s. 6d. from a sister.

There came in this evening 1l.

3s. besides.

By the 4l. which I took of the 5l. given by the gentleman from Devonshire,
the most pressing need with regard to the teachers in the Day Schools
is relieved.

This stranger gave me also 1l. for Missionary purposes.

Dec. 7. Three weeks and three days we have now been daily meeting for prayer, on account of the
state of the funds, and to ask the Lord’s blessing upon the work. We have been daily asking Him
to supply us with means for the School-Bible-Missionary-and Tract Fund. Now, today, in this our
great poverty, was sent by a sister from one of the Northern counties, whom I have never seen,
the sum of 50l. of which, according to her wish, 10l. is to be applied
to each of these objects, and 10l. for the Orphans.

Thus the Lord has been pleased to send us a little help, which is greatly needed for all the objects:
for the teachers have had only as much as was absolutely needful, the Bible stock is almost
entirely exhausted, the Tract stock is quite exhausted, and to some Missionary brethren we greatly
desired to send help, but were unable to do so. Nevertheless, even now we are waiting upon the
Lord for further supplies.

When this money came, there was none at all in hand for the Orphans,
though for many reasons fresh supplies were much needed.

By this 10l., then, the Lord has again helped us for the present. There was likewise sent anonymously
by post, 1l.

Dec. 9.

Dec. 11. Since the day before yesterday the following sums came in for the Orphans, whereby
the need of yesterday and today has been supplied. A brother gave 2l. A little boy and girl
brought the produce of their savings’ banks, amounting to 19s.

5d. By the sale of stockings came in 15s. 1d., and by six donations 10s. 6d.

Dec. 13. Yesterday came in 1l. 11s. 6d., and today 10s. By this 2l. 1s. 6d. this day’s need has
been met. There was also, very seasonably, half a ton of coals sent
to each of the three Orphan-Houses.

Dec. 14. Yesterday afternoon a lady sent a sovereign for the Orphans.

There came in 15s. 6d. besides. Thus we had enough for this day likewise.

Dec. 15. Having now again nothing in hand for the Orphans, the boxes were opened, in which 4s.
4d. was found. This, with a little which one of the labourers was able to add of his own, helped
us through the day.

From Nov. 12 up to this day, my fellow-labourers in the Church and I have seen thirty inquirers
and candidates for fellowship, and some of them we have seen repeatedly. How can we sufficiently
praise the Lord for still continuing to use us in His service.

Dec. 16. Nothing at all had come in for the Orphans; but as one of
the labourers had last evening, most unexpectedly, received some money
from a distance of about two hundred miles, and as the Lord inclined
his heart to give of it for the present need, we were supplied for
today also.

Dec. 17. In like manner we are helped today. Evening.
The Lord has been very kind to us this day. In the course of the morning
6s. came in. We had thus, with what provisions there were in hand,
all that was needed for the dinner, but no means to provide for the
next meal in the afternoon. A few minutes after the labourers had
met together for prayer this morning, there was given to one of them
a sovereign for himself. By means of this, all that was needed for
tea could be procured. Another labourer gave 3s. 6d. and two books,
which were sold for 4s. There came in still further in the course
of the afternoon and evening:--by sale of stockings, 8s. 8d.; by needlework,
8d.; and by sale of articles, 5s. Thus, when we again met in the evening
for prayer, we found that the supplies had amounted to 2l. 8s. 2d.,
enough for all that was required today. But one thing more is to be
noticed respecting this day. I was informed that three more of the
Orphans have been recently brought to the knowledge of the truth.
We have now been meeting daily for prayer during the last five weeks,
and thus the Lord has not merely heard our prayers respecting the
funds, but has also blessed these children.

Dec. 20. The Lord has
again kindly sent fresh supplies. A sister gave 1l.; a servant sent
1l.; another servant, 2s 6d. by sale of articles l3s. 1d. This morning,
just before was going to the prayer-meeting, a lady brought 3l.; and
5s. more I received this evening.

Dec. 21. Though 6s. 0s. 7d. had
been received yesterday and the day before, there was only 5s. remaining
towards the supply of the necessities of today. At one o’clock three
little boys gave me the produce of their Orphan-box, which was 4s.
7d. When I came home, I found that 18l. had come in, being a legacy
left for the Orphans by a lady who died at the commencement of the
year. This money comes in most seasonably, not merely for the supply
of the wants of the children, but also as enabling me to give to some
of the labourers in the Orphan-Houses supplies for themselves.

Dec.
23. This is now the sixth week that the labourers in the Day-Schools
and Orphan-Houses have daily met for prayer.

About the main streets there were few signs of the shells' work, except here and there a litter
of fragments tossed over the roofs and sprayed across the road. But, passing through a small
side square, the two officers saw something more of the effect of "direct hits." In the square
was parked a number of ambulance wagons, and over a building at the side floated a huge Red
Cross flag. Eight or nine shells had been dropped in and around the square. Where they had
fallen were huge round holes, each with a scattered fringe of earth and cobble-stones and broken
pavement. The trees lining the square showed big white patches on their trunks where the bark
had been sliced by flying fragments, branches broken, hanging and dangling, or holding out
jagged white stumps. Leaves and twigs and branches were littered about the square and heaped
thick under the trees. The brick walls of many of the houses round were pitted and pocked and
scarred by the shell fragments. The face of one house was marked by a huge splash, with solid
center and a ragged-edged outline of radiating jerky rays, reminding one immediately of a famous
ink-maker's advertisement. The bricks had taken the impression of the explosion's splash exactly
as paper would take the ink's. Practically every window in the square had been broken, and
in the case of the splash-marked house, blown in, sash and frame complete. One ambulance wagon
lay a torn and splintered wreck, and pieces of it were flung wide to the four corners of the
square. Another was overturned, with broken wheels collapsed under it, and in the Red Cross
canvas tilts of others gaped huge tears and rents.

At one spot a pool of blood spread wide across the pavement, and still dripping and running
sluggishly and thickly into and along the stone gutter, showed where at least one shell had
caught more than brick and stone and tree, although now the square was deserted and empty of life.

And even as the two hurriedly skirted the place another shell hurtled over, tripped on the
top edge of a roof across the square and exploded with an appalling clatter and burst of noise.
The roof vanished in a whirlwind of smoke and dust, and the officers jumped from the doorway
where they had flung themselves crouching, and finished their passage of the square at a run.

"Hottish corner," said one, as they slowed to a walk some distance away.

"Silly fools," growled the other. "What do they want to hoist that huge Red Cross flag up there
for, where any airman can see it? Fairly asking for it, I call it."

When they came to the outskirts of the town they found rather more signs of life. People were
hanging about their doorways and the shops, fewer windows were shuttered, fewer faces peeped
from the tiny grated windows of the cellars. And up the center of the road, with lordly calm,
marched three Highlanders. The smooth swing of their kilts, their even, unhurried step, the
shoulders well back, and the elbows a shade outturned, the bonnets cocked to a precisely same
angle on the upheld heads, all bespoke either an amazing ignorance of, or a bland indifference
to, the bombardment. Their march was stopped by a sentry, who shouted to them and moved out
from the pavement. Some sort of argument was going on as the officers approached, and in passing
they heard the finish of it.

"You were pit there tae warn folk," a Highlander was saying. "Weel, ye've dune that, so we'll
awa on oor road. We're nae fonder o' shells than y'are yersel. But we'd look bonnie, wouldn't
we, t' be tellin' the Cameron lads we promised to meet, that we were feared for a bit shellin'...."

And after they had passed, the officers looked back and saw the three Scots swinging their
kilts and swaggering imperturbably on to the town, and their meeting with the "Cameron lads."

There were no more shells, but that afternoon a Taube paid another of its frequent visits and
vigorously bombed the railway station again, driving the inhabitants back once more to the
inadequate shelter of their cellars and basements. And yet, as the same two officers marched
with their battalion through the town towards the firing-line that evening, they found the
streets quite normally bustling and astir, and there seemed to be no lack of light in the shops
and houses and about the streets. Here and there as they passed, children stood stiffly to
attention and gravely saluted the battalion, young women and old turned to call a cheery "Bonne
Chance" to the soldiers, to smile bravely and wave farewells to them.

"Plucky bloomin' lot, ain't they, Bill?" said one man, and blew a kiss to three girls waving
from a window.

"I takes off my 'at to them," said his mate. "What wi' Jack Johnsons and airyplane bombs, you
might expec' the population to have emigrated in a bunch. The Frenchmen is a plucky enough
crowd, but the women--My Lord."

"Airyplanes every other day," said the first man. "But I don't notice any darkened streets
and white-painted kerbs; and we don't 'ear the inhabitants shrieking about protection from
air raids, or 'Where's the anti-aircraft guns?' or 'Who's responsible for air defense?' or
'A baa the Government that don't a baa the air raids!' 'say la gerr,' says they, and shrugs
their shoulders, and leaves it go at that."

They were in a darker side-street now, and the glare of the burning house shone red in the
sky over the roof tops. "Somebody's 'appy 'ome gone west," remarked one man, and a mouth-organ
in the ranks answered, with cheerful sarcasm, "Keep the Home Fires Burning!"

THE SIGNALERS

"It is reported that ... "--EXTRACT FROM OFFICIAL DESPATCH.

The "it" and the "that" which were reported, and which the despatch related in another three
or four lines, concerned the position of a forward line of battle, but have really nothing
to do with this account, which aims only at relating something of the method by which "it was
reported" and the men whose particular work was concerned only with the report as a report,
a string of words, a jumble of letters, a huddle of Morse dots and dashes.

The Signaling Company in the forward lines was situated in a very damp and very cold cellar
of a half-destroyed house. In it were two or three tables commandeered from upstairs or from
some houses around. That one was a rough deal kitchen table, and that another was of polished
wood, with beautiful inlaid work and artistic curved and carven legs, the spoils of some drawing-room
apparently, was a matter without the faintest interest to the signalers who used them. To them
a table was a table, no more and no less, a thing to hold a litter of papers, message forms,
telephone gear, and a candle stuck in a bottle. If they had stopped to consider the matter,
and had been asked, they would probably have given a dozen of the delicate inlaid tables for
one of the rough strong kitchen ones. There were three or four chairs about the place, just
as miscellaneous in their appearance as the tables. But beyond the tables and chairs there
was no furniture whatever, unless a scanty heap of wet straw in one corner counts as furniture,
which indeed it might well do since it counted as a bed.

There were fully a dozen men in the room, most of them orderlies for the carrying of messages
to and from the telephonists. These men came and went continually. Outside it had been raining
hard for the greater part of the day, and now, getting on towards midnight, the drizzle still
held and the trenches and fields about the signalers' quarters were running wet, churned into
a mass of gluey chalk-and-clay mud. The orderlies coming in with messages were daubed thick
with the wet mud from boot-soles to shoulders, often with their puttees and knees and thighs
dripping and running water as if they had just waded through a stream. Those who by the carrying
of a message had just completed a turn of duty, reported themselves, handed over a message
perhaps, slouched wearily over to the wall farthest from the door, dropped on the stone floor,
bundled up a pack or a haversack, or anything else convenient for a pillow, lay down and spread
a wet mackintosh over them, wriggled and composed their bodies into the most comfortable, or
rather the least uncomfortable possible position, and in a few minutes were dead asleep.

It was nothing to them that every now and again the house above them shook and quivered to
the shock of a heavy shell exploding somewhere on the ground round the house, that the rattle
of rifle fire dwindled away at times to separate and scattered shots, brisked up again and
rose to a long roll, the devil's tattoo of the machine guns rattling through it with exactly
the sound a boy makes running a stick rapidly along a railing. The bursting shells and scourging
rifle fire, sweeping machine guns, banging grenades and bombs were all affairs with which the
Signaling Company in the cellar had no connection. For the time being the men in a row along
the wall were as unconcerned in the progress of the battle as if they were safely and comfortably
asleep in London. Presently any or all of them might be waked and sent out into the flying
death and dangers of the battlefield, but in the meantime their immediate and only interest
was in getting what sleep they could. Every once in a while the signalers' sergeant would shout
for a man, go across to the line and rouse one of the sleepers; then the awakened man would
sit up and blink, rise and listen to his instructions, nod and say, "Yes, Sergeant! All right,
Sergeant!" when these were completed, pouch his message, hitch his damp mackintosh about him
and button it close, drag heavily across the stone floor and vanish into the darkness of the
stone-staired passage.

His journey might be a long or a short one, he might only have to find a company commander
in the trenches one or two hundred yards away, he might on the other hand have a several hours'
long trudge ahead of him, a bewildering way to pick through the darkness across a maze of fields
and a net-work of trenches, over and between the rubble heaps that represented the remains
of a village, along roads pitted with all sorts of blind traps in the way of shell holes, strings
of barbed wire, overturned carts, broken branches of trees, flung stones and beams; and always,
whether his journey was a short one or a long, he would move in an atmosphere of risk, with
sudden death or searing pain passing him by at every step, and waiting for him, as he well
knew, at the next step and the next and every other one to his journey's end.

Each man who took his instructions and pocketed his message and walked up the cellar steps
knew that he might never walk down them again, that he might not take a dozen paces from them
before the bullet found him. He knew that its finding might come in black dark and in the middle
of an open field, that it might drop him there and leave him for the stretcher-bearers to find
some time, or for the burying party to lift any time. Each man who carried out a message was
aware that he might never deliver it, that when some other hand did so, and the message was
being read, he might be past all messages, lying stark and cold in the mud and filth with the
rain beating on his gray unheeding face; or, on the other hand, that he might be lying warm
and comfortable in the soothing ease of a bed in the hospital train, swaying gently and lulled
by the song of the flying wheels, the rock and roll of the long compartment, swinging at top
speed down the line to the base and the hospital ship and home. An infinity of possibilities
lay between the two extremes. They were undoubtedly the two extremes: the death that each man
hoped to evade, the wound whose painful prospect held no slightest terror but only rather the
deep satisfaction of a task performed, of an escape from death at the cheap price of a few
days' or weeks' pain, or even a crippled limb or a broken body.

A man forgot all these things when he came down the cellar steps and crept to a corner to snatch
what sleep he could, but remembered them again only when he was wakened and sent out into their
midst, and into all the toils and terrors the others had passed, or were to go into or even
then were meeting.

The signalers at the instruments, the sergeants who gathered them in and sent them forth, gave
little or no thought to the orderlies. These men were hardly more than shadows, things which
brought them long screeds to be translated to the tapping keys, hands which would stretch into
the candle-light and lift the messages that had just "buzzed" in over their wires. The sergeant
thought of them mostly as a list of names to be ticked off one by one in a careful roster as
each man did his turn of duty, went out, or came back and reported in. And the man who sent
messages these men bore may never have given a thought to the hands that would carry them,
unless perhaps to wonder vaguely whether the message could get through from so and so to such
and such, from this map square to that, and if the chance of the messages getting through--the
message you will note, not the messenger--seemed extra doubtful, orders might be given to send
it in duplicate or triplicate, to double or treble the chances of its arriving.

The night wore on, the orderlies slept and woke, stumbled in and out; the telephonists droned
out in monotonous voices to the telephone, or "buzzed" even more monotonous strings of longs
and shorts on the "buzzer." And in the open about them, and all unheeded by them, men fought,
and suffered wounds and died, or fought on in the scarce lesser suffering of cold and wet and
hunger.

In the signalers' room all the fluctuations of the fight were translated from the pulsing fever,
the human living tragedies and heroisms, the violent hopes and fears and anxieties of the battle
line, to curt cold words, to scribbled letters on a message form. At times these messages were
almost meaningless to them, or at least their red tragedy was unheeded. Their first thought
when a message was handed in for transmission, usually their first question when the signaler
at the other end called to take a message, was whether the message was a long one or a short
one. One telephonist was handed an urgent message to send off, saying that bombs were running
short in the forward line and that further supplies were required at the earliest possible
moment, that the line was being severely bombed and unless they had the means to reply must
be driven out or destroyed. The signaler took that message and sent it through; but his instrument
was not working very clearly, and he was a good deal more concerned and his mind was much more
fully taken up with the exasperating difficulty of making the signaler at the other end catch
word or letter correctly, than it was with all the close packed volume of meaning it contained.
It was not that he did not understand the meaning; he himself had known a line bombed out before
now, the trenches rent and torn apart, the shattered limbs and broken bodies of the defenders,
the horrible ripping crash of the bombs, the blinding flame, the numbing shock, the smoke and
reek and noise of the explosions; but though all these things were known to him, the words
"bombed out" meant no more now than nine letters of the alphabet and the maddening stupidity
of the man at the other end, who would misunderstand the sound and meaning of "bombed" and
had to have it in time-consuming letter-by-letter spelling.

When he had sent that message, he took off and wrote down one or two others from the signaling
station he was in touch with. His own station, it will be remembered, was close up to the forward
firing line, a new firing line which marked the limits of the advance made that morning. The
station he was connected with was back in rear of what, previous to the attack, had been the
British forward line. Between the two the thin insignificant thread of the telephone wire ran
twisting across the jumble of the trenches of our old firing line, the neutral ground that
had lain between the trenches, and the other maze of trench, dug-out, and bomb-proof shelter
pits that had been captured from the enemy. Then in the middle of sending a message, the wire
went dead, gave no answer to repeated calls on the "buzzer." The sergeant, called to consultation,
helped to overlook and examine the instrument. Nothing could be found wrong with it, but to
make quite sure the fault was not there, a spare instrument was coupled on to a short length
of wire between it and the old one. They carried the message perfectly, so with curses of angry
disgust the wire was pronounced disconnected, or "disc," as the signaler called it.

This meant that a man or men had to be sent out along the line to find and repair the break,
and that until this was done, no telephone message could pass between that portion of the forward
line and the headquarters in the rear. The situation was the more serious, inasmuch as this
was the only connecting line for a considerable distance along the new front. A corporal and
two men took a spare instrument and a coil of wire, and set out on their dangerous journey.

The break of course had been reported to the O.C., and after that there was nothing more for
the signaler at the dead instrument to do, except to listen for the buzz that would come back
from the repair party as they progressed along the line, tapping in occasionally to make sure
that they still had connection with the forward station, their getting no reply at the same
time from the rear station being of course sufficient proof that they had not passed the break.

Twice the signaler got a message, the second one being from the forward side of the old neutral
ground in what had been the German front line trench; the report said also that fairly heavy
fire was being maintained on the open ground. After that there was silence.

When the signaler had time to look about him, to light a cigarette and to listen to the uproar
of battle that filtered down the cellar steps and through the closed door, he spoke to the
sergeant about the noise, and the sergeant agreed with him that it was getting louder, which
meant either that the fight was getting hotter or coming closer. The answer to their doubts
came swiftly to their hands in the shape of a note from the O.C., with a message borne by the
orderly that it was to be sent through anyhow or somehow, but at once.

Now the O.C., be it noted, had already had a report that the telephone wire was cut; but he
still scribbled his note, sent his message, and thereafter put the matter out of his mind.
He did not know how or in what fashion the message would be sent; but he did know the Signaling
Company, and that was sufficient for him.

In this he was doing nothing out of the usual. There are many commanders who do the same thing,
and this, if you read it aright, is a compliment to the signaling companies beyond all the
praise of General Orders or the sweet flattery of the G.O.C. despatch--the men who sent the
messages put them out of their mind as soon as they were written and handed to an orderly with
a curt order, "Signaling company to send that."

You at home who slip a letter into the pillar box, consider it, allowing due time for its journey,
as good as delivered at the other end; by so doing you pay an unconscious compliment to all
manners and grades of men, from high salaried managers down to humble porters and postmen.
But the somewhat similar compliment that is paid by the men who send messages across the battlefield
is paid in the bulk to one little select circle; to the animal brawn and blood, the spiritual
courage and devotion, the bodies and brains, the pluck and perseverance, the endurance, the
grit and the determination of the signaling companies.

When the sergeant took his message and glanced through it, he pursed his lips in a low whistle
and asked the signaler to copy while he went and roused three messengers. His quick glance
through the note had told him, even without the O.C.'s message, that it was to the last degree
urgent that the message should go back and be delivered at once and without fail; therefore
he sent three messengers, simply because three men trebled the chances of the message getting
through without delay. If one man dropped, there were two to go on; if two fell, the third
would still carry on; if he fell--well, after that the matter was beyond the sergeant's handling;
he must leave it to the messenger to find another man or means to carry on the message.

The telephonist had scribbled a copy of the note to keep by him in case the wire was mended
and the message could be sent through after the messengers started and before they reached
the other end. The three received their instructions, drew their wet coats about their shivering
shoulders, relieved their feelings in a few growled sentences about the dog's life a man led
in that company, and departed into the wet night.

The sergeant came back, re-read the message and discussed it with the signaler. It said: "Heavy
attack is developing and being pressed strongly on our center a-a-a.[Footnote: Three a's indicate
a full stop.] Our losses have been heavy and line is considerably weakened a-a-a. Will hold
on here to the last but urgently request that strong reinforcements be sent up if the line
is to be maintained a-a-a. Additional artillery support would be useful a-a-a."

"Sounds healthy, don't it?" said the sergeant reflectively. The signaler nodded gloomily and
listened apprehensively to the growing sounds of battle. Now that his mind was free from first
thoughts of telephonic worries, he had time to consider outside matters. For nearly ten minutes
the two men listened, and talked in short sentences, and listened again. The rattle of rifle
fire was sustained and unbroken, and punctuated liberally at short intervals by the boom of
exploding grenades and bombs. Decidedly the whole action was heavier--or coming back closer
to them.

The sergeant was moving across the door to open it and listen when a shell struck the house
above them. The building shook violently, down to the very flags of the stone floor; from overhead,
after the first crash, there came a rumble of falling masonry, the splintering cracks of breaking
wood-work, the clatter and rattle of cascading bricks and tiles. A shower of plaster grit fell
from the cellar roof and settled thick upon the papers littered over the table. The sergeant
halted abruptly with his hand on the cellar door, three or four of the sleepers stirred restlessly,
one woke for a minute sufficiently to grumble curses and ask "what the blank was that"; the
rest slept on serene and undisturbed. The sergeant stood there until the last sounds of falling
rubbish had ceased. "A shell," he said, and drew a deep breath. "Plunk into upstairs somewhere."

The signaler made no answer. He was quite busy at the moment rearranging his disturbed papers
and blowing the dust and grit off them.

A telephonist at another table commenced to take and write down a message. It came from the
forward trench on the left, and merely said briefly that the attack on the center was spreading
to them and that they were holding it with some difficulty. The message was sent up to the
O.C. "Whoever the O.C. may be," as the sergeant said softly. "If the Colonel was upstairs when
that shell hit, there's another O.C. now, most like." But the Colonel had escaped that shell
and sent a message back to the left trench to hang on, and that he had asked for reënforcements.

"He did ask," said the sergeant grimly, "but when he's going to get 'em is a different pair
o' shoes. It'll take those messengers most of an hour to get there, even if they dodge all
the lead on the way."

As the minutes passed, it became more and more plain that the need for reënforcements was growing
more and more urgent. The sergeant was standing now at the open door of the cellar, and the
noise of the conflict swept down and clamored and beat about them.

"Think I'll just slip up and have a look round," said the sergeant. "I shan't be long."

When he had gone, the signaler rose and closed the door; it was cold enough, as he very sensibly
argued, and his being able to hear the fighting better would do nothing to affect its issue.
Just after came another call on his instrument, and the repair party told him they had crossed
the neutral ground, had one man wounded in the arm, that he was going on with them, and they
were still following up the wire. The message ceased, and the telephonist, leaning his elbows
on the table and his chin on his hands, was almost asleep before he realized it. He wakened
with a jerk, lit another cigarette, and stamped up and down the room trying to warm his numbed
feet.

First one orderly and then another brought in messages to be sent to the other trenches, and
the signaler held them a minute and gathered some more particulars as to how the fight was
progressing up there. The particulars were not encouraging. We must have lost a lot of men,
since the whole place was clotted up with casualties that kept coming in quicker than the stretcher-bearers
could move them. The rifle-fire was hot, the bombing was still hotter, and the shelling was
perhaps the hottest and most horrible of all. Of the last the signaler hardly required an account;
the growling thumps of heavy shells exploding, kept sending little shivers down the cellar
walls, the shiver being, oddly enough, more emphatic when the wail of the falling shell ended
in a muffled thump that proclaimed the missile "blind" or "a dud." Another hurried messenger
plunged down the steps with a note written by the adjutant to say the colonel was severely
wounded and had sent for the second in command to take over. Ten more dragging minutes passed,
and now the separate little shivers and thrills that shook the cellar walls had merged and
run together. The rolling crash of the falling shells and the bursting of bombs came close
and fast one upon another, and at intervals the terrific detonation of an aerial torpedo dwarfed
for the moment all the other sounds.

By now the noise was so great that even the sleepers began to stir, and one or two of them
to wake. One sat up and asked the telephonist, sitting idle over his instrument, what was happening.
He was told briefly, and told also that the line was "disc." He expressed considerable annoyance
at this, grumbling that he knew what it meant--more trips in the mud and under fire to take
the messages the wire should have carried.

"Do you think there's any chance of them pushing in the line and rushing this house?" he asked.
The telephonist didn't know. "Well," said the man and lay down again. "It's none o' my dashed
business if they do anyway. I only hope we're tipped the wink in time to shunt out o' here;
I've no particular fancy for sitting in a cellar with the Boche cock-shying their bombs down
the steps at me." Then he shut his eyes and went to sleep again.

The morsed key signal for his own company buzzed rapidly on the signaler's telephone and he
caught the voice of the corporal who had taken out the repair party. They had found the break,
the corporal said, and were mending it. He should be through--he was through--could he hear
the other end? The signaler could hear the other end calling him and he promptly tapped off
the answering signal and spoke into his instrument. He could hear the morse signals on the
buzzer plain enough, but the voice was faint and indistinct. The signaler caught the corporal
before he withdrew his tap-in and implored him to search along and find the leakage.

"It's bad enough," he said, "to get all these messages through by voice. I haven't a dog's
chance of doing it if I have to buzz each one."

The rear station spoke again and informed him that he had several urgent messages waiting.
The forward signaler replied that he also had several messages, and one in particular was urgent
above all others.

"The blanky line is being pushed in," he said. "No, it isn't pushed in yet--I didn't say it--I
said being pushed in--being--being, looks like it will be pushed in--got that? The O.C. has'
stopped one' and the second has taken command. This message I want you to take is shrieking
for reënforcements--what? I can't hear--no I didn't say anything about horses--I did not. Reënforcements
I said; anyhow, take this message and get it through quick."

He was interrupted by another terrific crash, a fresh and louder outburst of the din outside;
running footsteps clattered and leaped down the stairs, the door flung open and the sergeant
rushed in slamming the door violently behind him. He ran straight across to the recumbent figures
and began violently to shake and kick them into wakefulness.

"Up with ye!" he said, "every man. If you don't wake quick now, you'll maybe not have the chance
to wake at all."

The men rolled over and sat and stood up blinking stupidly at him and listening in amazement
to the noise outside.

"Rouse yourselves," he cried. "Get a move on. The Germans are almost on top of us. The front
line's falling back. They'll stand here." He seized one or two of them and pushed them towards
the door. "You," he said, "and you and you, get outside and round the back there. See if you
can get a pickaxe, a trenching tool, anything, and break down that grating and knock a bigger
hole in the window. We may have to crawl out there presently. The rest o' ye come with me an'
help block up the door."

Through the din that followed, the telephonist fought to get his message through; he had to
give up an attempt to speak it while a hatchet, a crowbar, and a pickaxe were noisily at work
breaking out a fresh exit from the back of the cellar, and even after that work had been completed,
it was difficult to make himself heard. He completed the urgent message for reënforcements
at last, listened to some confused and confusing comments upon it, and then made ready to take
some messages from the other end.

"You'll have to shout," he said, "no, shout--speak loud, because I can't 'ardly 'ear myself
think--no, 'ear myself think. Oh, all sorts, but the shelling is the worst, and one o' them
beastly airyale torpedoes. All right, go ahead."

The earpiece receiver strapped tightly over one ear, left his right hand free to use a pencil,
and as he took the spoken message word by word, he wrote it on the pad of message forms under
his hand. Under the circumstances it is hardly surprising that the message took a good deal
longer than a normal time to send through, and while he was taking it, the signaler's mind
was altogether too occupied to pay any attention to the progress of events above and around
him. But now the sergeant came back and warned him that he had better get his things ready
and put together as far as he could, in case they had to make a quick and sudden move.

"The game's up, I'm afraid," he said gloomily, and took a note that was brought down by another
orderly. "I thought so," he commented, as he read it hastily and passed it to the other signaler.
"It's a message warning the right and left flanks that we can't hold the center any longer,
and that they are to commence falling back to conform to our retirement at 3.20 ac emma, which
is ten minutes from now."

Over their heads the signalers could hear tramping scurrying feet, the hammering out of loopholes,
the dragging thump and flinging down of obstacles piled up as an additional defense to the
rickety walls. Then there were more hurrying footsteps, and presently the jarring rap-rap-rap
of a machine gun immediately over their heads.

"That's done it!" said the sergeant. "We've got no orders to move, but I'm going to chance
it and establish an alternative signaling station in one of the trenches somewhere behind here.
This cellar roof is too thin to stop an ordinary Fizzbang, much less a good solid Crump, and
that machine gun upstairs is a certain invitation to sudden death and the German gunners to
down and out us."

He moved towards the new opening that had been made in the wall of the cellar, scrambled up
it and disappeared. All the signalers lifted their attention from their instruments at the
same moment and sat listening to the fresh note that ran through the renewed and louder clamor
and racket. The signaler who was in touch with the rear station called them and began to tell
them what was happening.

"We're about all in, I b'lieve," he said. "Five minutes ago we passed word to the flanks to
fall back in ten minutes. What? Yes, it's thick. I don't know how many men we've lost hanging
on, and I suppose we'll lose as many again taking back the trench we're to give up. What's
that? No. I don't see how reënforcements could be here yet. How long ago you say you passed
orders for them to move up? An hour ago! That's wrong, because the messengers can't have been
back--telephone message? That's a lot less than an hour ago. I sent it myself no more than
half an hour since. Oo-oo! did you get that bump? Dunno, couple o' big shells or something
dropped just outside. I can 'ardly 'ear you. There's a most almighty row going on all round.
They must be charging, I think, or our front line's fallen back, because the rifles is going
nineteen to the dozen, a-a-ah! They're getting stronger too, and it sounds like a lot more
bombs going; hold on, there's that blighting maxim again."

He stopped speaking while upstairs the maxim clattered off belt after belt of cartridges. The
other signalers were shuffling their feet anxiously and looking about them.

"Are we going to stick it here?" said one. "Didn't the sergeant say something about 'opping it?"

"If he did," said the other, "he hasn't given any orders that I've heard. I suppose he'll come
back and do that, and we've just got to carry on till then."

The men had to shout now to make themselves heard to each other above the constant clatter
of the maxim and the roar of rifle fire. By now they could hear, too, shouts and cries and
the trampling rush of many footsteps. The signaler spoke into his instrument again.

"I think the line's fallen back," he said. "I can hear a heap o' men running about there outside,
and now I suppose us here is about due to get it in the neck."

There was a scuffle, a rush, and a plunge, and the sergeant shot down through the rear opening
and out into the cellar.

"The flank trenches!" he shouted. "Quick! Get on to them--right and left flank--tell them they're
to stand fast. Quick, now, give them that first. Stand fast; do not retire."

The signalers leaped to their instruments, buzzed off the call, and getting through, rattled
their messages off.

"Ask them," said the sergeant anxiously. "Had they commenced to retire." He breathed a sigh
of relief when the answers came. "No," that the message had just stopped them in time.

"Then," he said, "you can go ahead now and tell them the order to retire is cancelled, that
the reënforcements have arrived, that they're up in our forward line, and we can hold it good--oh!"

He paused and wiped his wet forehead; "you," he said, turning to the other signaler, "tell
them behind there the same thing."

"How in thunder did they manage it, sergeant?" said the perplexed signaler. "They haven't had
time since they got my message through."

"No," said the sergeant, "but they've just had time since they got mine."

"Got yours?" said the bewildered signaler.

"Yes, didn't I tell you?" said the sergeant. "When I went out for a look round that time, I
found an artillery signaler laying out a new line, and I got him to let me tap in and send
a message through his battery to headquarters."

"You might have told me," said the aggrieved signaler. "It would have saved me a heap of sweat
getting that message through." After he had finished his message to the rear station he spoke
reflectively: "Lucky thing you did get through," he said. "'Twas a pretty close shave. The
O.C. should have a 'thank you' for you over it."

"I don't suppose," answered the sergeant, "the O.C. will ever know or ever trouble about it;
he sent a message to the signaling company to send through--and it was sent through. There's
the beginning and the end of it."

And as he said, so it was; or rather the end of it was in those three words that appeared later
in the despatch: "It is reported."

CONSCRIPT COURAGE

You must know plenty of people--if you yourself are not one of them--who hold out stoutly against
any military compulsion or conscription in the belief that the "fetched" man can never be the
equal in valor and fighting instinct of the volunteer, can only be a source of weakness in
any platoon, company and regiment. This tale may throw a new light on that argument.

Gerald Bunthrop was not a conscript in the strict sense of the word, because when he enlisted
no legal form of conscription existed in the United Kingdom; but he was, as many more have
been, a moral conscript, a man utterly averse to any form of soldiering, much less fighting,
very reluctantly driven into the Army by force of circumstance and pressure from without himself.
Before the War the Army and its ways were to him a sealed book. Of war he had the haziest ideas
compounded of novels he had read and dimly remembered and mental pictures in a confused jumble
of Charles O'Malley dragoons on spirited charges, half-forgotten illustrations in the papers
of pith-helmeted infantry in the Boer War, faint boyhood recollections of Magersfontein and
the glumness of the "Black Week"--a much more realistic and vivid impression of Waterloo as
described by Brigadier Gerard--and odd figures of black Soudanese, of Light Brigade troopers,
of Peninsula red-coats, of Sepoys and bonneted Highlanders in the Mutiny period, and of Life
Guard sentries at Whitehall, lines of fixed bayonets on City procession routes, and khaki-clad
Terriers seen about railway stations and on bus-tops with incongruous rifles on Saturday afternoons.
Actually, it is not correct to include these living figures in his vague idea of war. They
had to him no connection with anything outside normal peaceful life, stirred his thoughts to
war no more than seeing a gasbracket would wake him to imaginings of a coalmine or a pit explosion.
His slight conceptions of war, then, were a mere matter of print and books and pictures, and
the first months of this present war were exactly the same, no more and no less--newspaper
paragraphs and photos and drawings in the weeklies hanging on the bookstalls. He read about
the Retreat and the Advance, skimmed the prophets' forecasts, gulped the communiques with interest
a good deal fainter than he read the accounts of the football matches or a boxing bout. He
expected "our side" to win of course, and was quite patriotic; was in fact a "supporter" of
the British Army in exactly the sense of being a "supporter" or "follower" of Tottenham Hotspurs
or Kent County. Any thoughts that he might shoulder a rifle and fight Germans would at that
time, if it had entered his head, have seemed just as ridiculous as a thought that he should
play in the Final at the Crystal Palace or step into the ring to fight Carpentier. It took
a long time to move him from this attitude of aloofness. Recruiting posters failed utterly
to touch him. He looked at them, criticized them, even discussed their "goodness" or drawing
power on recruits with complete detachment and without the vaguest idea that they were addressed
to him. He bought Allies' flag-buttons, and subscribed with his fellow-employees to a Red Cross
Fund, and joined them again in sending some sixpences to a newspaper Smokes Gift Fund; he always
most scrupulously stood up and uncovered to "God Save the King," and clapped and encored vociferously
any patriotic songs or sentiments from the stage. He thought he was doing his full duty as
a loyal Briton, and even--this was when he promised a regular sixpence a week to the Smokes
Fund--going perhaps a little beyond it. First hints and suggestions that he should enlist he
treated as an excellent jest, and when at last they became too frequent and pointed for that,
and began to come from complete strangers, he became justly indignant at such "impudence" and
"interference," and began long explainings to people he knew, that he wasn't the one to be
bullied into anything, that fighting wasn't "his line," that he "had no liking for soldiering,"
that he would have gone like a shot, but had his own good and adequate reasons for not doing so.

There is no need to tell of the stages by which he arrived at the conclusion that he must enlist:
from the first dawning wonder at such a possibility, through qualms of doubt and fear and spasms
of hope and--almost--courage, to a dull apathy of resignation. No need to tell either the particular
circumstances that "conscripted" him at last, because although his name is not real the man
himself is, and one has no wish to bring shame on him or his people. I have only described
him so closely to make it very clear that he was driven to enlistment, that a less promising
recruit never joined up, that he was a conscript in every real sense of the word. We can pass
over all his training, his introduction to the life of the trenches, his feelings of terror
under conditions as little dangerous as the trenches could be. He managed, more or less, to
hide this terror, as many a worse and many a better man has done before him, until one day----

The Germans had made a fierce attack, had overborne a section of the defense and taken a good
deal of trenched ground, had been counter-attacked and partly driven back, had scourged the
lost parts with a fresh tempest of artillery fire and driven in again to close quarters, to
hot bomb and bayonet work; were again checked and for the moment held.

Private Gerald Bunthrop's battalion had been hurried up to support the broken and breaking
line, was thrust into a badly wrecked trench with crumbling sides and broken traverses, with
many dead and wounded cumbering the feet of the few defenders, with a reek of high-explosive
fumes catching their throats and nostrils. The open ground beyond the trench was scattered
thick with great heaps of German dead, a few more sprawled on the broken parapet, another and
lesser few were huddled in the trench itself amongst the many khaki forms. The battalion holding
the trench had been almost annihilated in the task, had in fact at first been driven out from
part of the line and had only reoccupied it with heavy losses. Bunthrop had with his battalion
passed along some smashed communication trenches and over the open ground this fighting had
covered, and the sights they saw in passing might easily have shaken the stoutest hearts and
nerves. They made the approach, too, under a destructive fire with high-explosive shells screaming
and crashing over, around, and amongst them, with bullets whistling and hissing about them
and striking the ground with the sound of constantly exploding Chinese crackers.

Bunthrop himself, to state the fact baldly, was in an agony of fear. He might have been tempted
to bolt, but was restrained by a complete lack of any idea where to bolt to, by a lingering
remnant of self-respect, and by a firm conviction that he would be dealt with mercilessly if
he openly ran. But when he reached the comparative shelter of the broken trench all these safeguards
of his decent behavior vanished. He flung himself into the trench, cowered in its deepest part,
made not the slightest attempt to look over the parapet, much less to use his rifle. There
is this much of excuse for him, that on the very instant that they reached the cover of the
trench a bursting high-explosive had caught the four men next in line to him. The excuse may
be insufficient for those who have never witnessed at very close hand the instant and terrible
destruction of four companions with whom they have eaten and slept and talked and moved and
had their intimate being for many months; but those who have known such happenings will understand.
Bunthrop's sergeant understood, and because he was a good sergeant and had the instinct for
the right handling of men--it must have been an instinct, because, up to a year before, he
had been ledger clerk in a City office and had handled nothing more alive than columns of figures
in a book--he issued exactly the order that appealed exactly to Bunthrop's terror and roused
him from a shivering embodiment of fear to a live thinking and order-obeying private. "Get
up and sling some of those sandbags back on the parapet, Bunthrop!" he said, "and see if you
can't make some decent cover for yourself. You've nothing there that would stop a half-crippled
Hun jumping in on top of you." When he came back along the trench five minutes later he found
Bunthrop feverishly busy re-piling sandbags and strengthening the parapet, ducking hastily
and crouching low when a shell roared past overhead, but hurriedly resuming work the instant
it had passed. Then came the fresh German attack, preceded by five minutes' intense artillery
fire, concentrated on the half-wrecked trench. The inferno of noise, the rush and roar of the
approaching shells, the crash and earth-shaking thunder of their explosions, the ear-splitting
cracks overhead of high-explosive shrapnel, the drone and whirr and thump of their flying fragments--the
whole racking, roaring, deafening, sense-destroying tempest of noise was too much for Bunthrop's
nerve. He flung down and flattened himself to the trench bottom again, squeezing himself close
to the earth, submerged and drowned in a sweeping wave of panic fear. He gave no heed to the
orders of his platoon commander, the shouting of his sergeant, the stir that ran along the
trench, the flat spitting reports of the rifles that began to crack rapidly in a swiftly increasing
volume of fire. A huge fragment of shell came down and struck the trench bottom with a suggestively
violent thud a foot from his head. Half sick with the instant thought, "If it had been a foot
this way!..." half crazed with the sense of openness to such a missile, Bunthrop rose to his
knees, pressing close to the forward parapet, and looking wildly about him. His sergeant saw
him. "You, Bunthrop," he shouted, "are you hit? Get up, you fool, and shoot! If we can't stop
'em before they reach here we're done in." Bunthrop hardly heeded him. Along the trench the
men were shooting at top speed over the parapet; a dozen paces away two of the battalion machine-guns
were clattering and racketing in rapid gusts of fire; a little farther along a third one had
jambed and was being jerked and hammered at by a couple of sweating men and a wildly cursing
boy officer. So much Bunthrop saw, and then with a hideous screeching roar a high explosive
fell and burst in a shattering crash, a spouting hurricane of noise and smoke and flung earth
and fragments. Bunthrop found himself half buried in a landslide of crumbling trench, struggled
desperately clear, gasping and choking in the black cloud of smoke and fumes, saw presently,
as the smoke thinned and dissolved, a chaos of broken earth and sandbags where the machine-guns
had stood; saw one man and an officer dragging their gun from the débris, setting it up again
on the broken edge of the trench. Another man staggered up the crumbling earth bank to help,
and presently amongst them they got the gun into action again. The officer left it and ran
to where he saw the other gun half buried in loose earth. He dragged it clear, found it undamaged,
looked round, shouted at Bunthrop crouching flat against the trench wall; shouted again, came
down the earth bank to him with a rush. "Come and help!" he yelled, grabbing at Bunthrop's
arm. Bunthrop mumbled stupidly in reply. "What?" shouted the officer. "Come and help, will
you? Never mind if you are hurt," as he noticed a smear of blood on the private's face. "You'll
be hurt worse if they get into this trench with the bayonet. Come on and help!" Bunthrop, hardly
understanding, obeyed the stronger will and followed him back to the gun. "Can you load?" demanded
the officer. "Can you fill the cartridges into these drums while I shoot?" Bunthrop had had
in a remote period of his training some machine-gun instruction. He nodded and mumbled again.
"God!" said the officer. "Look at 'em! There's enough to eat us if they get to bayonet distance!
We must stop 'em with the bullet. Hurry up, man; hurry, if you don't want to be skewered like
a stuck pig!" He rattled off burst after burst of fire, clamoring at Bunthrop to hurry, hurry,
hurry. A wounded machine-gunner joined them, and then some others, and the gun began to spit
a steady string of bullets again. By this time the full meaning of the officer's words--the
meaning, too, of remarks between the wounded helpers--had soaked into Bunthrop's brain. Their
only hope, his only hope of life, lay in stopping the attack before it reached the trench;
and the machine-guns were a main factor in the stopping. He lost interest in everything except
cramming the cartridges into their place. When the officer was hit and rolled backwards and
lay groaning and swearing, Bunthrop's chief and agonizing thought was that they--he--had lost
the assistance and protection of the gun. When one of the wounded gunners took the officer's
place and reopened fire, Bunthrop's only concern again was to keep pace with the loading. The
thoughts were repeated exactly when that gunner was hit and collapsed and his place was taken
by another man. And by now the urgent need of keeping the gun going was so impressed on Bunthrop
that when the next gunner was struck down and the gun stood idle and deserted it was Bunthrop
who turned wildly urging the other loaders to get up and keep the gun going; babbled excitedly
about the only hope being to stop the Germans before they "got in" with the bayonet, repeated
again and again at them the officer's phrase about "skewered like stuck pigs." The others hung
back. They had seen man after man struck down at the gun, they could hear the hiss and whitt
of the bullets over their heads, the constant cracker-like smacks of others that hit the parapet,
and--they hung back. "Why th' 'ell don't you do it yerself?" demanded one of them, angered
by Bunthrop's goading and in some degree, no doubt, by the disagreeable knowledge that they
were flinching from a duty.

And then Bunthrop, the "conscript," the man who had held back from war to the last possible
minute, who hated soldiering and shrank from violence and all fighting, who was known to his
fellows as "a funk," the source of much uneasiness to company and platoon commanders and sergeants
as "a weak spot," Bunthrop did what these others, these average good men who had "joined up"
freely, who had longed for the end of home training and the transfer "out Front," dared not
do. Bunthrop scrambled up the broken bank, seized the gun, swung the sights full to the broad
gray target, and opened fire. He kept it going steadily, too, with a sleet of bullets whistling
and whipping past him, kept on after a bullet snatched the cap from his head, and others in
quick succession cut away a shoulder strap, scored a red weal across his neck, stabbed through
the point of his shoulder. And when a shell-fragment smashed the gun under his hands, he left
it only to plunge hastily to the other gun abandoned by all but dead and dying; pulled off
a dead man who sprawled across it and recommenced shooting. He stopped firing only when his
last cartridge was gone; squatted a moment longer staring over the sights, and then raised
his head and peered out into the trailing film of smoke clouds from the bursting shells. Although
it took him a minute to be sure of it he saw plainly at last that the attack was broken. Dimly
he could see the heaped clusters of dead that lay out in the open, the crawling and limping
figures of the wounded who sought safety back in the cover of their own trench, and more than
that he could see men running with their heads stooped and their gray coats flapping about
their ankles. It was this last that roused him again to action. He scrambled hurriedly back
down the broken parapet into the trench. "Come on, you fellows," he shouted to two or three
nearby men who continued to fire their rifles over the parapet. "It's no use waitin' here any
longer." A heavy shell whooped roaring over them and crashed thunderously close behind the
parapet. Bunthrop paid no slightest heed to it. His wide, staring eyes and white face, and
blood smeared from the trickling wound in his neck, his capless head and tumbled hair, his
clay and mud-caked and blood-stained uniform all gave him a look of wildness, of desperation,
of abandonment. His sergeant, the man who had seen his fear and set him to pile the sandbags,
caught sight of him again now, heard some word of his shoutings, and pushed hastily along the
trench to where he fidgeted and called angrily to the others to "chuck that silly shooting--I'm
goin' anyhow ... what's the use...."

The sergeant interrupted sharply.

"Here, you shut up, Bunthrop," he shouted. "Keep down in the trench. You're wounded, aren't
you? Well, you'll get back presently."

"That be damn," said Bunthrop. "You don't understand. They're runnin' away, but we can't go
out after 'em if these silly blighters here keep shootin'. Come on now, or they'll all be gone."
And Private Bunthrop, the despised "conscript," slung his bayoneted rifle over his wounded
shoulder and commenced to scramble up out over the front of the broken parapet. And what is
more he was really and genuinely annoyed when the sergeant catching him by the heel dragged
him down again and ordered him to stay there.

"Don't you understand?" he stuttered excitedly, and gesticulating fiercely towards the front.
"They're runnin', I tell you; the blighters are runnin' away. Why can't we get out after 'em?"

SMASHING THE COUNTER-ATTACK

" ... a violent counter-attack was delivered but was successfully repulsed at every point with
heavy losses to the enemy."--EXTRACT FROM OFFICIAL DESPATCH.

There appears to be some doubt as to who rightly claims to have been the first to notice and
report signs of the massing of heavy forces of Germans for the counter-attack on our positions.
The infantry say that a scouting patrol fumbling about in the darkness in front of the forward
fire trench heard suspicious sounds--little clickings of equipment and accouterments, stealthy
rustlings, distant tramping--and reported on their return to the trench. An artillery observing
officer is said to have seen flitting shadows of figures in the gray light of the dawn mists,
and, later, an odd glimpse of cautious movement amongst the trees of a wood some little distance
behind the German lines, and an unbroken passing of gray-covered heads behind a portion of
a communication trench parapet. He also reported, and he may have been responsible for the
dozen or so of shrapnel that were flung tentatively into and over the wood. An airman droning
high over the lines, with fleecy white puffs of shrapnel smoke breaking about him, also saw
and reported clearly "large force of Germans massing Map Square So-and-so."

But whoever was responsible for the first report matters little. The great point is that the
movement was detected in good time, apparently before the preparations for attack were complete,
so that the final arraying and disposal of the force for the launching of the attack was hampered
and checked, and made perforce under a demoralizing artillery fire.

What the results might have been if the full weight of the massed attack could have been prepared
without detection and flung on our lines without warning is hard to say; but there is every
chance that our first line at least might have been broken into and swamped by the sheer weight
of numbers. That, clearly, is what the Germans had intended, and from the number of men employed
it is evident that they meant to push to the full any chance our breaking line gave them to
reoccupy and hold fast a considerable portion of the ground they had lost. It is said that
three to four full divisions were used. If that is correct, it is certain that the German army
was minus three to four effective divisions when the attack withdrew, that a good half of the
men in them would never fight again. The attack lost its first great advantage in losing the
element of surprise. The bulk of the troops would have been moved into position in the hours
of darkness. That wood, in all probability, was filled with men by night. The only daylight
movement attempted would have been the cautious filling of the trenches, the pouring in of
the long gray-coated lines along the communication trenches, all keeping well down and under
cover. Under the elaborate system of deep trenches, fire-, and support-, communication- and
approach-trenches running back for miles to emerge only behind houses or hill or wood, it is
surprising how large a mass of men can be pushed into the forward trenches without any disclosure
of movement to the enemy. Scores of thousands of men may be packed away waiting motionless
for the word, more thousands may be pouring slowly up the communication ways, and still more
thousands standing ready a mile or two behind the lines; and yet to any eye looking from the
enemy's side the country is empty and still, and bare of life as a swept barn. Even the all-seeing
airmen can be cheated, and see nothing but the usual quiet countryside, the tangled crisscross
of trenches, looking from above like so many wriggling lines of thin white braid with a black
cord-center, the neat dolls' toy-houses and streets of the villages, the straight, broad ribbon
of the Route Nationale, all still and lifeless, except for an odd cart or two on the high road,
a few dotted figures in the village streets. Below the flying-men the packed thousands are
crouched still to earth. At the sound of the engine's drone, at sight of the wheeling shape,
square miles of country stiffen to immobility, men scurry under cover of wall or bush, the
long, moving lines in the trenches halt and sink down and hang their heads (next to movement
the light dots of upturned, staring faces are the quickest and surest betrayal of the earth-men
to the air-men), the open roads are emptied of men into the ditches and under the trees.

But this time some movement in the trenches, some delay in halting a regiment, some neglect
to keep men under cover, some transport too suspiciously close-spaced on the roads, betrayed
the movement. His suspicions aroused, the airman would have risked the anti-aircraft guns and
dropped a few hundred feet and narrowly searched each hillside and wood for the telltale gray
against the green. Then the wireless would commence to talk, or the 'plane swoop round and
drive headlong for home to report.

And then, picture the bustle at the different headquarters, the stir amongst the signalers,
the frantic pipings of the telephone "buzzers," the sharp calls. "Take a message. Ready? Brigade
H.Q. to O.C. Such-and-such Battery," or "to O.C. So-and-So Regiment"; imagine the furtive scurry
in the trenches to man the parapets, and prepare bombs, and lay out more ammunition; the rush
at the batteries, the quick consulting of squared maps, the bellowed string of orders in a
jargon of angles of sight, correctors, ranges, figures and measures of degrees and yards, the
first scramble about the guns dropping to the smooth work of ordered movement, the peering
gun muzzles jerking and twitching to their ordained angles, the click and slam of the closing
breech-blocks, the tense stillness as each gun reports "Ready!" and waits the word to fire.

And all the while imagine the Germans out there, creeping through the trees, crowding along
the trenches, sifting out and settling down into the old favorite formation, making all ready
for one more desperate trial of it, stacking the cards for yet another deep gambling plunge
on the great German game--the massed attack in solid lines at close interval. The plan no doubt
was the same old plan--a quick and overwhelming torrent of shell fire, a sudden hurricane of
high explosive on the forward trench, and then, before the supports could be hurried up and
brought in any weight through the reeking, shaking inferno of the shell-smitten communication
trenches, the surge forward of line upon line, wave upon wave, of close-locked infantry.

But the density of mass, the solid breadth, the depth, bulk, and weight of men so irresistible
at close-quarter work, is an invitation to utter destruction if it is caught by the guns before
it can move. And so this time it was caught. Given their target, given the word "Go," the guns
wasted no moment. The first battery ready burst a quick couple of ranging shots over the wood.
A spray of torn leaves whirling from the tree tops, the toss of a broken branch, showed the
range correct; and before the first rounds' solid white cotton-wooly balls of smoke had thinned
and disappeared, puff-puff-puff the shrapnel commenced to burst in clouds over the wood. That
was the beginning. Gun after gun, battery after battery, picked up the range and poured shells
over and into the wood, went searching every hollow and hole, rending and destroying trench
and dug-out, parapet and parados. The trenches, clean white streaks and zig-zags of chalk on
a green slope, made perfect targets on which the guns made perfect shooting; the wood was a
mark that no gun could miss, and surely no gun missed. What the scene in that wood must have
been is beyond imagining and beyond telling. It was quickly shrouded in a pall of drifting
smoke, and dimly through this the observing officers directing the fire of their guns could
see clouds of leaves and twigs whirling and leaping under the lashing shrapnel, could see branches
and smashed tree-trunks and great clods of earth and stone flying upward and outward from the
blast of the lyddite shells. The wood was slashed to ribbons, rent and riddled to tatters,
deluged from above with tearing blizzards of shrapnel bullets, scorched and riven with high-explosive
shells. In the trenches our men cowered at first, listening in awe to the rushing whirlwinds
of the shells' passage over their heads, the roar of the cannonade behind them, the crash and
boom of the bursting shells in front, the shriek and whirr of flying splinters, the splintering
crash of the shattering trees.

The German artillery strove to pick up the plan of the attack, to beat down the torrent of
our batteries' fire, to smash in the forward trenches, shake the defense, open the way for
the massed attack. But the contest was too unequal, the devastation amongst the crowded mass
of German infantry too awful to be allowed to continue. Plainly the attack, ready or not ready,
had to be launched at speed, or perish where it stood.

And so it was that our New Armies had a glimpse of what the old "Contemptible Little Army"
has seen and faced so often, the huge gray bulk looming through the drifting smoke, the packed
mass of the old German infantry attack. There were some of these "Old Contemptibles," as they
proudly style themselves now, who said when it was all over, and they had time to think of
anything but loading and firing a red-hot rifle, that this attack did not compare favorably
with the German attacks of the Mons-Marne days, that it lacked something of the steadiness,
the rolling majesty of power, the swinging stride of the old attacks; that it did not come
so far or so fast, that beaten back it took longer to rally and come again, that coming again
it was easier than ever to bring to a stand. But against that these "Old Contemptibles" admit
that they never in the old days fought under such favorable conditions, that here in this fight
they were in better constructed and deeper trenches, that they were far better provided with
machine-guns, and, above all, that they had never, never, never had such a magnificent backing
from our guns, such a tremendous stream of shells helping to smash the attack.

And smashed, hopelessly and horribly smashed, the attack assuredly was. The woods in and behind
which the German hordes were massed lay from three to four hundred yards from the muzzles of
our rifles. Imagine it, you men who were not there, you men of the New Armies still training
at home, you riflemen practicing and striving to work up the number of aimed rounds fired in
"the mad minute," you machine-gunners riddling holes in a target or a row of posts. Imagine
it, oh you Artillery, imagine the target lavishly displayed in solid blocks in the open, with
a good four hundred yards of ground to go under your streaming gun-muzzles. The gunners who
were there that day will tell you how they used that target, will tell you how they stretched
themselves to the call for "gun-fire" (which is an order for each gun to act independently,
to fire and keep on firing as fast as it can be served), how the guns grew hotter and hotter,
till the paint bubbled and blistered and flaked off them in patches, till the breech burned
the incautious hand laid on it, till spurts of oil had to be sluiced into the breech from a
can between rounds and sizzled and boiled like fat in a frying-pan as it fell on the hot steel,
how the whole gun smoked and reeked with heated oil, and how the gun-detachments were half-deaf
for days after.

It was such a target as gunners in their fondest dreams dare hardly hope for; and such a target
as war may never see again, for surely the fate of such massed attacks will be a warning to
all infantry commanders for all time.

The guns took their toll, and where death from above missed, death from the level came in an
unbroken torrent of bullets sleeting across the open from rifles and machine-guns. On our trenches
shells were still bursting, maxim and rifle bullets were still pelting from somewhere in half
enfilade at long range. But our men had no time to pay heed to these. They hitched themselves
well up on the parapet to get the fuller view of their mark; their officers for the most part
had no need to bother about directing or controlling the fire--what need, indeed, to direct
with such a target bulking big before the sights? What need to control when the only speed
limit was a man's capacity to aim and fire? So the officers, for the most part, took rifle
themselves and helped pelt lead into the slaughter-pit.

There are few, if any, who can give details of how or when the attack perished. A thick haze
of smoke from the bursting shells blurred the picture. To the eyes of the defenders there was
only a picture of that smoke-fog, with a gray wall of men looming through it, moving, walking,
running towards them, falling and rolling, and looming up again and coming on, melting away
into tangled heaps that disappeared again behind advancing men, who in turn became more falling
and fallen piles. It was like watching those chariot races in a theater where the horses gallop
on a stage revolving under their feet, and for all their fury of motion always remain in the
same place. So it was with the German line--it was pressing furiously forward, but always appeared
to remain stationary or to advance so slowly that it gave no impression of advancing, but merely
of growing bigger. Once, or perhaps twice, the advancing line disappeared altogether, melted
away behind the drifting smoke, leaving only the mass of dark blotches sprawled on the grass.
At these times the fire died away along a part of our front, and the men paused to gulp a drink
from a water-bottle, to look round and tilt their caps back and wipe the sweat from their brows,
to gasp joyful remarks to one another about "gettin' a bit of our own back," and "this pays
for the ninth o' May," and then listen to the full, deep roar of rifle-fire that rolled out
from further down the line, and try to peer through the shifting smoke to see how "the lot
next door" was faring. But these respites were short. A call and a crackle of fire at their
elbows brought them back to business, to the grim business of purposeful and methodical killing,
of wiping out that moving wall that was coming steadily at them again through the smoke and
flame of the bursting shells. The great bulk of the line came no nearer than a hundred yards
from our line; part pressed in another twenty or thirty yards, and odd bunches of the dead
were found still closer. But none came to grips--none, indeed, were found within forty yards
of our rifles' wall of fire. A scattered remnant of the attackers ran back, some whole and
some hurt, thousands crawled away wounded, to reach the safe shelter of their support trenches,
some to be struck down by the shells that still kept pounding down upon the death-swept field.
The counter-attack was smashed--hopelessly and horribly smashed.

A GENERAL ACTION

"At some points our lines have been slightly advanced and their position improved."--EXTRACT
FROM DESPATCH

It has to be admitted by all who know him that the average British soldier has a deep-rooted
and emphatic objection to "fatigues," all trench-digging and pick-and-shovel work being included
under that title. This applies to the New Armies as well as the Old, and when one remembers
the safety conferred by a good deep trench and the fact that few men are anxious to be killed
sooner than is strictly necessary, the objection is regrettable and very surprising. Still
there it is, and any officer will tell you that his men look on trench-digging with distaste,
have to be constantly persuaded and chivvied into doing anything like their best at it, and
on the whole would apparently much rather take their chance in a shallow or poorly-constructed
trench than be at the labor of making it deep and safe.

But one piece of trench-digging performed by the Tearaway Rifles must come pretty near a record
for speed.

When the Rifles moved in for their regular spell in the forward line, their O.C. was instructed
that his battalion had to construct a section of new trench in ground in front of the forward
trench.

It was particularly unfortunate that just about this time the winter issue of a regular rum
ration had ceased, and that, immediately before they moved in, a number of the Tearaways had
been put under stoppages of pay for an escapade with which this story need have no concern.

Without pay the men, of course, were cut off from even the sour and watery delights of the
beer sold in the local estaminets, which abound in the villages where the troops are billeted
in reserve some miles behind the firing line. As Sergeant Clancy feelingly remarked:

"They stopped the pay, and that stops the beer; and then they stopped the rum. It's no pleasure
in life they leave us at all, at all. They'll be afther stopping the fighting next."

Of that last, however, there was comparatively little fear at the moment. A brisk action had
opened some days before the Tearaways were brought up from the reserve, and the forward line
which they were now sent in to occupy had been a German trench less than a week before. 

I soon proposed a gallop with my African kindred over the neighborhood; and, one fine morning,
after a plentiful breakfast of stewed fowls, boiled to rags with rice, and seasoned with delicious
"palavra sauce," we cantered off to the distant villages. As we approached the first brook, but
before the fringe of screening bushes was passed, our cavalcade drew
rein abruptly, while Ahmah-de-Bellah cried out: "Strangers are coming!"

A few moments after, as we slowly crossed the stream, I noticed several women crouched in the
underwood, having fled from the bath. This warning is universally given, and enforced by law,
to guard the modesty of the gentler sex.

In half an hour we reached the first suburban village; but fame had preceded us with my character,
and as the settlement was cultivated either by serfs or negroes liable
to be made so, we found the houses bare.

The poor wretches had learned, on the day of my reception, that the principal object of my journey
was to obtain slaves, and, of course, they imagined that the only object of my foray in their
neighborhood, was to seize the gang and bear it abroad in bondage. Accordingly, we tarried only
a few minutes in Findo, and dashed off to Furo; but here, too, the blacks had been panic struck,
and escaped so hurriedly that they left their pots of rice, vegetables,
and meat boiling in their sheds.

Furo was absolutely stripped of inhabitants; the veteran chief of the village did not even remain
to do the honors for his affrighted brethren. Ahmah-de-Bellah laughed heartily at the terror
I inspired; but I confess I could not help feeling sadly mortified when I found my presence
shunned as a pestilence.

The native villages through which I passed on this excursion manifested the great comfort in which
these Africans live throughout their prolific land, when unassailed by the desolating wars that
are kept up for slave-trade. It was the height of the dry season, when every thing was parched
by the sun, yet I could trace the outlines of fine plantations, gardens, and rice-fields. Every
where I found abundance of peppers, onions, garlic, tomatoes, sweet
potatoes, and cassava; while tasteful fences were garlanded with immense
vines and flowers.

Fowls, goats, sheep, and oxen, stalked about in innumerable flocks, and from every domicil depended
a paper, inscribed with a charm from the Koran to keep off thieves
and witches.

My walks through Timbo were promoted by the constant efforts of my
entertainers to shield me from intrusive curiosity.

Whenever I sallied forth, two townsfolk in authority were sent forward to warn the public that
the Furtoo desired to promenade without a mob at his heels. These lusty criers stationed themselves
at the corners with an iron triangle, which they rattled to call attention to the king's command;
and, in a short time, the highways were so clear of people, who feared
a bastinado, that I found my loneliness rather disagreeable than otherwise.

Every person I saw, shunned me. When I called the children or little girls,--they fled from me.
My reputation as a slaver in the villages, and the fear of a lash
in the town, furnished me much more solitude than is generally agreeable
to a sensitive traveller.

Towards nightfall I left my companions, and wrapping myself closely in a Mandingo dress, stole
away through bye-ways to a brook which runs by the town-walls. Thither the females resort at
sunset to draw water; and, choosing a screened situation, where I
would not be easily observed, I watched, for more than an hour, the
graceful children, girls, and women of Timbo, as they performed this
domestic task of eastern lands.

I was particularly impressed by the general beauty of the sex, who,
in many respects, resembled the Moor rather than the negro.

Unaware of a stranger's presence, they came forth as usual in a simple dress which covers their body
from waist to knee, and leaves the rest of the figure entirely naked.

Group after group gathered together on the brink of the brook in the slanting sunlight and
lengthening shadows of the plain. Some rested on their pitchers and water vessels; some chatted,
or leaned on each other gracefully, listening to the chat of friends; some stooped to fill their
jars; others lifted the brimming vessels to their sisters' shoulders--while others strode homeward
singing, with their charged utensils poised on head or hand.

Their slow, stately, swinging movement under the burden, was grace that might be envied on
a Spanish paseo. I do not think the forms of these Fullah girls,--with their complexions of
freshest bronze,--are exceeded in symmetry by the women of any other
country.

There was a slender delicacy of limb, waist, neck, hand, foot, and bosom, which seemed to be the
type that moulded every one of them. I saw none of the hanging breast; the flat, expanded nostrils;
the swollen lips, and fillet-like foreheads, that characterize the Soosoos and their sisters
of the coast. None were deformed, nor were any marked by traces of
disease.

I may observe, moreover, that the male Fullahs of Timbo are impressed on my memory by a beauty
of form, which almost equals that of the women; and, in fact, the
only fault I found with them was their minute resemblance to the feminine
delicacy of the other sex.

They made up, however, in courage what they lacked in form, for their
manly spirit has made them renowned among all the tribes they have
so long controlled by distinguished bravery and perseverance.

The patriarchal landscape by the brook, with the Oriental girls over their water-jars, and
the lowing cattle in the pastures, brought freshly to my mind many
a Bible scene I heard my mother read when I was a boy at home; and
I do not know what revolution might have been wrought on my spirit
had I not suddenly become critical!

A stately dame passed within twenty feet of my thicket, whose coiffure excited my mirth so powerfully
that I might have been detected as a spy, had not a bitten lip controlled my laughter. Her
ladyship belonged, perhaps, to the "upper-ten" of Timbo, whose heads
had hitherto been hidden from my eyes by the jealous yashmacks they
constantly wear in a stranger's presence.

In this instance, however, the woman's head, like that of the younger girls, was uncovered, so that
I had a full view of the stately preparation.

Her lower limbs were clad in ample folds of blue and white cotton, knotted in an immense mass at
the waist, while her long crisp hair had been combed out to its fullest
dimensions and spliced with additional wool.

The ebony fleece was then separated in strands half an inch in diameter,
and plaited all over her skull in a countless number of distinct braids.

This quill-like structure was then adorned with amber beads, and copiously anointed with vegetable
butter, so that the points gleamed with fire in the setting sunlight, and made her look as if she
had donned for a bewitching headdress a porcupine instead of a "bird
of paradise."

* * * * *

My trip to Timbo, I confess, was one of business rather than pleasure
or scientific exploration.

I did not make a record, at the moment, of my "impressions de voyage," and never thought that, a
quarter of a century afterwards, I would feel disposed to chronicle the journey in a book, as
an interesting souvenir of my early life. Had I supposed that the day would come when I was
to turn author, it is likely I might have been more inquisitive;
but, being only "a slaver," I found Ahmah, Sulimani, Abdulmomen, the
Ali-Mami, and all the quality and amusements of Timbo, dull enough,
when my object was achieved.

Still, while I was there, I thought I might as well see all that
was visible.

I strolled repeatedly through the town.

I became excessively familiar with its narrow streets, low houses, mud walls, cul-de-sacs, and mosques.
I saw no fine bazaars, market-places, or shops. The chief wants of life were supplied by peddlers.
Platters, jars, and baskets of fruit, vegetables, and meat, were
borne around twice or thrice daily.

Horsemen dashed about on beautiful steeds towards the fields in the morning, or came home at
nightfall at a slower pace. I never saw man or woman bask lazily in the sun. Females were constantly
busy over their cotton and spinning wheels when not engaged in household occupations; and often
have I seen an elderly dame quietly crouched in her hovel at sunset
reading the Koran.

Nor are the men of Timbo less thrifty.

Their city wall is said to hem in about ten thousand individuals, representing all the social
industries.

They weave cotton, work in leather, fabricate iron from the bar, engage diligently in agriculture,
and, whenever not laboriously employed, devote themselves to reading
and writing, of which they are excessively fond.

These are the faint sketches, which, on ransacking my brain, I find
resting on its tablets.

But I was tired of Timbo; I was perfectly refreshed from my journey; and I was anxious to
return to my factory on the beach.

Two "moons" only had been originally set apart for the enterprise,
and the third was already waxing towards its full.

I feared the Ali-Mami was not yet prepared with slaves for my departure, and I dreaded lest objections
might be made if I approached his royal highness with the flat announcement. Accordingly, I schooled
my interpreters, and visited that important personage.

I made a long speech, as full of compliments and blarney as a Christmas pudding is of plums,
and concluded by touching the soft part in African royalty's heart--slaves!

I told the king that a vessel or two, with abundant freights, would
be waiting me on the river, and that I must hasten thither with his
choicest gangs if he hoped to reap a profit.

The king and the royal family were no doubt excessively grieved to part with the Furtoo Mongo,
but they were discreet persons and "listened to reason."

War parties and scouts were forthwith despatched to blockade the
paths, while press-gangs made recruits among the villages, and even
in Timbo.

Sulimani-Ali, himself, sallied forth, before daybreak, with a troop of horse, and at sundown,
came back with forty-five splendid fellows, captured in Findo and
Furo!

The personal dread of me in the town itself, was augmented. If I had been a Pestilence before,
I was Death now! When I took my usual morning walk the children ran
from me screaming.

Since the arrival of Sulimani with his victims, all who were under
the yoke thought their hour of exile had come.

The poor regarded me as the devil incarnate. Once or twice, I caught women throwing a handful
of dust or ashes towards me, and uttering an invocation from the
Koran to avert the demon or save them from his clutches.

Their curiosity was merged in terror. My popularity was over!

It was not a little amusing that in the midst of the general dismay, caused by the court of Timbo and
myself, my colored brother Ahmah-de-Bellah, and his kinsman Abdulmomen, lost no chance of lecturing
me about my soul! We kidnapped the Africans all day and spouted Islamism all night! Our religion,
however, was more speculative than practical. It was much more important, they thought, that
we should embrace the faith of their peculiar theology, than that we should trouble ourselves
about human rights that interfered with profits and pockets.

We spared Mahometans and enslaved only "the heathen;" so that, in fact, we were merely obedient to
the behests of Mahomet when we subdued "the infidel!"

This process of proselytism, however, was not altogether successful.

As I was already a rather poor Christian, I fear that the Fullah
did not succeed in making me a very good Mussulman.

Still, I managed to amuse him with the hope of my future improvement
in his creed, so that we were very good friends when the Ali-Mami
summoned us for a final interview.

The parting of men is seldom a maudlin affair.

The king's relations presented me bullocks, cows, goats, and sheep.
His majesty sent me five slaves.

Sulimani-Ali offered a splendid white charger. The king's wife supplied me with an African quilt
ingeniously woven of red and yellow threads unravelled from Manchester cottons; while Ahmah-de-Bellah,
like a gentleman of taste, despatched for my consolation, the two prettiest handmaidens he could
buy or steal in Timbo!

CHAPTER XXV.

I shall not weary the reader with a narrative of my journey homeward over the track I had followed on
my way to Timbo.

A grand Mahometan service was performed at my departure, and Ahmah-de-Bellah accompanied me as far
as Jallica, whence he was recalled by his father in consequence of
a serious family dispute that required his presence.

Ali-Ninpha was prepared, in this place, to greet me with a welcome, and a copious supply of
gold, wax, ivory, and slaves. At Tamisso, the worthy Mohamedoo had complied with his promise to
furnish a similar addition to the caravan; so that when we set out
for Kya, our troop was swelled to near a thousand strong, counting
men, women, children and ragamuffins.

At Kya I could not help tarrying four days with my jolly friend Ibrahim,
who received the tobacco, charged with "bitters," during my absence,
and was delighted to furnish a nourishing drop after my long abstinence.

As we approached the coast, another halt was called at a favorable encampment, where Ali-Ninpha
divided the caravan in four parts, reserving the best portion of
slaves and merchandise for me.

The division, before arrival, was absolutely necessary, in order to prevent disputes or disastrous
quarrels in regard to the merchantable quality of negroes on the
beach.

I hoped to take my people by surprise at Kambia; but when the factory came in sight from the hill-tops
back of the settlement, I saw the Spanish flag floating from its summit, and heard the cannon
booming forth a welcome to the wanderer. Every thing had been admirably conducted in my absence.
The Fullah and my clerk preserved their social relations and the
public tranquillity unimpaired.

My factory and warehouse were as neat and orderly as when I left them, so that I had nothing to
do but go to sleep as if I had made a day's excursion to a neighboring village.

Within a week I paid for the caravan's produce, despatched Mami-de-Yong, and made arrangements
with the captain of a slaver in the river for the remainder of his merchandise. But the Fullah
chief had not left me more than a day or two, when I was surprised
by a traveller who dashed into my factory, with a message from Ahmah-de-Bellah
at Timbo, whence he had posted in twenty-one days.

Ahmah was in trouble. He had been recalled, as I said, from Jallica by family quarrels. When he reached
the paternal mat, he found his sister Beeljie bound hand and foot in prison, with orders for
her prompt transportation to my factory as a slave.

These were the irrevocable commands of his royal father, and of her half-brother, Sulimani.
All his appeals, seconded by those of his mother, were unheeded.

She must be shipped from the Rio Pongo; and no one could be trusted with the task but the Ali-Mami's
son and friend, the Mongo Téodor!

To resist this dire command, Ahmah charged the messenger to appeal
to my heart by our brotherly love not to allow the maiden to be sent
over sea; but, by force or stratagem, to retain her until he arrived
on the beach.

The news amazed me.

I knew that African Mahometans never sold their caste or kindred into foreign slavery, unless their
crime deserved a penalty severer than death.

I reflected a while on the message, because I did not wish to complicate my relations with the
leading chiefs of the interior; but, in a few moments, natural sensibility mastered every selfish
impulse, and I told the envoy to hasten back on the path of the suffering brother, and assure
him I would shield his sister, even at the risk of his kindred's wrath.

About a week afterwards I was aroused one morning by a runner from a neighboring village over
the hill, who stated that a courier reached his town the night before from Sulimani-Ali,--a prince
of Timbo,--conducting a Fullah girl, who was to be sold by me immediately to a Spanish slaver.
The girl, he said, resisted with all her energy. She refused to walk. For the last four days
she had been borne along in a litter.

She swore never to "see the ocean;" and threatened to dash her skull against the first rock in her
path, if they attempted to carry her further. The stanch refusal embarrassed her Mahometan conductor,
inasmuch as his country's law forbade him to use extraordinary compulsion, or degrade the maiden
with a whip.

I saw at once that this delay and hesitation afforded an opportunity to interfere judiciously
in behalf of the spirited girl, whose sins or faults were still unknown to me. Accordingly, I imparted
the tale to Ali-Ninpha; and, with his consent, despatched a shrewd dame from the Mandingo's
harem, with directions for her conduct to the village. Woman's tact and woman's sympathy are
the same throughout the world, and the proud ambassadress undertook her task with pleased alacrity.
I warned her to be extremely cautious before the myrmidons of Sulimani,
but to seize a secret moment when she might win the maiden's confidence,
to inform her that I was the sworn friend of Ahmah-de-Bellah, and
would save her if she followed my commands implicitly.

She must cease resistance at once. She must come to the river, which was fresh water, and not
salt; and she must allow her jailers to fulfil all the orders they received from her tyrannical
kinsmen. Muffled in the messenger's garments, I sent the manuscript Koran of Ahmah-de-Bellah
as a token of my truth, and bade the dame assure Beeljie that her brother was already far
on his journey to redeem her in Kambia.

The mission was successful, and, early next day, the girl was brought
to my factory, with a rope round her neck.

The preliminaries for her purchase were tedious and formal. As her sale was compulsory, there
was not much question as to quality or price. Still, I was obliged to promise a multitude of
things I did not intend to perform.

In order to disgrace the poor creature as much as possible, her sentence declared she should
be "sold for salt,"--the most contemptuous of all African exchanges, and used in the interior
for the purchase of cattle alone.

Poor Beeljie stood naked and trembling before us while these ceremonies were performing. A scowl
of indignation flitted like a shadow over her face, as she heard the disgusting commands.
Tenderly brought up among the princely brood of Timbo, she was a
bright and delicate type of the classes I described at the brook-side.

Her limbs and features were stained by the dust of travel, and her expression was clouded with
the grief of sensible degradation: still I would have risked more than I did, when I beheld
the mute appeal of her face and form, to save her from the doom of Cuban exile.

When the last tub of salt was measured, I cut the rope from Beeljie's
neck, and, throwing over her shoulders a shawl,--in which she instantly
shrank with a look of gratitude,--called the female who had borne
my cheering message, to take the girl to her house and treat her as
the sister of my Fullah brother.

As I expected, this humane command brought the emissary of Sulimani
to his feet with a bound.

He insisted on the restitution of the woman! He swore I had deceived him; and, in fact, went
through a variety of African antics which are not unusual, even among
the most civilized of the tribes, when excited to extraordinary passion.

It

was my habit, during these outbursts of native ire, to remain perfectly quiet, not only until
the explosion was over, but while the smoke was disappearing from the scene. I fastened my eye,
therefore, silently, but intensely, on the tiger, following him in
all his movements about the apartment, till he sank subdued and panting,
on the mat.

I then softly told him that this excitement was not only unbecoming a Mahometan gentleman, and
fit for a savage alone, but that it was altogether wasted on the
present occasion, inasmuch as the girl should be put on board a slaver
in his presence.

Nevertheless, I continued while the sister of Ahmah was under my roof, her blood must be respected,
and she should be treated in every respect as a royal person.

I was quite as curious as the reader may be to know the crime of Beeljie, for, up to that moment,
I had not been informed of it. Dismissing the Fullah as speedily as possible, I hastened to Ali-Ninpha's
dwelling and heard the sufferer's story.

The Mahometan princess, whose age surely did not exceed eighteen, had been promised by the king
and her half-brother, Sulimani, to an old relative, who was not only accused of cruelty to
his harem's inmates, but was charged by Mussulmen with the heinous crime of eating "unclean
flesh."

The girl, who seemed to be a person of masculine courage and determination, resisted this disposal
of her person; but, while her brother Ahmah was away, she was forced from her mother's arms and given
to the filthy dotard.

It is commonly supposed that women are doomed to the basest obedience
in oriental lands; yet, it seems there is a Mahometan law,--or, at
least, a Fullah custom,--which saves the purity of an unwilling bride.

The delivery of Beeljie to her brutal lord kindled the fire of an ardent temper. She furnished
the old gentleman with specimens of violence to which his harem had been a stranger, save when
the master himself chose to indulge in wrath.

In fact, the Fullah damsel--half acting, half in reality--played the virago so finely, that
her husband, after exhausting arguments, promises and supplications, sent her back to her kindred
with an insulting message.

It was a sad day when she returned to the paternal roof in Timbo. Her resistance was regarded by
the dropsical despot as rebellious disobedience to father and brother;
and, as neither authority nor love would induce the outlaw to repent,
her barbarous parent condemned her to be "a slave to Christians."

Her story ended, I consoled the poor maiden with every assurance of
protection and comfort; for, now that the excitement of sale and journey
was over, her nerves gave way, and she sank on her mat, completely
exhausted.

I commended her to the safeguard of my landlord and the especial kindness of his women. Esther,
too, stole up at night to comfort the sufferer with her fondling tenderness, for she could not speak
the Fullah language;--and in a week, I had the damsel in capital
condition ready for a daring enterprise that was to seal her fate.

Now that the new parapet had been heightened and strengthened, the casualties behind it had
almost ceased, and the Tearaways were quite reasonably flattering themselves on the worst of
the work being done and the worst of the dangers over. It appeared to them that the trench
now provided quite sufficient shelter to fulfill both its ostensible object of allowing relief
parties to move to and from the listening-post, and also their own private undertaking of attaining
the dead General; but the O.C. and company commanders did not look on it in that light.

The order was to construct a firing trench, and that meant a good deal more work than had been
done, so reliefs were kept going and the work progressed steadily all night, a good deal of
impetus being given to it by some light German field-guns which commenced to scatter high-explosive
shrapnel over the open ground.

The shooting, fortunately, was not very accurate, no doubt because, by the light of the flares,
it was difficult for the German observers to direct their fire. But the hint was enough for
the Tearaways, and they knew that daybreak would bring more accurate and more constant artillery
fire upon the new position.

The British gunners had been warned not to open fire unless called upon, because a working
party was in the open; but now the batteries were telephoned to with a request for shrapnel
on the German parapets to keep down some of the heavy rifle fire.

Since the gunners had already registered the target of the German trench, their fire was just
as accurate by night as it would be by day, and shell after shell burst over the German parapet,
sweeping their trench with showers of shrapnel.

While all this was going on the men at the listening-post had tackled the job of driving their
sap out to the German General. This work was done in a different fashion from the digging of
the new trench.

The listening-post was merely a pit in the ground, originally a large shell crater, and deepened
and widened until it was sufficiently large to hold half-a-dozen men. At one side of the pit
the men commenced with pick and spade to hack out an opening like a very narrow doorway.

As the earth was broken down and shoveled back, the doorway gradually grew to be a passage.
In this two men at a time worked in turn, the one on the right-hand side making a narrow cut
that barely gave him shoulder-play, the second man on the left working a few paces in the rear
and widening the passage.

Necessarily it was slow work, because only these two men could reach the face of the cut, and
because it had to be of sufficient depth to allow a man to work upright without his head showing
above the ground. But because they worked in short reliefs and put every ounce of energy into
their task, they made surprising and unusual progress.

Lieutenant Riley, who was in command of the listening-post for that night, left the workers
to themselves, both because it was necessary for him to keep a sharp look-out in order to give
warning of any attempt to rush the working party, and because officially he was not supposed
to know anything of any sap to an officially unrecognized dead German General.

When he was relieved after daybreak, Riley told the joke and explained the position to the
subaltern who took over from him, and that subaltern in turn looked with a merely unofficial
eye on the work of the sapping party. As the day and the work went on, it was quite obvious
that a good many more men were working on the new trench than had been told off to it.

In the sap several fresh men were constantly awaiting their turn at the face with pick and
shovel. The diggers did no more than five minutes' work, hacking and spading at top speed,
yielding their tools to the next comer and retiring, panting and blowing and mopping their
streaming brows.

A fairly constant fire was maintained by the artillery on both sides, the shells splashing
and crashing on the open ground about the new trench and the German parapet. There was little
wind, and as a result the smoke of the shell-bursts hung heavily and trailed slowly over the
open space between the trenches, veiling to some extent the sapping operations and the new
trench. On the latter a tendency was quickly displayed to slacken work and to treat the job
as being sufficiently complete, but when it came to Lieutenant Riley's turn to take charge
of a fresh relief of workers on the new trench, he very quickly succeeded in brisking up operations.

Arrived at the listening-post, he found Sergeant Clancy and spoke a few words to him.

"Clancy," he said gently, "the work along that new trench is going a great deal too slow."

"'Tis hard work, sorr," replied Clancy excusingly, "and you'll be remembering the boys have
been at it all night."

"Quite so, Clancy," said Riley smoothly, "and since it has to be dug a good six foot deep,
I am just thinking the best thing to do will be to take this other party off the sap and turn
'em along to help on the trench. I'm not denying, Clancy, that I've a notion what the sap is
for, although I'm supposed to know nothing of it; but I don't care if the sap is made, and
I do care that the trench is. Now do you think I had better stop them on the sap, or can the
party in the trench put a bit more ginger into it?"

"I'll just step along the trench again, sorr," said Clancy anxiously, "and I don't think you'll
be having need to grumble again."

He stepped along the trench, and he left an extraordinary increase of energy behind him as he went.

"And what use might it be to make it any deeper?" grumbled McRory. "Sure it's deep enough for
all we need it."

"May be," said Sergeant Clancy, with bitter sarcasm, "it's yourself that'll just be stepping
up to the Colonel and saying friendly like to him: 'Prickles, me lad, it's deep enough we've
dug to lave us get out to our German Gineral. 'Tisn't for you we're digging this trench,' you'll
be saying, ''tis for our own pleasure entirely.' You might just let me know what the Colonel
says to that."

"There's some talk," he said, a little further down the line, "of our being relieved from here
to-morrow afternoon. I've told you what the Little Lad was saying about turning the sap party
in to help here. It's pretty you'd look clearing out to-morrow and leaving another battalion
to come in to take over your new trench and your new sap and your German Gineral and the gold
in his britches pocket together." And with that parting shaft he moved on.

For the rest of that day and all that night work moved at speed, and when the O.C. made his
tour of inspection the following morning he was as delighted as he was amazed at the work done--and
that, as he told the Adjutant, was saying something. Up to now he had known nothing of the
sap, merely expressing satisfaction--again mingled with amazement--when he saw the entrance
to the sap, lightly roofed in with boards for a couple of yards and shut off beyond that by
a curtain of sacking, and was told that the men were amusing themselves making a bomb-proof
dug-out.

But on this last morning, when the sap had approached to within twenty or thirty feet of the
white head which was its objective, the Colonel's attention was directed to the matter somewhat
forcibly. He heard the roar of exploding heavy shells, and as the "crump, crump," continued
steadily, he telephoned from the headquarters dug-out in rear of the support line to ask the
forward trenches what was happening.

While he waited an answer, a message came from the Brigade saying that the artillery had reported
heavy German shelling on a sap-head, and demanding to know what, where, and why was the sap-head
referred to. While the Colonel was puzzling over this mysterious message and vainly trying
to recall any sap-head within his sector of line, the regimental Padre came into the dug-out.

"I've just come from the dressing station," he said, "and there's a boy there, McRory, that
has me fair bewildered with his ravings. He's wounded in the head with a shrapnel splinter,
and, although he seems sane and sensible enough in other ways, he's been begging me and the
doctor not to send him back to the hospital. Did ever ye hear the like, and him with a lump
as big as the palm of my hand cut from his head to the bare bone, and bleeding like a stuck
pig in an apoplexy?"

The Colonel looked at him vacantly, his mind between this and the other problem of the Brigade's
message.

"And that's not all that's in it," went on the Padre. "The doctor was telling me that there's
been a round dozen of the past two days' casualties begging that same thing--not to be sent
away till we come out of the trenches. And to beat all, McRory, when he was told he was going
just the minute the ambulance came, had a confab with the stretcher bearers, and I heard him
arguing with them about 'his share,' and 'when they got the Gineral,' and 'my bit o' the fifty
thousand francs.' It has me beat completely."

By now the Colonel was completely bewildered, and he began to wonder whether he or his battalion
were hopelessly mad. It was extraordinary enough that the men should have dug so willingly
and well, and without a grumble being heard or a complaint made.

It was still more extraordinary that more or less severely wounded men should not be ardently
desirous of the safety and comfort and feeding of the hospitals; and on the top of all was
this mysterious message of a sap apparently being made by his men voluntarily and without any
sanction, much less the usual required pressure.

A message came from Captain Conroy, in the forward trench, to say that Riley was coming up
to headquarters and would explain matters.

Riley and the explanation duly arrived. "Ould Prickles," inclined at first to be mightily wroth
at the unauthorized digging of the sap, caught a twinkle in the Padre's eye; and a modest hint
from the Little Lad reminding him of the speed and excellence of the new trenches, construction
turned the scale. He burst into a roar of laughter, and the Padre joined him heartily, while
the Little Lad stood beaming and chuckling complacently.

"I must tell the Brigadier this," gasped the O.C. at last. "He might have had a cross word
or two to say about a sap being dug without orders, but, thank heaven, he's an Irishman, and
a poorer joke would excuse a worse crime with him. But I'm wondering what's going to happen
when they reach their General and find no francs, and no watch, and not even a General; and
mind you, Riley, the sap must be stopped at once. I can't be having good men casualtied on
an unofficial job. Will you see to that right away?"

The Little Lad's chuckling rose to open giggling.

"It's stopped now, sir," he said--"just before I came up here. And what's more, the General
won't need explaining; the German gunners spied our sap, and, trying to drop a heavy shell
on it--well, they dropped one on to the General. So now there isn't a General, only a hole
in the ground where he was."

Ould Prickles' and the Padre's laughter bellowed again.

"I must tell that to the Brigadier, too," said the O.C.; "that finish to the joke will completely
satisfy him."

"And I must go," said the Padre, rising, "and tell McRory, though I'm not just sure whether
it will be after satisfying him quite so completely."

AT LAST

"WHEN WE BEGIN TO PUSH"

"Here we are," said the Colonel, halting his horse. "Fine view one gets from here."

"Rather a treat to be able to see over a bit of country again, after so many months of the
flat," said, the Adjutant, reining up beside the other. They were halted on the top of a hill,
or, father, the corner of an edge on a wide plateau. On two sides of them the ground fell away
abruptly, the road they were on dipping sharply over the edge and sweeping round and downward
in a well-graded slope along the face of the hill to the wide flats below. Over these flats
they could see for many miles, miles of cultivated fields, of little woods, of gentle slopes.
They could count the buildings of many farms, the roofs of half a dozen villages, the spires
of twice as many churches, the tall chimneys and gaunt frame towers of scattered pit-heads.
It had been raining all day, but now in the late afternoon the clouds had broken and the light
of the low sun was tinging the landscape with a mellow golden glow.

"There's going to be a beautiful sunset presently," said the Colonel, "with all those heavy
broken clouds about. Let's dismount and wait for a bit."

Both dismounted and handed their reins to the orderly, who, riding behind them, had halted
when they did, but now at a sign came forward.

"We'll just stroll to that rise on the left," the Colonel said. "The best view should be from
there."

The Adjutant lingered a moment. "Take their bits out, Trumpeter," he said, "and let them pick
a mouthful of grass along the roadside."

A rough country track ran to the left off the main road, and the two walked along it a couple
of hundred yards to where it plunged over the crest and ran steeply down the hillside. Another
main road ran along the flat parallel with the hill foot, and along this crawled a long khaki
column.

"Look at the light on those hills over there," said the Colonel. "Fine, isn't it?"

The Adjutant was busily engaged with the field-glasses he had taken from the case slung over
his shoulder and was focusing them on the road below.

"I say," he remarked suddenly, "those are the Canadians. I didn't know the ----th Division
was so far south. Moving up front, too." The Colonel dropped his gaze to the road a moment
and then swept it slowly over the country-side. "Yes," he said, "and this area is pretty well
crowded with troops when you look closely."

The light on the distant hills was growing more golden and beautiful, the clouds were beginning
to catch the first tints of the sunset, but neither men for the moment noticed these things,
searching with their gaze the landscape below, sifting it over and picking out a battery of
artillery camped in a big chalk-pit by the roadside, the slow-rising and drifting columns of
blue smoke that curled up from a distant wood and told of the regiment encamped there, the
long strings of horses converging on a big mine building for the afternoon watering, the lines
of transport wagons parked on the outskirts of a village, the shifting khaki figures that stirred
about every farm building in sight, the row of gray-painted motor-omnibuses, drawn up in a
long line on a side road. The countryside that under a first look slept peacefully in the afternoon
sunlight, that drowsed calmly in the easy quiet of an uneventful field and farm existence,
proved under the closer searching look to be a teeming hive of activity, a close-packed camp
of well-armed fighting men, a widespread net and chain of men and guns and horses. The peaceful
countryside was overflowing with men and bristling with bayonets; every village was a crammed-full
military cantonment, every barn stuffed with soldiers like an overfilled barracks.

The Adjutant whistled softly. "This," he said, and nodded again and again to the plain below,
"this looks like business--at last."

"Yes," said the Colonel, "at last. It's going to be a very different story this time, when
we begin to push things."

"Hark at the guns," said the Adjutant, and both stood silent a moment listening to the long,
deep, rolling thunder that boomed steady and unbroken as surf on a distant beach. "And they're
our guns too, mostly," went on the Adjutant. "I suppose we're firing more shells in an ordinary
trench-war-routine day now than we dared fire in a month this time last year. His soul is amazed
at Thy condescension, and yet, not amazed when he considers that Thou doest it for the sake
of Thy dear Son, in whom Thou dost continually look upon Thy servant!--There
came in still further this evening 2s.

6d.
Feb. 6.

But the two on the hillside had no ear for these sounds of peace. They heard only that distant
sullen boom of the rumbling guns, the throbbing foot-beats of the marching battalions below
them, the plop-plopping hoofs and rattling wheels of wagons passing on their way up to the
firing line with food for the guns.

"Our turn coming," said the Adjutant--"at last."

"Yes," the Colonel said, and repeated grimly--"at last."

