In Canada the highest all-round adaptation for clover is in Ontario and Quebec, unless it be
the mountain valleys and tide lands of British Columbia. Because of the high adaptation in
the soil of the two provinces first named, and the plentifulness of the snowfall, clover in
these is one of the surest of the crops grown. The maritime provinces of New Brunswick, Nova
Scotia and Prince Edward's Island, particularly the former, have soils a little too hungry
to produce the highest returns in clover. On the open prairies between Ontario and the Rocky
Mountains, not much success has attended the attempts to grow any kind of clover, owing probably
to present uncongeniality in soils and more especially in climatic conditions. However, there
are good reasons for believing that with the introduction of hardy varieties and through the
use of Northern grown seed, an inoculated soil, where inoculation may be necessary, that medium
red clover will yet be grown over wide areas in all the provinces of Northwestern Canada, south
of and including the Saskatchewan valley.

=Soils.=--Fortunately, this most useful plant will grow in a considerable variety of soils,
though, of course, not equally well. Highest in general suitability, probably, are clay loams
underlaid with a moderately porous clay subsoil. They should at the same time be moist and
reasonably well stored with humus. On such a soil, in a climate with sufficient rainfall and
properly distributed, a stand of clover should be looked upon as reasonably certain any season
when properly sown. It would also be correct to say that on the volcanic soils of the mountain
States in the West, clover will grow equally well when supplied with moisture, and in these
it is also very tenacious of life.

Next in adaptation are what may be termed loam soils, also underlaid with clay. The proportion
of the clay in them will exercise an important influence on the growth of the clover. Loamy
sands will grow clover better than sandy loams, although both are very suitable, the other
conditions being right.

It would seem to be correct to assign third place to stiff clays, whether of the white or red
cast. The better that these are supplied with vegetable matter, and the more moist the season,
the better is the stand of the clover likely to be. In seasons that are generally favorable,
excellent crops of clover may be obtained from such soils, but in dry seasons it is easy to
secure a good stand of the plants. They are also considerably liable to heave in these soils
in the spring of the year from the action of the frost. The more perfectly they are drained,
the less will be the injury from this source, but it is scarcely possible to drain such lands
so perfectly that there will be no loss of clover plants in these from the source named in
the winters, characterized by frequent rains, accompanied by frequent alternations of freezing
and thawing. The loss from this source in such lands varies from nothing at all to 100 per cent.

Nearly, if not equal to the former, are dark loam soils with a gravel or sand drainage underneath,
providing, first, that the sand and gravel do not come too near the surface, and second, that
the normal rainfall is sufficient. On such soils it seldom fails to grow, is not liable to
heave in the winter or spring, and usually produces excellent crops when these soils are properly
tilled. It has special adaptation for being grown on calcareous or limy soils. It also, usually,
grows well on soils underlaid with yellow clay of more or less tenacity.

The black humus soils of the prairie vary much in their suitability for growing medium red
clover. Much depends on the clay content in such soils. The more of this element in them and
the nearer an underlying clay subsoil is to the surface, the better will this clover grow on
them. In large areas of the prairie, red clover will grow more successfully on the subsoil
when laid bare than when on the surface soil. It has been the experience in many instances
that when the humus soils of the prairie, porous and spongy in character, were first tilled,
clover grew on them so shyly that it was difficult to get a good stand of the same until it
had been sown for several seasons successively or at intervals. Eventually, good crops were
grown on these lands, and are now being grown on them. This was the experience that faced a
majority of the first settlers on the prairie where excellent crops are now being grown, and
it is the experience which faces many to-day, who are located on sections of the prairie but
newly broken.

Two reasons may be given by way of explanation, but these may not furnish all the reasons for
the experience just referred to. First, much of the land was so porous in its nature that in
dry seasons the young plants perished for want of moisture. As such lands become worn through
cropping, they lie more firmly and compactly; hence, there is less loss of moisture through
the free penetration of the soil within a short distance of the surface of the dry atmosphere.
And second, the requisite bacteria is not in these soils until it is brought to them by sowing
seed repeatedly, more or less of which grows, and in growing increases the bacteria in the
soil until that point is reached when good crops of clover can be grown with the usual regularity.

The suitability of sandy and gravelly lands for growing clover depends much on the amount of
plant food which they contain, on the character of the climate, and on the subsoil. Such soils
when possessed of some loam when underlaid with clay, and in a climate with 20 inches and more
per annum of rainfall, usually grow good crops of clover; but when conditions the opposite
prevail, the growth of this plant is precarious. However, when sandy or gravelly soils low
in fertility are underlaid with the same and the rainfall is sufficient, good crops of clover
may be grown if these soils are first sufficiently supplied with vegetable matter and then
sufficiently fertilized.

Muck soils do not seem to have the proper elements for growing clover in the best form. But
when these have in them some clay, and especially when they are underlaid with clay not distant
from the surface, they will grow good crops of clover, especially of the alsike variety. Thus
it is that lands which have grown black ash and tamarack generally make good clover lands also.
But clover will not succeed well on unreduced peaty soils, since it is not able in these to
gather food supplies. But when sufficiently reduced, some kinds of clover will succeed better
on these than on some other soils.

Deposit soils, such as are found in the bottom lands of rivers and streams, vary much in the
suitability for growing clover, owing to the great differences in the compositions; but since
they are usually possessed of sufficient friability, fertility and moisture, good crops of
clover may generally be grown upon them where the climatic conditions are suitable. The injury
from overflow on such soils will depend on the depth of the same and its duration, also the
season of the year when it occurs. Overflow in the spring season before growth has begun, or
when it is about starting, will be helpful rather than harmful, especially if some deposit
is left on the land by the subsiding waters. But if the overflow should be deep and of any
considerable duration, and, moreover, if it should occur when the clover was somewhat advanced
in growth, and in hot weather, the submergence of the clover would probably be fatal to it.

It may be proper to state here that the lands which grow hardwood timber will usually grow
clover. By hardwood timber is meant such trees as maple, beech, birch, oak, elm, basswood,
butternut and walnut. Where forests are found comprising one or more varieties of these trees
anywhere on this continent, and especially comprising several of them, the conclusion is safe
that medium red clover will grow, or, at least, can be grown, on such soils. If a considerable
sprinkling of pine trees is found in the same, the indications are not changed in consequence.
Where the forest is largely composed of maple and birch, excellent crops of clover may be looked
for when the land has been cleared. But because of what has been said, the conclusion must
not be reached that clover will not grow well under some conditions where soft woods abound,
but rather that where the former abound the indications of suitability for clover production
are more certain than where soft timbers abound.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Medium red clover may be made to precede or to follow almost any
crop that is grown upon the farm. Notwithstanding, there are certain crops which it precedes
or follows with much more advantage than others. Since it brings nitrogen to the soil from
the air and deposits the same for the benefit of the crops that immediately follow, it is advantageous
to plant such crops after it as require much nitrogen to make them productive, as, for instance,
wheat. Since, through the medium of its roots, it stores the ground with humus, such crops
should come after it as feed generously on humus, as, for instance, corn and potatoes. And
since it tends to lessen weed growth through smothering, it may with advantage be followed
by crops for which a clean seed bed is specially advantageous, as flax. It may, therefore,
be followed with much advantage by wheat, oats or barley, corn and sorghum in all their varieties,
flax, potatoes, field roots, vegetables and such small fruits as strawberries. Where wheat
is a success it is usually first grown among the small cereal grains after clover, since it
is less able to flourish under the conditions which become decreasingly favorable in the years
that follow the breaking up of the clover. Whether wheat or flax, corn or potatoes should immediately
follow the growing of clover, should be determined in great part by the immediate necessity
for growing one or the other of these crops, but also to some extent by the crops that are
to follow them.

Clover may follow such crops as require cultivation while they are growing, and of a character
that will clean the soil. This means that it may with advantage be made to follow corn, sorghum,
potatoes or field roots. It may also follow the summer fallow bare, or producing crops for
being plowed under where these come into the rotation. Of course, since clover can to a considerable
extent supply its own nitrogen, it may be successfully grown on lands that are not clean, and
that may not possess high fertility, but when thus sown the nurse crop with which it is usually
sown is not likely to succeed well, because of the presence of weeds in it, and from the same
cause the quality of the first of the clover is likely to be much impaired. The conditions
of the time of sowing are also less favorable for getting a stand of the seed.

There is probably no rotation in which clover may be grown with more advantage than when it
is made to alternate with corn or potatoes and some small cereal grains, as wheat or oats,
growing each crop for but one season. Of course the clover must be sown with the grain and
harvested the following year, taking from it two cuttings. In no other form of rotation, perhaps,
can clover be used to better advantage, nor would there seem to be any other way in which land
may be made to produce abundantly for so large a term of years without fertilization other
than that given to the soil by the clover. It would fully supply the needs of the crops alternating
with it in the line of humus, and also in that of nitrogen. In time the supply of phosphoric
acid and potash might run low, but not for a long term of years. The cultivation given to the
corn and potatoes would keep the land clean. Fortunate is the neighborhood in which a rotation
may be practised, and fortunate are the tillers of the soil who are in a position to adopt it.

Medium red clover may be followed with much advantage by certain catch crops sown at various
times through the season of growth. It may be pastured in the spring for several weeks, and
the land then plowed and sowed with millet or rape, or planted with corn, sorghum, late potatoes,
or certain vegetables, or it may be allowed to grow for several weeks and then plowed, to be
followed by one or the other of these crops. It may also be harvested for hay in time to follow
it with millet or rape for pasture, and under some conditions with fodder corn. But when the
stand of clover is good, it would usually be profitable to utilize the clover for food rather
than the crops mentioned, since doing so would involve but little labor and outlay. After the
second cutting for the season, winter rye may be grown as a catch crop by growing it as a pasture
crop.

=Preparing the Soil.=--Speaking in a general way, it would be correct to say that it would
not be easy to get soil in too friable a condition for the advantageous reception of medium
red clover seed. In other words, it does not often happen that soils are in too fine tilth
to sow seed upon them without such fineness resulting in positive benefit to the plants. The
exceptions would be clays of fine texture in climates subject to rainfalls so heavy as to produce
impaction. On the other hand, the hazard would be even greater to sow clover on these soils
when in a cloddy condition. The rootlets would not then be able to penetrate the soil with
sufficient ease to find enough food and moisture to properly nourish them. Some soils are naturally
friable, and in these a tilth sufficiently fine can be realized ordinarily with but little
labor. Other soils, as stiff clays, frequently require much labor to bring them into the condition
required. Usually, however, if sufficient time elapses between the plowing of the land and
the sowing of the seed, this work may be materially lessened by using the harrow and roller
judiciously soon after rainfall.

When preparing prairie soils so open that they will lift with the wind, the aim should be to
firm them rather than to render them more open and porous; otherwise they will not retain sufficient
moisture to properly sustain the young plants, if prolonged dry weather follows the sowing
of the seed. Plowing such land in the autumn aids in securing such density. The same result
follows summerfallowing the land or growing upon it a cultivated crop after the bare fallow,
or after the cultivated crop has been harvested prior to the sowing of the clover seed, otherwise
the desired firmness of the land will be lessened, and weed seeds will be brought to the surface,
which will produce plants to the detriment of the clover. In preparing such lands for the seed,
cultivation near the surface is preferable to plowing.

When the clover is sown late in the season, as is sometimes the case, in locations where the
winters are comparatively mild, the ground may be made reasonably clean before the seed is
sown, by stirring it occasionally at intervals before sowing the seed. This is done with some
form of harrow or weeder, and, of course, subsequently to the plowing of the land.

=Sowing.=--The time for sowing clover seed is influenced considerably by the climatic conditions.
Under some conditions it may be sown in the early autumn. It may be thus sown in the Southern
States and with much likelihood that a stand will be secured, yet in some instances an inauspicious
winter proves disastrous to the plants: all things considered, it is probably safer to sow
clover in the South at that season than the spring, when vegetation is beginning to start.
It may also succeed in some instances in areas well to the North when sown in the early autumn,
providing snow covers the ground all the winter, but should the snow fail to come the subsequent
winter, or fail to lie when it does come, the clover plants would perish. The element of hazard,
therefore, is too great in northerly areas to justify sowing the seed thus. But on the bench
lands of the mountain valleys there may be instances in which the seed may be sown so late
in the autumn that it will not sprout before winter sets in, but lies in the soil ready to
utilize the moisture, so all important in those areas, as soon as the earliest growth begins
in the spring.

The seed may be sown with no little assurance of success in the late summer. But this can only
be done where moisture is reasonably plentiful from the time of sowing onward, and where the
winters are not really severe. In some of the Central States this method of sowing may succeed
reasonably well. Clover and timothy sown thus without any nurse crop will produce a full crop
the next season. When the seed is sown thus, it may, of course, be made to follow a crop grown
on the land the same season. It may also insure a crop the following season, when the clover
seed sown the spring previously may for some reason have failed.

While medium red clover is frequently sown in the South and in some areas of the far West in
the months of January and February on the snow, in the North it is usually sown in the early
spring. This also is in a great majority of instances the best time for sowing. In many locations
it may be sown with safety as soon as the winter snows have gone. On the whole, the earlier
that it is sown in the spring the better, that the young plants may have all the benefit possible
from the moisture, which is more abundant than later. But there are certain areas, as, for
instance, in the northerly limits of the Mississippi basin, in which young clover plants perish
by frost after they have germinated. This, however, does not happen very frequently. When the
seed is sown on the snow, or while the ground is yet in a honeycombed condition from early
frost, it must of necessity be sown early. But where the hazard is present that the young plants
will be killed by frost, it will be safer to defer sowing the seed until it can be covered
with the harrow when sown.

Whether it will be more advisable to sow the seed on bare ground earlier than the season when
growth begins, or to sow later and cover with the harrow, will depend to a considerable degree
upon the soil and the condition in which it happens to be. On timber soils newly cleaned the
early sowing would be quite safe where the young plants are not liable to be killed after germination,
because of the abundance of humus in them. On the same soils, early sowing would probably be
preferable, even when much reduced in humus, providing they were in a honeycombed condition
at the time of sowing. This condition is far more characteristic of clay and clay loam soils,
than of those sandy in texture. To sow the seed on clay soils that are worn would be to throw
it away, unless in a most favorable season for growth. The same would prove true of the sandy
soils low in humus, since these do not honeycomb at any season. Seed sown on honeycombed ground
falls into openings made in the soil, and is covered by the action of the frost and the sun
on the same. The rule should be to defer sowing the seed where the ground does not honeycomb
until it can be covered with the harrow.

In some instances the seed is sown successfully just after a light fall of snow in the spring.
The seed is carried down into little crevices or fissures in the soil when these are present,
but the seed should not be thus sown. Usually it is not quite safe to sow clover seed where
the winter snow still lingers to any considerable depth, lest much of it should be carried
down to the lower lands by the sudden melting of the snows. The chief advantage of sowing before
the ground can be harrowed arises from the benefit which the young plants derive from the plentiful
supply of moisture in the soil at that season. They are more firmly rooted than plants sown
later, and, therefore, can better withstand the dry weather that frequently characterizes the
later months of the summer. There is also the further advantage that the labor of harrowing
at a season that is usually a busy one is dispensed with.

Various modes of sowing clover seed have been adopted. Sometimes it is sown by hand. In other
instances a sower is used which is strapped to the shoulder and turned with a crank. Sometimes
the seed is sown by a distributor, which is wheeled over the ground on a frame resembling that
of a wheelbarrow. Again, it is sown with a seeder attachment to the ordinary grain drill or
to the broadcast seeder, and yet again with the grain in the ordinary drill tubes, or scattered
with the same by the broadcast seeder; which of these methods should be adopted will depend
on such conditions as relate to season, climate and soil.

The seed may be sown by hand at almost any time desired, whether it is covered or not. The
advantages of hand sowing are that it may be done under some conditions when no other method
will answer as well, as, for instance, when it is sown upon snow or upon the ground honeycombed.
The disadvantages are that it takes more time than some of the other methods, especially when
the sower only scatters the seed with one hand, that it cannot be thus sown when the wind blows
stiffly or fitfully, and most of all, only a limited number of persons who sow seed are thus
able to sow it with complete regularity. A still time should, if possible, be chosen for hand
sowing; such a time is usually found in the early morning. When one hand is used, the seed
may be sown from a light dish or pail or sowing-bag, but when both hands are used a sowing-box
or a sowing-sack suspended in front of the breast is necessary. Clover seed may be sown when
a considerable breeze is blowing by having a due regard to the wind. When facing it, the cast
of seed should be low; when going before the wind it should be high. But when the wind is blowing
at right angles, much care must be observed by the sower as to where he walks, in relation
to the cast that is being sown.

When the seed is sown on grain that has been drilled, the rows of grain will suffice to serve
as a guide to the sower, and when the grain is not up, the drill marks may be made to serve
the same end.

The advantages of the hand seeder held in place by straps are that the sowing may be done by
an individual who cannot sow by hand, that the seed may be easily distributed and that it may
be used with advantage in sowing seed among brush. The disadvantages are that it cannot be
used when much wind is stirring, and when using it stakes are sometimes necessary for the guidance
of the sower.

The advantages from using the seeder wheeled over the ground are that the work may be done
by any one able to wheel the seeder, that the seed is distributed evenly, that it may be sown
when a fairly stiff wind is blowing, and that stakes are not necessary for the guidance of
the sower, as the distance of the cast may be gauged at least fairly well by the wheel marks
made. One disadvantage is that it cannot be used with much satisfaction on certain soils when
the ground is cloddy or frozen, or when it is wet. There is also the disadvantage to all three
methods of sowing by hand, that it is frequently necessary to provide a covering for the seed
by subsequently using the harrow.

The advantages from sowing with the seeder attachment to the grain drill are that the seed
may be made to fall before or behind the tubes as may be desired, or it may be sown with the
seed along with the grain, and that when sown by any of these methods there is much saving
of time as compared with sowing by hand. In some sections of the prairie the seed is sown with
the grain drill by driving the same across the newly sown grain rows. If necessary to insure
sufficiently thin sowing, the seed should be first mixed with some substance such as common salt.

In the moist areas of the upper Atlantic coast, Ontario and the Puget Sound region, the seed
is frequently made to fall behind the grain tubes on clay and clay loam soils, and is covered
by running the roller over the ground subsequently; but in States more inland the seed is usually
made to fall before the drill tubes, when, in some instances, the sowing of the grain will
provide a sufficient covering; but in others the harrow is used in addition, and sometimes
both the harrow and the roller. When clover seed is sown along with grain and by the same tubes,
it will in some soils be buried too deeply, but in others the objection does not hold good.
The young plants are also injured more by shade from the grain, since they grow only in the
line of the row along with the grain, and yet this method of sowing clover seed in some localities
seems to answer reasonably well.

When the broadcast seeder is used in sowing clover seed, time is also saved as compared with
hand sowing, but the seed can only fall before the seeder, and must, therefore, be given the
same covering as the grain, as, when the seed is sown with the grain drill, it will in some
instances be buried too deeply. In other instances it is not so.

The depth to which the seed of medium and other clovers ought to be buried should vary with
soil and climatic conditions, and with the season of sowing. The more stiff the soil, the more
moist the climate, and the earlier that the seed is sown, the less the covering required, and
vice versa. As has been shown, under certain conditions (see page 22), early sown clover seed
does not require any covering artificially given, and sometimes when sown later, a reasonably
copious rain will provide sufficient covering, providing it falls quite soon after the sowing
of the seed. But in certain of the soft, open, spongy soils of the prairie, it may sometimes
be buried to the depth of at least 3 inches, with apparent benefit. Lower than 5 or 6 inches
in any soil, clover seed will not germinate till brought nearer the surface. On all soils that
lift with the wind, the seed should, as a rule, be buried deeply. Ordinarily, from half an
inch to an inch, or an approximation to these distances, is considered a proper depth to bury
clover seed.

Some authorities recommend sowing medium and other clovers without any nurse crop. The advantages
claimed are that more or less of a crop may be obtained the same season, and that a stand of
clover is more certain when the seed is sown thus. The first claim is correct in the main.
In some localities favored with long seasons for growth, as in certain areas of Missouri, for
instance, good yields may be obtained from sowing the seed thus. This has happened even in
Minnesota. But in other areas and under other conditions, the yield would be light. In some
localities, as, for instance, the Willamette Valley, Oregon, satisfactory returns have been
obtained by sowing clover seed and rape seed in May and then pasturing both.

The chief objections to sowing clover seed thus are, first, that in a great majority of instances
a sufficient stand of the plants may be obtained when the seed is sown with a nurse crop; and
second, that when it is not thus sown, the first cutting of the hay will contain more or less
of weeds. That a stand is more assured when clover seed is sown alone in areas where adverse
weather conditions prevail cannot be disputed. Nevertheless, the fact remains that whenever
in order to get a stand of a short-lived crop, like clover, it is necessary to sow it alone,
and in many instances get but little return the same season, it will be well to consider if
there is not some more satisfactory way of securing a crop that will prove an equivalent. In
northerly areas the stubbles of the nurse crop frequently render substantial service to the
clover by holding the snow on the crop, and also by protecting it more or less from the effect
of the cold winds. The old-time practice of sowing clover with a nurse crop is likely to be
continued, notwithstanding that it has some disadvantages.

These disadvantages include the following: 1. The young plants are liable to be weakened by
the crowding and by overmuch shading from the grain when it grows rankly and thickly, and to
such an extent that they perish; 2. When the grain lodges, as it frequently does, on rich ground,
the clover plants underneath the lodged portions succumb from want of light; 3. Where the supply
of moisture is low, in the struggle for the same between the stronger plants of the nurse crop
and the weaker plants of the clover, the former secures the larger share. As a result, when
the nurse crop is harvested, should the weather prove hot and dry beyond a certain degree,
the clover plants will die. This is an experience not at all uncommon on the loose prairie
soils of the upper Mississippi basin.

Injury from crowding and overshading may be prevented, or at least lessened, by pasturing the
nurse crop with sheep for a time, at an early stage in its growth. The lodging of the grain
may also be prevented by the same means. Injury from drought may also be lessened by cutting
the crop at the proper stage of advancement, and making it into hay, as in the ripening stage
of growth it draws most heavily on the moisture in the soil. The oat crop is the most suitable
for being thus dealt with.

Clover seed may be sown with any of the small cereal grains as a nurse crop, but not with equal
advantage. Rye, barley, wheat and oats are probably suitable in the order named. Rye shades
less than wheat and oats and is harvested early; hence, its suitability for a nurse crop. Winter
rye and winter wheat are more suitable than spring varieties of the same, since, on these the
crop may usually be sown earlier, and the soil is likely to lose less moisture from surface
evaporation. The marked suitability of barley as a nurse crop arises chiefly from the short
period which it occupies the ground. Nor is the shade so dense as from grains that grow taller.
Oats are the least suitable of all the crops named as a nurse crop, since they are characterized
by a dense growth of leaves, which shut out the sunlight too much when the growth is rank.
Notwithstanding, the oat crop may well serve such an end when sown thinly and cut for hay.
Mixed grains grown together, as, for instance, wheat and oats, or a mixture of the three, answer
quite as well for a nurse crop as clover and oats. The objection to them for such use arises
from the fact that they are frequently sown more thickly than grain sown alone.

Clover may also be sown with flax or millet or mixed grains grown to provide soiling food.
When the weather is moist, it is likely to succeed well with flax, as the latter does not form
so dense a shade when it is growing as some other crops. But flax is usually sown so much later
than these crops, that in some climates the dry weather following injures and in some instances
destroys the young plants. The dense shade furnished by millet is also detrimental to the clover
plants; nevertheless, owing to the short period which the former occupies the ground, under
favorable conditions a stand of clover may be secured. But since millet is sown later than
flax, it frequently happens that there is not sufficient moisture in the soil to sustain both
crops. Mixed grains sown as soiling food are usually sown reasonably early, and as they are
cut before maturity, the danger is so far lessened that the young plants will perish from want
of moisture, but since these crops are usually grown thickly and on rich land, owing to the
dense character of the growth, the plants are much more likely to be injured by the dense shade
thus provided.

Clover seed may also be sown with corn and certain other crops that are usually grazed down,
as rape and mixed grains. When sown with corn, the seed is usually scattered over the ground
just before the last cultivation given to the corn. Attention is now being given to the introduction
of cultivators which scatter such seeds as clover and rape in front of them, and so preclude
the necessity for hand sowing. From Central Ohio southward, this method of securing a stand
of clover will succeed in corn-growing areas, the other conditions being right. North from
the areas named, the young clover plants may be winter killed when the seed is sown thus. The
less dense the shade furnished by the corn, and the less dry the weather subsequently to sowing
the seed, the better will be the stand of the plants secured.

When sown with rape that has been broadcast, clover usually makes a good stand, providing the
rape crop is not sown too late in the season. When the rape is grazed down, the grazing does
not appear to materially injure the clover, and when the shade has been removed by such grazing,
the clover plants may be expected to make a vigorous growth on such land. In northerly areas,
clover seed may be sown along with rape seed as late as the end of May. If sown later than
that time, the season may prove too short subsequently to the grazing of the rape to allow
the plants to gather sufficient strength to carry them safely through northern winters. When
clover seed is sown with rape, the seeds may be mixed and sown together.

Clover seed in several of the varieties may be successfully sown on certain grain crops grown
to provide grazing, especially when these are sown early. Such pastures may consist of any
one of the small cereal grains, or more than one, or of all of them.

The seed may be sown in these the same as with any crop sown to furnish grain. A stand of clover
may thus be secured under some conditions in which the clover would perish if sown along with
the grain to be harvested; under other conditions it would not succeed so well. The former
include soils so open as to readily lose moisture by surface evaporation. The tramping of the
animals on these increases their power to hold moisture, the grazing down of the grain lessens
its demands upon the same, thus leaving more for the clover plants, and they are further strengthened
by the freer access of sunlight. The latter include firm, stiff clays in rainy climates. To
pasture these when thus sown, if moist beyond a certain degree, would result in so impacting
them that the yield of the pasture would be greatly decreased in consequence.

Medium red clover is quite frequently sown alone; that is, without admixture with clovers or
grasses. It is always sown thus when it is to be plowed under, as green manure. It is also
usually sown alone in rotations where it is to be cropped or grazed for one year. But when
grown for meadow, which is to remain longer than one season, it is commonly sown along with
timothy. The first year after sowing, the crop is chiefly clover, and subsequently it is chiefly
timothy. Orchard grass or tall oat grass, or both, may also be sown along with medium red clover,
since these are ready for being cut at the same time as the clover.

When medium red clover is sown to provide pasture for periods of limited duration, it is frequently
sown along with alsike clover and timothy. Sometimes a moderate amount of alfalfa seed is added.
But in arable soils in the semi-arid West, these will provide pastures for many years in succession,
if supplied with moisture. The same is true of much of the land west of the Cascades, and without
irrigation. East from the Mississippi and for some distance west from it, much of the medium
red clover will disappear after being grazed for one season, but the alsike, timothy and alfalfa
will endure for a longer period.

In permanent pastures, whether few or many varieties of seed are sown, medium red clover is
usually included in the mixture. It is sown because of the amount of the grazing which it furnishes
the season after sowing, and with the expectation that it will virtually entirely disappear
in the pastures in two or three seasons after it has been sown.

When medium red clover is sown for being plowed under as green manure, it is always sown with
a nurse crop. Some farmers, in localities well adapted to the growth of clover, sow more or
less of the medium red variety on all, or nearly all, of the land devoted to the growth of
such cereals as rye, wheat, barley and oats, when the land is to be plowed the autumn or spring
following. Reduced quantities of seed are used. They believe that the benefit from the young
clover plants to the land will more than pay for the cost of the seed and the sowing of the same.

The amount of seed to sow will depend on the degree of suitability in the conditions for growing
medium red clover. The more favorable these are, the less the necessity for using maximum quantities
of seed, and vice versa. More seed is required when the clover is not grown with other grasses
or clovers than when it is grown with these. When grown without admixture, 16 pounds of seed
per acre may be named as the maximum quantity to sow and 8 pounds as the minimum, with 12 pounds
as an average. With all the conditions quite favorable, 10 pounds should suffice. In New England
and some of the Atlantic States, many growers sow much more seed than the quantities named,
and it may be that the necessities of the land call for more. In Great Britain also, considerably
larger quantities are sown.

When sown in grass or clover mixtures, the amount of the seed required will vary with the other
factors of the mixture, and the amount of each that is sown; that is, with the character of
the hay or pasture that is sought. The seed is much more frequently sown with timothy than
with any other kind of grass, and the average amount of each of these to sow per acre may be
put at 8 pounds of clover and 6 pounds of timothy. When other clovers are added, as the mammoth
or the alsike, for every pound of the seed of the former added, the seed of the medium red
may be reduced by one pound, and for every pound of the alsike added it may be reduced by 1-1/2
pounds. In mixtures for permanent pastures, 6 pounds may be fixed upon as the maximum quantity
of medium red clover seed to sow, and 3 pounds as the average quantity. When sown to provide
green manure, maximum quantities of seed are used when it is desired to improve the soil quickly.
Usually not less than 12 pounds per acre are sown, and quite frequently more. But when the
gradual improvement of the land is sought, by sowing the seed on all land devoted to the small
cereal grains, not more than 6 pounds per acre are used, and frequently even less than 4 pounds.
The greater the hazard to the plants in sowing the seed thus, the less the quantities of the
seed that are usually sown, with a view to reduce the loss in case of failure to secure a stand
of the clover.

A stand of medium red clover is sometimes secured by what may be termed self-sowing. For instance,
where clover has been cut for hay and then allowed to mature even but a portion of the seed
before being plowed under the same autumn, the seed thus buried remains in the ground without
sprouting. When the land is again plowed to the same depth and sown with some kind of grain,
the clover seed thus brought to the surface will germinate. If the plowing last referred to
is done in the autumn, it ought to be done late rather than early, lest the seed should sprout
in the autumn and perish in the winter, or be destroyed by the cultivation given in sowing
the grain crop that follows. The same result may be obtained from clover pastured after the
first cutting for the season, when the pasturing is not close.

When medium red clover is much grown for seed, many of the ripe heads are not cut by the mower,
since they lie near the ground, and many break off in the curing process. The seed thus becomes
so distributed in the ground, that many plants come up and grow amid the grain every season.
These may, of course, be grazed or plowed under for the enrichment of the land, as desired.
Seed thus buried is, therefore, not lost by any means. The plants which grow will render much
assistance in keeping the land in a good condition of tilth, as well as in enhancing its fertility.

When clover seed is much grown, therefore, on any piece of land, the quantity of seed sown
may be reduced materially. In fact, it may be so much reduced that it has been found possible
to grow clover in rotation for many years without adding seed. The first growth of the clover
was taken as hay, and the second growth as seed. The ground was then plowed and a crop of corn
was taken. The corn land was then plowed and sown with some cereal, such as wheat, oats or barley.

=Pasturing.=--Medium red clover will furnish grazing very suitable for any kind of live stock
kept upon the farm. All farm animals relish it, but not so highly as blue grass, when the latter
is tender and succulent. No plant is equally suitable in providing pasture for swine, unless
it be alfalfa; hence, for that class of stock, it has come to be the staple pasture outside
of areas where alfalfa may be readily grown. When desired, the grazing may begin even at a
reasonably early stage in the growth of the plants, and it may continue to the end of the pasturing
season.

Usually it is considered unwise to pasture medium red clover the same season in which it has
been sown when sown with a nurse crop. It has been noticed that when so pastured, it does not
winter so well, and that the later and more close the pasturing and the colder the winter following,
the greater is the hazard from pasturing the clover. This hazard arises chiefly from the exposure
of the roots to the sweep of the cold winds. It should be the rule, therefore, not only to
refrain from pasturing clover thus, but also to leave the stubbles high when pasturing the
grain. Where the snowfall is light and the cold is intense, to leave the stubbles thus high
is important, since they aid in holding the snow. But there may be instances when the clover
plants grow so vigorously that in places of heavy snowfall, smothering may result unless the
mass of vegetation is in some way removed. In such instances, pasturing may be in order; but
when practised, the grazing should be with cattle rather than sheep or horses, and it should
cease before the covering is removed. There may also be locations where much benefit follows
in several ways close, or reasonably close, cutting of the stubbles quite soon after the nurse
crop has been harvested.

When clover is sown without a nurse crop, it may be not only proper, but advantageous, to pasture
it. The grazing should not, however, be continued so late that the plants will not have time
to make a sufficiency of growth to protect them in winter. Such grazing is better adapted to
areas in which the season of growth is long, rather than short; where weed growth is abundant,
as on certain of the soils of the prairie, it may be necessary to call in the aid of the mower
once or even twice during the season of growth.

When a crop of medium red clover is desired, the surest way to obtain it in good form is to
pasture the field during the early part of the season, and closely enough to have the clover
eaten down on every part of the field. When it is not so eaten, the mower should be so used
that the growth and maturing of the seed crop may be even and uniform. The season for removing
the live stock will depend upon latitude and altitude, but it will be correct to say that it
ought to be from two to three weeks earlier than the proper season for cutting clover for hay.

When clover is not grazed the year that it is sown, in some seasons the stronger plants will
bear seed, if allowed. To such an extent does this follow under certain conditions and in certain
areas, that a considerable crop of seed could be obtained if this were desired, even as many
as 4 or 5 bushels per acre in some instances. But it has been noticed that if thus allowed
to produce seed, the effect upon the growth of the crop the next season is decidedly injurious.
To prevent such a result the mower should be run over the field as soon as much hazard is certainly
apparent, and the earlier in the season that this can be done the better, for the reason that
all weeds growing are clipped off, and the clover has also a better chance to provide protection
for the winter by growth subsequently made. When there is an over-luxuriant growth in the plants,
it may be well to thus mow the field, even though seed should not be produced. The growth made
by the plants and the mulch provided by the portion cut make an excellent preparation for entering
the cold season.

But few pasture crops grown will furnish as much grazing in one season as medium red clover.
It will probably furnish the most grazing if allowed to grow up before it is grazed until the
stage of bloom is approached or reached, but since it is seldom practicable to graze it down
quickly enough after that stage has been reached, and since there is frequently waste from
tramping, grazing usually begins, and properly so, at an earlier period.

When cattle and sheep graze upon young clover, there is some danger that hoven or bloating
may result to the extent of proving quickly fatal if not promptly relieved. The danger is greater
if the animals are hungry when turned in upon the clover, and when it is wet with dew or rain,
or in a more than ordinarily succulent condition. Such danger may be lessened, if not, indeed,
entirely eliminated, by giving the animals access to other food, as dry clover hay, for instance,
before turning them in on the pasture, and the danger is always less in proportion as grasses
are abundant in the pasture.

Should bloating occur, relief must usually be prompt to be effective. In mild cases, certain
medicines may bring relief. One of the most potent is the following: Give spirits of turpentine
in doses of 1 to 5 tablespoonfuls, according to the size of the animal. Dilute with milk before
administering. In bad cases, the paunch should be at once punctured. The best instruments are
the trocar and canula, but in the absence of these a pocket knife and goose quill may be made
to answer. The puncture is made on the left side, at a point midway between the last rib and
hook point, and but a few inches from the backbone. The thrusting instrument should point downward
and slightly inward going into the paunch. With much promptness the canula or the quill should
be pushed down into the paunch and held there till the gas escapes. Before the tube is withdrawn
the contents of the paunch that have risen in the same should be first pushed down.

=Harvesting for Hay.=--Medium red clover is at its best for cutting for hay when in full bloom,
and when a few of the heads which first bloomed are beginning to turn brown; that is to say,
in the later rather than in the earlier stage of full bloom. If cut sooner, the curing of the
crop is tedious. If cut later the stalks lose in palatability. But when the weather is showery
it may be better to defer cutting even for several days after the clover has reached the proper
stage for harvesting, as the injury from rain while the crop is being cured may be greater
than the injury from overmaturity in the same before it is mown.

When curing the crop, the aim should be to preserve to the greatest extent practicable the
loss of the leaves. To accomplish such a result, the clover ought to be protected as far as
possible from exposure to dew or rain, and also from excessive exposure to sunshine. Dew injures
more or less the color of the hay and detracts from its palatability. Rain intensifies such
injury in proportion as the crop being harvested is exposed to it. It also washes out certain
substances, which, when present, affect favorably its aroma.

The injury from such exposure increases with the interval between cutting and storing the crop.
Exposure to successive showers may so seriously injure the hay as to render it almost valueless
for feeding. After the mown clover has been exposed in the swath to the sunlight beyond a certain
time, it turns brown, and if exposed thus long enough the aroma will be lost. The aim should
be, therefore, to cure the clover to the greatest extent practicable by the aid of the wind
rather than by that of the sun.

The method of procedure to be followed is in outline as given below: Mow as far as possible
when the meadow is not wet with rain or dew. Mow in the afternoon rather than the forenoon,
as the injury from dew the night following will be less. Stir with the tedder as soon as the
clover has wilted somewhat. The tedder should be used once, twice or oftener as the circumstances
may require. The heavier the crop and the less drying the weather, the more the tedding that
should be given. Sometimes tedding once, and in nearly all instances twice, will be sufficient.
The hay should then be raked. It is ready for being raked as soon as the work can be done easily
and in an efficient manner. When clover is not dry enough for being raked, the draught on the
rake will be unnecessarily heavy, the dumping of the hay will be laborious, and it does not
rake as clean as it would if the hay were in a fit condition for being raked.

The aim should be to have the crop put up in heaps, usually called "cocks," but sometimes called
"coils," before the second night arrives after the mowing of the clover; and in order to accomplish
this, it may be necessary to work on until the shades of evening are drawing near.

When there is a reasonable certainty that the weather shall continue dry, it is quite practicable
to cure clover in the winrow, but in showery weather to attempt to do so would mean ruin to
the clover. In no form does it take injury so quickly from rain as in the winrow, and when
rain saturates it, much labor is involved in spreading it out again. Nor is it possible to
make hay quite so good in quantity when clover is cured in the winrow, as the surface exposed
to the sunshine is much greater than when it is mixed with timothy or some other grass that
purpose, nevertheless, to cure it thus, especially when it is mixed with timothy or some other
grass that cures more easily and readily than clover. It may also be taken up with the hay-loader
when cured thus, which very much facilitates easy storing. But when it is to be lifted with
the hay-loader, the winrows should be made small rather than large.

When the clover is to be put up into cocks, these should be small rather than large, if quick
curing is desired. In making these, skilled labor counts for much. The cocks are simply little
miniature stacks. The part next to the ground has less diameter than the center of the cock.
As each forkful is put on after the first, the fork is turned over so that the hay spreads
out over the surface of the heap as it is being deposited. Smaller forkfuls are put on as the
top is being reached. The center is kept highest when making the cock. Each one may be made
to contain about 100 pounds and upward of cured hay, but in some instances they should not
contain more than half the amount to facilitate drying. When the heap has become large enough,
the inverted fork should be made to draw down on every side the loose portions, which in turn
are put upon the top of the cock. Such trimming is an important aid to the shedding of rain.
An expert hand will put up one of these cocks of hay in less time than it takes to read about
how it is done.

A light rain will not very much injure a crop of clover after it has been put up into cocks,
but a soaking rain will probably penetrate them to the bottom. To guard against this, in localities
where the rainfall may be considerable in harvest time, hay caps are frequently used. These
may be made from a good quality of unbleached muslin or strong cotton, or they may be obtained
from some of those who deal in tent awnings and stack covers. When of good quality and well
cared for they should last for 10 to 20 years. Care should be taken in putting them on lest
the wind which frequently precedes a thunder storm should blow them away. The pins used at
the corners of the caps should be carefully and firmly inserted in the hay or the ground, or
the caps should have sufficiently heavy weights attached to them at the corners to prevent
their lifting with the wind. In putting up the hay the size of the cocks should be adjusted
to the size of the covers used. One person should apply the covers as quickly as two will put
up the hay.

When clover hay is put up into cocks, it undergoes what is termed the "heating" process; that
is, it becomes warm in the center of the heaps up to a certain point, after which the heat
gradually leaves it. The heat thus generated is proportionate to the size of the cocks and
the amount of moisture in the clover. The sweating process usually covers two or three days,
after which the hay is ready for being stored. When clover is cured in the winrow, it does
not go through the sweating process to the same extent as when cured in the cock; hence, it
is liable to sweat in the mow, and to such an extent as to induce mold, if it has been stored
away with moisture in it beyond a certain degree. If a wisp of clover is taken from the least
cured portion of the winrow or cock, and twisted between the hands, it is considered ready
for being stored if no liquid is discernible. If overcured, when thus twisted it will break
asunder. A skilled workman can also judge fairly well of the degree of the curing by the weight
when lifted with the fork.

Under some conditions, it may be advisable to "open out" the cocks two or three hours before
drawing them, that the hot sunshine may remove undue moisture. When this is done, if the cocks
are taken down in distinct forkfuls, as it were, each being given a place distinct from the
others, the lifting of these will be much easier than if the clover in each cock had been strewn
carelessly over the ground. The lowest forkful in the cock should be turned over, since the
hay in it will have imbibed more or less of dampness from the ground. But in some instances
the weather for harvesting is so favorable that the precaution is unnecessary of thus opening
out the cocks or even of making them at all.

=Storing.=--Storing clover under cover is far preferable to putting it up in stacks, except
in rainless climates. With the aid of the hay-loader in lifting it from winrows in the field,
and of the hay fork in unloading, the hand labor in storing is greatly reduced, but when it
is unloaded with the horse fork, the aim should be to dump the hay from the fork on different
parts of the mow or stack, lest it should become too solidly pressed together under the dump,
and heat and mold in consequence.

When the hay is stacked, especially in climates of considerable rainfall, a bottom should be
prepared on which to stack it. This may be made of poles or rails. A few of these should first
be laid one way on the ground and parallel, and others across them. Where such material cannot
be had, old straw or hay of but little value should be spread over the stack bottom to a considerable
depth. Where these precautions are not taken, the hay in the bottom of the stack will be spoiled
for some distance upward by moisture ascending from the ground. In building the stack, the
center should be kept considerably higher than the outer edges, that rain may be shed, and
the width of the same should increase up to at least two-thirds of the height, the better to
protect the hay underneath. The tramping should be even, or the hay in settling will draw to
one side, and the topping out should be gradual rather than abrupt. 

The editor of the German newspaper in his desire to poison and colour the news to suit his own
views does not rely upon an editorial, but inserts little paragraphs and sentences in the
news columns. For instance, a note of President Wilson's might be printed and after a paragraph
of that, a statement something like this will be inserted in parentheses. "This statement comes
well from the old hyprocrite whose country has been supplying arms and ammunition to the enemies
of Germany. The Editor." A few sentences more or a paragraph of the note and another interlineation
of this kind. Small newspapers have a news service furnished free by the government, thus
enabling the latter to colour the news to suit itself. It is characteristic of Germany and
shows how void of amusement the life of an average citizen is and how the country is divided
into castes, that there is no so-called society or personal news in the columns of the daily newspaper.

You
never see in a German newspaper accounts common even to our small
town newspapers, of how Mrs. Snooks gave a tea or how Mrs. Jones,
of Toledo, is visiting Mrs. Judge Bascom for Thanksgiving.

If a prince or duke comes to a German town a simple statement is printed that he is staying at
such and such a hotel.

German newspapers, as a rule, are very pronounced in their views, either distinctly Conservative
or Liberal or Socialist or Roman Catholic.

The Berliner Tageblatt is nearest our idea of a great independent, metropolitan, daily newspaper.
Other newspapers represent a class and many of them are owned by particular interests such
as the Krupps and other manufacturers or munition makers.

There is little that is sensational in the German newspaper. I remember on one occasion that
two women murderers were beheaded in accordance with German law.

Imagine how such an occurrence would have been "played up" in the American newspapers, with
pictures, perhaps, of the executioner and his sword, with articles from poets and women's organisations,
with appeals for pardon and talk of brainstorms and the other hysterical concomitants of murder
trials in the United States. But in the German newspapers a little paragraph, not exceeding ten
lines, simply related the fact that these two women, condemned for murdering such and such
a person, had been executed in the strangely medieval manner--their heads cut off on the scaffold
by a public executioner.

The German newspapers in reporting police court and other judicial proceedings often omit names and
it is possible in Berlin for a man to prosecute a blackmailer without having his own name
in print.

When a German victory was announced flags were displayed, but as the war progressed so many victories
announced turned out to be nothing wonderful or decisive that little
attention was paid to the vain-glorious flaunting of German triumphs.

Following an old custom ten or fifteen trumpeters climbed the tower of Rathhaus or City Hall
and there quite characteristically blew to the four quarters of Heaven; but again as these
official and brazen blowings were not always followed by the confirmation in fact, trumpetings
were gradually discontinued.

The Germans cleverly kept back the announcement of certain successes in order to offset reverses.
For instance, on a day when it was necessary to tell the people of a German retreat the newspapers
would have great headlines across the front of the first page announcing
the sinking of a British cruiser (sunk, perhaps, a month before) and
then hidden in a corner would be a minimised announcement of a German
defeat.

To us in Germany there was at the time no battle of the Marne. So gradually was the news of the
retreat of the German forces broken to the people that to-day the masses do not realise that the
fate of the world was settled at the Marne!

CHAPTER X

THE LITTLE KAISERS

As the king idea seems inseparably connected with war there is no country in the world where
kings and princes have been held in such great account as in the Central Empires.

I believe there are only two Christian kings in the world--the kings of Italy and of Montenegro--who
are not by blood related to some German or Austrian royalty.

For remember that while we think of Germany as ruled by the Kaiser and while it is his will
that is certainly imposed upon the whole of that territory which does not exist politically or
even geographically but which we call Germany, there are houses of
royalty in it almost as numerous as our big corporations.

There are the three kings of Bavaria, Würtemburg and Saxony, grand dukes and dukes, and princes,
all of them taking themselves very seriously and all of them residing in their own domains;
jealously keeping away from the Emperor's court and jealously guarding every remnant of rule
which the constitution of the German Empire has bequeathed to them.

Once I asked one of these princelings what his older brother, the reigning prince, did with
his time in the small provincial town which is the capital of the principality. The brother
looked at me with real surprise in his eyes and answered, "Why he reigns!"

Before the constitution of the German Empire, many of these poverty-stricken little courts were
centres of kindly amusement, even of intellectual life.

The court of the Grand Duke Charles-Augustus, of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach at Weimar where Goethe
resided and where he was entrusted with responsible state duties, was renowned in Europe as
a literary centre.

Many of these princelings, however ridiculous their courts may have
seemed, exercised despotic power.

To-day the inhabitants of the two Mecklenburg duchies are protected by neither constitution
nor bill of rights. The grand duke's power is absolute and he can behead at will any one of his
subjects in the market-place or torture him to death in the dungeons of the castle and is responsible
to God alone.

Here is an example from history. George Louis, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg-Celle, married his
mistress, a Huguenot girl called Eleanore d'Olbreuze. They had one daughter, Sophia Dorothea,
who married the Elector of Hanover, who was also George I of England.

Sophia Dorothea was supposed to have been involved in a love affair with a Swedish Count, Philip
Konigsmarck. Konigsmarck was murdered by order of George I, and Sophia Dorothea incarcerated
in Ahlden where she died in 1726. Konigsmarck's sister went to Saxony to beg the aid of the Saxon
King, Augustus the Strong. She failed to get news of her brother, but became one of the mistresses
of Augustus the Strong and the mother of the celebrated Marshal Saxe.

I say one of the "mistresses" of Augustus the Strong because he boasted that he was the father
of 365 illegitimate children!

The daughter of Sophia Dorothea was the mother of Frederick the Great and his brothers, and
therefore, an ancestor of the present German Kaiser. Any one writing about her in a disparaging
manner is subject to be imprisoned, under the decisions of the Imperial Supreme Court, for
"lèse-majesté" or injuring the person of the present monarch in daring
to slander his ancestors.

And, I suppose, any one referring to Augustus the Strong may be shut up in Dresden for insulting
a predecessor of the present King.

Every year the nobles of the Central Empires hold a convention at Frankfort, where the means are
discussed by which their privileges may be preserved. No newspaper prints an account of this Convention
of the highest Caste.

The German peasants, as far as I have seen, are not so much under the dominion of feudal tradition
as are the peasants in Austria and Hungary.

I was shooting once with a Hungarian Count who stationed me in one corner of a field to await
the partridges, which driven by the beaters were expected to fly over my head and as I stood waiting
for the beaters to take up their positions two peasant girls walked past me. One of them,
to my surprise, caught hold of my hand, which she kissed with true feudal devotion. As a guest
of the Count I was presumably of the noble class and therefore entitled by custom and right
to this mark of subjugation. And it became quite a task in walking through the halls of the castle
to dodge the servants, all of whom seemed anxious to imprint on me
the kiss of homage.

Thackeray in the "Fitzboodle Confessions" gives a most amusing account of life in one of these
small, sleepy, German courts and relates how he left Pumpernickel hurriedly, by night, after
the court ball where he had discovered not only that his German fiancée had eaten too much, but
that she had a taste for bad oysters.

All of these small kings and princes are jealous of the King of Prussia and of his position
of German Emperor and show their jealousy by avoiding Berlin.

In October, 1913, when in London on my way to Germany, I met the young Grand Duke of Mecklenburg Strelitz
in the Ritz Hotel where he was dining with an English earl and his beautiful wife. As I happened
to have a box for the Gaiety Theatre, we all went there together and paid a visit to George
Grossmith behind the scenes and talked with Emmy Wehlen, the Austrian actress, who was appearing
in the comic opera then running.

But in all the time that I was in Germany I never once saw or heard of the young Grand Duke
who rules the subjects of his duchy with autocratic rule without even the semblance of a constitution.

Formerly
our minister used to be accredited to some of these courts and, on inquiring informally through
a friend, I learned that the American Minister is still accredited to Bavaria on the records of
the Bavarian Foreign Office, no letters of recall ever having been presented. The fact that the
American Ambassador is accredited to none of these courts is a distinct disadvantage because without
letters of credence he does not come into contact with any of the twenty-four rulers of Germany
who control the Bundesrat in which their representatives sit, voting as they are told by the kings,
grand dukes and princes. A number of these kings and princelings, combining in the Bundesrat, can
outvote the powerful king of Prussia. But they don't dare!

CHAPTER XI

ROYALTY'S RECREATION

I had a shooting estate about twenty miles from Berlin, one that I could reach by automobile
in forty-five minutes from the door of the Embassy. Because of the strict German game laws I
had better shooting there than within two hundred miles of large cities in America.

There seemed to be something to shoot there almost every day of the year. On the sixteenth of
May the season opened for male roe--a very small deer. About the first of August the ducks, which
breed in northern Germany, can be shot.

These were mallards and there were about two thousand or more on a lake on my preserve. We usually
shot them by digging blinds in the oat fields, shooting them after sunset as they flew from the
lake to feed in the newly harvested grain. The season for Hungarian partridge opened on August
20th. These were shot over dogs in the stubble and in the potato fields. After a few weeks
partridges became very wild and we then shot them with a kite. When we had put up a covey out of
range and marked where they went down in a potato patch or field,
perhaps of lucern or clover, a small boy would fly a kite made in
the form of a hawk over the field.

This kept the partridges from flying and they would lie while the dogs pointed until we put them up.

By
October 1st pheasants could be shot; English pheasants become wild. These roosted in the trees
at night and so escaped the plentiful foxes. Later on came shooting at long ranges, after they
had collected in bands, of the female roedeer and also the hare shooting. Rabbits were shot at
all times, and in November and December and January on foggy days it was not difficult to get
a wild goose.

The hares were shot in cold weather, after the snow was on the ground, by walking in line of
ten or fifteen beaters with two or three guns at intervals along the line and later, when the hares
were very wild and the weather very cold, by what is called by the Germans "kessel-jagd" or
kettle-hunt. For this hunt the head keeper would collect a number of beaters, as many as a
hundred, from the neighboring towns and villages, mostly small boys and old men. On the great,
flat plain the keeper would send out his beaters to the right and the left, walking in a straight
line at about twenty-yard intervals. After each side had gone perhaps half a mile they would
then turn at right angles, walk a mile, and then turn at right angles until the two lines met,
so that perhaps a square mile of territory would be enclosed by the beaters with the ten to
fifteen men with guns at intervals in the line. When the square had been formed the head keeper
blew a blast on his bugle and all turned and walked slowly towards the centre and the hares
were shot as they attempted to break through the line.

On one day just before I left Germany, I and members of the Embassy shot more than two hundred hares
on one of these hunts. The German hare is an enormous animal with dark meat, almost impossible
to distinguish from venison.

After these hare drives, besides, of course, paying the beaters their
regular wages, I used to hold a lottery, giving a number of these
hares as prizes or distributing hares to the magnates of the village,
such as the pastor, the school teacher, the policeman and the postmaster.

When

we were shooting in the summer and autumn the peasants were working in the fields and one had
to be very careful in shooting roebuck with a high-powered rifle. It is customary to hunt roebuck
on these flat plains from a carriage. In this way a bullet, travelling at a downward angle, if
the buck is missed, strikes the ground within a short distance. If one were to shoot lying down,
kneeling or standing, the danger to peasants in the fields would be very great. The pheasants
were sometimes shot over dogs, but usually as the beaters drove small woods. A pheasant driven
and flying high makes a difficult mark. One getting up before the dogs is almost too easy a
shot.

We shot the rabbits by using ferrets, little animals like
weasels wearing little muzzles and bells upon their necks. In the
woods where the rabbits had their holes four or five ferrets would
be put in the rabbits' holes and it was quite difficult to shoot rabbits
as they came out like lightning, dodging among the trees. In the early
spring the "birkhahns" were shot, a variety of black and white grouse.
There were some blinds or little huts of twigs erected near places
where the ground was beaten hard and on these open, beaten spots early
in the morning the "birkhahns" waltz, doing a peculiar backward and
forward dance in some way connected with their marriage ceremonies.
There were also on this estate numbers, at times, of a curious bird
found only in Spain, Roumania, Asia Minor, and these plains of the
Mark of Brandenburg, a large bustard called by the Germans "trappe."
These birds were very shy and hard to approach. Although I had several
shots at them with a rifle at four or five hundred yards I did not
succeed in getting one.

In talking with the Chancellor he almost
always opened the conversation by asking if I had yet killed a "trappe."
As a rule the German uses for shooting deer and roebuck a German Mauser
military rifle, but with the barrel cut down and a sporting stock
with pistol grip added. On this there is a powerful telescope. Many
Germans carry a "ziel-stock," a long walking stick from the bottom
of which a tripod can be protruded and near the top a sort of handle
piece of metal about as big as a little finger. When the German sportsman
has sighted a roebuck he plants his aiming stick in the ground, rests
the rifle on the side projection, carefully adjusts his telescope,
sets the hair trigger on his rifle and finally touches the trigger.

At
the commencement of the war the Duke of Ratibor collected all these
sporting rifles with telescopes and sent them to the front. These
were of the same calibre as the military rifles and took the military
cartridge, so they proved enormously useful for sniping purposes.

Going
one day to a proof establishment to try a gun I opened by mistake
a door which led to a great room where thousands of German military
rifles were being fitted with telescopes. These telescopes have crossed
wires, like those in a surveyor's instrument, and it is only necessary
in aiming to fix the centre of the crossed wires on the game and pull
the trigger. A clever arrangement enables the wires to be elevated
for distant shooting.

So great is the discipline of the German people
that game on these estates is seldom, if ever, touched by the peasants.
There is no free shooting in Germany. The shooting rights of every
inch of land are in possession of some one and the tens of thousands
of game keepers constantly killing the crows, hawks, foxes and other
birds and animals that destroy eggs and game make the game plentiful.
The keeper has the right by law to shoot any stray dog or cat found
a hundred yards from a village. I paid the head keeper a certain sum
per month and in addition he received a premium called "shot money"
for each bird or roebuck shot. He also received a premium for each
fox or crow or hawk he destroyed, bringing, on the first of the month,
the beaks and claws of the hawks, etc., to prove his claim. Foxes
are very plentiful in Germany and in one winter on this estate, only
twenty miles from Berlin, the keeper trapped or killed twelve foxes. When clover is plowed under it will usually be found more profitable
to bury the second growth of the season than the first. The crop is in the best condition for
being plowed under when the plants are coming into bloom. If left until the stems lose their
succulence the slow decay following in conjunction with the bulkiness of the mass plowed under
might prove harmful to the crop following the clover. The influence of the roots upon the mechanical
condition of the soil is most beneficial. The roots go down deep into the subsoil and also
abound in fibrous growth. The tap roots in their decay furnish openings through which the superfluous
water may go down into the subsoil. The fibers adhering to the main roots so ramify through
the soil that when even stiff land is filled with them it is rendered friable, and is consequently
brought into a good mechanical condition.

While all varieties of clover may be utilized in producing food and in enriching land, none
is equal to the medium red for the two purposes combined. This arises from the fact that none
save the medium red grows two crops in one season under ordinary conditions. Though the first
crop should be taken for food, as it generally is, there is still ample time for a second crop
to grow for plowing under the same season. This second growth is ready for being plowed under
when time is less valuable than it would be when the mammoth or alsike varieties would be in
season for being thus covered. And yet the work may be done sufficiently early to admit of
sowing fall or winter crops on the land which produced the clover.

CHAPTER IV

ALFALFA

Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) previous to its introduction into California, from Chili, about the
middle of the last century, was usually known by the French name Lucerne. The name Alfalfa
is probably Arabic in its origin, and the term Lucerne has probably been given to it from the
Canton Lucerne in Switzerland. It has followed the plant into Spain and South America, and
now it seems probable that soon it will be known by no other name over all the United States
and Canada. It has also been known by names applied to it from various countries for which
it has shown high adaptation, as, for instance, Sicilian Clover, Mexican Clover, Chilian Clover,
Brazilian Clover, Styrian Clover and Burgundy Clover. In yet other instances, names have been
applied to it indicative of some peculiarity of growth, as, for instance, Branching Clover,
Perennial Clover, Stem Clover and Monthly Clover.

Alfalfa is upright and branching in its habit of growth, more so than the common varieties
of clover. It usually grows to the height of 2 to 3 feet, but it has been known to reach a
much greater height. Although possessed of a single stem when the plants are young, the number
of the stems increases up to a certain limit, with the age of the plants and the number of
the cuttings. Forty to fifty stalks frequently grow up from the crown of a single plant where
the conditions are quite favorable to growth, and in some instances as many as a hundred. The
leaves are not large, but numerous, and in the curing of the plants they drop off much more
easily than those of the more valuable of the clovers. The flowers are borne toward the top
of the stems and branches, and they are in a long cluster, rather than in a compact head. They
are usually of a bluish tint, but the shades of the color vary with the strain from blue to
pink and yellow. The seeds are borne in spirally coiled pods. They resemble those of red clover
in size, but are less uniform in shape. The color should be a light olive green. The tap roots
go down deeply into the soil and subsoil where the conditions as to texture and moisture are
favorable. It has been claimed that alfalfa roots have gone down into congenial subsoils 40
to 50 feet, but usually less, probably, than one-fourth of the distances mentioned would measure
the depths to which the roots go. And with decreasing porosity in the subsoil, there will be
decrease in root penetration until it will reach in some instances not more than 3 to 4 feet.
But where the roots are thus hindered from going deeper, they branch out more in their search
for food.

Alfalfa is perennial. In the duration of its growth, no fodder plant grown under domestication
will equal it. It has been known, it is claimed, to produce profitable crops for half a century.
In some of the Western States are meadows from 25 to 40 years old. Ordinarily, however, the
season of profitable growth is not more than, say, 6 to 12 years when grown on upland soils.
The meadows usually become more or less weedy or possessed by various grasses, and some of
the plants die. The plants at first send up a single stem. When this matures or is cut back
the uncut portion of the stem dies down to the crown of the plant, which then sends out other
stems. This is repeated as often as the stems are cut down until many stems grow up from one
plant as indicated above, unless the plants are so crowded that such multiplication is more
or less hindered. The plants grow rapidly as soon as spring arrives, and as often as cut off
they at once spring again into vigorous life, where the conditions are favorable to such growth;
hence, from one to twelve cuttings of soiling may be obtained in a single season, the former
result being obtained in arid climates, where the conditions are unpropitious, and the latter
being possible only in congenial soils, where the winters are very mild and where the soils
are irrigated. Usually, however, even on upland soils and in the absence of irrigation, not
fewer than 3 to 5 cuttings of soiling food are obtained each year and not fewer than 2 to 4
crops of hay.

A number of varieties so called are grown in this country. They differ from each other more,
however, in their adaptation in essential properties relating to the quality of the pasture
and fodder produced, than in the quality of food product obtained from them. The variety commonly
grown from seed produced in the West is usually spoken of simply as alfalfa, while that grown
from seed European in origin has been more commonly called Lucerne. The former of these has
a tendency to grow taller than the latter and to send its roots down to a greater depth. In
addition to these, such strains as the Turkestan, the Rhenish, the Minnesota and Sand Lucerne
have been introduced.

The Turkestan variety was introduced by the United States Department of Agriculture during
recent years. It was brought from provinces beyond the Caspian in Russia, Asia. The object
sought was to introduce a variety that would better withstand the rigors of a climate dry in
summer and cold in winter than the variety commonly grown. Some strains of this variety have
proved drought resistant to a remarkable degree. It has also shown itself capable of enduring
without injury temperatures so low as to result in the destruction of plants of the common
variety. In trials made by growers in North Dakota and Northern Minnesota, it has been found
able to endure the winter's cold in these areas. But it has also been found that while the
plants produced some seed in the Central Mountain States, they did not produce much seed when
grown in the Northern States. Unless seed can be secured from plants grown in the latter in
sufficient quantities to meet the needs of growers, it is feared that in time some of the hardy
characteristics of this variety will be lost if the Central and Southern Mountain States must
be relied upon as the American sources of seed supplies.

The Rhenish strain comes from Central Europe. It has been highly commended by some European
seedsmen for its hardihood, but it has been as yet grown to only a limited extent in America.
The Minnesota strain was doubtless brought to Carver County by German farmers, by whom it has
been grown in the neighborhood of Lake Waconia for nearly 20 years. It has been found much
hardier than the common variety when grown in that neighborhood, and the endurance of plants
grown from seed of this strain far northward has been very pronounced. As this variety produces
reasonably good seed crops in Central Minnesota, it would seem reasonable to expect that it
will become popular in Northern areas. Sand Lucerne, which comes from Central Europe, has considerable
adaptation for poor and light soils, and in trials made at the Michigan experiment station
was found possessed of distinctive merit for such soils.

Where alfalfa can be grown freely, it is unexcelled as a pasture for swine, and is in favor
also as a pasture for horses. While cattle and sheep grazed upon it are exceedingly fond of
it, the danger that it will produce bloat in them is so frequently present as to greatly neutralize
its value for such a use. It is a favorite pasture for fowls. In furnishing soiling food where
it produces freely, it is without an equal in all the United States. It is highly relished
by all kinds of farm animals, not excluding rabbits and goats, and when fed judiciously may
be fed in this form with perfect safety. Its high value in producing such food rests on its
productiveness, its high palatability and the abundant nutrition which it contains. As a hay
crop, it is greatly prized. Even swine may be wintered in a large measure on cured alfalfa hay.

As a fertilizer, the value of alfalfa will be largely dependent on the use that is made of
the plants. When pastured or fed upon the farm, the fertility resulting being put back upon
the land, it ranks highly as a producer of fertility. But this question is further discussed
on page 191. As a destroyer of weeds much will depend upon the way in which it is grown. This
question also is discussed again. (See page 185.)

=Distribution.=--It is thought that alfalfa is more widely distributed over the earth's surface,
furnishes more food for live stock, and has been widely cultivated for a longer period than
any other legume. It is grown over wide areas of Asia, Europe, North and South America, and
its cultivation is constantly extending. It was grown on the irrigated plains of Babylon long
before the days of Nebuchadnezzar. It was the principal fodder used in the stables of the kings
of Persia. From Persia, it is thought, it was brought to Greece about 470 B. C., and that its
cultivation in Italy began at least two centuries before the Christian era. Several Roman writers,
as Virgil, Columella and Varro, mention it. From Italy it was introduced into Spain and from
Spain it was doubtless carried by missionaries of the Roman Catholic Church to Mexico and the
South American States which lie west of the Andes, as Peru and Chili. In the arid and semi-arid
regions of the Andes, the conditions were found so favorable to the growth of alfalfa that
it is now the principal forage crop grown. It is almost certain that it was brought from Chili
to California, from which it has spread over much of the cultivated portion of the arid and
semi-arid west. Western grown seed is also the chief source of supply at the present time for
all the States of the Union.

Fully a century ago attempts were made by Chancellor Livingstone and others to introduce it
into the Eastern States, but without much success, owing, probably, to the lack of knowledge
on the part of the people as to how it should be grown. The seed at that time was doubtless
brought from European sources, probably France. It has been noticed by more recent growers
in these States that the results from sowing such seed do not prove as satisfactory as those
from American grown seed, but that alone should not sufficiently explain why the attempts to
grow alfalfa just referred to were not successful.

But it is not alone in the areas named that alfalfa has proved so helpful to agriculture. In
Central Asia and northward it has for long centuries furnished the Tartars with the principal
forage crop grown. In Turkestan and other places it will grow under conditions so dry as to
forbid the vigorous growth of many hardy grasses. In Southern Asia, from India to Arabia, it
has lost none of the popular favor accorded to it long centuries ago. In Southern Russia it
is extensively grown, and up and down the basin of the Danube. In the Mediterranean provinces
of Southern Europe it is still one of the leading forage crops. In France it stands high in
the popular estimate, and also in some parts of Germany. And even in humid England it is grown
more or less freely on dry, calcareous soils. And the day is doubtless near when in many parts
of Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Eastern South America this great fodder plant will be
found capable of yielding abundant harvests. In some parts of Argentina it has been claimed
that it grows like a weed.

It is believed by many that alfalfa if exposed to very low temperatures will perish and that
it cannot stand as much winter exposure as medium red or alsike clover. This is only true of
some varieties. Other varieties, as the Turkestan, for instance, will endure lower temperatures
and more exposure than the clovers named. Alfalfa has been grown with some success at the government
experiment station, Indian Head, Sask, Canada, and yet it sometimes winter kills in Texas.
As with clover, it is injured most by exposure to sweeping winds blowing over it in winter
when the mercury is low, and the injury is more fatal just after the removal of a snow covering
and when the plants are young. Ice forming over the fields after a sudden thaw and remaining
for a time is very liable to kill the plants. It can stand considerably more summer heat than
any of the clovers grown northward, as witnessed in the good crops grown in some parts of Louisiana
during the hottest weather of summer. Nevertheless, with reference to temperatures, what may
be termed a mild climate, such as characterizes Southern France in Europe and Western California
in the United States, is best adapted to its growth.

It is better adapted to climates that are dry, where the plants can be irrigated, as then rains
do not interfere with the harvesting of the hay. Even in the absence of irrigation, a climate
that is reasonably dry is preferable to one where drenching rains frequently fall, which wash
away the soil when sandy, or which fill it full of water when composed of clay. But where rains
fall frequently and in moderation, as in the northern Puget Sound region, the effect is helpful
to the growth of the alfalfa plants, although it may add somewhat to the labor of making alfalfa
hay, and to the hazard in curing it. Alfalfa will maintain its hold for years on some portions
of the table lands of the mountain States under conditions so dry that the plants can only
furnish one cutting of hay in a season. It is safe to assume, therefore, that alfalfa can be
grown under a wider range of climatic conditions than any other legume grown in the United
States. But the influence which climate should be allowed to exercise on the use that is to
be made of it should not be lost from view. In climates much subject to frequent rains in summer,
it should be grown rather for soiling food and pasture than for hay, whereas in dry climates,
and especially where it can be irrigated, it should be grown for hay, soiling food and pasture,
but especially the former.

While alfalfa can be successfully grown in one or the other of its varieties in some portion
of every State in the Union, it has its favorite feeding grounds. The best conditions for growing
it are found in the valleys of all the Rocky Mountain States, where the growth can be regulated
by the application of irrigating waters. In these the conditions southward are superior to
those northward, because of the milder climate, which precludes the danger of winter killing
by exposure, which occasionally happens in the more northerly of the mountain States, and because
of the more prolonged season for growth, which adds to the number of the cuttings. This does
not mean that the river bottoms in other parts of the United States will not be found good
for growing alfalfa. It can be grown in many of these; in fact, in nearly all of them, and
to some extent by the aid of irrigation, if the waste waters were stored, but the deposit soil
in these valleys being of much closer texture than that in the western valleys, is, on the
whole, lower in adaptation than the soil in the latter.

In the western valleys of the mountain States, alfalfa is the crop around which it may be said
that agricultural production centers. It is the principal hay crop of those States. The extent
to which it may be grown there is revolutionizing the production of live stock on the ranges,
as it is providing food for them in winter, which is fast removing, and will probably soon
entirely remove, the element of hazard from live stock dependent on the range pastures for
support in that season. The dairy and swine industries in those valleys must largely depend
upon it. Fruit orchards must ultimately grow on buried alfalfa meadows, and the rotation of
all crops in the same will be largely dependent upon the growing of alfalfa. Next in adaptation
to the mountain States are, it is thought, certain soils that lie between the Rocky Mountains
and the Mississippi, especially such as are in proximity to rivers, or are underlaid with sheet
water not far distant from the surface. But an unusually large proportion of the upland soil
in these States, from Central Minnesota southward, have high adaptation for the growth of this
plant. Particularly is this true of the soils of Nebraska and Kansas and of considerable portions
of Missouri, Arkansas and Louisiana.

In States east of the Mississippi, the adaptation is not so general, and is more dependent
on soil conditions than on those that are climatic. In nearly all of the river bottoms of these
States it will grow with more or less success. On nearly all upland soils it will also grow
well, where the subsoil furnishes naturally good drainage. For the exception, see page 132.
But in no State east of the Mississippi, is such a proportion of the area so highly adapted
to growing alfalfa as in many of the States west of that river. In other States areas are found
in which alfalfa will produce excellent crops, but usually these do not embrace the larger
portion of the entire area in any State. In a considerable number of the States such areas
are more or less limited, and usually they are distributed variously in the different States;
that is, they do not lie side by side. The favorite soil conditions in these are a good loam,
preferably more or less sandy and resting upon a porous subsoil.

A more exact idea will be given of relative adaptation in various States in what is now submitted.
In California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado and New Mexico, alfalfa is now grown chiefly by the aid
of irrigation, and all of these States have highest adaptation for its growth. In some parts
of California 6 to 10 tons of cured hay are obtained in one year, with pasture in winter additional.
In Utah, good crops have been grown successively on the same land for more than a quarter of
a century. In Colorado two cuttings are obtained the first season, and it is said that there
the plants are not easily destroyed. It yields enormously in the irrigated valleys of New Mexico
and Arizona.

In Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana and Wyoming, it is grown with and without irrigation.
In large areas in all these States, excellent crops are and may be grown, but the season of
growth being shorter, not so many cuttings are obtained per year as in the mountain States
further south. In Northern Idaho two cuttings may be obtained per year, even on high, dry land.

In North Dakota, especially westward, alfalfa gives promise of successful growth. It will grow
well in much of South Dakota, especially on sandy soils not too distant from water. In Minnesota
it has been grown successfully in Carver County since 1886. Good success is being obtained
from growing it in other parts of the State, even in some parts of the Red River valley. In
Western Iowa it is being grown with much success, and in some portions of Eastern Iowa. In
Missouri, the two important centers for growing it are the northwest and the southeast, but
in other areas it has also done well. In Kansas it will grow well in all parts of the State
where the subsoil is porous. It has been cut for hay in that State in less than 60 days from
the date of sowing. It grows equally well over at least two-thirds of Nebraska, especially
the eastern half, and its growth in Nebraska is rapidly extending. In the Arkansas valley it
luxuriates, and it is also being grown in Oklahoma. In Louisiana immense fields are being grown
along the Red River and in other parts of the State. In Texas it is being grown more or less
north, east and south, and especially in the valley of the Brazos.

In the Southern States alfalfa has not in many instances been given a good chance where tried.
The plants have too frequently had to contend there as elsewhere with ill-prepared and weedy
soils and imprudent pasturing. Yet it is being grown with considerable success, though as yet
in limited areas, in all the Southern States. It has done well in parts of Kentucky, Tennessee,
Mississippi and Alabama, and in Georgia are some alfalfa meadows 25 years old. In the other
Southeastern States, viz., Virginia, the Carolinas and Florida, it does well only in areas
more or less circumscribed, but it has been grown with some success even in the rainy climate
of Southern Florida.

In the States northward from the Ohio River, that is, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan and
Wisconsin, the necessity for growing alfalfa has not been so much felt as in some other States,
because of the excellence of the crops of clover grown in these. Its growth, however, is extending
in all of these States. Much of the soil in Illinois, it is said, must first be inoculated
with the bacteria proper to alfalfa before vigorous crops can be grown, and this is probably
true of sections of Indiana soil. Some sections of Ohio are becoming noted for the crops of
alfalfa which they have grown, and in Wisconsin Hon. W. D. Hoard succeeded in securing 5.7
tons of alfalfa hay in one season from four cuttings made on three-fifths of an acre.

In all the Eastern and New England States, alfalfa is being grown to some extent. In some counties
of New York, as Onondaga and Madison, it is becoming the leading soiling and hay crop. In Massachusetts
it has borne cuttings year after year on sandy loam soil. On Long Island three to four cuttings
each season have been obtained for a series of years. It is believed that it will grow over
nearly the whole of Southern Maryland and also in much of the eastern part of that State, and
its growth has been quite successful in parts of Delaware and Pennsylvania.

Alfalfa will grow well in considerable areas in Canada. The statement would seem safe that
at the present time profitable crops could be grown in some parts of every province of Canada
in which the land is tilled. In Quebec, even on high land, it usually endures the winters.
Near Montreal it has been cut for soiling food at the height of 30 inches as early as May 15th.
In some parts of Eastern Ontario good crops can be grown, and also over considerable areas
of Western Ontario. The author grew it with much success at the experiment station at Guelph
in 1890 and subsequently, and during recent years considerable areas are being grown in several
of the Lake Erie counties and in those that lie north from them. But in no part of Ontario
are the conditions for growing alfalfa better than in some of the mountain valleys of British
Columbia.

But few crops, if, indeed, any, are being experimented with at the present time to so great
an extent as alfalfa; hence, the expectation is reasonable that there will be an enormous increase
in the area grown in the future that is near. The two chief causes of failure in the past were
want of knowledge in growing and caring for it on the part of the growers, and the absence
of the proper bacteria in the soil. Acidity in some soils and want of drainage in others are
also responsible for many of the failures referred to. But even where it does grow reasonably
well, some trouble is found from the alfalfa failing in spots. In some instances the cause
can be traced, as when coated with ice in winter, or where the soil is not uniform, but in
other instances the precise causes have not been determined. Notwithstanding these drawbacks,
however, greatly increased areas will be grown in the future, especially in States in which
the dairy interest is paramount or even important.

=Soils.=--It was formerly thought by many that alfalfa would only grow vigorously on soils
and subsoils sandy in character, and underlaid at some distance from the surface with water.
It is now being ascertained that it will grow on a great variety of soils, providing they are
reasonably fertile, free from acidity, sufficiently porous below to carry away water with reasonable
quickness, and not underlaid with hard pan or a subsoil so tenacious that it is almost impervious
to water.

The best soils for alfalfa are those of the Western mountain States, and in these the deposit
soils of the river valleys stand among the foremost. These soils are usually of much depth.
Many of them have water underneath, and the subsoil is usually so porous that the roots can
go far down in them, such is the character of nearly all the bottom land west of the Mississippi.
But in nearly all of the mountain region of the West, from Banff in British Columbia to Mexico,
alfalfa will grow well under irrigation, or in the absence of irrigation, if ground water is
not too distant from the surface. In this region alfalfa grows more vigorously and more persistently
than in almost any other portion of the United States.

In regions where alfalfa is not dependent upon irrigation, the best soils probably are deep,
rich calcareous loams, clay or sandy, and underlaid with what may be termed a mild or reasonably
porous clay subsoil. With such soils the plants may be in no way influenced by sheet water
below, as on some of these in Nebraska, for instance, such water is fully 150 feet below the
surface. These soils are usually possessed of abundant food supplies to nourish the plants,
and the roots can go far down into the subsoils to gather food and moisture. Such lands are
found more or less in nearly all the States of the Union east from the Rocky Mountains; hence,
when the requisite bacteria are present, good crops can be grown on them in every State in
the Union.

On the ordinary black soils of the prairie, alfalfa will usually grow reasonably well if underlaid
with clay not too distant nor too tenacious. When the roots get down into the subsoil, they
can usually find much food in the same, and unless in very dry areas a sufficiency of moisture,
but in many instances it may be necessary to introduce the requisite bacteria, and to apply
farmyard manure to encourage sufficient growth to carry the roots down quickly to the subsoil.
In some prairie soils the growth will be vigorous from the start, but usually these are lands
that have grown hardwood timber, and that have in them more or less clay.

In climates where the rainfall is considerable, alfalfa will frequently grow well on gravelly
soils and on those that are stony. Some of the best alfalfa soils in the State of New York,
New England States, and in the Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario are of this character.

Alfalfa will frequently grow fairly well even on stiff clays, and in some instances on gumbo
soils. But these soils must not be so retentive as to collect and hold water for any considerable
time within a few feet of the surface. Such lands have usually much staying power; hence, alfalfa
grown on them frequently improves for years after it has been sown. On the reddish soils that
cover much of the South, it has been found, as in growing alfalfa on stiff clays in the North,
that where deep subsoiling is practiced alfalfa is not only more easily established, but it
also grows with added vigor.

On upland soils sandy or gravelly in character where the rainfall is much less than normal
and where the subsoil is not underlaid with sheet water, alfalfa will not usually succeed,
notwithstanding that it may grow well on these soils where the rainfall is normal. On such
soils it is not easy to get a stand of the plants, as they are much apt to perish in the dry
weather of the first season, but if once established on such soils the plants have much power
to grow even where the rainfall is considerably less than normal.

Alfalfa will not grow well in soils naturally wet until they are drained. And when drained
it will not grow with normal vigor, on what may be termed slough soils, where the subsoil is
far down and covered with a deep covering of vegetable mold. What are termed slough soils in
the Western prairies, therefore, are not well fitted for the growth of alfalfa. On these it
may not succeed well, when it may grow with much vigor on the adjoining upland. When some wet
soils are drained, alfalfa may not succeed well on them for a time and later may grow luxuriantly.
This may arise from the lack of time for proper aeration after being drained, or from the want
of lime to further correct acidity in the soil, or from the want of the proper bacteria. Notwithstanding
that alfalfa will not grow well on undrained lands that are naturally wet, and notwithstanding
that it will perish if the roots reach standing water at a distance too near the surface, the
best crops by far are usually grown on irrigated lands. This arises, first, from the ability
to adjust the supplies of water to meet the needs of the plants, and second, from the congenial
character of the soil and subsoil. Next to these the best crops are grown where congenial soils
are underlaid with ground water, not too near nor too distant from the surface. On these soils
the plants are largely supplied with moisture from the water below ascending on the principle
of capillary attraction. How near or how distant such water should be will depend somewhat
on subsoil conditions. It would seem correct to say that it ought never to come nearer to the
surface than 3 feet, nor should it be more than 20 feet down. The most suitable distance would
be, say, 8 to 16 feet. When the roots of alfalfa reach water at too short a depth they will die.

Alfalfa may sometimes be grown satisfactorily on soils subject to overflow, but usually there
is hazard in growing it on these. If the overflow occurs comparatively early in the season,
if it is not of great depth, if it is of short duration, and if the waters quickly drain out
of the subsoil possessed by the alfalfa, it may receive little or no harm from such overflow.
Instances are on record wherein ice has formed on alfalfa and yet the plants survived, but
such a condition will usually prove fatal to them. But should the overflow take place in hot
weather, usually it will injure the plants seriously, and may, indeed, completely destroy them.
So great is such hazard, that care must be taken against the application of an excess of irrigating
waters under such conditions. Overflow waters that are stagnant are more injurious probably
than those that are in motion, owing, it may be, to the less supply of dissolved oxygen in
the former.

Soils suitable in themselves, but lying on stiff clay bottoms or underlaid with hard pan within
two or three feet of the surface, will not maintain a good stand of alfalfa. The plants in
these may grow well for a time, probably a year or two, after which they will fail. The roots
are not able to go down to gather food. When the subsoils are simply stiff clays, deep subsoiling,
as already intimated, may render much service, but when composed of hard pan this may not be
practicable. In moist climates, however, reasonably good crops have been obtained from soils
with underlying rock not more than four feet below the surface.

The fact should not be overlooked that soils may have the requisite physical conditions for
growing alfalfa, and they may possess in fair supply the essential elements of plant food,
and yet alfalfa will not succeed at the first when sown on these, because of the absence of
the soil bacteria, the presence of which is essential to the vigorous growth of the plants.
Because of this, growers should be slow to conclude that alfalfa will not flourish on the soils
on which they sow it until they have first tried to grow it on those soils that have been inoculated
with the requisite alfalfa bacteria. For the methods of procedure in such cases see page 53.
Some persons claim that soils which will grow medium red clover in good form will also grow
alfalfa in good form. This does not necessarily follow. While there is much of similarity in
the soils suitable for the growth of both, alfalfa may fail on lands that grow red clover luxuriantly
until the bacteria proper to alfalfa have been introduced. Soils may be tested for bacteria,
and even in winter, by sowing some seed in pots and treating them like well-cared-for house
plants. When the plants are 2 to 3 months old, if tubercles are found on the roots, the conclusion
would seem safe that such soil does not require inoculation.

=Place in the Rotation.=--In a certain sense it can scarcely be said of alfalfa that it is
a rotation plant, because of the long term of years for which it is grown in an unbroken succession.
Nevertheless, in all places it cannot always be maintained for a long term of successive years
without renewal. In the Eastern States it is frequently, though not always so crowded by various
grasses, that the fields in which it grows are broken up at some period short of ten years,
and not infrequently at the end of five or six years. When thus grown, it becomes a rotation
plant, though grown in what may be termed long rotations. But even in the West, where, under
irrigation, it may be grown for a quarter of a century or even for a longer period without
renewal, it may be used when desired in short rotations. In such situations it grows so readily
and becomes established so quickly, that the fields may be broken with a view to alternate
with other crops at the end of the second year, or of any year subsequently from the sowing
of the seed that may be desired. Alfalfa in these soils will serve even better than medium
red clover in such situations, since while it is growing, it will produce more hay or soiling
food, and consequently should excel the former in the fertility which it makes available.

East of the Mississippi and north of the Ohio River, alfalfa will frequently follow cultivated
crops, as corn, potatoes and field roots, and when the fields are broken, it will be followed
by crops other than legumes. On many soils the influence which this crop has on relieving the
surface soil from excessive moisture, through channels opened into the subsoil by the decaying
roots, is so helpful as to considerably stimulate production in addition to the fertilizing
influence which it exerts directly. Particularly good crops of corn, the small cereal grains,
and even field roots may be grown after alfalfa.

On soils east of the Mississippi and south of the Ohio, the rotation will be somewhat similar.
But on Southern soils alfalfa will frequently follow immediately crops especially grown to
be plowed under as green manures for the benefit of the alfalfa. These crops include cow peas,
soy beans, crimson clover, and to a limited extent, burr clover. It will also be followed frequently
by crops of cotton and other non-leguminous plants, the growth of which in the United States
is confined to the area now being considered.

In the area west of the Mississippi and east of the semi-arid region beside the mountains,
alfalfa may follow the small cereal grains, and may in turn be followed by them and also by
millets. It may also follow and precede corn, or the non-saccharine sorghums, where the climatic
conditions are suitable for growing the latter.

In the irrigated regions of the West, alfalfa may be made to serve almost any purpose in the
rotation that may be desired. By growing it as a rotation crop in these valleys it may be made
to furnish the soil indefinitely with supplies of nitrogen and humus. In these soils it may
be made to follow directly almost any crop grown on them, and similarly it may be made to precede
the growth of almost any crop for which the locality has marked adaptation. Small cereal grains,
timothy, vegetables, field roots, potatoes, corn, small fruits and orchards may be profitably
grown on buried alfalfa meadows. This does not imply, however, that alfalfa meadows should
not, as a rule, be maintained for a long term of years.

=Preparing the Soil.=--In preparing the soil for alfalfa the aim should be to make a seed-bed
clean, rich, fine, moist, even, and sufficiently firm or friable, according to the conditions.
The subsoil should also be made sufficiently dry and open. From what has just been said, it
will be apparent that in properly preparing the seed-bed, it will be necessary to study closely
the requisite conditions.

The advantage from having a clean seed-bed will be apparent when it is called to mind that
alfalfa is a somewhat delicate plant when young, and that because of this, it is ill able to
overcome in the fight with weeds. Cleanness in the surface soil may be obtained by summerfallowing
the land, by growing a root crop or a crop of corn or any of the non-saccharine sorghums. When
the seed is spring sown, this preparation must be given the year previously, but when autumn
sown, it may be given the same season. In preparing the land thus, the aim should be to make
the surface as clean as possible, rather than to get weed seeds out of the lower strata of
the cultivated soil, in which they will likely perish before the field sown to alfalfa is broken
up again. Summerfallowing makes an excellent preparation for the land, because of the fine
opportunity which it furnishes for cleaning the same perfectly and leveling it off properly.
The excellent condition in which it puts the seed-bed, viewed from the standpoint of the duration
of the years of cropping that are likely to follow, would seem to more than justify such preparation
of the land. The outcome may more than justify the loss of the crop for one season when thus
summerfallowing the land. But it may not be necessary to lose the production of one season
whether the seed is sown spring or autumn, as the summerfallowing in the North may follow the
pasturing off of some crop, and in the South the interval for fallowing the land may be sufficiently
long after the harvesting of an early winter grain crop, before sowing the seed in the autumn.
(See page 136.)

When sowing the seed autumn or spring, on land that is filled with weed seeds near the surface,
it is frequently better to defer sowing the seed for some weeks to give time for sprouting
many of these than to sow at once. This suggestion is specially applicable to spring sowing.
It should also be mentioned that when the weeds infesting the soil are annual or even biennial
in character, the harm done to the alfalfa by these will be much less than when the land is
infested with perennials at the time of sowing. The former may be prevented from seeding by
clipping back frequently, while the latter remain in the soil, increase from year to year,
and injure the plants by crowding. Where crab grass grows abundantly, as in some parts of the
South, unless the alfalfa is sown and cultivated, spring sowing ought to be avoided. But it
is less objectionable to sow alfalfa on land that is weedy when the adaptation of the land
for the crop is high than when it is low, as the alfalfa in the former instance has so much
more power to fight its own battle. On good alfalfa soils, therefore, it may be wiser in some
instances to sow alfalfa in weed-infested land than to defer sowing for a whole year in order
to clean the land.

It is greatly important that the land shall be rich in available plant food on which the seed
is sown. If naturally poor, it should be well fertilized before sowing. When this cannot be
done, it is better not to sow. A vast preponderance of the land in the Rocky Mountain region,
when first broken, would seem to possess abundantly all the essential foods required by alfalfa;
hence, for a time, at least, it is not necessary to enrich these before sowing the seed. The
sandy and hungry gravelly soils, which are considerable in the South, in the Atlantic States,
and in some of the Central and Northern States, should be fertilized before laying them down
to alfalfa. Such fertilization usually calls for both humus and readily available plant food,
and these are most cheaply supplied by growing certain green crops and plowing them under,
or by applying farmyard manure. These may be supplemented when necessary by commercial fertilizers.
Some precede alfalfa on such soils by growing cow peas or soy beans, followed by crimson clover,
both crops being plowed in, and shortly before sowing the alfalfa they apply more or less of
phosphoric acid and potash, which is usually incorporated in the surface soil by the harrow.
On some soils, as in some parts of Florida, two successive crops of cow peas should be plowed
under before sowing alfalfa. When farmyard manure can be used in fertilizing those leechy soils
it is well when it can be applied on the surface in a somewhat decomposed form and also kept
near the surface during the subsequent cultivation given when preparing the seed-bed. In the
North it is best applied in the autumn or winter, and in the South in the summer. But on loam
soils with a reasonably retentive subsoil, the better way to apply farmyard manure is to make
a heavy application of the same to the crop preceding the alfalfa. It has thus become incorporated
with the soil, and many weed seeds in it will have sprouted before sowing the alfalfa. The
results from applying manure on soil somewhat stiff and not highly productive have been noticeably
marked. This may have been owing in part to the mechanical influence of the manure on the land.
The relation between the free application of farmyard manure and abundant growth in alfalfa
is so marked in all, or nearly all, soils west of the Mississippi River that in many instances
better crops will be obtained from poor soils well manured than from good soils unmanured.
The relation between abundant manuring and soil inoculation is worthy of more careful study,
in the judgment of the author, than has yet been accorded to it.

Fine pulverization of the surface soil is advantageous when sowing alfalfa, because of the
influence which it has upon the retention of moisture near the surface, and upon the exclusion
from the soil of an overabundance of light. It is in clay soils, of course, that this condition
is most difficult to secure. The agencies in securing it are the cultivator, the harrow and
the roller, and in many instances the influences of weather, after the land has been plowed,
especially when plowed in the autumn prior to spring seeding.

Moistness in the seed-bed sufficient to promptly sprout the seed is a prime essential, but
it is very much more important where the seasons are dry than where the lack of rain is but
little feared. When the seed is sown after summerfallow or cultivated crops, it is usually
considered preferable to make the seed-bed without using the plow, but to this there may be
some exceptions. If sowing is deferred for a few weeks in the spring on such lands, or on other
lands autumn plowed or early spring plowed, a free use of the harrow ought to be made in the
interval, because of the favorable influence which this will have on the retention of moisture.
In preparing some soils for autumn sowing after a grain crop, as in some parts of Nebraska
and Kansas, it is only necessary to use the harrow; in preparing others the disk and harrow;
and in yet others the disk and harrow and roller. In preparing other soils, as the clays of
the South, it may be necessary first to plow and subsoil, and subsequently to use sufficiently
the harrow and roller.

Evenness in the soil on the surface is important when it is so retentive that water may collect
in the depressions after heavy rain. In such places the plants are much liable to fail, especially
in the early winter, or even shortly after they may have begun to grow, if moisture is excessive.
In order to smooth and even the land sufficiently, it may be necessary to run over it some
form of leveller. This does not mean, however, that it will not be necessary sometimes to plow
the land in ridges, or "lands," as they are sometimes called, but it does mean that the slope
from the center of the lands toward the furrows shall be even and gradual, in order that an
excess of surface water, as in rainy climates, shall be carried away by the latter.

Firmness in the seed-bed is necessary chiefly to prevent too much drying out near the surface
in dry weather, and the holding of too much water in the spaces between the particles near
the surface in wet weather, followed by freezing of the soil. The less deep the stirring of
the cultivated portion when preparing it, the longer the interval between such stirring and
the sowing of the seed, and the heavier the pressure when rolling, the more firm will the seed-bed
be. The deeper the land is plowed, therefore, the longer should be the interval before it is
sowed, but ample rainfall will shorten this period. Firmness in the seed-bed is more important,
relatively, in summer or early autumn when evaporation from the surface soil is the most rapid.
On some soils of the Middle States which border on the Mississippi, the early sown autumn crop
will sometimes perish after the plants have grown some distance above the ground, because of
want of firmness in the soil; hence, in such locations harrowing the surface of the ground
thoroughly may sometimes be a more suitable preparation than plowing and harrowing.

Friability in the seed-bed is important when the soils are heavy. The influences which promote
it are the presence of humus, liberal cultivation, and sometimes weather influences, as rain
and frost. Unless heavy clay soils are brought into this condition, the roots of the alfalfa
will not be able to penetrate the soil quickly enough or deeply enough in search of food.

As has been intimated, it will not avail to sow alfalfa in soils not sufficiently drained naturally
or otherwise. Usually, good alfalfa soils have sufficient drainage naturally, the subsoil being
sufficiently open to admit of the percolation of water down into the subsoil with sufficient
quickness. But good crops of alfalfa may be grown on subsoils so retentive that underdrainage
is necessary to facilitate the escape of an excess of moisture with sufficient quickness. The
question has been raised as to whether the roots of the plants will be much liable to enter
and choke the drains at the joints between the tiles. While it would not be safe to say that
this would never happen, it is not likely to happen, owing to the character of the root growth.
Where too much water is held near the surface, in climates characterized by alternate freezing
and thawing in winter, the young plants will certainly be thrown out through the heaving of
the soil.

The subsoiling of lands not sufficiently open below will be greatly helpful to the growth of
alfalfa. This may also be true of lands not over-retentive naturally, but made so by the treading
of the animals for successive years on the soil under the furrow when plowing the land. In
some conditions, without subsoiling thus, the growing of alfalfa will not be successful, but
in doing this work, care should be taken not to bring up raw subsoil to the surface. In subsoiling
for alfalfa, usually the more deeply the ground can be stirred by the subsoiler, the better
will be the results that will follow. Subsoiling is particularly helpful to the growing of
alfalfa on many of the clay soils of the South.

In the far West, toward the mountains, and probably within the same, are areas in which excellent
stands of alfalfa may be obtained by simply sowing the seed on surfaces stirred with a disk
or with a heavy harrow weighted while it is being driven over the land. The implements should
be driven first one way and then the other, and, of course, the seed is harrowed after it has
been sown. Let us divide the fungus. At the first touch of the knife, through the stem, the color
begins to change, and in a moment stem, tubes, and cap turn to a bright blue. We can see the
color steal along, at first faintly, and then deepen into a darker blue. The cap is a light
brownish yellow color, 2 inches broad, covered with woolly scales.

The tubes are free from the stem. They have been white, but are changing to yellow. The mouths
or openings of the tubes are becoming bluish-green. The stem is swollen in the middle. It is covered
with a bloom. It is stuffed with a pith, and tapers toward the apex. It is like the cap in color,
and measures 1½ inch in length. The mouths of the tubes are round. This is Boletus cyanescens,
or the bluing Boletus, as named by Professor Peck in his work on Boleti. He says it grows more
in the North, and sometimes is much larger than the one we found.

We turn to the bank in hopes of discovering another, and see, instead, what appears to be a
mass of jelly half-hidden in the clay, and in the midst some bright scarlet cherries, or at
least something that resembles them. We take the trowel and loosen them from the earth, and
there, among the gelatinous matter, we find small round balls as large as a common marble, covered
by a bright red skin. When cut in half we see they are filled with
a pure white substance, like the inside of a young puff-ball.

This is quite a discovery. We must look in our books for its name. It is not in our British
manual, but we learn from Professor Peck that it is called Calostoma cinnabarinus. Calostoma
is a Greek word meaning beautiful mouth, and cinnabarinus is taken from cinnabaris, which
means dragon’s-blood. We are not responsible for the names given to plants, but cannot help wishing
that some might be changed or shortened.

We could go on prolonging our search, and describe many wonderful fungi, so easily found on a summer
day, but as our object is to excite curiosity and interest and not fatigue the reader, we will
here pause, and afterward arrange the descriptions of mushrooms in a separate section. The
ones we have described may be found in the Middle States and in New
England.

MUSHROOMS.

ANTIQUITY OF FUNGI.

Fungi have existed from early geological ages. They flourished in the Carboniferous period, when
the enormous beds of coal were formed, a space of time that occupied many millions of years.
Bessey says that the oldest known member of the order of membrane fungi, Hymenomycetes, was
called by the name of “Polyporites Bowmanii.” During the Tertiary period members of the genera
now known under the names of Lenzites, Polyporus, and Hydnum were all in existence. It is
interesting to know that even before the Tertiary period the undergrowth
consisted of ferns and fleshy fungi.

What a time of delight for the botanist! But there were no human beings in those days to roam
amongst that luxuriant undergrowth, and only the fossil remains in the deposits of coal and
peat are left to tell of their former existence.

MANNER OF GROWTH.
Fungi are either solitary, grow in clusters, in groups, or in rings
and arcs of circles.

The species called the Fairy mushroom, Marasmius
oreades, is the most familiar of all those that grow in rings. Besides
this there is the Horse mushroom, Agaricus arvensis; the Chantarelle,
Cantharellus cibarius; the Giant mushroom, Clitocybe maximus, and
St. George’s mushroom, Tricholoma gambosa. The latter species is reproduced
in rings every year. It is a popular saying that when the ring is
unbroken there will be a plentiful harvest the following season. It
is an early mushroom, appearing in April. It derives its name from
the fact of its appearing about April 23d, which is St. George’s day
in the English calendar. Besides these mushrooms there is another
Tricholoma, T. tigrinus, the Tiger mushroom, which sometimes appears
in circles. The word tigrinus means a tiger. The cap is variegated
with dark brown spots, hence the name. West from the same are areas where early autumn sowing is frequently
the best. In much of the Southern and Southwestern States, early autumn sowing is considered
better practice than spring sowing, but to this there are exceptions. Under some conditions
alternate freezing and thawing of the land near the surface tend to throw out young plants,
as, for instance, those autumn sown, more readily than plants from spring-sown seed.

Alfalfa is usually sown much the same as medium red clover (see page 75), but there are the
following points of difference: 1. Since alfalfa is more commonly sown in dry areas, it is
more important, relatively, that the seed shall be buried more uniformly and deeply in the
soil in such areas. 2. Since it is liable to be more injured, relatively, by a nurse crop than
the clovers, it is more frequently sown without one. And 3. Since it is expected to furnish
food for a much longer term of years than any of the clovers, it is relatively more important
that the seed shall be sown with a view to seek a uniform and sufficient stand of the plants.

Whether the seed is sown by hand, or by any of the hand machines in use, the results will usually
prove satisfactory, but in climates where moisture is deficient, decidedly better results are
obtained from sowing the seed with some form of seed drill. A press drill is preferred in soils
so light and open as to dry out easily or to lift easily with the wind. Under conditions of
ample moisture, a light covering with a harrow will suffice, but under conditions the opposite,
more covering is necessary. In areas where spring and early autumn showers are frequent, the
roller will provide a sufficient covering, especially where the soils are well charged with
a clay content. On other soils, as those which cover much of the prairie, the seed should be
buried from 1 to 2 inches deep.

Where alfalfa is much sown on soils well supplied with humus, and on the soils which prevail
in the Rocky Mountain region, many growers sow the seed with the grain drill, and before sowing
they first mix the seed with some material, as earth, some kind of coarse meal, bran or other
substance to make it feed out more regularly. In some instances one-half of the seed is sown
the first time the drill is driven over the land, and the balance is sown by driving again
over the same at right angles to the drill marks previously made. When thus sown, the plants
are more evenly distributed over the soil, and produce, it is thought, a more uniform quality
of stalk. This method meets, in part, at least, the objection sometimes made to drill sowing,
that it does not distribute the plants sufficiently in the soil.

In the Northern and Atlantic States, also west of the Cascade Mountains, and in some parts
of the South, alfalfa is frequently sown with a nurse crop, and under favorable conditions
the results are usually satisfactory, if the nurse crop is not sown too thickly. The best nurse
crops in the areas named are barley and winter rye, but oats will answer also, if sown thinly
and cut for hay. It has also been sown quite successfully along with winter wheat in the spring
and also with spring wheat. When sown with winter wheat or winter rye, it is usually advantageous
to cover the seed well with the harrow. In many instances, however, even in these areas, it
is thought better to sow the seed without a nurse crop, in order that the plants may have all
the benefit from moisture and sunlight which it is possible to give them. This is specially
desirable when the fear is present that they may succumb the first winter to the severity of
the weather. As weeds grow rapidly along with the plants, the mower should be run over the
field from one to three times during the season. If the mowing is done at the proper time,
it will not be necessary to remove what has been cut off by the mower. It may be allowed to
lie as a mulch on the land. But should the growth of weeds be excessive before the mowing is
done, it would then be necessary to remove them, in order to avoid smothering the plants. The
clipping back of the alfalfa plants is helpful, rather than hurtful. When not thus clipped
back the leaves frequently assume a yellowish tint on the top of the plants, which gradually
extends downward until the greater portion of the leaves may be thus affected. Such condition
frequently betokens a lack of nitrogen, but it may also be induced by other causes. When it
does appear, the mower should at once be used and also as often as it appears. As soon as mowed
off the plants usually stool out, sending up fresh shoots more numerously. They thus form a
crown, somewhat like the crown in clover plants. Root growth is also strengthened, and the
plants are thus made much stronger for going into the winter. Each clipping during the season,
of course, cuts down weeds and prevents them from making seed. If not thus clipped, they would
frequently injure the crop more by shade and crowding than would a nurse crop. The mulch thus
made through clipping back the plants is in many instances quite helpful to them, because of
the check which it gives to the escape of ground moisture. There is some difference in the
view held as to whether close clipping is preferable, but the balance of authority is in favor
of reasonably close clipping.

Alfalfa is usually sown alone, but in some instances it maybe advantageous to sow more or less
of some other kind or kinds of grass or clover along with it. When grown for hay it is usually
preferable to sow the seed without admixture. But there may be instances in which medium red
or alsike clover may improve the crop the first year or two that it is mown for hay. But where
red clover grows much more vigorously than alfalfa the first season, it should not be thus
sown in any considerable quantities, or the clover plants will injure the alfalfa plants by
crowding and overshading. Nevertheless, alfalfa may frequently with profit form a considerable
factor in clover grown as pasture.

Where the main purpose of sowing alfalfa is to provide pasture, various grasses and clovers
may be sown along with it, and in varying quantities, according to the attendant conditions.
The choice of the variety or varieties to sow along with the alfalfa should be based on the
needs of the stock to be pastured, and on the degree of the vigor with which these grow and
maintain themselves in the locality. In the Northern States and Eastern Canada timothy and
Russian brome grass (Bromus inermis) may be chosen. In areas with Southern Illinois as a center,
red top and timothy should be satisfactory. In the Southern States, the claims of orchard grass
and tall oat grass would probably be paramount. In areas with Iowa as a center, nothing would
be more suitable, probably, than Russian brome grass. In the mountain States, with Wyoming
as a center, timothy and alsike clover would be suitable. In the dry upland country in Washington
and Oregon, Russian brome grass or tall oat grass would answer the purpose. In many areas the
plan of sowing clover chiefly with the alfalfa is a good one, providing the alfalfa is cut
for a year or two, and is then grazed, as by that time grasses indigenous to the locality,
or which grow well in the same, come in to such an extent as to form a very considerable proportion
of the pasture. Blue grass frequently behaves thus in the North, and crab grass in the South.

The amounts of seed to sow will vary with the character of the soil and climate, with the use
that is to be made of the alfalfa, and with the manner in which it is sown. On soils and in
climates quite favorable to the growth of alfalfa it is common to sow more seed than in those
with less adaptation, and with a view, probably, to check coarseness in the growth of the stems.
If sown thinly in such areas, the rank growth which follows would be coarse. This explains
why in the Western and mountain States more seed is usually sown than in the Eastern and Northern
States. Averaging the whole country, 20 pounds of seed per acre is more frequently mentioned
as the proper amount to sow than any other quantity. In the Northern States many growers sow
15 pounds per acre, and judging by the yield obtained, this amount of seed has proved satisfactory.
Some growers even mention 10 to 12 pounds as satisfactory. The amounts last named are certainly
too small for average conditions. Fifteen to 20 pounds may be fixed upon as the proper amounts
to sow on soil in good condition for speedy germination. But many growers claim satisfactory
results from sowing larger amounts of seed than those named. Under semi-arid conditions, where
irrigation cannot be given, a moderate amount of seed will be more satisfactory than very thick
seeding, as when sown too thickly the plants would suffer more from want of moisture than if
sown more thinly. The aim should be to obtain a stand that will cover the ground evenly and
as thickly as will admit of the vigorous growing of the plants. Because of the relatively long
duration of the period of the growth of alfalfa fields, it is specially important that good
stands shall be obtained at the first, and for the further reason that the plants will then
be better able to contend with intruding weeds, the great bane of alfalfa meadows.

When alfalfa is grown mainly for seed, it should be more thinly sown than when it is grown
for hay or soiling food. It has been noticed that when the plants stand thickly beyond a certain
degree, they do not seed well. Twelve to 16 pounds have been mentioned as quite enough to sow
for such production in the mountain States. Where both objects are important, medium thick
sowing would be the most suitable.

When sown in combinations such as have been named above, it will be necessary to modify somewhat
the amounts of alfalfa seed sown, according to the proportion of the other seeds sown with
the alfalfa. But since many grasses are more aggressive than alfalfa, it is not necessary to
reduce the amount of alfalfa seed sown proportionately to the amounts of the other seeds that
may be sown along with it. In many instances it may be proper not to reduce the amount of the
alfalfa seed at all, as some of these grasses will soon crowd the alfalfa plants, to their
injury, even though the usual amount of seed should be sown. The amount of the grasses sown
with the alfalfa will, of course, vary. It will seldom be necessary in any instance to sow
more than 6 or 7 pounds per acre, and under many conditions not more than 5 pounds. When alfalfa
is sown with timothy and clover in temporary meadows or pastures, it is seldom necessary to
sow more than 3 to 5 pounds per acre, and the same is true of it when sown in a permanent pasture.
The crop is so little grown for hay in mixtures, that it is scarcely necessary to dwell upon
the nature of these, or the respective amounts of seed to sow in making them.

When alfalfa is sown with the grain, there will be a saving of seed to the extent of at least
20 per cent., as compared with broadcast sowing. This arises from the more general sprouting
of all the seeds, since they are planted at a more uniform depth, and from the subsequent loss
of a smaller percentage of the plants through drought, and it may be other causes. But when
sowing broadcast, it will in many instances prove more satisfactory to add 20 per cent. to
the amounts mentioned above, as suitable for being sown without admixture with other grasses
and clovers, rather than to deduct 20 per cent. from these amounts when sowing the seed with
the drill.

=Cultivating.=--Under some conditions, it is, in a sense, necessary to sow alfalfa in rows,
and to give it cultivation during the first season and sometimes for a longer period. In some
parts of Florida, for instance, the most satisfactory results have been obtained from sowing
in rows with 12 to 24 inches between the rows, and then to cultivate between these as may be
necessary to keep down the growth of weeds. Under some conditions also in the Atlantic States,
the most satisfactory results have been obtained from sowing alfalfa in rows 14 to 16 inches
apart and cultivating between them. Even hand hoeing the first season may be justifiable along
the line of the rows for small areas, but with the price of labor as at present, would be too
costly for large areas. When grown in rows as indicated in the Atlantic States and westward
from these, the yields of seed have been more satisfactory than when sown broadcast, but the
crop is less satisfactory for hay, owing to the coarse and uneven character of the stems. The
amounts of seed wanted for such sowing will, of course, vary chiefly with the distance between
the rows. As small an amount as 6 pounds or even less will in some instances suffice per acre.

=Pasturing.=--The practice of pasturing alfalfa the first season, especially where it cannot
be irrigated, is usually condemned, lest it should weaken the plants unduly for entering the
winter. It would seem probable, however, that under some conditions such grazing would be helpful
rather than hurtful. The cropping of the plants by stock, in the influence which it exerts
upon the plants, is akin to that which arises from cutting them back frequently during the
summer. The animals thus grazed will also crop down weeds. This, at least, is true of sheep.
The author has succeeded in getting a good stand of alfalfa by sowing seed at the rate of 15
pounds per acre, along with 2 to 4 pounds of Dwarf Essex rape seed, and grazing the same with
sheep. Other growers, during recent years, have succeeded similarly. The grazing should not
begin until the plants have made a good start, but it should not be deferred so long that the
rape and the weeds will unduly shade the alfalfa plants. The pasturing should not be too close,
nor should it be so long continued that the alfalfa plants will not be able to provide a good
growth in the early autumn before the advent of winter.

The management of the spring-sown crop the first season requires careful attention in areas
where the hazard exists in any considerable degree that the plants may take serious harm at
that season, or, indeed, fail altogether. In Western areas, from Canada to Kentucky and Missouri,
it is important that the stubbles of the grain shall be cut high, amid which alfalfa grows
when it is sown with a nurse crop. When not thus sown, it is of prime importance that the plants
shall stand up several inches above the surface of the ground before the advent of winter.
This is specially important in States west of the Mississippi River. The objects effected are
three-fold. First, the snow is arrested and held for the protection of the plants, and to furnish
them with moisture when the snow melts. The extent to which the stubbles and the erect young
alfalfa plants will hold snow is simply surprising. On the exposed prairies, the snow usually
drifts so completely from unprotected lands, that during almost any winter a large proportion
of the area will be quite bare. The melting of the snow thus held is also of much value to
the crop in the moisture which it brings to it, especially in areas where the rainfall is less
than normal. Second, the plants are thus protected from the sweep of the cold winds which blow
so much of the season in the unprotected prairie, and which are frequently fatal to various
winter crops. Third, they are also protected from the intensity of the frost, which may in
some instances kill young alfalfa plants in areas northward.

In the Northern States east of Minnesota, the New England States, and the provinces of Canada
east of Lake Huron, the considerable covering on the ground is not so important, relatively,
to protect the plants against the coming winter, but it is also of considerable importance,
as sometimes the early snows melt so completely that the fields are left bare in midwinter.
The warm temperatures which melt the snow may be followed by a cold wave, which may be greatly
injurious to the plants. There may be instances, as where the snow usually falls very deeply,
in which the covering left would prove excessive, and so tend to smother the plants; hence,
sometimes it may be necessary to guard against too much covering.

If the plants should lack age or vigor on entering the first winter, a top-dressing of farmyard
manure will render great service in protecting them. This, however, is only practicable with
comparatively limited areas. It is sometimes practiced in the North Atlantic States, where
the manure thus applied will prove greatly helpful to the growth of the alfalfa during the
following season. These precautions to guard against the severity of winter weather are not
nearly so necessary in the Rocky Mountain States where irrigation is practiced. In these, alfalfa
spring sown is sometimes pastured during the following winter, and without any great harm to
the crop. Thus greatly do conditions vary.

It may also be well to remember that where rainfall is usually plentiful and sometimes excessive,
that a better stand of the young plants can be obtained when the rainfall is moderate than
when it is copious. Saturated ground is hurtful to the young plants. They will not grow properly
under such conditions and are likely to assume a sickly appearance. Mildew may appear and the
plants may fail in patches. And this may happen on land which will ordinarily produce reasonably
good crops of alfalfa after they have once been established.

The value of alfalfa in providing pasture is more restricted than in providing hay. This arises
in part from the injury which may come to the plants from grazing too closely at certain times,
and in a greater degree from injury which may result to certain animals which may feed upon
the plants, more especially cattle and sheep, through bloating, to which it frequently gives rise.

This plant is pre-eminently a pasture for swine. They may be grazed upon it with profit all
the season, from spring until fall. No plant now grown in the United States will furnish so
much grazing from a given area in localities well adapted to its growth. Swine are very fond
of it. Some growers do not feed any grain supplement to their swine when grazing on alfalfa,
but it is generally believed that, under average conditions, it is wise to supplement the alfalfa
pasture daily with a light feed of grain, carbonaceous in character, as of rye, corn or barley,
and that this should be gradually increased with the advancement of the grazing season. One
acre of alfalfa will provide pasture for 5 to 15 head of swine, through all the grazing season,
dependent upon the degree of the favorable character of the conditions for growth in the alfalfa,
the age of the swine, and the extent to which the pasture is supplemented with grain. But in
some instances the area named will graze at least 15 hogs through all the growing season without
a grain supplement.

Swine may be turned in to graze on alfalfa when well set, as soon as it begins to grow freely
in the spring. It should be so managed that the grazing will be kept reasonably tender and
succulent. For swine pasture the plants should never be allowed to reach the blossoming stage.
This can be managed by running the field mower over the pasture occasionally when the stems
are growing long and coarse. Close and prolonged grazing by swine will tend to shorten the
period of the life of the alfalfa. The extent to which this result will follow will depend
upon soil and climatic conditions and the closeness of the grazing. To avoid such a result
and also to secure the utilization of the food to the utmost, some growers advocate cutting
the alfalfa and feeding it to swine as soiling. The advisability of handling it thus will be
dependent to some extent on the relative price of labor.

The best results, relatively, from growing alfalfa to provide pasture will be found in the
Western valleys, where alfalfa grows with much vigor, and in certain areas of the South, where
it grows freely and can be pastured during much of the year. In areas eminently adapted to
the growth of clover, it is not so necessary to grow alfalfa for such a use. In Western areas,
where Canada field peas are a success, and especially where artichokes are not hidden from
swine by frost, pork can be grown very cheaply, and without the necessity of harvesting any
very large portion of these crops, except through grazing them down by swine.

Such conditions would be highly favorable to the maintenance of health in the swine, and the
quality of the pork made would be of the best. In some instances a small stack of Canada field
peas is put up in the swine pasture that the swine may help themselves from the same the following
year, as in rainless or nearly rainless climates, where such grain will keep long without injury.

Alfalfa furnishes excellent grazing for horses, more especially when they are not at work.
Like other succulent pastures, it tends too much to induce laxness in the bowels with horses
which graze it, without any dry fodder supplement. But it has high adaptation for providing
pasture for brood mares, colts, and horses that are idle or working but little. While it induces
abundant milk production in brood mares, and induces quick and large growth in colts until
matured, it is thought by some practical horsemen that horses grown chiefly on alfalfa have
not the staying power and endurance of those, for instance, that are grazed chiefly on Kentucky
blue grass and some other grasses. There is probably some truth in the surmise, and if so,
the objection raised could be met by dividing the grazing either through alternating the same
with other pastures or by growing some other grass or grasses along with the alfalfa.

The alfalfa furnishes excellent grazing for cattle, whether they are grown as stockers, are
kept for milk producing, or are being fattened for beef. For the two purposes first named it
has high excellence, and it will also produce good beef, but alfalfa grazing alone will not
finish animals for the block quite so well without a grain supplement as with one. But the
danger is usually present to a greater or less degree that cattle thus grazed may suffer from
bloat, induced by eating the green alfalfa. This danger increases with the humidity of the
atmosphere, with the succulence of the alfalfa, and with the degree of the moisture resting
on it, as from dew or rain. This explains why in some sections the losses from this source
are much greater than in others. It also explains why such losses are greater in some areas
than in others. It is considered that grazing alfalfa with cattle in the mountain valleys is
less hazardous than in areas East and Southeast, as the atmosphere is less humid, the danger
from the succulence can be better controlled by the amount of irrigating water supplied, and
because of the infrequency of the rainfall. Nevertheless, the losses from bloat are sometimes
severe in both cattle and sheep in the mountain States, notwithstanding that some seasons large
herds are grazed upon alfalfa through the entire season without any loss.

Cattle grazed upon alfalfa may be so managed that the extent of this hazard will be very much
lessened, if not entirely obviated, but with large herds some of the precautionary methods
now to be submitted may not always be practicable. They should never be turned in to graze
upon alfalfa when hungry. Some grazers adopt the plan of leaving them on the grazing continuously
when once put in to graze. Others leave them in for a limited time each day at the first, increasing
the duration of the pasturing period from day to day. After managing them thus for a week or
two, the animals are only removed from the pasture for such purposes as milking. Others, again,
feed some alfalfa or other food in the morning before turning them on to alfalfa pastures.
Another plan adopted is to graze them on a field of other grazing, located, if possible, beside
the alfalfa field, until after the dew has lifted, and then to open the gate into the alfalfa
pasture. This is readily practicable with a herd of cows, but not to anything like the same
extent with a large herd being grown for beef.

The danger from bloat in pasturing sheep upon alfalfa is at least as great as in pasturing
cattle on the same, and the methods of managing them while thus being grazed are not far different.
So, too, the experiences in such grazing are very similar. The losses from such grazing some
seasons have been slight. Other seasons they have proved so heavy as to make such grazing unprofitable.
When sheep are being grazed on alfalfa, a light feed of grain given in the early morning reduces
materially the danger from bloat. It also enables the flock-master to finish his sheep or lambs
for the market cheaply and in fine form, since this small grain factor, not necessarily more
than half a pound a day, whether given as wheat, rye, barley, oats or corn, puts the ration
practically in balance for the purpose named, and it may be given to the sheep daily in troughs
without taking them out of the pasture.

It is thought that there is more danger to cattle and sheep from grazing on alfalfa than on
any of the clovers, and probably such is the case. But whether this is true or not, the danger
is very considerable, and is enhanced by the presence of frost as well as the presence of moisture,
from much succulence in the plants, from rain and from dew. So great is the danger that the
inexperienced should proceed with much caution in such grazing. When bloat does occur, the
method of dealing with it is given on page 95.

The tendency to produce bloat in alfalfa pastures decreases with the extent to which other
grasses are present in the pastures. Should alfalfa be grown, therefore, for the purpose of
providing pasture, some other grass or grasses should be sown along with it. Which of these
should be thus sown ought to depend chiefly on the adaptation of the grasses for producing
vigorous growth under the conditions present. In the States east of the Mississippi and north
of the Ohio, and in all of Canada east from Lake Huron, alfalfa may be made an important feature
in pastures variously composed. For instance, on suitable soils alfalfa may be made an important
feature in pastures composed otherwise of medium red and alsike clover and timothy. The author
can speak from experience as to the slightness of the danger from grazing cattle and sheep
on such pastures. In the Southern States tall oat grass could be sown with the alfalfa, and
probably orchard grass. In some areas alfalfa will maintain its hold on lands smitten with
Johnson grass, both producing freely. In much of Kansas meadow fescue would answer the purpose,
northward brome grass would probably answer, and in some places timothy. In Idaho and the States
adjoining, tall oat grass, meadow fescue and orchard grass will all be helpful, and in some
of the mountain States it has been found that when alsike clover is grown freely in alfalfa
pastures, the tendency to bloat is not only lessened in the animals grazing, but the value
of the pasture, especially for winter grazing, is greatly improved. Some grazers, especially
in the mountain States, have adopted the plan of sowing other pastures, as wheat or barley,
beside the alfalfa pastures, and these are made accessible at will to the animals that are
being grazed. The plan has some commendable features, but grazing animals thus does not reduce
the danger as much as when they are grazed on pastures in which other grasses grow up amid
alfalfa. In some of the Western States pure alfalfa meadows are grazed through successive seasons
with but little loss, but in such instances the grazing began in the spring and was continuous.
Judicious care should be exercised in grazing alfalfa lest the stand of the plants shall be
injured. The liability to injury in the plants from injudicious grazing increases with the
lack of adaptation in the soil and climate for abundant and prolonged growth in the alfalfa.

In a large majority of instances, as previously intimated, it is not wise to graze down alfalfa
at all closely the season of sowing, and in some instances it should not then be grazed to
any extent, lest the plants be unduly weakened for entering the winter. In cold areas the hazard
is much greater from such grazing than in those that are mild, and likewise, it is greater
when the growth is only moderately vigorous than in areas where alfalfa grows with the vigor
of a weed, as in Western mountain valleys. In areas where the winters are cold, and especially
where the snowfall is light and the winds have a wide sweep, the animals which graze upon alfalfa
should be removed in time to allow the plants to grow up to the height of several inches before
the advent of winter. The growth thus secured will catch and hold the snow, and the protection
thus furnished is greatly helpful to the preservation and vigor of the plants. Experience has
shown that in Northern areas pasturing alfalfa in winter, especially when the ground is bare
and frozen, brings imminent hazard to the plants. On the other hand, grazing in winter in the
mountain valleys, when as far north as Central Montana, may be practiced with little or no
hazard to the stand of plants when these have become well established. In such areas alfalfa
may be grazed practically as may be desired, providing this grazing is not too close.

Cattle injure alfalfa less than other animals when they graze upon it, as they do not crop
it too closely; swine injure it more, if the grazing is constant. Horses do even greater injury,
through biting the crowns of the plants too closely; but sheep injure alfalfa pastures more
than any of these animals, when the grazing is close, owing to the extent to which they trim
off the leaves.

=As Soiling Food.=--For being fed as soiling food, alfalfa has the very highest adaptation,
owing, 1. To the long period covered by the growth. 2. To the rapidity of the growth resulting
in large relative production. 3. To the palatability of the green food produced. 4. To the
entire safety to the animals fed. And 5. To its high feeding value. In Louisiana, for instance,
alfalfa may be made to furnish soiling food for nine months in the year. In the North, of course,
the duration of production is much less, but it is seldom less than five months. The growth
is so rapid that cuttings for soiling food may usually be made at intervals of four to six
weeks, according to season and climate; hence, the cuttings for soiling food will run all the
way from two to eight or nine each season. It is so palatable that horses, mules, cattle, sheep
and swine relish it highly. When wilted a little before being fed, the danger of producing
bloat is eliminated. Its feeding value is nearly the same as that of the medium red clover,
thus making it in itself what may be termed a balanced or perfect food for horses, mules, cattle
and sheep until development is completed and subsequently when they are at rest; that is, when
they are not producing, as in the form of labor or milk.

The highest use, probably, from feeding alfalfa when green will arise from feeding it to milch
cows. Its high protein content in combination with its succulence pre-eminently adapts it to
such a use. Wherever alfalfa can be grown and will produce even two cuttings a year, it will
serve a good purpose in producing milk. Every dairyman dependent more or less on soiling food
will find it to his advantage to grow alfalfa where it may be grown in good form. When fed
to milch cows, some meal added, carbonaceous in character, as corn or non-saccharine sorghum
seed, may prove a paying investment, and it may also be advisable to alternate the green alfalfa,
morning or evening, with such other green crops as oats and peas, millet, rape, corn or sorghum
when in season, to provide variety. But even though alfalfa alone should be thus made to supplement
the pastures, the outcome should be at least fairly satisfactory. When fed to horses that are
working, some care must be exercised in feeding it, lest too lax a condition of the bowels
should be induced, and a grain factor should be fed at the same time. It has frequently been
given to sheep that were being fitted for show purposes, but may also be fed green to the entire
flock, with a view to supplement the pastures. It has special adaptation for promoting large
growth in lambs, and, indeed, in any kind of young stock to which it may be fed. When fed to
swine, a small grain supplement properly chosen and fed will insure more satisfactory growth.
It is thought that more satisfactory results will be obtained from allowing the alfalfa to
get fairly well on toward the blossoming stage before beginning to feed, and to continue to
feed until in full bloom. This in practice may not always be possible, but usually an approximation
to it may be reached, especially when the production of the alfalfa will more than supply the
needs in soiling food. The ideal plan is to commence cutting the alfalfa as soon as a good
growth is made, cutting enough daily or every other day to supply the needs of the animals.
If the growth becomes too much advanced before the field is gone over thus, the balance should
be made into hay, and the cutting should begin again where it began previously.

There is no question but that considerably more food can be obtained from a given area when
green alfalfa is fed in the soiling form, instead of being grazed. The difference in such production
would not be easy to determine, but of the fact stated there cannot be any doubt. Ordinarily,
each cutting of green alfalfa for soiling should not produce less than 4 tons; hence, where
8 cuttings can be secured, not fewer than 32 tons of soiling food could be obtained per season.
But whether the increase from soiling alfalfa, as compared with pasturing the same, would repay
the cost of the extra labor, will depend upon conditions that vary with time and place. Alfalfa
fields thus managed or cut for hay will also produce for a longer period than when the fields
are grazed.

Continuity in the production of soiling food may not be possible some seasons in the absence
of irrigation; hence, under such conditions provision should always be made for a supply of
such other soiling foods as may be needed, and of a character that will make it practical to
turn them into dry fodder when not wanted as soiling food. But where irrigating waters are
unfailing, it is quite possible to furnish soiling food from alfalfa soils through practically
all the growing season. Dairymen thus located are in a dairyman's paradise.

Alfalfa, like clover, may be made into silage. In dry climates this would seem to be unnecessary,
but in rainy climates it may be wise in some instances to make alfalfa ensilage, the better
to insure the curing of the crop. What has been said with reference to clover ensilage will
apply almost equally to alfalfa. Their power for offence is broken for many months. From the West
I hear the French are rather discouraged.

Germany has ample food and gets all copper, etc., necessary for war purposes through Sweden
in exchange for potash and other commodities.

An officer of the war ministry, who comes to see me about prisoners,
etc., told me last night that because the French have kept several
hundred Germans as prisoners in Dahomey and other places in Africa,
fifteen thousand French prisoners will be sent to work in the unhealthy
swamps of Holstein.

I have cabled the State Department often about this Dahomey business, transmitting the request
of Germany that these prisoners be sent to Europe. Germans cannot be beaten on reprisals.

* * * * *

Two or three German-Americans have attacked the President, Secretary Bryan and our Government, some
publicly. I have ordered their passports taken away and hope to be sustained. To permit them
to continue poisoning the atmosphere would be taken as a sign of weakness here. No one who abuses
his own country, its government or its Chief is entitled to protection from that country.

We have the visiting of British prisoners in good shape now, that prohibition put on our visiting
and inspecting the camps was abolished in March by the "treaty" I arranged between England and
Germany. It was not until March twenty-ninth that we finally got passes to visit camps under the
"treaty." The prisoners say they are badly treated when they are first captured, but we know only
of their treatment in the camps.

I do not believe all the atrocity stories; but one of our servants in this house came back from
the East front recently and said the orders were to kill all Cossacks. Our washerwoman reports
that her son was ordered to shoot a woman in Belgium and I myself have heard an officer calmly
describe the shooting of a seven-year-old Belgian girl child, the excuse being that she had
tried to fire at an officer.

If the Lusitania business settles down, I hope the suggestion made to me by the authorities here
and cabled to the State Department, will be carried into effect. This was that each American and
Spanish Ambassador, having charge of prisoners in belligerent countries, should meet in Switzerland
and discuss the whole prison situation. Each Ambassador would be accompanied by representatives
of whatever authorities deal with prisoners (here the War Ministry) in the country to which he is
accredited. To prevent unseemly discussions the actual talking would be done by the Ambassadors
(coached by those representatives). In addition to doing away with many misunderstandings and helping
the prisoners, there are great possibilities in such a meeting. We could all give each other
useful "tips" on the caring for prisoners, inspections, camps, package
delivery, mail, etc.

There is plenty of food in Germany now and enough
raw materials to carry on the war. Raw materials for peaceful industries
are needed.

A suggestion--why not start a great government chemical
school or give protection for a certain number of years to dyestuffs,
medicine, chemical, and cyanide material? All these industries are
run here by the trustiest trusts that ever trusted, and by their methods
keep American manufacturers from starting the business. A Congressman
represents one of the best firms, hence his statements that it is
impossible to start such manufactures in America. Our annual tribute
to these trusts is enormous. (See page 100.)

=Storing.=--When cured in cocks, these are preferably made small to facilitate quick curing,
but usually from two to four days are necessary to complete the curing. If the cocks require
opening out before being drawn, the work should be done with care. Ordinary stacking and storing
may be done in practically the same way as in handling medium red clover, and the same care
is necessary in protecting the stacks. In areas where considerable rain falls in the autumn,
hay sheds will prove a great convenience in storing alfalfa in the absence of better facilities.
In the Eastern States alfalfa is sometimes stored in mows undercured, by putting it into the
mow in alternate layers with straw. The straw not only aids in preserving the alfalfa in good
condition, but the alfalfa imparts an aroma to the straw which induces live stock to eat it
readily. In showery weather this method of curing alfalfa merits careful attention where straw
can be had near at hand and in sufficient quantities.

The method is sometimes adopted of cutting alfalfa even for hay by using the self-rake reaper.
The sheaves thus made are allowed to lie on the ground undisturbed until they are ready for
being drawn. By this method of cutting, the loss of leaves is almost entirely avoided, but
there are these objections to it: that it exposes unduly to sunlight during the curing process,
and in case of rain the sheaves are easily saturated and do not dry readily unless turned over.

Rain falling on alfalfa will injure it quite as much as it does red clover. (See page 96.)
In climates with much rainfall in May or June, when the first cutting of alfalfa is ready for
being harvested, according to locality, in instances not a few much difficulty is found in
curing alfalfa without loss. Sometimes the entire cutting will be rendered practically useless
by rain. Because of this, as previously intimated, it may be well to arrange, where practicable,
to cut the first crop of the season for soiling food.

The number of cuttings during the year depends on such conditions as relate to the length of
the season, the character of the soil, the abundance of moisture present, and the use to which
the alfalfa is put. In some of the river bottoms southward in the Rocky Mountains, where irrigating
waters are plentiful, it is claimed that alfalfa may be made to furnish one cutting for soiling
food every month in the year. Even in the Northern western valleys, as many as five or six
cuttings for the use named may be obtained. North from the Ohio and Potomac rivers three to
five cuttings of soiling food may be looked for each season, and south of these rivers even
a larger number. North of the same rivers the hay crops run from two to four, and southward
from the same they are seldom less than three. In the western valleys they range from three
to five or six, according to location. In States bordering on the semi-arid States eastward
and some distance south of the Canadian boundary, from three to four cuttings may usually be
expected. In Colorado and States north and south from the same, two good crops of alfalfa may
be cut from spring-sown seed the same season, but where irrigation is not practiced it is seldom
that one crop of hay is harvested under similar conditions of sowing. But in the semi-arid
belt not more than one cutting is usually obtained each season in the absence of water. But
the number of cuttings will be reduced when one of these is a seed crop. When a seed crop is
taken, the vitality of the plants is apparently so much reduced for the season that the subsequent
growth is much less vigorous than if seed had not been thus taken.

The yield of hay from each cutting will, of course, vary much with conditions, but it is seldom
less than a ton. An approximate average would place the average cutting at about 1-1/4 tons,
but as much as 2 tons have been obtained per acre at a cutting, and, again, not more than 1/2
ton. In New Jersey an average of 4.57 tons per acre was obtained under good conditions of management,
but without irrigation, at the experiment station for three years in succession. In Kansas,
4 to 6 tons per acre may usually be expected from good soils. In Tulare County, California,
as much as 6 to 10 tons have been secured under irrigation.

The yields from the various cuttings are by no means uniform, especially in the absence of
irrigation. They are much influenced by rainfall. In such areas, the second cutting is usually
the best for the season, the subsequent cuttings being considerably less. Where irrigation
is practiced, the crops are much more uniform, but even in mild climates, as the season advances,
there is a tendency to lesser yields, indicative of the necessity of at least partial rest
for plants during a portion of the year. The yields of alfalfa are usually exceeded by those
of no other crop, where the conditions are quite favorable to its growth, even in the absence
of irrigation. At the New Jersey Experiment Station, as stated in Bulletin No. 148, one acre
of alfalfa produced 36,540 pounds of green food; of corn, 24,000; of red clover, 14,000; of
crimson clover, 14,000; of millet, 16,000; of cow peas, 16,000; and of oats and peas, 14,000
pounds. But where only two, or even three, cuttings can be obtained per year, some crops may
produce larger yields than alfalfa. In the distinctive alfalfa belt in the West, no forage
crop can be grown that will compare with it in the yields obtained. The protein in alfalfa
is also relatively high. At the station quoted above it was found one ton of alfalfa contained
265 pounds of protein; hence, its high relative value as a food; red clover, 246 pounds; timothy,
118 pounds; and wheat bran, 118 pounds. At the Delaware Experiment Station, in Bulletin No.
55, it is stated that maximum crops of cow peas and of crimson clover gave 720 pounds of protein,
while a maximum crop of alfalfa gave 1230 pounds.

Where alfalfa is irrigated, it is usual to apply irrigating waters just after each cutting
of the crop. It is a matter of some importance that the water shall be applied at once as soon
as the previous crop has been harvested, otherwise time will be lost in growing the next crop.
There are instances where it is necessary to apply water before the first crop is grown, but
usually the moisture which falls in the winter and spring will suffice to produce the first
crop of the season. Some irrigators apply water some time previous to harvesting the crop,
but not so late as to leave the ground in a soft condition when mowing is begun. The amount
of water required will vary with the soil, the season of the year, the distance of the ground
water from the surface, and the precipitation. The more porous the soil and subsoil, the hotter
the weather, the less the precipitation and the farther below the surface, up to a certain
limit, the greater will be the amount of water needed. There are situations, as in some of
the islands in the Yellowstone River, in which ground water is so near the surface that alfalfa
grown on these is able to get enough of water from this subterranean source to produce good
crops. Care should be taken not to apply water in excess of the needs of the crop, or the yields
will be proportionately reduced. The amounts that will best serve the end sought can only be
ascertained by actual test. Caution is also necessary where the winters are cold not to apply
water late or in excessive quantities, lest a sappy condition of the plants shall be induced,
which will make them succumb to the cold of the winter following. Moreover, on some soils alfalfa
fields will produce good crops, if irrigated only the first season, until the roots get down
to moisture, the irrigating waters being utilized when more needed.

Alfalfa hay is fed freely to all kinds of domestic animals on the farm, and with results that
should prove highly satisfactory. Properly fed, it is an excellent food for horses and mules.
It not only serves to maintain flesh, but it is favorable to glossiness in the coat. Horses
that are working hard should be accustomed to it gradually. When it is fed to them too freely
at the first, it induces too much of a laxity in the bowels, too free urination, and profuse
sweating. When fed to such horses or mules, some authorities claim that several weeks should
be covered in getting them on to what is termed a "full feed" of alfalfa. When fed to milch
cows, free lactation results. Alfalfa fine in character is now manufactured into food suitable
for calves and other young stock. Cattle and sheep are now fattened for slaughter on alfalfa
hay fed alone, but when thus fattened the finish made is not equal to that resulting from adding
grain to the alfalfa. To meet the needs of the best markets, alfalfa alone does not produce
enough of fat or of firmness in the flesh, but it has been claimed, and probably it is true,
that one-half the amount of grain required for finishing along with carbonaceous fodder, such
as corn stalks or timothy, will give equally good and quick increase when fed with alfalfa
hay. It is most excellent fodder on which to grow cattle and sheep, even in the absence of
a grain supplement. The later cuttings of the season are thought to be the most suitable for
calves and also for sheep and lambs, because of the greater fineness of the fodder and the
greater abundance of leaves on it. Alfalfa hay is used with much advantage in wintering swine,
especially brood sows. Swine have been wintered on alfalfa hay without any grain supplement
where the winters are mild, but they will fare much better with a grain supplement. It is thought
that half the usual amount of grain fed will produce equal results when fed with alfalfa, to
those obtained from feeding a full allowance of grain in its absence. Alfalfa and sorghum properly
grown make an excellent food for swine, and the two may be profitably fed thus where the conditions
may be over-dry for corn, but not for sorghum. When feeding alfalfa, the aim should be to use
it in conjunction with a carbonaceous food, as corn. Fortunate is the country which grows good
crops of corn and alfalfa.

=Securing Seed.=--Localities differ much in their capacity to produce alfalfa seed. The best
crops of seed are now grown west and southwest of the Mississippi River. Certain areas in the
semi-arid country east of and between the ranges of the Western mountains seem to have special
adaptation for growing seed. At the present time the greatest seed-producing States are Kansas,
Colorado, Utah, Arizona and California. But in some areas east of that river paying crops can
be grown. It has also been noticed that when the crop is sown less thickly than it is usually
sown for hay, the plants seed more freely, when sown with sufficient distance between the rows
to admit of cultivating the crop, and when such cultivation is given, the influence on seed
production is also markedly favorable; such treatment given to the varieties of recent introduction
may possibly result in the production of seed from the same, notwithstanding that they bear
seed very shyly when grown in the ordinary way.

Nearly all the seed now grown in the United States is produced by fields that have been sown
in the usual way, and primarily to produce hay, but in some areas, especially where irrigation
is practiced, it is sometimes grown mainly for seed. On the irrigated lands of the West it
is customary to grow the first cutting of the season for hay and the second for seed. But in
many instances the second cutting also is made into hay, and the seed is taken from the third
cutting; even in the States east of the Mississippi, and also in Ontario and Quebec, seed is
usually taken from the second cutting. But in Montana, Washington and Idaho, on the higher
altitudes, seed is not unfrequently taken from the first cutting for the season, since, in
the short season for growth of those uplands, seed from cuttings later than the first does
not always mature so well. In a large majority of instances seed does not form so profusely
from plants of the first cutting as from those of later growths. This is thought to arise,
in part, at least, from the fact that bees, and it may be other insects, are then less active
in searching for food, and because of this do not aid in the fertilization of the plants as
they do later. Nor does seed of the first cutting ripen so evenly. An important justification
is also found for taking seed from the later cuttings, in the fact that when a crop has produced
seed, it grows less vigorously during the subsequent period of growth that same season. So
pronounced is this habit of growth in alfalfa, that in many localities, if the first growth
is allowed to produce seed, but little subsequent growth will be made again the same season.
The second cutting, all things considered, is the most favorable to seed production, as, unless
on irrigated lands, the third cutting is not usually possessed of that vigor necessary to induce
abundant seeding in the plants.

The yields of seed are also much influenced by moisture. An excess of moisture is more unfavorable
to the production of seed than a shortage in the same. Hence, in areas where the rainfall for
the season is very abundant, but little seed will be produced. Where irrigation is practiced,
the excessive application of water would have a similar effect, though less pronounced in degree;
hence, the apportionment of the water to the prospective needs of the seed crop calls for careful
adjustment. Where the first crop is grown for seed, where irrigation is practiced, in many
instances no water is applied until after the seed crop has been harvested.

The seed is ready for being harvested when a majority of the seed-pods assume a dark brown
tint. The pods of later formation will still possess a yellow tint, and some of them may still
possess the green color. These do not produce seed nearly equal in quality to the pods which
ripen earlier. To wait for all the later maturing pods to ripen before harvesting the crop
would mean the loss of much of the best seed through shattering. All these movements of lesser
so-called nationalities are fostered by Prussian propagandists.

The region of the Ukraine, in Southern Russia, is supposed to be clamouring for freedom and independent
existence. Long before the Russian revolution, I and all the diplomats of Germany were flooded
with newspapers, pamphlets and literature about the longing of the
Ukraine--all as plainly issued by the Germans as if they had been
stamped with the Royal arms of Prussia and the seal of the General
Staff.

The Lithuanians, too, stir uneasily. There is, perhaps, more in their claim; they request the
world not to confuse them with the Poles and they protest against incorporation with Poland.
But should a number of little states be created, sliced from the map of Russia, they would
enjoy but a short independence before falling, one by one, into the maw of Prussia.

Every one sympathises with the Poles and hopes for the establishment
of a really free and independent Poland, and not a Poland under the
rule or protection of either Austria or Germany.

It will be a great experiment, because in the past the great state of Poland, one of the greatest
in Europe, was broken because of the incapacity of the Poles to rule themselves. Their armies showed
great bravery, the Polish cavalry, winged like angels, terrified enemy cavalry horses and charged
often to victory; but the Polish aristocrats, camped with thousands of retainers at the place where
the King was elected, sat patiently waiting for the highest bidder before giving their votes.

And
the King once elected, the Polish diet accomplished nothing, because
any noble who voted against a proposition could defeat it.

This was the so-called "liberum veto" so fatal to Poland. Katharine of Russia, that clever,
wise, dissolute but great German Princess, placing a puppet favourite on the Polish throne, insisted
on the retention of the "liberum veto" in the Polish Constitution, because she knew that by
the mere existence of this asinine institution Poland could be counted on to commit suicide
for the benefit of the watching spoilers, Russia, Prussia and Austria.

But a new, real Poland would not be governed by its aristocracy, and under a democratic government
the splendid Polish race could be trusted to work out successfully their political salvation.

Should
the strong man fail to appear in Russia and the Bolsheviki continue to rule, then the confusion
of Russia may not prove an immediate help to Germany.

In the first place, no one now works in Russia; the population will be in want of food and will
not have any great surplus to export; and it will be a long time before Germany can draw any material
help from the Steppes of incompetency. Had Russia immediately settled down to a new form of
government, the case might have been different, but now Germany or some power in Russia must
first organise that vast country for production under new conditions before Germany can begin
to profit from the withdrawal of Russia from the war except, perhaps, in that important factor--the
release of German troops from the Eastern frontier. But as time passes the Germans may use food
from Russia to bribe northern neutral nations into an alliance with the Central Empires.

Revolutions are contagious. In 1848, the movement started in France spread all over Europe.
The burdened horse on the road evinces a tendency to get out of hand
at the mere sight of another horse cavorting about a pasture.

The Germans are in blinders and driven by heavy hand, but forgotten as liberty is in Germany,
the German Michael, the peasant chained to the soil, the hard-driven, poorly paid worker of
the cities, at least, will exhibit a spirit of uneasiness, when across
the line he sees Ivan, the Russian moujik, capering about, free from
restraint and running things at his own sweet will.

The yoke fits tight to Michael's neck, the German Kaiser drives hard from his All Highest
Place; but no Emperor seemed more secure than the head of the Romanoffs, and the very fact that
the chains of the yoke seem so strong may make the driven cattle all the more ready to toss
the yoke aside when knowledge of power comes to the lower castes of Germany and Austria.
 Such renovation would be comparatively easy on clean land,
were it not for fact that the alfalfa plants already rooted overshadow the young plants, always
to their injury, and sometimes to their total destruction. The spring will probably be the
best season to attempt such renovation, but there may be instances where the winters are not
severe, in which autumn seeding will succeed as well or better than spring seeding. Because
of the uncertainty of the results of such renovation, the aim should be so to prepare the land
and sow the seed that a good, thick stand will be secured at the first.

Should the alfalfa fields be spotted, because in places the nurse crop lodged and smothered
the plants, or because excessive moisture destroyed them on the lower portions of the field
in an abnormally wet season, the renewing process is simple indeed. It consists in disking
those parts so thoroughly as to destroy all vegetation that may have become rooted on them,
and sowing seed in the usual way without a nurse crop. But should the low places be such as
to hold an excess of water at any time of the year under normal conditions for days in succession,
even though it should not rise to the surface, the attempts to make alfalfa grow successfully
on these will prove abortive.

When weeds and grasses crowd the crop, the plan of disking the fields to destroy these is becoming
quite common, especially in the West. The work is usually done in the early spring. In doing
it, disk harrows are driven over the field, usually two ways, the second disking being done
at right angles to the first. The disks are set at that angle which will do the least injury
to the plants, and that will at the same time do the work effectively. This can only be determined
by actual test in each instance. Some of the crowns of the plants will be split open by the
disk, which some authorities claim is an advantage in that it tends to an increase in the number
of the stems produced, an opinion which is by no means held in common at the present time,
and yet there are localities where it has certainly proved advantageous. Occasionally, a plant
will be cut off. There can be no doubt, however, that such disking, when necessary, does tend
to clean the land and also to strengthen growth in the alfalfa crop, on the principle that
cultivation which does not seriously disturb growing plants is always helpful to them. The
frequency of such diskings will depend on the needs of the crop. Some advocate disking every
spring, some every other spring, and some not at all. That plan which disks the ground only
when it is necessary to keep the weeds at bay would seem to be the most sensible. This would
mean that sometimes, as where crab grass has a firm hold, disking may be necessary at least
for a time every spring. In other instances it would be necessary only every second or third
season, and in yet other instances not at all. However, some growers in dry areas advocate
disking frequently, as, for instance, after some of the cuttings of the hay, and with a view
to retain moisture. It is at least questionable, however, if disking so frequently would not
soon tend to thin the plants too much, to say nothing of the labor while the work is being done.

The idea of stirring the surface soil in alfalfa fields is by no means new. In England the
plan prevailed to some extent years ago of harrowing the fields in the autumn with heavy harrows
until, when the process was completed, they would take on the appearance of the bare fallow
for a time. In the Eastern States and in some parts of Canada the harrow is used instead of
the disk, but usually the latter will do the work more effectively and with less cost. Frequently,
when the disk has been used on alfalfa, it may also be advantageous to run a light harrow over
the ground to smoothen the surface.

With a view to renovate the crop and increase the yields, in some sections, as in the Atlantic
States, it has been recommended to top-dress alfalfa fields with farmyard manure every autumn.
This, no doubt, would prove very effective, but it would also be very expensive, unless in
the neighborhood of large cities. It would be impracticable without neglecting the needs of
the other crops of the farm. In the mountain areas of the West, it has been found that the
cost of fertilizing with farmyard manure is in the meantime greater than the increased production
in the alfalfa is worth, but it may not be always thus, even on these rich lands. Some Eastern
growers also apply more or less gypsum. This is generally sown over the fields after the crop
has begun to grow in the spring.

Renovating alfalfa fields is much more easily and effectively done, as would naturally be expected,
in areas where conditions are highly favorable to its growth than where these are only moderately
favorable. In some of the mountain valleys instances have occurred in which alfalfa fields
have been plowed and sown with oats, with a result, first that a good crop of oats was reaped,
and second, that fairly good crops of alfalfa were harvested the following season without re-sowing
the field.

=Sources of Injury to Alfalfa.=--Chief among the sources of injury to alfalfa, after the plants
have become established, are frost in saturated ground, ice, floods, grasshoppers, gophers,
dodder, and pasturing by live stock in the late autumn or winter. When it happens that two
or three of these act in conjunction, the injury following is just so much more rapid and complete.
As has been intimated, where water is excessive, in a climate which in winter or spring is
characterized by alternations of freezing and thawing, the plants will either have the roots
snapped asunder, or they will be gradually raised out of the ground. This will only happen
in soil with a subsoil more retentive than is compatible with well-doing of the highest order
in the plants. The danger from this source is greatest during the first winter after sowing
the plants, as then the roots are not really established. The only remedy for such a contingency
is the draining of the land.

Some reference has also been made to injury done through ice, where it collects in low places
in land. The destructiveness of the ice depends on its thickness and its nearness to the ground.
When it rests upon the ground for any considerable time the plants die. If, however, water
intervenes, the plants may live when the submergence is for a limited time. One instance is
on record in Onondaga County in New York State, in which alfalfa survived submergence for a
considerable period under a thin sheet of water covered by three inches of ice, but when growth
came it was for a time less vigorous than normal.

Floods in warm weather are greatly injurious to alfalfa. The extent of the injury done increases
with increase of depth in the waters of submergence, increase in stagnation in the waters,
and increase in the duration of the period of overflow. Stagnant water sooner loses its dissolved
nitrogen; hence, the plants cannot breathe normally. The harm done, therefore, by floods in
each case can only be known by waiting to see the results. These summer floods always harm
the crops temporarily, and in many instances kill them outright. Occasional periods of overflow
should not prevent the sowing of alfalfa on such lands, since on these it is usually not difficult
to start a new crop, but the seed should not be sown on such lands when overflow occurs at
such a season. When it occurs in cool weather and quickly subsides, it may be possible to grow
paying crops of alfalfa.

In some areas grasshoppers are a real scourge in alfalfa fields. Because of the shade provided
by the ground and the influence which this exerts in softening it, they are encouraged to deposit
their eggs and remain so as to prove a source of trouble the following year. It has been found
that through disking of the land both ways after sharp frosts have come is greatly effective
in destroying the grasshopper eggs deposited in the soil. They are thus exposed to the action
of the subsequent frosts and so perish. The disking has also tended to stimulate growth in
the crop the following year. The eggs will not, of course, be all destroyed by such disking,
but so large a percentage will, that the crop should be practically protected from serious
injury, unless when grasshoppers come from elsewhere.

It would seem correct to say that gophers do more injury to alfalfa fields in certain areas
of the West than comes to them from all other sources combined. They not only destroy the plants
by feeding upon them, but they fill the soil with mounds, which greatly interfere with the
harvesting of the crops. They are destroyed by giving them poisoned food, trapping, shooting,
and suffocating through the use of bisulphide of carbon. Poison is frequently administered
by soaking grain in strychnine or dropping it on pieces of potato and putting the same in or
near the burrows. Bisulphide of carbon is put upon a rag or other substance, which is put into
the burrow and the opening closed.

Dodder is a parasitical plant introduced, probably, in seed from Europe, which feeds upon alfalfa
plants, to their destruction. The seeds of alfalfa sometimes become so impregnated with the
seeds of dodder that the latter will grow where the seed is sown, thus introducing it to new
centers. The dodder starts in the soil and soon throws up its golden-colored thread-like stems,
which reach out and fasten on the alfalfa plants that grow sufficiently near. The dodder then
loses its hold upon the soil and gets its food entirely from the alfalfa plants, which it ultimately
destroys. But since the seeds of the dodder remain at least for a time in the soil, and the
adjacent soil becomes infected with them, the circles in which the dodder feeds continually
widen. In certain parts of New York State some fields have become so seriously affected as
to lead to investigations conducted through officials from the State experiment station. Pending
these investigations, the exercise of great care in the purchase of seed and the immediate
plowing of the infested areas are recommended.

Some reference has already been made to injurious results from pasturing close in the autumn
or winter, except in the most favored alfalfa regions. In addition to what has been already
said, the wisdom of not grazing alfalfa the first year is here emphasized, and also the mistake
of grazing at any time when the ground is frozen, at least in areas east of and, generally
speaking, adjacent to the Mississippi River.

=Alfalfa as a Fertilizer.=--Alfalfa is not considered equal to medium red clover as a direct
means of fertilizing and otherwise improving the land on which it grows. This does not arise
from less inherent power on the part of alfalfa to draw nitrogen from the air and deposit it
in the soil, but rather from the fact that clover establishes itself more quickly, and is much
more frequently grown in the rotation. Several crops of medium red clover can be grown in short
rotations, each one being a source of much benefit to the crops that follow, while one crop
of alfalfa occupies the land. But when the alfalfa is all fed upon the farm on which it grew,
where the plants grow freely, it then becomes a source of fertilization without a rival, probably,
among plants grown upon the farm.

The fertility thus furnished does not consist so much in the plant food deposited in the soil
directly as in that furnished in the successive crops that are grown and fed every year. In
Farmers' Bulletin No. 133, published by the United States Department of Agriculture, it is
stated that the Wyoming Experiment Station found 44 pounds of nitrogen, 8.27 pounds of phosphoric
acid, and 50.95 pounds of potash in one ton of alfalfa. This would mean that in the yield of
alfalfa hay from a given area, estimated at four tons per acre for the season, alfalfa would
furnish 176 pounds of nitrogen, 33.08 pounds of phosphoric acid, and 203.8 pounds of potash.
If this alfalfa were fed upon the farm, it would not only prove a cheap source of protein for
feeding, but it would furnish fertility, as stated above, without seriously diminishing the
supply of the same in the surface soil, since much of the fertilizing material produced would
come from the air and subsoil. The manure thus made, if carefully saved and applied, would
thus add materially to the fertility of the land. If, however, the alfalfa were sold, the mineral
matter drawn from the cultivable area of the soil and from the subsoil lying under it would
be reduced to the extent of the draft made upon these in growing the alfalfa.

The direct influence of alfalfa upon the fertility of the land on which it grows is shown in
the greatly increased production in the crops which follow alfalfa. This increase is not only
marked, but it is frequently discernible for several successive years. But as has been intimated,
the benefit that would otherwise accrue from growing alfalfa as a direct means of fertilizing
the land is much circumscribed by the long term of years for which it is usually grown.

The mechanical effects of alfalfa upon the land are beneficent. It improves the tilth by means
of the shade furnished, and the extent to which the roots fill the soil. These in their decay
further influence favorably that friability which is so desirable in soils that are cultivated,
and as previously stated, the long, deep roots in their decay exercise a salutary influence
on drainage.

The work of breaking alfalfa fields is frequently laborious, owing to the number and size of
the roots. If, however, a plow is used, the share of which has a serrated edge, the roots will
be cut or broken off more easily and more effectively.

CHAPTER V

ALSIKE CLOVER

Alsike Clover (Trifolium hybridum) takes its name from a parish in the south of Sweden. From
there it is probable that it was introduced into England. Linnæus gave it the name of hybridum,
imagining it to be a cross between the red and the white varieties. Botanists do not generally
hold this view. It is known by various names, as Swedish, White Swedish, Alsace, Hybrid, Perennial
Hybrid, Elegant and Pod Clover, but more commonly in America it is spoken of as alsike.

The plants of this variety are more slender than those of the medium red variety, although
they grow in some instances to a greater height. The slender stems are much branched. The leaves
are numerous and oblong in shape, the flowers are of a pinkish tint, the heads are globular
and are about three-fourths of an inch in diameter, and the pods, like those in white clover,
contain more than one seed. The roots are in no small degree fibrous, and yet the slender tap
root goes down to a considerable distance.

Alsike clover is a perennial. In favorable situations it will live for many years. Ordinarily,
it grows to the height of 18 to 24 inches, but in slough lands it sometimes grows to the height
of 5 feet. The plants do not reach their full size until the second year, and in some instances
until a period even later. They grow less rapidly than those of medium red clover, are several
weeks later coming into flower, and grow much less vigorously in the autumn. Ordinarily, they
furnish but one cutting of hay each year. Because of the more fibrous character of the root
growth, the plants do not heave so readily as those of red clover. In moist situations they
are much given to lodge; hence, the importance of growing this crop, when grown for hay, along
with some kind of grass that will help to keep the stems erect.

Alsike clover furnishes a large amount of pasture. It is relished, at least, fairly well. The
leaves are slightly bitter, but not enough to seriously interfere with their palatability.
The quality of the hay is excellent. This arises from its fineness, from the number of the
small branches and leaves on the stems, and from its fragrance when well cured. While it makes
a very suitable hay for horses and cattle, it has peculiar adaptation for sheep, owing to its
fineness.

As a fertilizer it is probably not equal to medium red clover, since the root growth is not
so bulky. Nor does it produce a second cutting anything like so vigorous as the former. Nevertheless,
the roots possess even stiff soils to such an extent that they not only furnish them with much
plant food, but they also tend to disintegrate them and to render them more easy to pulverize.

As a honey plant, alsike clover is without a rival among clovers, unless it be in the small
white variety. It is a great favorite with bee-keepers. Many of them sow it to enable them
to furnish pastures for their bees. The bloom remains for a relatively long period. The honey
is also accessible to the common honey bee, since the branches are numerous on the stems, and
since each branch bears a head, the flower heads are relatively quite numerous. Since the honey
is accessible to the common bee, pollination in the plants is assured; hence, the failures
in the seed crop are few, and when other conditions are favorable, seed production is abundant.
Because of the many good qualities of this clover it is deservedly a favorite wherever it can
be successfully grown. When in full bloom, a field of alsike clover is a very beautiful sight.
The flowers are a pale white at first, but gradually they deepen into a beautiful pink of tinted
shades, and their fragrance is fully equal to their beauty.

=Distribution.=--Alsike clover is found in Europe, Northern Africa and Western Asia. In these
it has been cultivated for a long time, but its favorite home in the Old World would seem to
be in Northern Europe. It would doubtless be correct to say that it is indigenous to Europe,
and probably that it is indigenous to each of the three continents named. It is not indigenous
to America, but was introduced into the same probably from Great Britain or Scandinavia. In
some parts of North America it grows with a luxuriance equal to, if not, indeed, greater, than
that shown by this plant when grown under the most favorable conditions which Europe furnishes.

This plant is better adapted to a cool and humid climate than to one hot and dry. It is even
more hardy than medium red clover, in the sense of enduring cold, and will live under conditions
of climate so austere as to be fatal to red clover. It may, therefore, be grown further north
than medium red clover, and under conditions so exposed as to cause medium red clover to fail.
But it does not succeed quite so well as the former toward the southerly limit of the successful
production of medium red clover; hence, the limit of production in the semi-arid belt ceases
sooner than in the case of the other variety. The best climatic conditions for growing it are
found not far from the boundary line between the United States and Canada, and in the vicinity
of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and the Great Lakes.

In the United States the best crops are grown in the States which border on Canada, and in
these the highest adaptation, climate and soil considered, is found in Michigan, Wisconsin
and Northeastern Minnesota. But in New York the adaptation is also high, and also in certain
parts of Montana, Idaho and Washington. Good crops may also be grown in nearly all the second
tier of States that lie southward from the Canadian boundary. The exceptions are those embraced
in the semi-arid belt. Further south than the second tier of States to which reference has
just been made, the successful growth of alsike generally lessens, and yet in parts of these
States, as, for instance, Kentucky, Tennessee and Missouri, good crops are grown. Some of the
Rocky Mountain valleys, more especially those that can be irrigated, and that are also sufficiently
elevated, grow excellent crops of alsike. Much of the province of Ontario has very high adaptation
to the growth of alsike clover, and in several counties of that province large quantities are
grown, not only for hay, but also for seed. In Ontario County in the said province, are certain
clay soils rich in lime; in fact, almost marley in character, which have been found especially
well adapted to growing alsike clover seed, and in certain areas in proximity to the Georgian
Bay, adaptation exists about equally high. In some parts of Quebec good crops are also grown.
But this variety of clover has not been grown as yet with much success in Manitoba, Assiniboia,
Alberta or Saskatchewan. Both soil and climate, however, in these provinces should not be uncongenial
to it in the main. In the cultivable lands of British Columbia, as in those of Washington,
it grows remarkably well. Especially in the river bottoms and on the tide lands can immense
crops be grown, as also on the tide lands of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, but not on the
upland sandy soils of these provinces.

=Soils.=--The most suitable soil for alsike clover is a moist clay loam, not too friable nor
too dense, and moist and deep. A goodly impregnation of lime in the same is favorable to maximum
production. Abundant moisture conduces to the same end. This plant will, however, produce good
crops, and in a moist season, excellent crops, on the stiffest clays, whether white or red,
after a good stand has once been secured, providing hard pan is not found near the surface,
but in dry seasons it is not easy to secure a stand on such soils. The plants send their fibrous
roots down into the soil in all directions, and in this way render it much more friable when
it is broken up.

Next in adaptation, probably, come slough soils, even though covered with humus to a considerable
depth, providing that clay lies under the humus. Enormous crops of hay or pasture can be grown
on such soils, but the crops of seed are not usually so large as on the moist clays referred
to above. On these also the hay is much more liable to lodge, unless supported by some kind
of grass growing along with it.

After slough soils come those that have been deposited by the action of water, as in river
beds and on lake bottoms, when the waters have subsided, providing the clay element so necessary
to the successful growth of this clover is plentifully present. In some instances the very
best crops of alsike can be grown on such lands, but in many other instances these deposit
soils have in them too much sand to produce these.

Good crops can be grown on sandy loam soils, if well stored with vegetable matter, and at the
same time fairly well impregnated with clay, but if one or both of these elements is lacking,
adaptation in these soils will be correspondingly reduced.

On the average upland prairie soil, alsike clover does not grow so vigorously as the medium
red. The less of density that these possess under ordinary conditions, the less suitable are
they to the needs of this plant, but when ample moisture is present, good crops may be grown
on much of the soil in prairie areas.

Soils lowest in adaptation to the growth of alsike include infertile sands and gravels, and
the vegetable soils of the prairie so light that when cultivated they lift more or less with
the wind. On such soils the growth of alsike is short and feeble, and any lack of moisture
renders it increasingly so.

This plant not only requires much moisture to insure the most vigorous growth, but it is also
able to thrive under conditions of soil saturation such as some of the useful forage plants
could not endure. When the weather is cool, it may be covered with shallow water for several
days in succession without apparent injury. The possession of this characteristic makes it
possible to grow alsike clover in sloughs not yet drained, but which are dry certain portions
of the year.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Much of what has been said about the place for medium red clover
in the rotation may also apply to alsike clover. (See page 70.) On upland soils its place in
the rotation will be very similar to that of the other variety, but with the difference that
the rotations will be longer, because of the perennial habit of growth in the alsike. It will
be best sown, therefore, on clean land which has produced a crop that has been cultivated the
previous year. Consequently, it may follow such crops as corn, potatoes, field roots and beans
in the North, and the same crops in the South, with the addition of cow peas, soy beans and
the non-saccharine sorghums. But it may be sown after other crops when necessary, especially
when it is to be pastured. One chief objection to sowing it thus for hay is that the hay will
be less free from weeds.

On upland this crop may be followed with any kind of a crop requiring much nitrogen. No crops
can be made to follow it with more advantage, however, than corn and the sorghums, or potatoes.
Rape will feed ravenously on the overturned sod, and wheat and the other small grains will
also feed similarly.

On low lands, especially when they partake of the nature of sloughs, the rotation is different. In
political economy, the doctrines of the English and Scotch schools were elaborated to their fullest
extent. Retrenchment in pensions and salaries, diminution of armies, equal taxation, the resumption
by the State of all the Church lands, the development of the agricultural and mechanical resources,
the abolition of the monopolies, total free trade, local government, and national education;
such-were the doctrines for which Turgot fought, and Condorcet popularized. If they had been taken
in time, France would have escaped a revolution, and Europe would have been ruled by peace and
freedom. It may be asked, who brought about the advocacy of those
doctrines, for they were not known before the middle of the eighteenth
century?

They were introduced as a novelty, and defended as a paradox. France had been exhausted by wars,
annoyed by ennui, brilliant above all by her genius, she was struck with lassitude for her licentious
crimes. There was an occasion for a new school. Without it, France, like Carthage, would have
bled to death on the hecatomb of her own lust. Her leading men cast their eyes to England;
it was then the most progressive nation in existence. The leading men of that country were
intimate with the rulers of the French; the books of each land were read with avidity by their
neighbors; a difference was observable between the two: but how that difference was to be reconciled
was past the skill of the wisest to unravel. England had liberal institutions, and a people
with part of the substance, and many of the forms of Liberalism, along with a degree of education
which kept them in comparative ignorance, yet did not offer any obstacles to raising themselves in
the social sphere. Before France could compete with England, she had to rid herself of the feudal system,
and obtain a Magna Charta. She was above four centuries behind-hand here. She had to win her
spurs through revolutions, like those of Cromwell's and that of 1688, and the still greater
ones of Parliament. The Freethinkers of England prepared the Whig revolution of William, by
advocating the only scheme which was at the time practicable, for of the two--the Protestant
and the Catholic religion--the former is far more conducive to the liberties of a people than
the latter, and at the time, and we may also say, nearer the present, the people were not prepared
for any organic change. This being the case, it is not to be wondered at that the French Revolution
was a failure as a constructive effort; it was a success as a grand outbreak of power; showing
politicians where (in the future) to rely for success. The men who undertook to bring about
this Revolution are not to be censured for its non-success. They wished to copy English institutions,
and adapt them to those of the French; for this purpose, the Continental League was formed, each
member of which pledged himself to uproot, as far as lay in his power, the Catholic Church in
France. A secret name was given to it--L'Infame--and an organized attack was speedily commenced.
The men at the head of the movement, besides Voltaire and Frederick, were D'Alembert, Diderot,
Grim, St. Lambert, Condillac, Helvetius, Jordan, Lalande, Montesquieu, and a host of others
of less note. Con-dorcet, being secretary of the Academy, corresponded with, and directed the movements
of all, in the absence of his chief. Every new book was criticised--refutations were published
to the leading theological works of the age; but by far the roost
effective progress was made by the means of poems, essays, romances,
epigrams, and scientific papers.

The songs of France at this era were written by the philosophers; and this spirit was diffused
among the people. In a country so volatile and excitable as the French, it is difficult to estimate
too highly the power of a ballad warfare. The morality of Abbots and Nuns were sung in strains
as rhapsodical, and couplets as voluptuous as the vagaries of the Songs of Solomon.

Much discretion was required, that no separate species of warfare
should be overdone, lest a nausea of sentiment should revert upon
the authors, and thus lead to a reaction more sanguinary than the
force of the philosophers could control.

In all those cases Condorcet was the prime mover and the agent concerned.
 For instance, there may be seasons when alsike clover, and, indeed,
any kind of clover, will succeed along with a catch crop sown for pasture or to provide soiling
food. But it should not be sown in the autumn unless where the winters are mild, or the young
plants will not survive their rigors.

Alsike clover is more commonly sown with a nurse crop. As with medium red, the crops with which
it may be best sown are the small cereal grains, as winter rye, barley, wheat and oats, favorable
in the order named. But it may also be sown with flax, with rape, and with grain crops that
are to be cut for soiling or to be grazed down.

The method of sowing alsike clover is virtually the same as that followed in sowing medium
red clover (see page 78); that is to say, it may be sown by hand machines, with a grass-seeder
attachment to the grain drill, or with the ordinary tubes of the grain drill and along with
the grain. The seed is very small, and, consequently, may not admit of being buried so deeply
as medium red clover, but in the open soils of the prairie it will sometimes succeed as well
sown along with the grain as when buried less deeply, but in many soils the roller will provide
a sufficient covering. Especially is this true in climates that are moist.

Alsike clover has special adaptation for being sown along with timothy and red top on slough
soils, and soils made up of rich deposit. It matures about the same time as these grasses.
They support the slender stems of the alsike, and in doing so prevent lodging more or less.
This greatly improves the quality of the hay. The more numerous the plants in those mixtures,
the finer also will be the quality of the hay. If but two varieties are wanted in the mixture,
ordinarily these two should be alsike clover and timothy. Both furnish hay of excellent quality;
hence, when the proportion of alsike is not too large, such hay sells readily to dairymen who
have to purchase fodder.

Although this clover does not mature until three to four weeks later than the medium red, nevertheless,
it may be well to add the latter to the timothy and alsike clover mixture. When these are thus
sown in due balance, the first cutting will be mainly red clover, after which there will be
but little of the red present. But the medium red clover will add much to the pasture after
the first cutting for hay. Subsequently, the hay crop will usually consist of alsike and timothy.
Alsike clover along with timothy may also be sown with mammoth clover, since the two mature
about the same time. But the mammoth variety will monopolize the ground while the first hay
crop is being produced. The advantage from sowing the seed thus lies chiefly in prolonging
the period of clover production along with timothy grown chiefly for hay. It is not wise, usually,
to sow alsike clover alone for hay, owing to its tendency to lodge. In the South it is frequently
sown with red top and orchard grass, especially the latter. It fills in the spaces between
the plants in the orchard grass, and in so doing adds much to the hay or to the pasture.

There may be conditions in which it would be advisable to sow alsike clover alone, as when
it is wanted for seed, and subsequently for pasture. But ordinarily to provide pasture, it
is better to sow it along with some other grass or clover, or with a number of these. It greatly
improves a timothy pasture in the upland or in the valley. It has also been used with much
advantage in strengthening alfalfa pastures for horses in winter in certain of the Rocky Mountain
valleys. It would probably be correct to say that with the area of adaptation for this plant,
no kind of pasture can be grown on reasonably moist land that would not be benefited by having
alsike in it. Among the clovers it has, relatively, high adaptation for permanent pastures,
because of its enduring character.

The seeds of alsike clover are small. They are considered to be less than half the size of
those of medium red clover, consequently, the amounts of seed are relatively much less. When
alsike clover is sown alone and for seed, from 3 to 5 pounds of seed should suffice per acre,
according to the soil conditions. Four pounds are frequently sown. In the various mixtures
given above, the amounts of seed will vary with local and other conditions, but the following
amounts may be given as averages: Alsike and timothy, 4 and 6 pounds, respectively, per acre;
alsike, timothy and red top, 3, 4 and 3 pounds; alsike, timothy and red clover, 3, 4 and 3
pounds; alsike, timothy and mammoth clover, 3, 4 and 3 pounds. When sown with other grasses
for pasture, it would not be possible to give the amounts to sow that would best meet the needs
of the grower under all conditions. But it may be said that 1 to 2 pounds of alsike seed per
acre, sown under almost any circumstances in moist soils and within the alsike clover area,
will be a good investment when laying down pastures of any considerable permanency.

This clover is also sometimes added to the seed sown in making lawns, more especially on farms
where the lawn cannot be given that close attention which is necessary to keep it in the most
presentable form. Because of its permanence, it is helpful in giving variety to the sward,
and when mown but two or three times in the season, as is frequently the case with such lawns,
it provides considerable bloom in the same, which is very attractive. The amount of seed to
use on these lawns may vary to suit the desires of the owner. It is not usual, however, to
sow in these more than maximum amounts for field crops. At the rate of 3 to 4 pounds of seed
per acre should be ample.

=Pasturing.=--Alsike clover has by some authorities been assigned to a high place as a pasture
plant. For such a use it has no little merit, but in the judgment of the author it is not nearly
equal to medium red clover as a pasture plant, under average conditions, since it does not
grow so well, relatively, on average upland soils, and because the aftermath is usually light,
after the crop has been cut for hay or for seed. Nor is it thought to be relished quite as
highly by stock as the medium red clover. Nevertheless, domestic animals eat it freely, and
under suitable conditions it will furnish for them a considerable amount of grazing. This feature
has been finely illustrated by an experiment in grazing conducted at the Agricultural Experiment
Station of Montana, on irrigated land, at Bozeman, in the Gallatin valley. Full particulars
relating to this unique experiment are given in Bulletin No. 31, issued by the afore-mentioned
station. In the summer of 1900, 18 cattle, one and two years old, were pastured on 5.04 acres
of alsike clover for 102 days, beginning with June 9th. The increase in the weight obtained
from the pasture in the time stated was 4560 pounds. This gain was valued at the very moderate
price of 4 cents per pound live weight; hence, the net return per acre for the pasture for
the season was $36.19. It would scarcely be possible under any conditions, howsoever favorable,
to obtain such results without irrigation.

Ordinarily, the results from pasturing alsike clover will be more satisfactory when one or
two other plants are grown along with it, as, for instance, medium red clover or medium red
clover and orchard grass, since both of these plants tend to prolong the period of grazing.
In slough lands, red top and timothy add considerably to the value of the grazing. When grazing
alsike clover, much more pasture will be obtained if it can be allowed to make a good start
in the spring, and if it is then kept grazed so short that the plants do not come into flower.
Such treatment tends very much to prolong the period of grazing for the season. Should the
grazing be so uneven as to admit of certain areas in the pasture pushing on into the flower
stage, the mower may sometimes be profitably used to prevent such a result. Weeds should also
be kept from going to seed in the pastures by using the mower or the scythe, or both. Nor should
the fact be lost sight of that the tendency to produce bloat in alsike clover is much the same
as in medium red clover.

=Harvesting for Hay.=--Alsike clover is ready to harvest for hay when the plants are just beginning
to pass beyond the meridian of full bloom. Some of the first blossoms will then have turned
brown and some of the smaller ones will still be deepening their tints, since the season of
bloom is about the same as for timothy, and since alsike for hay is more commonly grown with
timothy than with any other grass, both may be cut when at their best, especially when intended
for cows and sheep. But when the hay is intended for horses, it should stand a few days longer
than the stage indicated above, in order to have the timothy in the condition best suited to
feeding horses. But the alsike, in the meantime, would lose something in digestibility.

If grown alone for hay, the process of harvesting would be much the same as in harvesting medium
red clover. (See page 95.) But since the stems of alsike clover are finer than those of the
medium red, less time will suffice for curing it. It will also cure more quickly along with
some other grass than if alone, since it does not then lie so closely in the winrow or in the
cock. Grasses, as a rule, cure more quickly than clovers, and this also has a bearing on hastening
curing in clover when the two are grown together; and also in lessening the degree of the fermentation
after the crop has been stored. Ordinarily, when the weather is bright, alsike clover along
with timothy may be cut in the forenoon, tedded once or twice soon after cutting, raked into
small winrows the same evening and stored away the following afternoon. When thus managed,
the hay loader may be used in lifting the hay from the winrows. Alsike clover growing alone
could not be cured thus quickly. Nor would it be wise in showery weather to try and cure the
crop without putting it into cocks, whether grown alone or with some other crop. When properly
cured, the heads retain much of their bloom and the stems much of their greenness.

The yields of hay vary greatly with the soil. On dry, sandy uplands the yields of cured hay
may not exceed 1/2 ton, while on rich loam soils it may exceed 3 tons. Ordinarily, on good
soils a combined crop of alsike clover should yield from 1-1/2 to 2 tons per acre of very excellent
hay. Some authorities speak of getting two cuttings per year, but this is not usual. Under
quite favorable conditions it would be possible to get two cuttings for soiling uses, providing
the first was taken when the plants were coming into bloom. Usually, the growth of the aftermath,
when the hay has been removed, is very moderate.

=Securing Seed.=--Alsike is a great producer of seed. This arises in part from the relatively
large number of the heads on the plants, and in part from the completeness of the pollinations,
through the action of the honey bee. These are relatively much more numerous than the bumble
bees, which alone among bees, it has been claimed, aid in the pollination of medium red and
mammoth clover. Although the seeds are considerably less than half the size of those of medium
red clover, as much as 8 bushels of seed have been secured from an acre. Frequently, however,
the yields are less than 2 bushels. Good average yields may be stated as running from 3 to
4 bushels per acre. The best yields are usually obtained from the first crop, but under favorable
conditions this clover may be cut for seed for two and even three years in succession. Better
yields are usually obtained from crops of medium vigor than from those of excessive rankness.
The latter lodge to such an extent as to reduce materially the yields of the seed, since the
heads do not fill well. The cost of harvesting and threshing such crops is also greater, relatively,
than of those of medium growth. To prevent such excessive growth in the seed crop, pasturing
for a time is frequently resorted to. The grazing should begin reasonably early in the season
before growth anywhere becomes so rank that the animals do not eat it in certain portions of
the field, whereas, at the same time, they graze other portions of the field too closely. Rather
close grazing, from the time that grazing begins, is preferable to grazing that leaves the
crop uneven. When certain portions of the field are left ungrazed, or only partially grazed,
the mower should be run over such portions about the time that the grazing ceases. If this
is done a few days before the removal of the stock, they will eat much of the clover thus mown.
Unless the mower is thus used, under such conditions the seed will ripen unevenly in the grazed
and ungrazed portions of the same.

The duration of the grazing is much dependent on the soil and the season. The more moist and
rich the soil and the more moist the season, the more prolonged should the grazing be. In Northern
areas it seldom begins earlier than May 1st, and seldom extends beyond June 1st. If prolonged
unduly and dry weather follows, the growth of the plants will not be enough to produce average
crops of seed. Quite frequently on upland soils, the grazing should cease before the end of May.

