But, whatever else was lacking, Mr. Arnot had a profound respect for his wife. First and chiefly,
she was wealthy, and he, having control of her property, made it subservient to his business.
He had chafed at first against what he termed her "sentimental ways of doing good" and her
"ridiculous theories," but in these matters he had ever found her as gentle as a woman, but
as unyielding as granite. She told him plainly that her religious life and its expression were
matters between herself and God--that it was a province into which his cast-iron system and
material philosophy could not enter. He grumbled at her large charities, and declared that
she "turned their dwelling into a club-house for young men"; but she followed her conscience
with such a quiet, unswerving dignity that he found no pretext for interference. The money
she gave away was her own, and fortunately, the house to which it was her delight to draw young
men from questionable and disreputable places of resort had been left to her by her father.
Though she did not continually remind her husband of these facts, as an under-bred woman might
have done, her manner was so assured and unhesitating that he was compelled to recognize her
rights, and to see that she was fully aware of them also. Since she yielded so gracefully and
considerately all and more than he could justly claim, he finally concluded to ignore what
he regarded as her "peculiarities." As for himself, he had no peculiarities. He was a "practical,
sensible man, with no nonsense about him."

Mrs. Haldane had been in such sore straits and perplexity about her son that she overcame her
habitual reserve upon family and personal matters, and wrote to her friend a long and confidential
letter, in which she fully described the "mysterious providence" which was clouding her life.

Mrs. Arnot had long been aware of her friend's infirmity, and more than once had sought with
delicacy and yet with faithfulness to open her eyes to the consequences of her indulgence.
But Mrs. Haldane, unfortunately, was incapable of taking a broad, and therefore correct, view
of anything. She was governed far more by her prejudices and feelings than by reason or experience,
and the emotion or prejudice uppermost absorbed her mind so completely as to exclude all other
considerations. Her friendship for Mrs. Arnot had commenced at school, but the two ladies had
developed so differently that the relation had become more a cherished memory of the happy
past than a congenial intimacy of their maturer life.

The "mysterious providence" of which Mrs. Haldane wrote was to Mrs. Arnot a legitimate and
almost inevitable result. But, now that the mischief had been accomplished, she was the last
one in the world to say to her friend, "I told you so." To her mind the providential feature
in the matter was the chance that had come to her of counteracting the evil which the mother
had unconsciously developed. This opportunity was in the line of her most cherished plan and
hope of usefulness, as will be hereafter seen, and she had lost no time in persuading her husband
to give Haldane employment in his counting-room. She also secured his consent that the youth
should become a member of the family, for a time at least. Mr. Arnot yielded these points reluctantly,
for it was a part of his policy to have no more personal relations with his employes than with
his machinery. He wished them to feel that they were merely a part of his system, and that
the moment any one did not work regularly and accurately he must be cast aside as certainly
as a broken or defective wheel. But as his wife's health made her practically a silent partner
in his vast business, he yielded--though with rather ill grace, and with a prediction that
it "would not work well."

Haldane was aware that his mother had written a long letter to Mrs. Arnot, and he supposed
that his employer and his wife had thus become acquainted with all his misdeeds. He, therefore,
rather dreaded to meet those who must, from the first, regard him as a graceless and difficult
subject, that could not be managed at home. But, with the characteristic recklessness of young
men who have wealth to fall back upon, he had fortified himself by thoughts like the following:

"If they do not treat me well, or try to put me into a straight-jacket, or if I find the counting-house
too dull, I can bid them good-morning whenever I choose."

But Mrs. Arnot's frank and cordial reception was an agreeable surprise. He arrived quite late
in the evening, and she had a delightful little lunch brought to him in her private parlor.
By the time it was eaten her graceful tact had banished all stiffness and sense of strangeness,
and he found himself warming into friendliness toward one whom he had especially dreaded as
a "remarkably pious lady"--for thus his mother had always spoken of her.

It was scarcely strange that he should be rapidly disarmed by this lady, who cannot be described
in a paragraph. Though her face was rather plain, it was so expressive of herself that it seldom
failed to fascinate. Nature can do much to render a countenance attractive, but character accomplishes
far more. The beauty which is of feature merely catches the careless, wandering eye. The beauty
which is the reflex of character holds the eye, and eventually wins the heart. Those who knew
Mrs. Arnot best declared that, instead of growing old and homely, she was growing more lovely
every year. Her dark hair had turned gray early, and was fast becoming snowy white. For some
years after her marriage she had grown old very fast. She had dwelt, as it were, on the northern
side of an iceberg, and in her vain attempt to melt and humanize it, had almost perished herself.
As the earthly streams and rills that fed her life congealed, she was led to accept of the
love of God, and the long arctic winter of her despair passed gradually away. She was now growing
young again. A faint bloom was dawning in her cheeks, and her form was gaming that fulness
which is associated with the maturity of middle age. Her bright black eyes were the most attractive
and expressive feature which she possessed, and they often seemed gifted with peculiar powers.

As they beamed upon the young man they had much the same effect as the anthracite coals which
glowed in the grate, and he began to be conscious of some disposition to give her his confidence.

Having dismissed the servant with the lunch tray, she caused him to draw his chair sociably
up to the fire, and said, without any circumlocution:

"Mr. Haldane, perhaps this is the best time for us to have a frank talk in regard to the future."

The young man thought that this was the preface for some decided criticism of the past, and
his face became a little hard and defiant. But in this he was mistaken, for the lady made no
reference to his faults, of which she had been informed by his mother. She spoke in a kindly
but almost in a business-like way of his duties in the counting-room, and of the domestic rules
of the household, to which he would be expected to conform. She also spoke plainly of her husband's
inexorable requirement of system, regularity, and order, and dwelt upon the fact that all in
his employ conformed to this demand, and that it was the business-like and manly thing to do.

"This is your first venture out into the world, I understand," she said, rising to intimate
that their interview was over, "and I greatly wish that it may lead toward a useful and successful
career. I have spoken plainly because I wished you to realize just what you have undertaken,
and thus meet with no unpleasant surprises or unexpected experiences. When one enters upon
a course with his eyes open, he in a certain sense pledges himself to do the best he can in
that line of duty, and our acquaintance, though so brief, has convinced me that you can do
very well indeed."

"I was under the impression," said the young man, coloring deeply, "that my mother's letter
had led you to suppose--to expect just the contrary."

"Mr. Haldane," said Mrs. Arnot, giving him her hand with graceful tact, "I shall form my opinion
of you solely on the ground of your own action, and I wish you to think of me as a friend who
takes a genuine interest in your success. Good-night."

He went to his room in quite a heroic and virtuous mood.

"She does not treat me a bit like a 'bad boy,' as I supposed she would," he thought; "but appears
to take it for granted that I shall be a gentleman in this her house, and a sensible fellow
in her husband's office. Blow me if I disappoint her!"

Nor did he for several weeks. Even Mr. Arnot was compelled to admit that it did "work rather
better than he expected," and that he "supposed the young fellow did as well as he could."

As the novelty of Haldane's new relations wore off, however, and as his duties became so familiar
as to be chiefly a matter of routine, the grave defects of his character and training began
to show themselves. The restraint of the counting-room grew irksome. Associations were formed
in the city which tended toward his old evil habits. As a piece of Mr. Arnot's machinery he
did not move with the increasing precision that his employer required and expected on his becoming
better acquainted with his duties.

Mrs. Arnot had expected this, and knew that her husband would tolerate carelessness and friction
only up to a certain point. She had gained more influence over the young man than any one else
had ever possessed, and by means of it kept him within bounds for some time; but she saw from
her husband's manner that things were fast approaching a crisis.

One evening she kindly, but frankly, told him of the danger in which he stood of an abrupt,
stern dismissal.

He was more angry than alarmed, and during the following day about concluded that he would
save himself any such mortification by leaving of his own accord. He quite persuaded himself
that he had a soul above plodding business, and that, after enjoying himself at home for a
time, he could enter upon some other career, that promised more congeniality and renown.

In order that his employer might not anticipate him, he performed his duties very accurately
that day, but left the office with the expectation of never returning.

He had very decided compunctions in thus requiting Mrs. Arnot's kindness, but muttered recklessly:

"I'm tired of this humdrum, treadmill life, and believe I'm destined to better things. If I
could only get a good position in the army or navy, the world would hear from me. They say
money opens every door, and mother must open some good wide door for me."

Regardless now of his employer's good or bad opinion, he came down late to supper; but, instead
of observing with careless defiance the frown which he knew lowered toward him, his eyes were
drawn to a fair young face on the opposite side of the table.

Mrs. Arnot, in her pleasant, cordial voice, which made the simplest thing she said seem real
and hearty, rather than conventional, introduced him:

"Mr. Haldane, my niece, Miss Laura Romeyn. Laura, no doubt, can do far more than an old lady
to make your evenings pass brightly."

After a second glance of scrutiny, Haldane was so ungratefully forgetful of all Mrs. Arnot's
kindness as to be inclined to agree with her remark.

CHAPTER IV

IMMATURE

"Is she a young lady, or merely a school-girl?" was Haldane's query concerning the stranger
sitting opposite to him; and he addressed to her a few commonplace but exploring remarks. Regarding
himself as well acquainted with society in general, and young ladies in particular, he expected
to solve the question at once, and was perplexed that he could not. He had flirted with several
misses as immature as himself, and so thought that he was profoundly versed in the mysteries
of the sex. "They naturally lean toward and look up to men, and one is a fool, or else lacking
in personal appearance, who does not have his own way with them," was his opinion, substantially.

Modesty is a grace which fine-looking young men of large wealth are often taught by some severe
experiences, if it is ever learned. Haldane, as yet, had not received such wholesome depletion.
His self-approval and assurance, moreover, were quite natural, since his mother and sisters
had seldom lost an opportunity of developing and confirming these traits. The yielding of women
to his will and wishes had been one of the most uniform experiences of his life, and he had
come to regard it as the natural order of things. Without formulating the thought in plain
words, he nevertheless regarded Mrs. Arnot's kindness, by which she sought to gain a helpful
influence over him, as largely due to some peculiar fascination of his own, which made him
a favorite wherever he chose to be. Of course, the young stranger on the opposite side of the
table would prove no exception to the rule, and all he had to do was to satisfy himself that
she was sufficiently pretty and interesting to make it worth while to pay her a little attention.

But for some reason she did not seem greatly impressed by his commonplace and rather patronizing
remarks. Was it pride or dignity on her part, or was it mere girlish shyness? It must be the
latter, for there was no occasion for pride and dignity in her manner toward him.

Then came the thought that possibly Mrs. Arnot had not told her who he was, and that she looked
upon him as a mere clerk of low degree. To remove from her mind any such error, his tones and
manner became still more self-asserting and patronizing.

"If she has any sense at all," he thought, "she shall see that I have peculiar claims to her
respect."

As he proceeded in these tactics, there was a growing expression of surprise and a trace of
indignation upon the young girl's face. Mrs. Arnot watched the by-play with an amused expression.
There was not much cynicism in her nature. She believed that experience would soon prick the
bubble of his vanity, and it was her disposition to smile rather than to sneer at absurdity
in others. Besides, she was just. She never applied to a young man of twenty the standard by
which she would measure those of her own age, and she remembered Haldane's antecedents. But
Mr. Arnot went to his library muttering:

"The ridiculous fool!"

When Miss Romeyn rose from the table, Haldane saw that she was certainly tall enough to be
a young lady, for she was slightly above medium height. He still believed that she was very
young, however, for her figure was slight and girlish, and while her bearing was graceful it
had not that assured and pronounced character to which he had been accustomed.

"She evidently has not seen much of society. Well, since she is not gawky, I like her better
than if she were blase. Anything but your blase girls," he observed to himself, with a consciousness
that he was an experienced man of the world.

The piano stood open in the drawing-room, and this suggested music. Haldane had at his tongue's
end the names of half a dozen musicians whose professional titles had been prominent in the
newspapers for a few months previous, and whose merits had formed a part of the current chit-chat
of the day. Some he had heard, and others he had not, but he could talk volubly of all, and
he asked Miss Romeyn for her opinion of one and another in a manner which implied that of course
she knew about them, and that ignorance in regard to such persons was not to be expected.

Her face colored with annoyance, but she said quietly and a trifle coldly that she had not
heard them.

Mrs. Arnot again smiled as she watched the young people, but she now came to her niece's rescue,
thinking also it would be well to disturb Haldane's sense of superiority somewhat. So she said:

"Laura, since we cannot hear this evening the celebrated artists that Mr. Haldane has mentioned,
we must content ourselves with simple home music. Won't you play for us that last selection
of which you wrote to me?"

"I hardly dare, auntie, since Mr. Haldane is such a critical judge, and has heard so much music
from those who make it a business to be perfect. He must have listened to the selection you
name a hundred times, for it is familiar to most lovers of good music."

Haldane had sudden misgivings. Suppose he had not heard it? This would be awkward, after his
assumed acquaintance with such matters.

"Even if Mr. Haldane is familiar with it," Mrs. Arnot replied, "Steibelt's Storm Rondo will
bear repetition. Besides, his criticism may be helpful, since he can tell you wherein you come
short of the skilled professionals."

Laura caught the twinkle in her aunt's eye, and went to the piano.

The young man saw at once that he had been caught in his own trap, for the music was utterly
unfamiliar. The rondo was no wonderful piece of intricacy, such as a professional might choose.
On the contrary, it was simple, and quite within the capabilities of a young and well-taught
girl. But it was full of rich melody which even he, in his ignorance, could understand and
appreciate, and yet, for aught that he knew it was difficult in the extreme.

At first he had a decided sense of humiliation, and a consciousness that it was deserved. He
had been talking largely and confidently of an art concerning which he knew little, and in
which he began to think that his listener was quite well versed.

But as the thought of the composer grew in power and beauty he forgot himself and his dilemma
in his enjoyment. Two senses were finding abundant gratification at the same time, for it was
a delight to listen, and it was even a greater pleasure to look at the performer.

She gave him a quick, shy glance of observation, fearing somewhat that she might see severe
judgment or else cool indifference in the expression of his face, and she was naturally pleased
and encouraged when she saw, instead, undisguised admiration. His previous manner had annoyed
her, and she determined to show him that his superior airs were quite uncalled for. Thus the
diffident girl was led to surpass herself, and infuse so much spirit and grace into her playing
as to surprise even her aunt.

Haldane was soon satisfied that she was more than pretty--that she was beautiful. Her features,
that had seemed too thin and colorless, flushed with excitement, and her blue eyes, which he
had thought cold and expressionless, kindled until they became lustrous. He felt, in a way
that he could not define to himself, that her face was full of power and mind, and that she
was different from the pretty girls who had hitherto been his favorites.

As she rose from the piano he was mastered by one of those impulses which often served him
in the place of something better, and he said impetuously:

"Miss Romeyn, I beg your pardon. You know a hundred-fold more about music than I do, and I
have been talking as if the reverse were true. I never heard anything so fine in my life, and
I also confess that I never heard that piece before."

The young girl blushed with pleasure on having thus speedily vanquished this superior being,
whom she had been learning both to dread and dislike. At the same time his frank, impulsive
words of compliment did much to remove the prejudice which she was naturally forming against
him. Mrs. Arnot said, with her mellow laugh, that often accomplished more than long homilies:

"That is a manly speech, Egbert, and much to your credit. 'Honest confession is good for the
soul.'"

Haldane did not get on his stilts again that evening, and before it was over he concluded that
Miss Romeyn was the most charming young lady he had ever met, though, for some reason, she
still permitted him to do nearly all the talking. She bade him good-night, however, with a
smile that was not unkindly, and which was interpreted by him as being singularly gracious.

By this time he had concluded that Miss Romeyn was a "young lady par excellence"; but it has
already been shown that his judgment in most matters was not to be trusted. Whether she was
a school-girl or a fully fledged young lady, a child or a woman, might have kept a closer observer
than himself much longer in doubt. In truth, she was scarcely the one or the other, and had
many of the characteristics of both. His opinion of her was as incorrect as that of himself.
He was not a man, though he considered himself a superior one, and had attained to manly proportions.

But there were wide differences in their immaturity. She was forming under the guidance of
a mother who blended firmness and judgment equally with love. Gentle blood was in her veins,
and she had inherited many of her mother's traits with her beauty. Her parents, however, believed
that, even as the garden of Eden needed to be "dressed and kept," so the nature of their child
required careful pruning, with repression here and development there. While the young girl
was far from being faultless, fine traits and tendencies dominated, and, though as yet undeveloped,
they were unfolding with the naturalness and beauty of a budding flower.

In Haldane's case evil traits were in the ascendant, and the best hope for him was that they
as yet had not become confirmed.

"Who is this Mr. Haldane, auntie?" Laura asked on reaching her room. There was a slight trace
of vexation in her tone.

"He is the son of an old friend of mine. I have induced my husband to try to give him a business
education. You do not like him."

"I did not like him at all at first, but he improves a little on acquaintance. Is he a fair
sample of your young men proteges?"

"He is the least promising of any of them," replied Mrs. Arnot, sitting down before the fire.
Laura saw that her face had become shadowed with sadness and anxiety.

"You look troubled, auntie. Is he the cause?"

"Yes."

"Are you very much interested in him?"

"I am, Laura; very much, indeed. I cannot bear to give him up, and yet I fear I must."

"Is he a very interesting 'case'?" asked the young girl in some surprise. "Mother often laughingly
calls the young men you are trying to coax to be good by your winning ways, 'cases.' I don't
know much about young men, but should suppose that you had many under treatment much more interesting
than he is."

"Sister Fanny is always laughing at my hobby, and saying that, since I have no children of
my own, I try to adopt every young man who will give me a chance. Perhaps if I try to carry
out your mother's figure, you will understand why I am so interested in this 'case.' If I were
a physician and had charge of a good many patients, ought I not to be chiefly interested in
those who were in the most critical and dangerous condition?"

"It would be just like you to be so, auntie, and I would not mind being quite ill myself if
I could have you to take care of me. I hope the young men whom you 'adopt' appreciate their
privileges."

"The trouble with most of us, Laura, is that we become wise too late in life. Young people
are often their own worst enemies, and if you wish to do them good, you must do it, as it were,
on the sly. If one tries openly to reform and guide them--if I should say plainly, Such and
such are your faults; such and such places and associations are full of danger--they would
be angry or disgusted, or they would say I was blue and strait-laced, and had an old woman's
notions of what a man should be. I must coax them, as you say; I must disguise my medicines,
and apply my remedies almost without their knowing it. I also find it true in my practice that
tonics and good wholesome diet are better than all moral drugs. It seems to me that if I can
bring around these giddy young fellows refining, steadying, purifying influences, I can do
them more good than if I lectured them. The latter is the easier way, and many take it. It
would require but a few minutes to tell this young Haldane what his wise safe course must be
if he would avoid shipwreck; but I can see his face flush and lip curl at my homily. And yet
for weeks I have been angling for him, and I fear to no purpose. Your uncle may discharge him
any day. It makes me very sad to say it, but if he goes home I think he will also go to ruin.
Thank God for your good, wise mother, Laura. It is a great thing to be started right in life."

"Then this young man has been started wrong?

"Yes, wrong indeed."

"Is he so very bad, auntie?" Laura asked with a face full of serious concern.

Mrs. Arnot smiled as she said, "If you were a young society chit, you might think him 'very
nice,' as their slang goes. He is good-looking and rich, and his inclination to be fast would
be a piquant fact in his favor. He has done things which would seem to you very wrong indeed.
But he is foolish and ill-trained rather than bad. He is a spoiled boy, and spoiled boys are
apt to become spoiled men. I have told you all this partly because, having been your mother's
companion all your life, you are so old-fashioned that I can talk to you almost as I would
to sister Fanny, and partly because I like to talk about my hobby."

A young girl naturally has quick sympathies, and all the influences of Laura's life had been
gentle and humane. Her aunt's words speedily led her to regard Haldane as an "interesting case,"
a sort of fever patient who was approaching the crisis of his disease. Curling down on the
floor, and leaning her arms on her aunt's lap, she looked up with a face full of solicitude
as she asked:

"And don't you think you can save him? Please don't give up trying."

"I like the expression of your face now," said Mrs. Arnot, stroking the abundant tresses, that
were falling loosely from the girl's head, "for in it I catch a glimpse of the divine image.
Many think of God as looking down angrily and frowningly upon the foolish and wayward; but
I see in the solicitude of your face a faint reflection of the 'Not willing that any should
perish' which it ever seems to me is the expression of His."

"Laura," said she abruptly, after a moment, "did any one ever tell you that you were growing
up very pretty?"

"No, auntie," said the girl, blushing and laughing.

"Mr. Haldane told you so this evening."

"O auntie, you are mistaken; he could not have been so rude."

"He did not make a set speech to that effect, my dear, but he told you so by his eyes and manner,
only you are such an innocent home child that you did not notice. But when you go into society
you will be told this fact so often that you will be compelled to heed it, and will soon learn
the whole language of flattery, spoken and unspoken. Perhaps I had, better forewarn you a little,
and so forearm you. What are you going to do with your beauty?"

"Why, auntie, how funny you talk! What should I do with it, granting that it has any existence
save in your fond eyes?"

"Suppose you use it to make men better, instead of to make them merely admire you. One can't
be a belle very long at best, and of all the querulous, discontented, and disagreeable people
that I have met, superannuated belles, who could no longer obtain their revenue of flattery,
were the worst. They were impoverished, indeed. If you do as I suggest, you will have much
that is pleasant to think about when you come to be as old as I am. Perhaps you can do more
for young Haldane than I can."

"Now, auntie, what can I do?"

"That which nearly all women can do: be kind and winning; make our safe, cosey parlor so attractive
that he will not go out evenings to places which tend to destroy him. You feel an interest
in him; show it. Ask him about his business, and get him to explain it to you. Suggest that
if you were a man you would like to master your work, and become eminent in it. Show by your
manner and by words, if occasion offers, that you love and revere all that is sacred, pure,
and Christian. Laura, innocent dove as you are, you know that many women beguile men to ruin
with smiles. Men can be beguiled from ruin with smiles. Indeed, I think multitudes are permitted
to go to destruction because women are so unattractive, so absorbed in themselves and their
nerves. If mothers and wives, maidens and old maids, would all commence playing the agreeable
to the men of their household and circle, not for the sake of a few compliments, but for the
purpose of luring them from evil and making them better, the world would improve at once."

"I see, auntie," said Laura, laughing; "you wish to administer me as a sugar-coated pill to
your 'difficult case.'"

A deep sigh was the only answer, and, looking up, Laura saw that her words had not been heeded.
Tears were in her aunt's eyes, and after a moment she said brokenly:

"My theories seem true enough, and yet how signally I have failed in carrying them out! Perhaps
it is my fault; perhaps it is my fault; but I've tried--oh! how I have tried! Laura, dear,
you know that I am a lonely woman; but do not let this prejudice you against what I have said.
Good-night, dear; I have kept you up too long after your journey."

Her niece understood her allusion to the cold, unloving man who sat alone every evening in
his dim library, thinking rarely of his wife, but often of her wealth, and how it might increase
his leverage in his herculean labors. The young girl had the tact to reply only by a warm,
lingering embrace. It was an old sorrow, of which she had long been aware; but it seemed without
remedy, and was rarely touched upon.

CHAPTER V

PASSION'S CLAMOR

Laura had a strong affection for her aunt, and would naturally be inclined to gratify any wishes
that she might express, even had they involved tasks uncongenial and unattractive. But the
proposal that she should become an ally in the effort to lure young Haldane from his evil associations,
and awaken within him pure and refined tastes, was decidedly attractive. She was peculiarly
romantic in her disposition, and no rude contact with the commonplace, common-sense world had
chastened her innocent fancies by harsh and disagreeable experience. Her Christian training
and girlish simplicity lifted her above the ordinary romanticism of imagining herself the heroine
in every instance, and the object and end of all masculine aspirations. On this occasion she
simply desired to act the part of a humble assistant of Mrs. Arnot, whom she regarded as Haldane's
good angel; and she was quite as disinterested in her hope for the young man's moral improvement
as her aunt herself.

The task, moreover, was doubly pleasing since she could perform it in a way that was so womanly
and agreeable. She could scarcely have given Haldane a plain talk on the evils of fast living
to save her life, but if she could keep young men from going to destruction by smiling upon
them, by games of backgammon and by music, she felt in the mood to be a missionary all her
life, especially if she could have so safe and attractive a field of labor as her aunt's back
parlor.

But the poor child would soon learn that perverse human nature is much the same in a drawing-room
and a tenement-house, and that all who seek to improve it are doomed to meet much that is excessively
annoying and discouraging.

The simple-hearted girl no more foresaw what might result from her smiles than an ignorant
child would anticipate the consequences of fire falling on grains of harmless-looking black
sand. She had never seen passion kindling and flaming till it seemed like a scorching fire,
and had not learned by experience that in some circumstances her smiles might be like incendiary
sparks to powder.

In seeking to manage her "difficult case," Mrs. Arnot should have foreseen the danger of employing
such a fascinating young creature as her assistant; but in these matters the wisest often err,
and only comprehend the evil after it has occurred. Laura was but a child in years, having
passed her fifteenth birthday only a few months previous, and Haldane seemed to the lady scarcely
more than a boy. She did not intend that her niece should manifest anything more than a little
winning kindness and interest, barely enough to keep the young fellow from spending his evenings
out she knew not where. He was at just the age when the glitter and tinsel of public amusements
are most attractive. She believed that if she could familiarize his mind with the real gold
and clear diamond flash of pure home pleasures, and those which are enjoyed in good society,
he would eventually become disgusted with gilt, varnish, and paste. If Laura had been a very
plain girl, she might have seconded Mrs. Arnot's efforts to the utmost without any unpleasant
results, even if no good ones had followed; and it may well be doubted whether any of the latter
would have ensued. Haldane's disease was too deeply rooted, and his tastes vitiated to such
a degree that he had lost the power to relish long the simple enjoyments of Mrs. Arnot's parlor.
He already craved the pleasures which first kindle and excite and then consume.

Laura, however, was not plain and ordinary, and the smiles which were intended as innocent
lures from snares, instead of into them, might make trouble for all concerned. Haldane was
naturally combustible, to begin with, and was now at the most inflammable period of his life.

The profoundest master of human nature portrayed to the world a Romeo and a Juliet, both mastered
by a passion which but a few words and glances had kindled. There are many Romeos who do not
find their Juliets so sympathetic and responsive, and they usually develop at about the age
of Haldane. Indeed, nearly all young men of sanguine temperaments go through the Romeo stage,
and they are fortunate if they pass it without doing anything especially ridiculous or disastrous.
These sudden attacks are exceedingly absurd to older and cooler friends, but to the victims
themselves they are tremendously real and tragic for the time being. More hearts are broken
into indefinite fragments before twenty than ever after; but, like the broken bones of the
young, they usually knit readily together again, and are just as good for all practical purposes.

There was nothing unusual in the fact, therefore, that Haldane was soon deeply enamored with
his new acquaintance. It was true that Laura had given him the mildest and most innocent kind
of encouragement--and the result would probably have been the same if she had given him none
at all--but his vanity, and what he chose to regard as his "undying love," interpreted all
her actions, and gave volumes of meaning to a kindly glance or a pleasant word. Indeed, before
there had been time to carry out, to any extent, the tactics her aunt had proposed, symptoms
of his malady appeared. While she was regarding him merely as one of her aunt's "cases," and
a very hard one at best, and thought of herself as trying to help a little, as a child might
hold a bandage or a medicine phial for experienced hands, he, on the contrary, had begun to
mutter to himself that she was "the divinest woman God ever fashioned."

There was now no trouble about his spending evenings elsewhere, and the maiden was perplexed
and annoyed at finding her winning ways far too successful, and that the one she barely hoped
to keep from the vague--and to her mind, horrible--places of temptation, was becoming as adhesive
as sticking-plaster. If she smiled, he smiled and ogled far too much in return. If she chatted
with one and another of the young men who found Mrs. Arnot's parlor the most attractive place
open to them in the town, he would assume a manner designed to be darkly tragical, but which
to the young girl had more the appearance of sulking.

She was not so much of a child as to be unable to comprehend Haldane's symptoms, and she was
sufficiently a woman not to be excessively angry. And yet she was greatly annoyed and perplexed.
At times his action seemed so absurd that she was glad to escape to her room, that she might
give way to her merriment; and again he would appear so much in earnest that she was quite
as inclined to cry and to think seriously of bringing her visit to an abrupt termination.

While under Mrs. Arnot's eye Haldane was distant and circumspect, but the moment he was alone
with Laura his manner became unmistakably demonstrative.

At first she was disposed to tell her aunt all about the young man's sentimental manner, but
the fact that it seemed so ridiculous deterred her. She still regarded herself as a child,
and that any one should be seriously in love with her after but a few days' acquaintance seemed
absurdity itself. Her aunt might think her very vain for even imagining such a thing, and,
perhaps, after all it was only her own imagination.

"Mr. Haldane has acted queerly from the first," she concluded, "and the best thing I can do
is to think no more about him, and let auntie manage her 'difficult case' without me. If I
am to help in these matters, I had better commence with a 'case' that is not so 'difficult.'"

She therefore sought to avoid the young man, and prove by her manner that she was utterly indifferent
to him, hoping that this course would speedily cure him of his folly. She would venture into
the parlor only when her aunt or guests were there, and would then try to make herself generally
agreeable, without an apparent thought for him.

While she assured herself that she did not like him, and that he was in no respect a person
to be admired and liked, she still found herself thinking about him quite often. He was her
first recognized lover. Indeed, few had found opportunity to give more than admiring glances
to the little nun, who thus far had been secluded almost continuously in the safest of all
cloisters--a country home. It was a decided novelty that a young man, almost six feet in height,
should be looking unutterable things in her direction whenever she was present. She wished
he wouldn't, but since he would, she could not help thinking about him, and how she could manage
to make him "behave sensibly."

She did not maintain her air of indifference very perfectly, however, for she had never been
schooled by experience, and was acting solely on the intuitions of her sex. She could not forbear
giving a quick glance occasionally to see how he was taking his lesson. At times he was scowling
and angry, and then she could maintain her part without difficulty; again he would look so
miserable that, out of pity, she would relent into a half smile, but immediately reproach herself
for being "so foolish."

Haldane's manner soon attracted Mrs. Arnot's attention, notwithstanding his effort to disguise
from her his feeling and a little observation on the part of the experienced matron enabled
her to guess how matters stood. While Mrs. Arnot was perplexed and provoked by this new complication
in Haldane's case, she was too kindly in her nature not to feel sorry for him. She was also
so well versed in human nature as to be aware that she could not sit down and coolly talk him
out of his folly.

Besides it was not necessarily folly. The youth was but following a law of nature, and following
it, too, in much the same manner as had his fathers before him since the beginning of time.
There would not be any thing essentially wrong in an attachment between these young people,
if it sprang up naturally; only it would be necessary to impress upon them the fact that they
were young, and that for years to come their minds should be largely occupied with other matters.
Haldane certainly would not have been her choice for Laura, but if a strong attachment became
the means of steadying him and of inciting to the formation of a fine character, all might
be well in the end. She was morbidly anxious, however, that her niece should not meet with
any such disappointment in life as had fallen to her lot, and should the current of the young
girl's affection tend steadily in his direction she would deeply regret the fact.

She would regret exceedingly, also, to have the young girl's mind occupied by thoughts of such
a nature for years to come. Her education was unfinished; she was very immature, and should
not make so important a choice until she had seen much more of society, and time had been given
for the formation of her tastes and character.

Mrs. Arnot soon concluded that it would be wiser to prevent trouble than to remedy it, and
that Laura had better return speedily to the safe asylum of her own home. She could then suggest
to Haldane that if he hoped to win the maiden in after years he must form a character worthy
of her.

Had she carried out her plan that day all might have turned out differently, but the advanced
in life are prone to forget the impetuosity of youth. Haldane was already ripe for a declaration,
or, more properly, an explosion of his pent-up feelings, and was only awaiting an opportunity
to insist upon his own acceptance. He was so possessed and absorbed by his emotions that he
felt sure they would sweep away all obstacles. He imagined himself pleading his cause in a
way that would melt a marble heart; and both vanity and hope had whispered that Laura was a
shy maiden, secretly responsive to his passion, and only awaiting his frank avowal before showing
her own heart. Else why had she been so kind at first? Having won his love, was she not seeking
now to goad him on to its utterance by a sudden change of manner?

Thus he reasoned, as have many others equally blind.

On becoming aware of Haldane's passion, Mrs. Arnot resolved to sedulously guard her niece,
and prevent any premature and disagreeable scenes. She was not long in discovering that the
feeling, as yet, was all on the young man's side, and believed that by a little adroitness
she could manage the affair so that no harm would result to either party.

But on the day following the one during which she had arrived at the above conclusions she
felt quite indisposed, and while at dinner was obliged to succumb to one of her nervous headaches.
Before retiring to her private room she directed the waitress to say to such of her young friends
as might call that she was too ill to see them.

Haldane's expressions of sympathy were hollow, indeed, for he hoped that, as a result of her
indisposition, he would have Laura all to himself that evening. With an insinuating smile he
said to the young girl, after her aunt had left the table:

"I shall expect you to be very agreeable this evening, to compensate me for Mrs. Arnot's absence."

Laura blushed vividly, and was provoked with herself that she did so, but she replied quietly:

"You must excuse me this evening, Mr. Haldane; I am sure my aunt will need me."

His smile was succeeded by a sudden frown; but, as Mr. Arnot was at the table, he said, with
assumed carelessness:

"Then I will go out and try to find amusement elsewhere."

"It might be well, young man," said Mr. Arnot austerely, "to seek for something else than amusement.
When I was at your age I so invested my evenings that they now tell in my business."

"I am willing to invest this evening in a way to make it tell upon my future," replied Haldane,
with a meaning glance at Laura.

Mr. Arnot observed this glance and the blushing face of his niece, and drew his own conclusions;
but he only said dryly:

"That remark is about as inexplicable as some of your performances at the office of late."

Laura soon after excused herself and sought a refuge in her aunt's room, which, being darkened,
prevented the lady from seeing her burning cheeks and general air of vexation and disquiet.
Were it not for Mrs. Arnot's suffering condition and need of rest, Laura would then have told
her of her trouble and asked permission to return home, and she determined to do this at the
first opportunity. Now, however, she unselfishly forgot herself in her effort to alleviate
her aunt's distress. With a strong sense of relief she heard Haldane go out, slamming the front
door after him.

"Was there ever such an absurd fellow!" thought she; "he has made himself disagreeable ever
since I came, with his superior airs, as if he knew everything, when, in fact, he doesn't know
anything well, not even good manners. He acts as if I belonged to him and had no right to any
will or wishes of my own. If he can't take the hints that I have given he must be as stupid
and blind as an owl. In spite of all that I can do or say he seems to think that I only want
an opportunity to show the same ridiculous feeling that makes him appear like a simpleton.
If I were a young lady in society I should detest a man who took it for granted that I would
fall in love with him."

With like indignant musings she beguiled the time, wondering occasionally why her aunt did
not ask her to go down and entertain the object of her dread, but secretly thankful that she
did not.

At last Mrs. Arnot said:

"Mr. Haldane went out, did he not?"

"Yes, auntie, some time ago."

"I left my other bottle of smelling-salts in the parlor. I think it is stronger than this.
Would you mind getting it for me? It's on the mantel."

Laura had no difficulty in finding it in the somewhat dimly-lighted drawing-room, but as she
turned to leave the apartment she saw Haldane between her and the door.

Before he had reached any of his garish haunts he had felt such an utter distaste for them
in his present mood that he returned. He was conscious of the impulse merely to be near the
object of his thoughts, and also hoped that by some fortunate chance he might still be able
to find her alone. That his return might be unnoted, he had quietly entered a side door, and
was waiting and watching for just such an opportunity as Mrs. Arnot had unwittingly occasioned.

Laura tried to brush past, but he intercepted her, and said:

"No, Miss Laura, not till you hear me. You have my destiny in your hands."

"I haven't anything of the kind," she answered, in tones of strong vexation. Guided by instinct,
she resolved to be as prosaic and matter-of-fact as possible; so she added: "I have only aunt's
smelling-salts in my hands, and she needs them."

"I need you far more than Mrs. Arnot needs her smelling-salts," he said tragically.

"Mr. Haldane, such talk is very absurd," she replied, half ready to cry from nervousness and
annoyance.

"It is not absurd. How can you trifle with the deepest and holiest feelings that a man--of
which a man--feels?" he retorted passionately, and growing a little incoherent.

"I don't know anything about such feelings, and therefore cannot trifle with them."

"What did your blushes mean this evening? You cannot deceive me; I have seen the world and
know it."

"I am not the world. I am only a school-girl, and if you had good sense you would not talk
so to me. You appear to think that I must feel and do as you wish. What right have you to act so?"

"The truest and strongest right. You know well that I love you with my whole soul. I have given
you my heart--all there is of me. Have I not a right to ask your love in return?"

Laura was conscious of a strange thrill as she heard these passionate words, for they appeared
to echo in a depth of her nature of which she had not been conscious before.

The strong and undoubting assurance which possessed him carried for a moment a strange mastery
over her mind. As he so vehemently asserted the only claim which a man can urge, her woman's
soul trembled, and for a moment she felt almost powerless to resist. His unreserved giving
appeared to require that he should receive also. She would have soon realized, however, that
Haldane's attitude was essentially that of an Oriental lover, who, in his strongest attachments,
is ever prone to maintain the imperative mood, and to consult his own heart rather than that
of the woman he loves. While in Laura's nature there was unusual gentleness and a tendency
to respect and admire virile force, she was too highly bred in our Western civilization not
to resent as an insult any such manifestation of this force as would make the quest of her
love a demand rather than a suit, after once recognizing such a spirit. She was now confused,
however, and after an awkward moment said:

"I have not asked or wished you to give me so much. I don't think you realize what you are
saying. If you would only remember that I am scarcely more than a child you would not talk
so foolishly. Please let me go to my aunt."

"No, not till you give me some hope. Your blushes prove that you are a woman."

"They prove that I am excessively annoyed and vexed."

"Oh, Laura, after raising so many hopes you cannot--you cannot----"

"I haven't meant to raise any hopes."

"Why were you so kind to me at first?"

"Well, if you must know, my aunt wished me to be. If I had dreamed you would act so I would
not have spoken to you."

"What motive could Mrs. Arnot have had for such a request?"

"I will tell you, and when you know the whole truth you will see how mistaken you are, and
how greatly you wrong me. Aunt wanted me to help her keep you home evenings, and away from
all sorts of horrid places to which you were fond of going."

These words gave Haldane a cue which he at once followed, and he said eagerly:

"If you will be my wife, I will do anything you wish. I will make myself good, great, and renowned
for your sake. Your smiles will keep me from every temptation. But I warn you that if you cast
me off--if you trifle with me--I shall become a reckless man. I shall be ruined. My only impulse
will be self-destruction."

Laura was now thoroughly incensed, and she said indignantly:

"Mr. Haldane, I should think you would be ashamed to talk in that manner. It's the same as
if a spoiled boy should say: If you don't give me what I wish, right or wrong, I will do something
dreadful. If I ever do love a man, it will be one that I can look up to and respect, and not
one who must be coaxed and bribed to give up disgusting vices. If you do not open that door
I will call uncle."

The door opened, and Mr. Arnot entered with a heavy frown upon his brow.

CHAPTER VI

"GLOOMY GRANDEUR"

Mr. Arnot's library was on the side of the hall opposite to the drawing-room. Though he had
been deeply intent upon his writing, he at last became conscious that there were some persons
in the parlor who were talking in an unusual manner, and he soon distinguished the voice of
his niece. Haldane's words, manner, and glances at the dinner-table at once recurred to him,
and stepping silently to the drawing-room door, he heard the latter part of the colloquy narrated
in the previous chapter. He was both amused and angry, and while relieved to find that his
niece was indulging in no "sentimental nonsense," he had not a particle of sympathy or charity
for Haldane, and he determined to give the young man a "lesson that would not soon be forgotten."

"What is the meaning of this ridiculous scene?" he demanded sternly. "What have you been saying
to this child?"

Haldane at first had been much abashed by the entrance of his employer; but his tone and manner
stung the young fellow into instant anger, and he replied haughtily:

"She is not a child, and what I have said concerns Miss Romeyn only."

"Ah, indeed! I have no right to protect my niece in my own house!"

"My intentions toward Miss Romeyn are entirely honorable, and there is no occasion for protection."

Reassured by her uncle's presence, Laura's nervous apprehension began to give place to something
like pity for the youth, who had assumed an attitude befitting high tragedy, and toward whom
she felt that she had been a little harsh. Now that he was confronted by one who was disposed
to be still more harsh, womanlike, she was inclined to take his part. She would be sorry to
have him come to an open rupture with his employer on her account, so she said eagerly:

"Please, uncle, do me the favor of letting the whole matter drop. Mr. Haldane has seen his
mistake by this time. I am going home to-morrow, and the affair is too absurd to make any one
any more trouble."

Before he could answer, Mrs. Arnot, hearing their voices, and surmising the trouble which she
had hoped to prevent, now appeared also, and by her good sense and tact brought the disagreeable
scene to a speedy close.

"Laura, my dear," she said quietly, "go up to my room, and I will join you there soon." The
young girl gladly obeyed.

There were times when Mrs. Arnot controlled her strong-willed husband in a manner that seemed
scarcely to be reconciled with his dictatorial habits. This fact might be explained in part
by her wealth, of which he had the use, but which she still controlled, but more truly by her
innate superiority, which ever gives supremacy to the nobler and stronger mind when aroused.

Mr. Arnot had become suddenly and vindictively angry with his clerk, who, instead of being
overwhelmed with awe and shame at his unexpected appearance, was haughty and even defiant.
One of the strongest impulses of this man was to crush out of those in his employ a spirit
of independence and individual self-assertion. The idea of a part of his business machinery
making such a jarring tumult in his own house! He proposed to instantly cast away the cause
of friction, and insert a more stolid human cog-wheel in Haldane's place.

But when his wife said, in a tone which she rarely used:

"Mr. Arnot, before anything further is said upon this matter, I would like to see you in your
library"--he followed her without a word.

Before the library door closed, however, he could not forbear snarling.

"I told you that your having this big spoiled boy as an inmate of the house would not work well."

"He has been offering himself to Laura, has he not?" she said quietly.

"I suppose that is the way in which you would explain his absurd, maudlin words. A pitiful
offer it was, which she, like a sensible girl, declined without thanks."

"What course do you propose to take toward Haldane?"

"I was on the point of sending him home to his mother, and of suggesting that he remain with
her till he becomes something more than a fast, foolish boy. As yet I see no reason for acting
differently."

"On just what grounds do you propose to discharge him?"

"Has he not given sufficient cause this evening in his persecution of Laura and his impudence
to me?"

"Thomas, you forget that while young Haldane is your clerk, he enjoys a social position quite
equal to that which a son of ours would possess, did we have one. Though his course toward
Laura has been crude and boyish, I have yet to learn that there has been anything dishonorable.
Laura is to us a child; to him she seems a very pretty and attractive girl, and his sudden
passion for her is, perhaps, one of the most natural things in the world. Besides, an affair
of this kind should be managed quietly and wisely, and not with answering passion. You are
angry now; you will see that I am right in the morning. At all events, the name of this innocent
girl, my sister's child, must not be bandied about in the gossip of the town. Among young men
Haldane passes for a young man. Do you wish to have it the town talk that he has been discharged
because he ventured to compliment your niece with the offer of his hand? That he has been premature
and rash is chiefly the fault of his years and temperament; but no serious trouble need follow
unless we make it ourselves. Laura will return home in a day or two, and if the young fellow
is dealt with wisely and kindly, this episode may do much toward making a sensible man of him.
If you abruptly discharge him, people will imagine tenfold more than has occurred, and they
may surmise positive evil."

"Well, well, have it your own way," said her husband impatiently. "Of course, I do not wish
that Laura should become the theme of scandal. But as for this young firebrand of a Haldane,
there must be a decided change in him. I cannot bother with him much longer."

"I think I can manage him. At any rate, please make no change that can seem connected with
this affair. If you would also exercise a little kindness and forbearance, I do not think you
would ever have cause to regret it."

"My office is not an asylum for incapables, lovesick swains, and fast boys. It's a place of
business, and if young Haldane can't realize this, there are plenty who can."

"As a favor to me, I will ask you to bear with him as long as possible. Can you not send him
to your factory near New York on some errand? New scenes will divert his thoughts, and sudden
and acute attacks, like his, usually do not last very long."

"Well, well, I'll see."

Mrs. Arnot returned to the parlor, but Haldane was no longer there. She went to his room, but,
though he was within, she could obtain no response to her knocking, or to the kind tone in
which she spoke his name. She sighed, but thought that perhaps he would be calmer and more
open to reason on the morrow, and, therefore, returned to her own apartment. Indeed, she was
glad to do so, for in her ill and suffering condition the strain had already been too great.

She found Laura tearful and troubled, and could not do less than listen to her story.

"Do you think I have done anything wrong, auntie?" asked the girl in deep anxiety.

"No, dear, I think you have acted very sensibly. I wish I could have foreseen the trouble sooner,
and saved you both from a disagreeable experience."

"But uncle won't discharge Mr. Haldane on my account, will he?" she continued with almost equal
solicitude.

"Certainly not. Egbert has not done anything that should cause his dismissal. I think that
the only result will be to teach you both that these are matters which should be left to future
years."

"I'm glad they are distant, for I had no idea that love affairs were so intensely disagreeable."

Her aunt smiled, and after a little time the young girl departed to her rest quite comforted
and reassured.

The next morning Mrs. Arnot was too ill to appear at breakfast, and her niece would not venture
down alone. Haldane and his employer sat down together in grim silence, and, after a cup of
coffee only, the former abruptly excused himself and went to the office.

As might have been expected, the young man had passed a restless night, during which all sorts
of rash, wild purposes surged through his mind. At first he meditated hiding his grief and
humiliation in some "far distant clime"; but the thought occurred to him after a little time
that this would be spiting himself more than any one else. His next impulse was to leave the
house of his "insulting employer" forever; but as he was about to depart, he remembered that
he happened to have scarcely a dollar in his pocket, and therefore concluded to wait till he
had drawn his pay, or could write to his mother for funds. Then, as his anger subsided, a sense
of loss and disappointment overwhelmed him, and for a long time he sobbed like a brokenhearted
child. After this natural expression of grief he felt better, and became able to think connectedly.
He finally resolved that he would become "famous," and rise in "gloomy grandeur" till he towered
far above his fellow men. He would pierce this obdurate maiden's heart with poignant but unavailing
regret that she had missed the one great opportunity of her life. He gave but slight and vague
consideration to the methods by which he would achieve the renown which would overshadow Laura's
life; but, having resolutely adopted the purpose with a few tragic gestures and some obscure
fragmentary utterances, he felt consoled and was able to obtain a little sleep.

The routine duties at the office on the following day did not promise very much, but he went
through them in a kind of grim, vindictive manner, as if resolving to set his foot on all obstacles.
He would "suffer in silence and give no sign" till the hour came when he could flash out upon
the world. But as the day declined, he found the role of "gloomy grandeur" rather heavy, and
he became conscious of the fact that he had scarcely eaten anything for nearly twenty-four
hours. Another impulse began to make itself felt--that of fulfilling his threat and torturing
Miss Romeyn by going to ruin. With alluring seductiveness the thought insinuated itself into
his mind that one of the first steps in the tragedy might be a game and wine supper, and his
growing hunger made this mode of revenge more attractive than cold and austere ambition.

But Laura's words concerning "disgusting vices" recurred to him with all and more than their
first stinging plainness, and he put the impulse away with a gesture and tragic expression
of face that struck a sere and withered bookkeeper, who happened at that moment to look up,
as so queer that he feared the young man was becoming demented.

Haldane concluded--and with some reason in view of Laura's romantic nature--that only a career
of gloomy grandeur and high renown would impress the maiden whom yesterday he proposed to make
happy forever, but to-day to blight with regret like a "worm i' the bud." He already had a
vague presentiment that such a role would often mortify his tastes and inclinations most dismally;
and yet, what had he henceforth to do with pleasure? But if, after he had practiced the austerity
of an anchorite, she should forget him, marry another, and be happy! The thought was excruciating.
O, that awful "another"! He is the fiend that drags disappointed lovers down to the lowest
depth of their tortures. If Laura had had a previous favorite, Haldane would have been most
happy to have her meet "another" in himself; but now this vague but surely coming rival of
the future sent alternately cold chills and molten fire through his veins.

He was awakened from such painful reveries by a summons to his employer's private office.

CHAPTER VII

BIRDS OF PREY

Mr. Arnot in his widely extended business owned several factories, and in the vicinity of one,
located at a suburb of New York, there were no banking facilities. It was, therefore, his custom
at stated times to draw from his bank at Hillaton such amounts in currency as were needed to
pay those in his employ at the place indicated, and send the money thither by one of his clerks.
Upon the present occasion, in compliance with his wife's request, he decided to send Haldane.
He had no hesitation in doing this, as the errand was one that required nothing more than honesty
and a little prudence.

"Mr. Haldane," said his employer, in tones somewhat less cold and formal than those habitual
with him, "we will let bygones be bygones. I am inclined to think that hereafter you will be
disposed to give your thoughts more fully to business, as a man should who proposes to amount
to anything in the world. In these envelopes are one thousand dollars in currency. I wish you
to place them securely in your breast-pockets, and take the five-thirty train to New York,
and from thence early to-morrow go out on the Long Island road to a little station called Arnotville,
and give these packages to Mr. Black, the agent in charge of my factory there. Take his receipt,
and report to me to-morrow evening. With that amount of money upon your person you will perceive
the necessity of prudence and care. Here is a check paying your salary for the past month.
The cashier will give you currency for it. Report your expenses on your return, and they will
be paid. As the time is limited, perhaps you can get some lunch at or near the depot."

"I prefer to do so," said Haldane, promptly, "and will try to perform the business to your
satisfaction."

Mr. Arnot nodded a cool dismissal, and Haldane started for a hotel-restaurant near the depot
with a step entirely too quick and elastic for one who must walk henceforth in the shadow of
"bitter memories and dark disappointment." The exercise brought color to his cheek, and there
certainly was a sparkle in his dark eyes. It could not be hope, for he had assured himself
again and again that "hope was dead in his heart." It might have been caused after his long
fast by the anticipation of a lunch at the depot and a petit souper in the city, and the thought
of washing both down with a glass of wine, or possibly with several. The relish and complacency
with which his mind dwelt on this prospect struck Haldane as rather incongruous in a being
as blighted as he supposed himself to be. With his youth, health, and unusually good digestion
he would find no little difficulty in carrying out the "gloomy grandeur" scheme, and he began
to grow conscious of the fact.

Indeed, in response to a law of nature, he was already inclined to react from his unwonted
depression into reckless hilarity. Impulse and inclination were his controlling forces, and
he was accustomed to give himself up to them without much effort at self-restraint. And yet
he sought to imagine himself consistent, so that he could maintain his self-approval.

"I will hide my despair with laughter," he muttered; "the world cannot know that it is hollow,
and but a mask against its vulgar curiosity."

A good cold lunch and a cup of coffee--which he could have obtained at once at the hotel near
the depot--would not answer for this victim of despair. Some extra delicacies, which required
time for preparation, were ordered. In the meantime he went to the bar for an "appetizer,"
as he termed it. Here he met an acquaintance among the loungers present, and, of course, asked
him to take a social glass also. This personage complied in a manner peculiarly felicitous,
and in such a way as to give the impression that his acceptance of the courtesy was a compliment
to Haldane. Much practice had made him perfect in this art, and the number of drinks that he
was able to secure gratis in the course of a year by being always on hand and by maintaining
an air of slight superiority, combined with an appearance of bonhomie and readiness to be social,
would have made a remarkable sum total.

Before their glasses clinked together he said, with the off-handed courtesy indigenous to bar-rooms,
where acquaintances are made with so little trouble and ceremony:

"Mr. Haldane, my friends from New York, Mr. Van Wink and Mr. Ketchem."

Haldane turned and saw two young men standing conveniently near, who were dressed faultlessly
in the style of the day. There was nothing in their appearance to indicate that they did not
reside on Fifth Avenue, and, indeed, they may have had rooms on that fashionable street.

Messrs. Van Wink and Ketchem had also a certain air of superiority, and they shook hands with
Haldane in a way that implied:

"While we are metropolitan men, we recognize in you an extraordinarily fine specimen of the
provincial." And the young man was not indifferent to their unspoken flattery. He at once invited
them also to state to the smirking bartender their preferences among the liquid compounds before
them, and soon four glasses clinked together.

With fine and thoughtful courtesy they had chosen the same mixture that he had ordered for
himself, and surely some of the milk of human kindness must have been infused in the punches
which they imbibed, for Messrs. Van Wink and Ketchem seemed to grow very friendly toward Haldane.
Perhaps taking a drink with a man inspired these worthies with a regard for him similar to
that which the social eating of bread creates within the breasts of Bedouins, who, as travellers
assert, will protect with their lives a stranger that has sat at their board; but rob and murder,
as a matter of course, all who have not enjoyed that distinction. Whatever may have been the
cause, the stylish men from the city were evidently pleased with Haldane, and they delicately
suggested that he was such an unusually clever fellow that they were willing to know him better.

"I assure you, Mr. Haldane," protested Mr. Van Wink, "our meeting is an unexpected pleasure.
Having completed our business in town, time was hanging heavily on our hands, and it is still
a full half-hour before the train leaves."

"Let us drink again to further acquaintance," said Mr. Ketchem cordially, evincing a decided
disposition to be friendly; "Mr. Haldane is in New York occasionally, and we would be glad
to meet him and help him pass a pleasant hour there, as he is enlivening the present hour for us."

Haldane was not cautious by nature, and had been predisposed by training to regard all flattering
attention and interest as due to the favorable impression which he supposed himself to make
invariably upon those whose judgment was worth anything. It is true there had been one marked
and humiliating exception. But the consoling thought now flashed into his mind that, perhaps,
Miss Romeyn was, as she asserted, but a mere "child," and incapable of appreciating him. The
influence of the punch he had drank and the immediate and friendly interest manifested by these
gentlemen who knew the world, gave a plausible coloring to this explanation of her conduct.
After all, was he not judging her too harshly? She had not realized whom she had refused, and
when she grew up in mind as well as in form she might be glad to act very differently. "But
I may choose to act differently also," was his haughty mental conclusion.

This self-communion took place while the still smirking bartender was mixing the decoctions
ordered by the cordial and generous Mr. Ketchem. A moment later four glasses clinked together,
and Haldane's first acquaintance--the young man with the air of slight but urbane superiority--felicitated
himself that he had "made two free drinks" within a brief space of time.

The effect of the liquor upon Haldane after his long fast was far greater than if it had been
taken after a hearty meal, and he began to reciprocate the friendliness of the strangers with
increasing interest.

"Gentlemen," said he, "our meeting is one of those fortunate incidents which promise much more
pleasure to come. I have ordered a little lunch in the dining-room. It will take but a moment
for the waiters to add enough for three more, and then we will ride into the city together,
for my business takes me there this evening also."

"I declare," exclaimed Mr. Van Wink in a tone of self-gratulation, "were I piously inclined
I should be tempted to call our meeting quite providential. But if we lunch with you it must
be on condition that you take a little supper with us at the Brunswick after we arrive in town."

"No one could object to such agreeable terms," cried Haldane; "come, let us adjourn to the
dining-room. By the way, Mr. Bartender, send us a bottle of your best claret."

The young man who an hour before had regarded himself as cruelly blighted for life, was quite
successful in "hiding his despair with laughter." Indeed, from its loudness and frequency,
undue exhilaration was suggested rather than a "secret sorrow." It gave him a fine sense of
power and of his manly estate to see the waiters bustling around at his bidding, and to remember
that he was the host of three gentlemen, who, while very superior in style, and evidently possessed
of wealth, still recognized in him an equal with whom they were glad to spend a social hour.

Scarcely ever before had he met any one who appreciated him as fully as did Messrs. Van Wink
and Ketchem, and their courteous deference confirmed a view which he had long held, that only
in the large sphere of the metropolis could he find his true level and most congenial companionships.
These young men had a style about them which provincials could not imitate. Even the superior
gentleman who introduced them to him had a slightly dimmed and tarnished appearance as he sat
beside his friends. There was an immaculate finish and newness about all their appointments--not
a speck upon their linen, nor a grain of dust upon their broadcloth and polished boots. If
the theory be true that character is shown in dress, these men, outwardly so spotless, must
be worthy of the confidence with which they had inspired their new acquaintance. They suggested
two bright coins just struck from the mint, and "They have the ring of true metal," thought
Haldane.

It seemed to the young men that they had just fairly commenced to enjoy their lunch, when a
prolonged shriek of a locomotive, dying away in the distance, awakened them to a sense of the
flight of time. Hastily pulling out his watch, Haldane exclaimed with an oath:

"There goes our train."

Messrs. Van Wink and Ketchem were apparently much concerned.

"Haldane," they exclaimed, "you are much too entertaining a fellow for one to meet when there's
a train to be caught."

"This is a serious matter for me," said Haldane, somewhat sobered by the thought of Mr. Arnot's
wrath; "I had important business in town."

"Can it not be arranged by telegraph?" asked Mr. Van Wink in a tone of kindly solicitude.

"One can't send money by telegraph. No; I must go myself."

The eyes of Haldane's three guests met for a second in a way that indicated the confirmnation
of something in their minds, and yet so evanescent was this glance of intelligence that a cool,
close observer would scarcely have detected it, much less their flushed and excited host.

"Don't worry, Haldane," said his first acquaintance; "there is an owl-train along at eleven
to-night, and you can mail your check or draft on that if you do not care to travel at such
an unearthly hour."

"Oh, there is a late train!" cried the young man, much relieved. "Then I'm all right. I am
obliged to go myself, as the funds I carry are in such a shape that I cannot mail them."

Again the eyes of his guests met with a furtive gleam of satisfaction.

Now that Haldane felt himself safely out of his dilemma, he began to be solicitous about his
companions.

"I fear," he said, "that my poor courtesy can make but small amends for the loss of your train."

"Well, Haldane," said Mr. Ketchem, with great apparent candor, "I speak for myself when I say
that I would regret losing this train under most circumstances, but with the prospect of a
social evening together I can scarcely say that I do."

"I, too," cried Mr. Van Wink, "am inclined to regard our loss of the train as a happy freak
of fortune. Let us take the owl-train, also, Ketchem, and make a jovial night of it with Mr.
Haldane."

"Fill up your glasses, and we'll drink to a jolly night," cried Haldane, and all complied with
wonderful zest and unanimity. The host, however, was too excited and preoccupied to note that
while Mr. Van Wink and Mr. Ketchem were always ready to have their glasses filled, they never
drained them very low; and thus it happened that he and the slightly superior gentleman who
made free drinks one of the chief objects of existence shared most of the bottle of wine between
them.

As the young men rose from the lunch table Haldane called this individual aside, and said:

"Harker, I want you to help a fellow out of a scrape. You must know that I was expected to
leave town on the five-thirty train. I do not care to be seen in the public rooms, for old
cast-iron Arnot might make a row about my delay, even though it will make no difference in
his business. Please engage a private room, where we can have a bottle of wine and a quiet
game of cards, and no one be the wiser."

"Certainly--nothing easier in the world--I know just the room--cosey--off one side--wait a
moment, gentlemen."

It seemed but a moment before he returned and led them, preceded by a bell-boy, to just such
an apartment as he had described. Though the evening was mild, a fire was lighted in the grate,
and as it kindled it combined with the other appointments to give the apartment an air of luxurious
comfort.

"Bring us a bottle of sherry," said Haldane to the bell-boy.

"Also a pack of cards, some fine old brandy and cigars, and charge to me," said Mr. Ketchem;
"I wish to have my part in this entertainment. Come, Harker, take a seat."

"Desperately sorry I can't spend the evening with you," said this sagacious personage, who
realized with extreme regret that not even for the prospect of unlimited free potations could
he afford to risk the loss of his eminent respectability, which he regarded as a capitalist
does his principal, something that must be drawn upon charily. Mr. Harker knew that his mission
was ended, and, in spite of the order for the sherry and brandy, he had sufficient strength
of mind to retire. In delicate business transactions like the one under consideration he made
it a point to have another engagement when matters got about as far along as they now were
in Haldane's case. If anything unpleasant occurred between parties whom he introduced to each
other, and he was summoned as a witness, he grew so exceedingly dignified and superior in his
bearing that every one felt like asking his pardon for their suspicions. He always proved an
alibi, and left the court-room with the air of an injured man. As people, however, became familiar
with his haunts and habits, there was an increasing number who regarded his virtuous assumptions
and professions of ignorance in respect to certain cases of swindling with incredulous smiles.

Mr. Barker, however, could not tear himself away till the brandy and sherry appeared, and,
after paying his respects to both, went to keep his engagement, which consisted in lounging
about another hotel on the other side of the depot.

Messrs. Van Wink and Ketchem, of course, both knew how to deal the cards, and with apologetic
laughter the young men put up small stakes at first, just to give zest to the amusement. Haldane
lost the first game, won the second and third, lost again, had streaks of good and bad luck
so skilfully intermingled that the thought often occurred to him:

"These fellows play as fair a game as I ever saw and know how to win and lose money like gentlemen."

But these high-toned "gentlemen" always managed to keep the bottle of sherry near him, and
when they lost they would good-naturedly and hilariously propose that they take a drink. Haldane
always complied, but while he drank they only sipped.

As the evening waned the excitement of the infatuated youth deepened. The heat of the room
and the fumes of tobacco combined with the liquor to unman him and intensify the natural recklessness
of his character.

There is, probably, no abnormal passion that so completely masters its victims as that for
gambling; and as Haldane won, lost, and won again, he became so absorbed as to be unconscious
of the flight of time and all things else. But as he lost self-control, as he half-unconsciously
put his glass to his lips with increasing frequency, his companions grew cooler and more wary.
Their eyes no longer beamed good-naturedly upon their victim, but began to emit the eager,
cruel gleams of some bird of prey.

But they still managed the affair with consummate skill. Their aim was to excite Haldane to
the last degree of recklessness, and yet keep him sufficiently sober for further playing. From
Harker they had learned that Mr. Arnot had probably sent him in the place of the clerk usually
employed; and, if so, it was quite certain that he had a large sum of money upon his person.
Haldane's words on becoming aware that he had missed his train confirmed their surmises, and
it was now their object to beguile him into a condition which would make him capable of risking
his employer's funds. They also wished that he should remain sufficiently sober to be responsible
for this act, and to remember, as he recalled the circumstances, that it was his own act. Therefore
they kept the brandy beyond his reach; that was not yet needed.

By the time the evening was half over, Haldane found that, although he had apparently won considerable
money, he had lost more, and that not a penny of his own funds remained. With an angry oath
he stated the fact to his companions.

"That's unfortunate," said Mr. Ketchem, sympathetically. "There are nearly two hours yet before
the train leaves, and with your disposition toward good luck tonight you could clean us out
by that time, and would have to lend us enough to pay our fares to New York."

"It's a pity to give up our sport now that we have just got warmed up to it," added Mr. Van
Wink, suggestively. "Haven't you some funds about you that you can borrow for the evening--just
enough to keep the game going, you know?"

Haldane hesitated. He was not so far gone but that conscience entered an emphatic protest.
The trouble was, however, that he had never formed the habit of obeying conscience, even when
perfectly sober. Another influence of the past also proved most disastrous. His mother's weakness
now made him weak. In permitting him to take her money without asking, she had undermined the
instinct of integrity which in this giddy moment of temptation might have saved him. If he
from childhood had been taught that the property of others was sacred, the very gravity of
the crime to which he now was urged would have sobered and awakened him to his danger. But
his sense of wrong in this had been blunted, and there was no very strong repugnance toward
the suggestion.

Moreover, his brain was confused and excited to the last degree possible in one who still continued
sane and responsible. Indeed, it would be difficult to say how far he was responsible at this
supreme moment of danger. He certainly had drank so much as to be unable to realize the consequences
of his action.

After a moment's hesitation, like one who feebly tries to brace himself in a swift torrent,
the gambler's passion surged up against and over his feeble will--then swept him down.

CHAPTER VIII

THEIR VICTIM

Haldane drew an envelope from his breast-pocket, and laid it on the table, saying with a reckless
laugh:

"Well, well, as you say, there is no great harm in borrowing a little of this money, and returning
it again before the evening is over. The only question is how to open this package, for if
torn it may require explanations that I do not care to make."

"We can easily manage that," laughed Ketchem; "put the package in your pocket a few moments,"
and he rang the bell.

To the boy who appeared he said, "Bring us three hot whiskey punches--hot, remember; steaming hot."

He soon reappeared with the punch, and the door was locked again.

"Hold your package over the steam of your punch, and the gum will dissolve so that you can
open and close it in a way that will defy detection."

The suggestion was speedily carried out.

"Now," continued Mr. Ketchem, "the punch having already served so excellent a turn, we will
finish it by drinking to your good luck."

Haldane won the first two games. This success, together with the liquor, which was strong,
almost wholly dethroned his reason, and in his mad, drunken excitement he began to stake large
sums. The eyes of his companions grew more wolfish than ever, and, after a significant flash
toward each other, the gamblers turned fortune against their victim finally. The brandy was
now placed within his reach, and under its influence Haldane threw down money at random. The
first package was soon emptied. He snatched the other from his pocket and tore it open, but
before its contents had likewise disappeared his head drooped upon his breast, and he became
insensible.

They watched him a moment, smiled grimly at each other, drew a long breath of relief, and,
rising, stretched themselves like men who had been under a strain that had taxed them severely.

"Half an hour yet," said Mr. Van Wink; "wish the time was up."

"This is a heavy swag if we get off safely with it. I say, Haldane, wake up."

But Haldane was sunk in the deepest stupor.

"I guess it's safe enough," said Van Wink, answering Ketchem's questioning eyes.

The latter thereupon completely emptied the remaining package of money, and replaced the two
empty envelopes in Haldane's breast-pocket, and buttoned up his coat.

With mutual glances of exultation at the largeness of the sum, they swiftly divided the spoil
between them. It was agreed that after leaving the hotel they should separate, that one should
go to Boston, the other to Baltimore, and that they should return to their old haunts in New
York after the interest caused by the affair had died out. Then, lighting cigars, they coolly
sat down to wait for the train, having first opened a window and placed Haldane where the fresh
air would blow upon him.

When the time of departure approached, Mr. Van Wink went to the bar and paid both their own
and Haldane's bill, saying that they would now vacate the room. On his return Ketchem had so
far aroused Haldane that he was able to leave the house with their assistance, and yet so intoxicated
as to be incapable of thinking and acting for himself. They took him down a side street, now
utterly deserted, and left him on the steps of a low groggery, from whence still issued the
voices of some late revellers. Five minutes later the "owl train" bore from the town Messrs.
Van Wink and Ketchem, who might be called with a certain aptness birds of the night and of prey.

Haldane remained upon the saloon steps, where he had been left, blinking stupidly at a distant
street lamp. He had a vague impression that something was wrong--that a misfortune of some
kind had befallen him, but all was confused and blurred. He would have soon gone to sleep again
had not the door opened, and a man emerged, who exclaimed:

"Faix, an who have we here, noddin' to himself as if he knew more'n other folk? Are ye waitin'
for some un to ax ye within for a comfortin' dhrop?"

"Take me 'ome," mumbled Haldane.

"Where's yer home?"

"Mrs. Haldane's," answered the youth, thinking himself in his native town.

"By me sowl, if it isn't Boss Arnot's new clerk. Sure's me name is Pat M'Cabe 'tis Misther
Haldane. I say, are ye sick?"

"Take me 'ome."

"Faix, I see," winking at two or three of his cronies who had gathered at the open door; "it's
a disase I'm taken wid meself at odd spells, though I takes moighty good care to kape out o'
the way of ould man Arnot when I'm so afflicted. He has a quare way o' thinkin' that ivery
man about him can go as rigaler as if made in a mash-shine shop, bad luck till 'im."

Perhaps all in Mr. Arnot's employ would have echoed this sentiment, could the ill luck have
blighted him without reaching them. In working his employes as he did his machinery, Mr. Arnot
forgot that the latter was often oiled, but that he entirely neglected to lubricate the wills
of the former with occasional expressions of kindness and interest in their welfare. Thus it
came to pass that even down to poor Pat M'Cabe, man of all work around the office building,
all felt that their employer was a hard, driving taskmaster, who ever looked beyond them and
their interests to what they accomplished for him. The spirit of the master infused itself
among the men, and the tendency of each one to look out for himself without regard to others
was increased. If Pat had served a kinder and more considerate man, he might have been inclined
to show greater consideration for the intoxicated youth; but Pat's favorite phrase, "Divil
take the hindmost," was but a fair expression of the spirit which animated his master, and
the majority in his employ. When, therefore, Haldane, in his thick, imperfect utterance, again
said, "Take me 'ome," Pat concluded that it would be the best and safest course for himself.
Helping the young man to his feet he said:

"Can ye walk? Mighty onstiddy on yer pins; but I'm athinkin' I can get ye to the big house
afore mornin'. Should I kape ye out o' the way till ye get sober, and ould man Arnot find it
out, I'd be in the street meself widout a job 'fore he ate his dinner. Stiddy now; lean aginst
me, and don't wabble yer legs so."

With like exhortations the elder and more wary disciple of Bacchus disappeared with his charge
in the gloom of the night.

It chanced that the light burned late, on this evening, in Mrs. Arnot's parlor. The lady's
indisposition had confined her to her room and couch during the greater part of the day; but
as the sun declined, the distress in her head had gradually ceased, and she had found her airy
drawing-room a welcome change from the apartment heavy with the odor of anaesthetics. Two students
from the university had aided in beguiling the early part of the evening, and then Laura had
commenced reading aloud an interesting tale, which had suspended the consciousness of time.
But as the marble clock on the mantel chimed out the hour of twelve, Mrs. Arnot rose hastily
from the sofa, exclaiming:

"What am I thinking of, to keep you up so late! If your mother knew that you were out of your
bed she would hesitate to trust you with me again."

"One more chapter, dear auntie, please?"

"Yes, dear, several more--to-morrow; but to bed now, instanter. Come, kiss your remorseful
aunt good-night. I'll remain here a while longer, for either your foolish story or the after
effects of my wretched headache make me a trifle morbid and wakeful to-night. Oh, how that
bell startles me! what can it mean so late?"

The loud ring at the door remained unanswered a few moments, for the servants had all retired.
But the applicant without did not wait long before repeating the summons still more emphatically.

Then they heard the library door open, and Mr. Arnot's heavy step in the hall, as he went himself
to learn the nature of the untimely call. His wife's nervous timidity vanished at once, and
she stepped forward to join her husband, while Laura stood looking out from the parlor entrance
with a pale and frightened face. "Can it be bad news from home?" she thought.

"Who is there?" demanded Mr. Arnot, sternly.

"Me and Misther Haldane," answered a voice without in broadest brogue.

"Mr. Haldane!" exclaimed Mr. Arnot excitedly; "what can this mean? Who is me?" he next asked
loudly.

"Me is Pat M'Cabe, sure; the same as tidies up the office and does yer irrinds. Mr. Haldane's
had a bad turn, and I've brought him home."

As Mr. Arnot swung open the door, a man, who seemingly had been leaning against it, fell prone
within the hall. Laura gave a slight scream, and Mrs. Arnot was much alarmed, thinking that
Haldane was suffering from some sudden and alarming attack. Thoughts of at once telegraphing
to his mother were entering her mind, when the object of her solicitude tried to rise, and
mumbled in the thick utterance of intoxication:

"This isn't home. Take me to mother's."

Mrs. Arnot's eyes turned questioningly to her husband, and she saw that his face was dark with
anger and disgust.

"He is drunk," he said, turning to Pat, who stood in the door, cap in hand.

"Faix, sur, it looks moighty loike it. But it's not for a dacent sober man loike meself to
spake sartainly o' sich matters."

"Few words and to the point, sir," said Mr. Arnot harshly; "your breath tells where you have
been. But where did you find this--and how came you to find him?"

Either Mr. Arnot was at a loss for a term which would express his estimation of the young man,
who had slowly and unsteadily risen, and was supporting himself by holding fast the hatrack,
or he was restrained in his utterance by the presence of his wife.

"Well, sur," said Pat, with as ingenuous and candid an air as if he were telling the truth,
"the wife o' a neighbor o' mine was taken on a suddint, and I went for the docther, and as
I was a comin' home, who shud I see sittin' on a doorsthep but Misther Haldane, and I thought
it me duty to bring him home to yees."

"You have done right. Was it on the doorstep of a drinking-place you found him?"

"I'm athinkin' it was, sur; it had that sort o' look."

Mr. Arnot turned to his wife and said coldly, "You now see how it works. But this is not a
fit object for you and Laura to look upon; so please retire. I will see that he gets safely
to his room. I suppose he must go there, though the station-house is the more proper place
for him."

"He certainly must go to his own room," said Mrs. Arnot, firmly but quietly.

"Well, then, steady him along up the stairs, Pat. I will show you where to put the--" and Mr.
Arnot again seemed to hesitate for a term, but the blank was more expressive of his contempt
than any epithet could be, since his tone and manner suggested the worst.

Returning to the parlor, Mrs. Arnot found Laura's face expressive of the deepest alarm and
distress.

"O auntie, what does all this mean? Am I in any way to blame? He said he would go to ruin if
I didn't--but how could I?"

"No, my dear, you are not in the slightest degree to blame. Mr. Haldane seems both bad and
foolish. I feel to-night that he is not worthy to speak to you; much less is he fit to be intrusted
with that which you will eventually give, I hope, only to one who is pre-eminently noble and
good. Come with me to your room, my child. I am very sorry I permitted you to stay up to-night."

But Laura was sleepless and deeply troubled; she had never seen a laborer--much less one of
her own acquaintances--in Haldane's condition before; and to her young, innocent mind the event
had almost the character of a tragedy. Although conscious of entire blamelessness, she supposed
that she was more directly the cause of Haldane's behavior than was true, and that he was carrying
out his threat to destroy himself by reckless dissipation. She did not know that he had been
beguiled into his miserable condition through bad habits of long standing, and that he had
fallen into the clutches of those who always infest public haunts, and live by preying upon
the fast, foolish, and unwary. Haldane, from his character and associations, was liable to
such an experience whenever circumstances combined to make it possible. Young men with no more
principle than he possessed are never safe from disaster, and they who trust them trust rather
to the chances of their not meeting the peculiar temptations and tests to which they would
prove unequal. Laura could not then know how little she had to do with the tremendous downfall
of her premature lover. The same conditions given, he would probably have met with the same
experience upon any occasion. After his first glass of punch the small degree of discretion
that he had learned thus far in life began to desert him; and every man as he becomes intoxicated
is first a fool, and then the victim of every one who chooses to take advantage of his voluntary
helplessness and degradation.

But innocent Laura saw a romantic and tragic element in the painful event, and she fell asleep
with some vague womanly thoughts about saving a fellow-creature by the sacrifice of herself.
However, the morning light, the truth concerning Haldane, and her own good sense, would banish
such morbid fancies. Indeed the worst possible way in which a young woman can set about reforming
a bad man is to marry him. The usual result is greatly increased guilt on the part of the husband,
and lifelong, hopeless wretchedness for the wife.

CHAPTER IX

PAT AND THE PRESS

Pat having steadied and half carried Haldane to his room, Mr. Arnot demanded of his clerk what
had become of the money intrusted to his care; but his only answer was a stupid, uncomprehending
stare.

"Hold his hands," said Mr. Arnot impatiently. 

No, this isn't going to have the regulation hero-act end, in which Thomas Jefferson Brown saves
the life of the lady he loves. It's something different--something that Thomas Jefferson Brown never
guessed at when the water spurted in, and Lady Isobel turned to him with a little scream, her
beautiful blue eyes wide and filled with horror.

"Don't be afraid," he said. "Here, take this jacket and hold it down tight over the seam. We'll
reach the island, all right."

Lady Isobel held the jacket over the hole, and Thomas Jefferson Brown
put a strength into his paddle that threatened to crack off the handle.

After a minute or two, he saw a little trickle of water, beginning to ooze in about the edges
of the jacket. He leaned back for an instant, and signaled Lord Meton to bend over toward him.

"Take off your clothes," he said, so low that Lady Isobel couldn't hear. "Can you swim?"

"Not a stroke," said Lord Meton, and his face went as white as chalk;
but it was no whiter than Thomas Jefferson Brown's.

When a birchbark
seam begins to part there's no power on earth that will hold it when
the canoe is heavily loaded.

A few minutes later, the water was gushing in by the quart about Lady Isobel's feet. She fought
hard to hold it back.

When at last she saw that it was hopeless, she turned again, to see Lord Meton in his underwear,
and Thomas Jefferson Brown stripped of everything but his shirt and his buckskin trousers, which
don't water-sog.

He laughed straight into her face, as if it was all an amusing joke;
and then, suddenly, he began playing that banjo thing with his mouth.

It was all so strange, with the beat of the sea, the wail of the wind, and Thomas Jefferson
Brown sitting there as if nothing were happening, that Lady Isobel just stared in astonishment,
while the water gushed in about her.

At last he put down his paddle, and stretched out both hands; and it seemed the most natural thing
in the world that her two hands should come out to meet his.

"Listen," he said, and his eyes were telling her again what they told
her on the day when he brought her in from the York boat.

"You'll do as I tell you, won't you? And you won't be afraid?"

For an instant Lady Isobel looked at Lord Meton, shrinking and shivering
in the stern of the canoe; and then she looked back to the other man's
face, and blue fires seemed to leap into her eyes.

"With you--no, I'm not afraid," she said.

She leaned toward him, nearer and nearer, as the water rose about them, looking straight into
his eyes. They both knew in that moment that it was the man and the woman who had triumphed,
and that for them the lady and the gentleman were dead.

"I'm not afraid--with you," she said again.

Her lips trembled, and her golden hair swept over his breast, and Thomas Jefferson Brown bent
down and kissed her once upon the mouth. Then he said, as if he were speaking to a little girl:

"Do
not be afraid, and hold to the edge of the canoe when it fills. The wind will carry us to Harrison's
Island."

He turned to Lord Meton, and repeated the words; and just then the birchbark began to settle
under them. With one hand gripping the side, Thomas Jefferson Brown leaped over the sea. Lower
and lower settled the canoe with almost a scream, Lord Meton cried above the wind:

"Good Lord, it won't hold us up!"

For a few moments Thomas Jefferson relieved the canoe of his weight,
and the bark rose again, slowly. Then, with a gasp, he clutched at
the side again, and into Lady Isobel's drenched face, half hid the
wet veil of her shining hair.

"The canoe won't hold us all up," he
said trying to smile. "But it will hold two--you two and the wind
is taking it to the island, four miles to the island, and I may be
make it."

He knew that he never could make it; no man could swim
so far in the chill waters of Hudson Bay; but he spoke as if his words
were "I'm going to let go and try. Isobel, my love, will you kiss
me?"

She threw one arm about his neck. Meton, clutching with frantic
terror to the canoe saw nothing of what happened, nor did he hear
the sobbing cry of Lady Isobel's heart as she kissed Thomas Jefferson
Brown, once, and then three times, before he dropped back into the
sea again.

"Good-by, sweetheart!" he said.

In the eyes that looked
up at her, in his eyes in the one last look of love that he said,
"Good-by." Lady Isobel saw the truth, and stretched out her arm to
him.

"Stop! Come back! Take me with you!" she cried. "I want to go
with you!" And yet they sez that them as buys news is loike them
that takes stolen goods--moighty willin' to kape dark about where they got it, so that they
kin get more next time. That's the iditor of the 'Currier' in yon high room, and p'raps he'll
pay me as much for a wink and a hint the night as I'll get for me day's work termorrow. Bust
me if I don't thry him, if he'll fust promise me to say it any one axes him that he niver saw
Pat M'Cabe in his loife," and the suddenly improvised reporter climbed the long stairways to
where the night editor sat at his desk.

Pat gave a hearty rap for manners, but as the night was waning he walked in without waiting
for an answer, and addressed the startled newspaper man with a business-like directness, which
might often be advantageously imitated:

"Is this the shop where yer pays a dacent price for news?"

"It depends on the importance of the news, and its truthfulness," answered the editor, after
eying the intruder suspiciously for a moment.

"Thin I've got ye on both counts, though I didn't think ye'd bear down so heavy on its being
thrue," said Pat, advancing confidently.

As the door of the press-room, in which men were at work, stood open, the editor felt no alarm
from the sudden appearance of the burly figure before him, but, supposing the man had been
drinking, he said impatiently:

"Please state your business briefly, as my time is valuable."

"If yer time is worth mor'n news, I'll go to another shop," said Pat stiffly, making a feint
of departure.

"That's a good fellow, go along," chimed in the editor, bending down to his writing again.

Such disastrous acquiescence puzzled Pat for a moment, and he growled, "No wonder yer prints
a paper that's loike a lump o' lead, when 'stead o' lookin' for news yer turns it away from
yer doors."

"Now, look here, my man," said the editor rising, "if you have anything to say, say it. If
you have been drinking, you will not be permitted to make a row in this office."

"It's not me, but another man that's been dhrinkin'."

"Well," snarled the editor, "if the other man had the drink, you have the 'drunk,' and if you
don't take yourself off, I'll call some men from the press-room who may put you downstairs
uncomfortably fast."

"Hould on a bit," remonstrated Pat, "before yer ruffle yer feathers clane over yer head and
blinds yer eyes. Wud a man loike Boss Arnot send me, if I was dhrunk, wid a letther at this
toime o' night? and wud he send a letther to the superintindent o' the perlice at this toime
o' the night to ax him the toime o' day! Afore yer calls yer spalpeens out o' the press-room
squint at that."

The moment the editor caught sight of the business stamp on Mr. Arnot's letter and the formal
handwriting, his manner changed, and he said suavely:

"I beg your pardon--we have misunderstood one another--take a chair."

"There's been no misunderstandin' on my part," retorted Pat, with an injured air; "I've got
as dainty a bit o' scandal jist under me tongue as iver ye spiced yer paper wid, and yees thrates
me as if I was the inimy o' yer sowl."

"Well, you see," said the editor apologetically, "your not being in our regular employ, Mr.--I
beg your pardon--and your coming in this unusual way and hour--"

"But, begorry, somethin' unusual's happened."

"So I understand; it was very good of you to come to us first; just give me the points, and
I will jot them down."

"But what are yees goin' to give me for the pints?"

"That depends upon what they are worth. News cannot be paid for till we learn its value."

"Och! here I'm rinnin' a grate risk in tellin' ye at all, and whin I've spilt it all out, and
can't pick it up agin, ye may show me the door, and tell me to go 'long wid me rubbish."

"If you find what you have to report in the paper, you may know it is worth something. So if
you will look at the paper to-morrow you can see whether it will be worth your while to call
again," said the editor, becoming impatient at Pat's hesitancy to open his budget.

"But I'm in sore need of a dollar or two to-night. Dade, it's as much as my loife's worth to
go home widout 'em."

"See here, my good friend," said the editor, rising again and speaking very energetically,
"my time is very valuable, and you have taken considerable of it. Whatever may be the nature
of your news, it will not be worth anything to me if you do not tell it at once."

"Well, you see the biggest part o' the news is goin' to happen to-morrow."

"Well, well, what has happened to-night?"

"Will ye promise not to mention me name?"

"How can I mention it when I don't know it?"

"That's thrue, that's thrue. Now me mind's aisy on that pint, for ye must know that Boss Arnot's
in'ards are made o' cast-iron, and he'd have no marcy on a feller. You'll surely give me a
dollar, at laste."

"Yes, if your story is worth printing, and I give you just three minutes in which to tell it."

Thus pinned down, Pat related all he knew and surmised concerning Haldane's woful predicament,
saying in conclusion:

"Ye must know that this Haldane is not a poor spalpeen uv a clerk, but a gintleman's son. They
sez that his folks is as stylish and rich as the Arnots themselves. If ye'll have a reporther
up at the office in the mornin', ye'll git the balance o' the tale."

Having received his dollar, Pat went chuckling on his way to deliver his employer's letter
to the superintendent of the city police.

"Faix! I was as wise as a sarpent in not tellin' me name, for ye niver can thrust these iditors.
It's no green Irishman that can make a dollar after twelve o' the night."

A sleepy reporter was aroused and despatched after Pat, in order to learn, if possible, the
contents of Mr. Arnot's note.

In the meantime heavily leaded lines--vague and mysterious--concerning "Crime in High Life,"
were set up, accompanied on the editorial page by a paragraph to the following effect:

"With our usual enterprise and keen scent for news, we discovered at a late hour last night
that an intelligent Irishman in the employ of Mr. Arnot had been intrusted by that gentleman
with a letter written after the hour of midnight to the superintendent of the police. The guilty
party appears to be a Mr. Haldane--a young man of aristocratic and wealthy connections--who
is at present in Mr. Arnot's employ, and a member of his family. We think we are aware of the
nature of his grave offence, but in justice to all concerned we refer our readers to our next
issue, wherein they will find full particulars of the painful affair, since we have obtained
peculiar facilities for learning them. No arrests have yet been made."

"That will pique all the gossips in town, and nearly double our next issue," complacently muttered
the local editor, as he carried the scrawl at the last moment into the composing-room.

In the meantime the hero of our story--if such a term by any latitude of meaning can be applied
to one whose folly had brought him into such a prosaic and miserable plight--still lay in a
heavy stupor on the lounge where Pat had thrown his form, that had been as limp and helpless
as if it had become a mere body without a soul. But the consequences of his action did not
cease with his paralysis, any more than do the influences of evil deeds perish with a dying man.

CHAPTER X

RETURNING CONSCIOUSNESS

Mr. Arnot did not leave his library that night. His wife came to the door and found it locked.
To her appeal he replied coldly, but decisively, that he was engaged.

She sighed deeply, feeling that the sojourn of young Haldane under her roof was destined to
end in a manner most painful to herself and to her friend, his mother. She feared that the
latter would blame her somewhat for his miserable fiasco, and she fully believed that if her
husband permitted the young man to suffer open disgrace, she would never be forgiven by the
proud and aristocratic lady.

And yet she felt that it was almost useless to speak to her husband in his present mood, or
to hope that he could be induced to show much consideration for so grave an offense.

Of the worst feature in Haldane's conduct, however, she had no knowledge. Mr. Arnot rarely
spoke to his wife concerning his business, and she had merely learned, the previous evening,
that Haldane had been sent to New York upon some errand. Acting upon the supposition that her
husband had remembered and complied with her request, she graciously thanked him for giving
the young man a little change and diverting novelty of scene.

Mr. Arnot, who happened to verge somewhat toward a complacent mood upon this occasion, smiled
grimly at his wife's commendation, and even unbent so far as to indulge in some ponderous attempts
at wit with Laura concerning her "magnificent offer," and asserted that if she had been "like
his wife, she would have jumped at the chance of getting hold of such a crude, unreformed specimen
of humanity. Indeed," concluded he, "I did not know but that Mrs. Arnot was bringing about
the match, so that she might have a little of the raw material for reformatory purposes continually
on hand."

Mrs. Arnot smiled, as she ever did, at her husband's attempted witticisms; but what he regarded
as light, delicate shafts, winged sportively and carelessly, had rather the character of any
heavy object that came to hand thrown at her with heedless, inconsiderate force. It is due
Mr. Arnot to say that he gave so little thought and attention to the wounds and bruises he
caused, as to be unaware that any had been made. He had no hair-springs and jewel-tipped machinery
in his massive, angular organization, and he acted practically as if the rest of humanity had
been cast in the same mold with himself.

But Haldane's act touched him at his most vulnerable point. Not only had a large sum of his
money been made away with, but, what was far worse, there had been a most serious irregularity
in the business routine. While, therefore, he resolved that Haldane should receive full punishment,
the ulterior thought of giving the rest of his employes a warning and intimidating lesson chiefly
occupied his mind.

Aware of his wife's "unbusinesslike weakness and sentimental notions," as he characterized
her traits, he determined not to see her until he had carried out his plan of securing repayment
of the money, and of striking a salutary sentiment of fear into the hearts of all who were
engaged in carrying out his methodical will.

Therefore, with the key of Haldane's room in his pocket, he kept watch and guard during the
remainder of the night, taking only such rest as could be obtained on the lounge in his library.

At about sunrise two men appeared, and rapped lightly on the library window. Mr. Arnot immediately
went out to them, and placed one within a summer-house in the spacious garden at the rear of
the house, and the other in front, where he would be partially concealed by evergreens. By
this arrangement the windows of Haldane's apartment and every entrance of the house were under
the surveillance of police officers in citizen's dress. Mr. Arnot's own personal pride, as
well as some regard for his wife's feelings, led him to arrange that the arrest should not
be made at their residence, for he wished that all the events occurring at the house should
be excluded as far as possible from the inevitable talk which the affair would occasion. At
the same time he proposed to guard against the possibility of Haldane's escape, should fear
or shame prompt his flight.

Having now two assistant watchers, he threw himself on the sofa, and took an hour or more of
unbroken sleep. On awaking, he went with silent tread to the door of Haldane's room, and, afer
listening a moment, was satisfied from the heavy breathing within that its occupant was still
under the influence of stupor. He now returned the key to the door, and unlocked it so that
Haldane could pass out as soon as he was able. Then, after taking a little refreshment in the
dining-room, he went directly to the residence of a police justice of his acquaintance, who,
on hearing the facts as far as then known concerning Haldane, made out a warrant for his arrest,
and promised that the officer to whom it would be given should be sent forthwith to Mr. Arnot's
office--for thither the young man would first come, or be brought, on recovering from his heavy
sleep.

Believing that he had now made all the arrangements necessary to secure himself from loss,
and to impress the small army in his service that honesty was the "best policy" in their relations
with him, Mr. Arnot walked leisurely to one of his factories in the suburbs, partly to see
that all was right, and partly to remind his agents there that they were in the employ of one
whose untiring vigilance would not permit any neglect of duty to escape undetected.

Having noted that the routine of work was going forward as regularly as the monotonous clank
of the machinery, he finally wended his way to his city office, and was the first arrival thither
save Pat M'Cabe, who had just finished putting the place in order for the business of the day.
His factotum was in mortal trepidation, for in coming across town he had eagerly bought the
morning "Courier," and his complacent sense of security at having withheld his name from the
"oncivil iditer" vanished utterly as he read the words, "an intelligent Irishman in Mr. Arnot's
employ."

"Och! bloody blazes! that manes me," he had exclaimed; "and ould Boss Arnot will know it jist
as well as if they had printed me name all over the paper. Bad luck to the spalpeen, and worse
luck to meself! 'Intilligent Irishman,' am I? Then what kind o' a crather would one be as had
no sinse a' tall? Here I've bin throwin' away fotry dollars the month for the sake o' one!
Whin I gets me discharge I'd better go round to the tother side o' the airth' than go home
to me woife."

Nor were his apprehensions allayed as he saw Mr. Arnot reading the paper with a darkening scowl;
but for the present Pat was left in suspense as to his fate.

Clerks and book-keepers soon appeared, and among them a policeman, who was summoned to the
inner office, and given a seat somewhat out of sight behind the door.

Upon every face there was an expression of suppressed excitement and expectation, for the attention
of those who had not seen the morning paper was speedily called to the ominous paragraph. But
the routine and discipline of the office prevailed, and in a few minutes all heads were bending
over bulky journals and ledgers, but with many a furtive glance at the door.

As for Pat, he had the impression that the policeman within would collar him before the morning
was over, and march him off, with Haldane, to jail; and he was in such a state of nervous apprehension
that almost any event short of an earthquake would be a relief if it could only happen at once.

The April sun shone brightly and genially into the apartment in which Haldane had been left
to sleep off his drunken stupor. In all its appointments it appeared as fresh, inviting, and
cleanly as the wholesome light without. The spirit of the housekeeper pervaded every part of
the mansion, and in both furniture and decoration it would seem that she had studiously excluded
everything which would suggest morbid or gloomy thoughts. It was Mrs. Arnot's philosophy that
outward surroundings impart their coloring to the mind, and are a help or a hindrance. She
was a disciple of the light, and was well aware that she must resolutely dwell in its full
effulgence in order to escape from the blighting shadow of a life-long disappointment. Thus
she sought to make her home, not gay or gaudy--not a brilliant mockery of her sorrow, which
she had learned to calmly recognize as one might a village cemetery in a sunny landscape--but
cheerful and lightsome like this April morning, which looked in through the curtained windows
of Haldane's apartment, and found everything in harmony with itself save the occupant.

And yet he was young and in his spring-time. Why should he make discord with the bright fresh
morning? Because the shadow of evil--which is darker than the shadow of night, age, or sorrow--rested
upon him. His hair hung in disorder over a brow which was contracted into a frown. His naturally
fine features had a heavy, bloated, sensual aspect; and yet, even while he slept, you caught
a glimpse in this face--as through a veil--of the anguish of a spirit that was suffering brutal
wrong and violence.

His insensibility was passing away. His mind appeared to be struggling to cast off the weight
of a stupefied body, but for a time its throes--which were manifested by starts, strong shudderings,
and muttered words--were ineffectual. At last, in desperation, as it were, the tortured soul,
poisoned even in its imaginings by the impurity of the lower nature, conjured up such a horrid
vision that in its anguish it broke its chains, threw off the crushing weight, and the young
man started up.

This returning consciousness had not been, like the dawn stealing in at his window, followed
by a burst of sunlight. As the morning enters the stained, foul, dingy places of dissipation,
which early in the evening had been the gas-lighted, garish scenes of riot and senseless laughter,
and later the fighting ground of all the vile vermin of the night with their uncanny noises--as
when, the doors and windows having been at last opened, the light struggles in through stale
tobacco-smoke, revealing dimly a discolored, reeking place, whose sights and odors are more
in harmony with the sewer than the sweet April sunshine and the violets opening on southern
slopes--so when reason and memory, the janitors of the mind, first admitted the light of consciousness,
only the obscure outline of miserable feelings and repulsive events were manifest to Haldane's
introspection.

There was a momentary relief at finding that the horrible dream which had awakened him was
only a dream, but while his waking banished the uncouth shapes of the imagination, his sane,
will-guided vision saw revealed that from which he shrank with far greater dread.

For a few moments, as he stared vacantly around the room, he could realize nothing save a dull,
leaden weight of pain. In this dreary obscurity of suffering, distinct causes of trouble and
fear began to shape themselves. There was a mingled sense of misfortune and guilt. He had a
confused memory of a great disappointment, and he knew from his condition that he had been
drinking.

He looked at himself--he was dressed. There stood his muddy boots--two foul blots on the beauty
and cleanliness of the room. So then he had come, or had been brought, at some hour during
the night, to the house of his stern and exacting employer. Haldane dismissed the thought of
him with a reckless oath; but his face darkened with anguish as he remembered that this was
also the home of Mrs. Arnot, who had been so kind, and, at the present time, the home of Laura
Romeyn also.

They may have seen, or, at least, must know of, his degradation.

He staggered to the ewer, and, with a trembling hand, poured out a little water. Having bathed
his hot, feverish face, he again sat down, and tried to recall what had happened.

In bitterness of heart he remembered his last interview with Laura, and her repugnance toward
both himself and what she regarded as "his disgusting vices," and so disgusting did his evil
courses now seem that, for the first time in his life, he thought of himself with loathing.

Then, as memory rapidly duplicated subsequent events, he gave a contemptuous smile to his "gloomy
grandeur" schemes in passing, and saw himself on the way to New York, with one thousand dollars
of his employer's funds intrusted to his care. He remembered that he was introduced to two
fascinating strangers, that they drank and lunched together, that they missed the train, that
they were gambling, that, having lost all his own money, he was tempted to open a package belonging
to Mr. Arnot; did he not open the other also? At this point all became confused and blurred.

What had become of that money?

With nervous, trembling haste he searched his pockets. Both the money and the envelopes were gone.

His face blanched; his heart sank with a certain foreboding of evil. He found himself on the
brink of an abyss, and felt the ground crumbling beneath him. First came a mad impulse to fly,
to escape and hide himself; and he had almost carried it out. His hand was on the door, but
he hesitated, turned back, and walked the floor in agony.

Then came the better impulse of one as yet unhardened in the ways of evil, to go at once to
his employer, tell the whole truth, and make such reparation as was within his power. He knew
that his mother was abundantly able to pay back the money, and he believed she would do so.

This he conceded was his best, and, indeed, only safe course, and he hoped that the wretched
affair might be so arranged as to be kept hidden from the world. As for Mrs. Arnot and Laura,
he felt that he could never look them in the face again.

Suppose he should meet them going out. The very thought was dreadful, and it seemed to him
that he would sink to the floor from shame under their reproachful eyes. Would they be up yet?
He looked at his watch; it had run down, and its motionless hands pointed at the vile, helpless
condition in which he must have been at the time when he usually wound it up.

He glanced from the window, with the hope of escaping the two human beings whom he dreaded
more than the whole mocking world; but it was too lofty to admit of a leap to the ground.

"Who is yonder strange man that seems to be watching the house?" he queried.

Was it his shaken nerves and sense of guilt which led him to suspect danger and trouble on
every side?

"There is no help for it," he exclaimed, grinding his teeth; and, opening the door, he hastened
from the house, looking neither to the right hand nor to the left.

CHAPTER XI

HALDANE IS ARRESTED

As Haldane strode rapidly along the winding, gravelled path that led from Mrs. Arnot's beautiful
suburban villa to the street, he started violently as he encountered a stranger, who appeared
to be coming toward the mansion; and he was greatly relieved when he was permitted to pass
unmolested. And yet the cool glance of scrutiny which he received left a very unpleasant impression.
Nor was this uneasiness diminished when, on reaching the street, he found that the stranger
had apparently accomplished his errand to the house so speedily that he was already returning,
and accompanied by another man.

Were not their eyes fixed on him, or was he misled by his fears? After a little time he looked
around again. One of the men had disappeared, and he breathed more fully. No; there he was
on the opposite side of the street, and walking steadily abreast with him, while his companion
continued following about the same distance away.

Was he "shadowed"? He was, indeed, literally and figuratively. Although the sun was shining
bright and warm, never before had he been conscious of such a horror of great darkness. The
light which can banish the oppressive, disheartening shadow of guilt must come from beyond the sun.

As he entered the busier streets in the vicinity of the office, he saw a few persons whom he
knew. Was he again misled by his overwrought and nervous condition? or did these persons try
to shun him by turning corners, entering shops, or by crossing the street, and looking resolutely
the other way.

Could that awful entity, the world, already know the events of the past night?

A newsboy was vociferating down a side street. The word "Crime" only caught Haldane's ear,
but the effect was as cold and as chilling as the drip of an icicle.

As he hastened up the office steps, Pat M'Cabe scowled upon him, and muttered audibly:

"Bad luck till yees! I wish I'd lift ye ablinkin' like an owl where I found ye."

"An' back luck till yees, too," added Pat in his surly growl, as a reporter, note-book in hand,
stepped nimbly in after Haldane; "it's meself that wishes iviry iditer o' the land was burned
up wid his own lyin' papers."

Even the most machine-like of the sere and withered book-keepers held their pens in suspense
as Haldane passed hastily toward Mr. Arnot's private office, followed by the reporter, whose
alert manner and observant, questioning eye suggested an animated symbol of interrogation.

The manner of his fellow clerks did not escape Haldane's notice even in that confused and hurried
moment, and it increased his sense of an impending blow; but when, on entering the private
office, Mr. Arnot turned toward him his grim, rigid face, and when a man in the uniform of
an officer of the law rose and stepped forward as if the one expected had now arrived, his
heart misgave him utterly, and for a moment he found no words, but stood before his employer,
pallid and trembling, his very attitude and appearance making as full a confession of guilt
as could the statement he proposed to give.

If Pat's opinion concerning Mr. Arnot's "in'ards" had not been substantially correct, that
inexorable man would have seen that this was not an old offender who stood before him. The
fact that Haldane was overwhelmed with shame and fear, should have tempered his course with
healing and saving kindness. But Mr. Arnot had already decided upon his plan, and no other
thought would occur to him save that of carrying it out with machine-like precision. His frown
deepened as he saw the reporter, but after a second's thought he made no objection to his presence,
as the increasing publicity that would result would add to the punishment which was designed
to be a signal warning to all in his employ.

After a moment's lowering scrutiny of the trembling youth, during which his confidential clerk,
by previous arrangement, appeared, that he might be a witness of all that occurred, Mr. Arnot
said coldly:

"Well, sir, perhaps you can now tell me what has become of the funds which I intrusted to your
care last evening."

"That is my purpose--object," stammered Haldane; "if you will only give me a chance I will
tell you everything."

"I am ready to hear, sir. Be brief; business has suffered too great an interruption already."

"Please have a little consideration for me," said Haldane, eagerly, great beaded drops of perspiration
starting from his brow; "I do not wish to speak before all these witnesses. Give me a private
interview, and I will explain everything, and can promise that the money shall be refunded."

"I shall make certain of that, rest assured," replied Mr. Arnot, in the same cold, relentless
tone. "The money was intrusted to your care last evening, in the presence of witnesses. Here
are the empty envelopes. If you have any explanations to make concerning what you did with
the money, speak here and now."

"I must warn the young man," said the policeman, interposing, "not to say anything which will
tend to criminate himself. He must remember that whatever he says will appear against him in
evidence."

"But there is no need that this affair should have any such publicity," Haldane urged in great
agitation. "If Mr. Arnot will only show a little humanity toward me I will arrange the matter
so that he will not lose a penny. Indeed, my mother will pay twice the sum rather than have
the affair get abroad."

The reporter just behind him grinned and lifted his eyebrows as he took down these words verbatim.

"For your mother's sake I deeply regret that 'the affair' as you mildly term it, must and has
become known. As far as you are concerned, I have no compunctions. When a seeming man can commit
a grave crime in the hope that a widowed mother--whose stay and pride he ought to be--will
come to his rescue, and buy immunity from deserved punishment, he neither deserves, nor shall
he receive, mercy at my hands. But were I capable of a maudlin sentiment of pity in the circumstances,
the duty I owe my business would prevent any such expression as you desire. When any one in
my employ takes advantage of my confidence, he must also, and with absolute certainty, take
the consequences."

"Bad luck ter yez!" mentally ejaculated Pat, whom curiosity and the fascination of his own
impending fate had drawn within earshot.

"What do you intend to do with me?" asked Haldane, his brow contracting, and his face growing
sullen under Mr. Arnot's harsh, bitter words.

"Do! What is done with clerks who steal their employers' money?"

"I did not steal your money," said Haldane impetuously.

"Where is it, then?" asked Mr. Arnot, with a cold sneer.

"Be careful, now," said the policeman; "you are getting excited, and you may say what you'll
wish you hadn't."

"Mr. Arnot, do you mean to have it go abroad to all the world that I have deliberately stolen
that thousand dollars?" asked the young man desperately.

"Here are the empty envelopes. Where is the money?" said his employer, in the same cool, inexorable
tone.

"I met two sharpers from New York, who made a fool of me--"

"Made a fool of you! that was impossible," interrupted Mr. Arnot with a harsh laugh.

"Dastard that you are, to strike a man when he is down," thundered Haldane wrathfully. "Since
everything must go abroad, the truth shall go, and not foul slander. I got to drinking with
these men from New York, and missed the train--"

"Be careful, now; think what you are saying," interrupted the policeman.

"He charges me with what amounts to a bald theft, and in a way that all will hear of the charge,
and shall I not defend my self?"

"O, certainly, if you can prove that you did not take the money--only remember, what you say
will appear in the evidence."

"What evidence?" cried the bewildered and excited youth with an oath. "If you will only give
me a chance, you shall have all the evidence there is in a sentence. These blacklegs from New
York appeared like gentlemen. A friend in town introduced them to me, and, after losing the
train, we agreed to spend the evening together. They called for cards, and they won the money."

Mr. Arnot's dark cheek had grown more swarthy at the epithet of "dastard," but he coolly waited
until Haldane had finished, and then asked in his former tone:

"Did they take the money from your person and open the envelopes, one carefully, the other
recklessly, before they won it?"

Guided by this keen questioning, memory flashed back its light on the events of the past night,
and Haldane saw himself opening the first package, certainly, and he remembered how it was
done. He trembled, and his face, that had been so flushed, grew very pale. For a moment he
was so overwhelmed by a realization of his act, and its threatening consequences, that his
tongue refused to plead in his behalf. At last he stammered:

"I did not mean to take the money--only to borrow a little of it, and return it that same night
They got me drunk--I was not myself. But I assure you it will all be returned. I can--"

"Officer, do your duty," interrupted Mr. Arnot sternly. "Too much time has been wasted over
the affair already, but out of regard for his mother I wished to give this young man an opportunity
to make an exculpating explanation or excuse, if it were in his power. Since, according to
his own statement, he is guilty, the law must take its course."

"You don't mean to send me to prison?" asked Haldane excitedly.

"I could never send you to prison," replied Mr. Arnot coldly; "your own act may bring you there.
But I do mean to send you before the justice who issued the warrant for your arrest, held by
this officer. Unless you can find some one who will give bail in your behalf, I do not see
why he should treat you differently from other offenders."

"Mr. Arnot," cried Haldane passionately, "this is my first and only offence. You surely cannot
be so cold-blooded as to inflict upon me this irreparable disgrace? It will kill my mother."

"You should have thought of all this last evening," said Mr. Arnot. "If you persist in ignoring
the fact, that it is your own deed that wounds your mother and inflicts disgrace upon yourself,
the world will not. Come, Mr. Officer, serve your warrant, and remove your prisoner."

"Is it your purpose that I shall be dragged through these streets in the broad light of day
to a police court, and thence to jail?" demanded Haldane, a dark menace coming into his eyes,
and finding expression in his livid face.

"Yes, sir," said the man of business, rising and speaking in loud, stern tones, so that all
in the office could hear; "I mean that you or any one else in my employ who abuses my trust
and breaks the laws shall suffer their full penalty."

"You are a hard-hearted wretch!" thundered Haldane; "you are a pagan idolater, and gold is
your god. You crush your wife and servants at home; you crush the spirit and manhood of your
clerks here by your cast-iron system and rules. If you had shown a little consideration for
me you would have lost nothing, and I might have had a chance for a better life. But you tread
me down into the mire of the streets; you make it impossible for me to appear among decent
men again; you strike my mother and sisters as with a dagger. Curse you! if I go to jail, it
will require you and all your clerks to take me there!" and he whirled on his heel, and struck
out recklessly toward the door.

The busy reporter was capsized by the first blow, and his nose long bore evidence that it is
a serious matter to put that member into other people's affairs, even in a professional way.

Before Haldane could pass from the inner office two strangers, who had been standing quietly
at the door, each dexterously seized one of his hands with such an iron grasp that, after a
momentary struggle, he gave up, conscious of the hopelessness of resistance.

"If you will go quietly with us we will employ no force," said the man in uniform; "otherwise
we must use these;" and Haldane shuddered as light steel manacles were produced. "These men
are officers like myself, and you see that you stand no chance with three of us."

"Well, lead on, then," was the sullen answer. "I will go quietly if you don't use those, but
if you do, I will not yield while there is a breath of life in me."

"A most desperate and hardened wretch!" ejaculated the reporter, sopping his streaming nose.

With a dark look and deep malediction upon his employer, Haldane was led away.

Mr. Arnot was in no gentle mood, for, while he had carried out his programme, the machinery
of the legal process had not worked smoothly. Very disagreeable things had been said to him
in the hearing of his clerks and others. "Of course, they are not true," thought the gentleman;
"but his insolent words will go out in the accounts of the affair as surely as my own."

If Haldane had been utterly overwhelmed and broken down, and had shown only the cringing spirit
of a detected and whipped cur, Mr. Arnot's complacency would have been perfect. But as it was,
the affair had gone forward in a jarring, uncomfortable manner, which annoyed and irritated
him as would a defective, creaking piece of mechanism in one of his factories. Opposition,
friction of any kind, only made his imperious will more intolerant of disobedience or neglect;
therefore he summoned Pat in a tone whose very accent foretold the doom of the "intelligent
Irishman."

"Did I not order you to give no information to any one concerning what occurred last night?"
he demanded in his sternest tone.

Pat hitched and wriggled, for giving up his forty dollars a month was like a surgical operation.
He saw that his master was incensed, and in no mood for extenuation; so he pleaded--

"Misther Arnot, won't ye plaze slape on it afore ye gives me me discharge. If ye'll only think
a bit about them newspaper men, ye'll know it could not be helped a' tall. If they suspicion
that a man has anything in him that they're wantin' to know, they the same as put a corkscrew
intil him, and pull till somethin' comes, and thin they make up the rest. Faix, sur, I niver
could o' got by 'em aloive wid me letther onless a little o' the news had gone intil their
rav'nous maws."

"Then I'll find a man who can get by them, and who is able to obey my orders to the letter.
The cashier will pay you up to date; then leave the premises."

"Och, Misther Arnot, me woife'll be the death o' me, and thin ye'll have me bluid on yer sowl.
Give me one more--"

"Begone!" said his employer harshly; "too much time has been wasted already."

Pat found that his case was so desperate that he became reckless, and, instead of slinking
off, he, too showed the same insubordination and disregard for Mr. Arnot's power and dignity
that had been so irritating in Haldane. Clapping his hat on one side of his head, and with
such an insolent cant forward that it quite obscured his left eye, Pat rested his hands on
his hips, and with one foot thrust out sidewise, he fixed his right eye on his employer with
the expression of sardonic contemplation, and then delivered himself as follows:

"The takin' up a few minits o' yer toime is a moighty tirrible waste, but the sindin' of a
human bain to the divil is no waste a' tall a' tall: that's the way ye rason, is it? I allers
heerd that yer in'ards were made o' cast-iron, and I can belave--"

"Leave this office," thundered Mr. Arnot.

"Begorry, ye can't put a man in jail for spakin' his moind, nor for spakin' the truth. If ye
had given me a chance I'd been civil and obadient the rist o' me days. But whin ye act to'ard
a man as if he was a lump o' dirt that ye can kick out o' the way, and go on, ye'll foind that
the lump o' dirt will lave some marks on yer nice clothes. I tell ye till yer flinty ould face
that ye'r a hard-hearted riprobate that 'ud grind a poor divil to paces as soon as any mash-shine
in all yer big factories. Ye'll see the day whin ye'll be under somebody's heel yerself, bad
luck to yez!"

Pat's irate volubility flowed in such a torrent that even Mr. Arnot could not check it until
he saw fit to drop the sluice-gates himself, which, with a contemptuous sniff, and an expression
of concentrated wormwood and gall, he now did. Lifting his battered hat a little more toward
the perpendicular, he went to the cashier's desk, obtained his money, and then jogged slowly
and aimlessly down the street, leaving a wake of strange oaths behind him.

Thus Mr. Arnot's system again ground out the expected result; but the plague of humanity was
that it would not endure the grinding process with the same stolid, inert helplessness of other
raw material. Though he had had his way in each instance, he grew more and more dissatisfied
and out of sorts. This vituperation of himself would not tend to impress his employes with
awe, and strike a wholesome fear in their hearts. The culprits, instead of slinking away overwhelmed
with guilt and the weight of his displeasure, had acted and spoken as if he were a grim old
tyrant; and he had a vague, uncomfortable feeling that his clerks in their hearts sided with
them and against him. It even occurred to him that he was creating a relation between himself
and those in his service similar to that existing between master and slaves; and that, instead
of forming a community with identical interests, he was on one side and they on the other.
But, with the infatuation of a selfish nature and imperious will, he muttered:

"Curse them! I'll make them move in my grooves, or toss them out of the way!" Then, summoning
his confidential clerk, he said:

"You know all about the affair. You will oblige me by going to the office of the justice, and
stating the case, with the prisoner's admissions. I do not care to appear further in the matter,
except by proxy, unless it is necessary."

CHAPTER XII

A MEMORABLE MEETING

Mrs. Arnot had looked upon Haldane's degradation with feelings akin to disgust and anger, but
as long, sleepless hours passed, her thoughts grew more gentle and compassionate. She was by
nature an advocate rather than a judge. Not the spirit of the disciples, that would call down
fire from heaven, but the spirit of the Master, who sought to lay his healing, rescuing hand
on every lost creature, always controlled her eventually. Human desert did not count as much
with her as human need, and her own sorrows had made her heart tender toward the sufferings
of others, even though well merited.

The prospect that the handsome youth, the son of her old friend, would cast himself down to
perish in the slough of dissipation, was a tragedy that wrung her heart with grief; and when
at last she fell asleep it was with tears upon her face.

Forebodings had followed Laura also, even into her dreams, and at last, in a frightful vision,
she saw her uncle placing a giant on guard over the house. Her uncle had scarcely disappeared
before Haldane tried to escape, but the giant raised his mighty club, as large and heavy as
the mast of a ship, and was about to strike when she awoke with a violent start.

In strange unison with her dream she still heard her uncle's voice in the garden below. She
sprang to the window, half expecting to see the giant also, nor was she greatly reassured on
observing an unknown man posted in the summer-house and left there. Mr. Arnot's mysterious
action, and the fact that he was out at that early hour, added to the disquiet of mind which
the events of the preceding night had created.

Her simple home-life had hitherto flowed like a placid stream in sunny meadows, but now it
seemed as if the stream were entering a forest where dark and ominous shadows were thrown across
its surface. She was too womanly to be indifferent to the fate of any human being. At the same
time she was still so much of a child, and so ignorant of the world, that Haldane's action,
even as she understood it, loomed up before her imagination as something awful and portentous
of unknown evils. She was oppressed with a feeling that a crushing blow impended over him.
Now, almost as vividly as in her dream, she still saw the giant's club raised high to strike.
If it were only in a fairy tale, her sensitive spirit would tremble at such a stroke, but inasmuch
as it was falling on one who had avowed passionate love for her, she felt almost as if she
must share in its weight. The idea of reciprocating any feeling that resembled his passion
had at first been absurd, and now, in view of what he had shown himself capable, seemed impossible;
and yet his strongly expressed regard for her created a sort of bond between them in spite
of herself. She had realized the night before that he would be immediately dismissed and sent
home in disgrace; but her dream, and the glimpse she had caught of her uncle and the observant
stranger, who, as she saw, still maintained his position, suggested worse consequences, whose
very vagueness made them all the more dreadful.

As it was still a long time before the breakfast hour, she again sought her couch, and after
a while fell into a troubled sleep, from which she was awakened by her aunt. Hastily dressing,
she joined Mrs. Arnot at a late breakfast, and soon discovered that she was worried and anxious
as well as herself.

"Has Mr. Haldane gone out?" she asked.

"Yes; and what perplexes me is that two strangers followed him to the street so rapidly that
they almost seemed in pursuit."

Then Laura related what she had seen, and her aunt's face grew pale and somewhat rigid as she
recognized the fact that her husband was carrying out some plan, unknown to her, which might
involve a cruel blow to her friend, Mrs. Haldane, and an overwhelming disgrace to Egbert Haldane.
At the same time the thought flashed upon her that the young man's offence might be graver
than she had supposed. But she only remarked quietly:

"I will go down to the office and see your uncle after breakfast."

"Oh, auntie, please let me go with you," said Laura nervously.

"I may wish to see my husband alone," replied Mrs. Arnot doubtfully, foreseeing a possible
interview which she would prefer her niece should not witness.

"I will wait for you in the outer office, auntie, if you will only let me go. I am so unstrung
that I cannot bear to be left in the house alone."

"Very well, then; we'll go together, and a walk in the open air will do us both good."

As Mrs. Arnot was finishing her breakfast she listlessly took up the morning "Courier," and
with a sudden start read the heavy head-lines and paragraph which Pat's unlucky venture as
a reporter had occasioned.

"Come, Laura, let us go at once," said she, rising hastily; and as soon as they could prepare
themselves for the street they started toward the central part of the city, each too busy with
her own thoughts to speak often, and yet each having a grateful consciousness of unspoken sympathy
and companionship.

As they passed down the main street they saw a noisy crowd coming up the sidewalk toward them,
and they crossed over to avoid it. But the approaching throng grew so large and boisterous
that they deemed it prudent to enter the open door of a shop until it passed. Their somewhat
elevated position gave them a commanding view, and a policeman's uniform at once indicated
that it was an arrest that had drawn together the loose human atoms that are always drifting
about the streets. The prisoner was followed by a retinue that might have bowed the head of
an old and hardened offender with shame--rude, idle, half-grown boys, with their morbid interest
in every thing tending to excitement and crime, seedy loungers drawn away from saloon doors
where they are as surely to be found as certain coarse weeds in foul, neglected corners--a
ragged, unkempt, repulsive jumble of humanity, that filled the street with gibes, slang, and
profanity. Laura was about to retreat into the shop in utter disgust, when her aunt exclaimed
in a tone of sharp distress:

"Merciful Heaven! there is Egbert Haldane!"

With something like a shock of terror she recognized her quondam lover, the youth who had stood
at her side and turned her music. But as she saw him now there appeared an immeasurable gulf
between them; while her pity for him was profound, it seemed as helpless and hopeless in his
behalf as if he were a guilty spirit that was being dragged away to final doom.

Her aunt's startled exclamation caught the young man's attention, for it was a voice that he
would detect among a thousand, and he turned his livid face, with its agonized, hunted look,
directly toward them.

As their eyes met--as he saw the one of all the world that he then most dreaded to meet, Laura
Romeyn, regarding him with a pale, frightened face, as if he were a monster, a wild beast,
nay, worse, a common thief on his way to jail--he stopped abruptly, and for a second seemed
to meditate some desperate act. But when he saw the rabble closing on him, and heard the officers
growl in surly tones, "Move on," a sense of helplessness as well as of shame overwhelmed him.
He shivered visibly, dashed his hat down over his eyes, and strode on, feeling at last that
the obscurity of a prison cell would prove a welcome refuge.

But Mrs. Arnot had recognized the intolerable suffering and humiliation stamped on the young
man's features; she had seen the fearful, shrinking gaze at herself and Laura, the lurid gleam
of desperation, and read correctly the despairing gesture by which he sought to hide from them,
the rabble, and all the world, a countenance from which he already felt that shame had blotted
all trace of manhood.

Her face again wore a gray, rigid aspect, as if she had received a wound that touched her heart;
and, scarcely waiting for the miscellaneous horde to pass, she took Laura's arm, and said briefly
and almost sternly:

"Come."

Mr. Arnot's equanimity was again destined to be disturbed. Until he had commenced to carry
out his scheme of striking fear into the hearts of his employes, he had derived much grim satisfaction
from its contemplation. But never had a severe and unrelenting policy failed more signally,
and a partial consciousness of the fact annoyed him like a constant stinging of nettles which
he could not brush aside. When, therefore, his wife entered, he greeted her with his heaviest
frown, and a certain twitching of his hands as he fumbled among his papers, which showed that
the man who at times seemed composed of equal parts of iron and lead had at last reached a
condition of nervous irritability which might result in an explosion of wrath; and yet he made
a desperate effort at self-control, for he saw that his wife was in one of those moods which
he had learned to regard with a wholesome respect.

"You have sent Haldane to prison," she said calmly. Though her tone was so quiet, there was
in it a certain depth and tremble which her husband well understood, but he only answered briefly:

"Yes; he must go there if he finds no bail."

"May I ask why?"

"He robbed me of a thousand dollars."

"Were there no extenuating circumstances?" Mrs. Arnot asked, after a slight start.

"No, but many aggravating ones."

"Did he not come here of his own accord?"

"He could not have done otherwise. I had detectives watching him."

"He could have tried to do otherwise. Did he not offer some explanation?"

"What he said amounted to a confession of the crime."

"What did he say?"

"I have not charged my mind with all the rash, foolish words of the young scapegrace. It is
sufficient for me that he and all in my employ received a lesson which they will not soon forget.
I wish you would excuse me from further consideration of the subject at present. It has cost
me too much time already."

"You are correct," said Mrs. Arnot very quietly. "It is likely to prove a very costly affair.
I tremble to think what your lesson may cost this young man, whom you have rendered reckless
and desperate by this public disgrace; I tremble to think what this event may cost my friend,
his mother. Of the pain it has cost me I will not speak--"

"Madam," interrupted Mr. Arnot harshly, "permit me to say that this is an affair concerning
which a sentimental woman can have no correct understanding. I propose to carry on my business
in the way which experience has taught me is wise, and, with all respect to yourself, I would
suggest that in these matters of business I am in my own province."

The ashen hue deepened upon Mrs. Arnot's face, but she answered quietly:

"I do not wish to overstep the bounds which should justly limit my action and my interest in
this matter. You will also do me the justice to remember that I have never interfered in your
business, and have rarely asked you about it, though in the world's estimation I would have
some right to do so. But if such harshness, if such disastrous cruelty, is necessary to your
business, I must withdraw my means from it, for I could not receive money stained, as it were,
with blood. But of this hereafter. I will now telegraph Mrs. Haldane to come directly to our
house--"

"To our house!" cried Mr. Arnot, perfectly aghast.

"Certainly. Can you suppose that, burdened with this intolerable disgrace, she could endure
the publicity of a hotel? I shall next visit Haldane, for as I saw him in the street, with
the rabble following, he looked desperate enough to destroy himself."

"Now, I protest against all this weak sentimentality," said Mr. Arnot, rising. "You take sides
with a robber against your husband."

"I do not make light of Haldane's offence to you, and certainly shall not to him. But it is
his first offence, as far as we know, and, though you have not seen fit to inform me of the
circumstances, I cannot believe that he committed a cool, deliberate theft. He could have been
made to feel his guilt without being crushed. The very gravity of his wrong action might have
awakened him to his danger, and have been the turning-point of his life. He should have had
at least one chance--God gives us many."

"Well, well," said Mr. Arnot impatiently, "let his mother return the money, and I will not
prosecute. But why need Mrs. Haldane come to Hillaton? All can be arranged by her lawyer."

"You know little of a mother's feelings if you can suppose she will not come instantly."

"Well, then, when the money is paid she can take him home, that is, after the forms of law
are complied with."

"But he must remain in prison till the money is paid?"

"Certainly."

"You intimated that if any one went bail for him he need not go to prison. I will become his
security."

"O nonsense! I might as well give bail myself."

"Has he reached the prison yet?"

"I suppose he has," replied Mr. Arnot, taking care to give no hint of the preliminary examination,
for it would have annoyed him excessively to have his wife appear at a police court almost
in the light of an antagonist to himself. And yet his stubborn pride would not permit him to
yield, and carry out with considerate delicacy the merciful policy upon which he saw she was bent.

"Good-morning," said his wife very quietly, and she at once left her husband's private room.
Laura rose from her chair in the outer office and welcomed her gladly, for, in her nervous
trepidation, the minutes had seemed like hours. Mrs. Arnot went to a telegraph office, and
sent the following despatch to Mrs. Haldane:

"Come to my house at once. Your son is well, but has met with misfortune."

She then, with Laura, returned immediately home and ordered her carriage for a visit to the
prison. She also remembered with provident care that the young man could not have tasted food
that morning.

CHAPTER XIII

OUR KNIGHT IN JAIL

As Haldane emerged from the office into the open glare of the street, he was oppressed with
such an intolerable sense of shame that he became sick and faint, and tottered against the
policeman, who took no other notice of his condition than the utterance of a jocular remark:

"You haven't got over your drunk yet, I'm athinking."

Haldane made no reply, and the physical weakness gradually passed away. As his stunned and
bewildered mind regained the power to act, he became conscious of a morbid curiosity to see
how he was regarded by those whom he met. He knew that their manner would pierce like sword-thrusts,
and yet every scornful or averted face had a cruel fascination.

With a bitterness of which his young heart had never before had even a faint conception, he
remembered that this cold and contemptuous, this scoffing and jeering world was the same in
which only yesterday he proposed to tower in such lofty grandeur that the maiden who had slighted
him should be consumed with vain regret in memory of her lost opportunity. He had, indeed,
gained eminence speedily. All the town was hearing of him; but the pedestal which lifted him
so high was composed equally of crime and folly, and he felt as if he might stand as a monument
of shame.

But his grim and legal guardians tramped along in the most stolid and indifferent manner. The
gathering rabble at their heels had no terror for them. Indeed, they rather enjoyed parading
before respectable citizens this dangerous substratum of society. It was a delicate way of
saying, "Behold in these your peril, and in us your defence. We are necessary to your peace
and security. Respect us and pay us well."

They represented the majesty of the law, which could lay its strong hand on high and low alike,
and the publicity which was like a scorching fire to Haldane brought honor to them.

Although the journey seemed interminable to the culprit, they were not long in reaching the
police court, where the magistrate presiding had already entered on his duties. All night long,
and throughout the entire city, the scavengers of the law had been at work, and now, as a result,
every miserable atom of humanity that had made itself a pestilential offence to society was
gathered here to be disposed of according to sanatory moral rules.

Hillaton was a comparatively well-behaved and decorous city; but in every large community there
is always a certain amount of human sediment, and Haldane felt that he had fallen low indeed,
when he found himself classed and huddled with miserable objects whose existence he had never
before realized. Near him stood men who apparently had barely enough humanity left to make
their dominating animal natures more dangerous and difficult to control. To the instincts of
a beast was added something of a man's intelligence, but so developed that it was often little
more than cunning. If, when throwing away his manhood, man becomes a creature more to be dreaded
than a beast or venomous reptile, whichever he happens most to resemble, woman, parting with
her womanhood, scarcely finds her counterpart even in the most noxious forms of earthly existence.
She becomes, in her perversion, something that is unnatural and monstrous; something, so opposite
to the Creator's design, as to suggest it only in caricature, or, more often, in fiendish mockery.
The Gorgons, Sirens, and Harpies of the ancients are scarcely myths, for their fabled forms
only too accurately portray, not the superficial and transient outward appearance, but the
enduring character within.

Side by side with Haldane stood a creature whose dishevelled, rusty hair, blotched and bloated
features, wanton, cunning, restless eyes, combined perfectly to form the head of the mythological
Harpy. It required little effort of the imagination to believe that her foul, bedraggled dress
concealed the "wings and talons of the vulture." Being still unsteady from her night's debauch,
she leaned against the young man, and when he shrank in loathing away, she, to annoy him, clasped
him in her arms, to the uproarious merriment of the miscellaneous crowd that is ever present
at a police court. Haldane broke away from her grasp with such force as to make quite a commotion,
and at the same time said loudly and fiercely to the officer who had arrested him:

"You may have power to take me to jail, but you have not, and shall not have, the right nor
the power to subject me to such indignities."

"Silence there! Keep order in the court!" commanded the judge.

The officer removed his prisoner a little further apart from the others, growling as he did so:

"If you don't like your company, you should have kept out of it."

Even in his overwhelming anxiety and distress Haldane could not forbear giving a few curious
glances at his companions. He had dropped out of his old world into a new one, and these were
its inhabitants. In their degradation and misery he seemed to see himself and his future reflected.
What had the policeman said?--"Your company," and with a keener pang than he had yet experienced
he realized that this was his company, that he now belonged to the criminal classes. He who
yesterday had the right to speak to Laura Romeyn, was now herded with drunkards, thieves, and
prostitutes; he who yesterday could enter Mrs. Arnot's parlor, might now as easily enter heaven.
As the truth of his situation gradually dawned upon him, he felt as if an icy hand were closing
upon his heart.

But little time, however, was given him for observation or bitter revery. With the rapid and
routine-like manner of one made both callous and expert by long experience, the magistrate
was sorting and disposing of the miserable waifs. Now he has before him the inmates of a "disorderly
house," upon which a "raid" had been made the previous night. What is that fair young girl
with blue eyes doing among those coarse-featured human dregs, her companions? She looks like
a white lily that has been dropped into a puddle. Perhaps that delicate and attractive form
is but a disguise for the Harpy's wings and claws. Perhaps a gross, bestial spirit is masked
by her oval Madonna-like face. Perhaps she is the victim of one upon whom God will wreak his
vengeance forever, though society has for him scarcely a frown.

The puddle is suddenly drained off into some law-ordained receptacle, and the white lily is
swept away with it. She will not long suggest a flower that has been dropped into the gutter.
The stains upon her soul will creep up into her face, and make her hideous like the rest.

The case of Egbert Haldane was next called. As the policeman had said, his own admissions were
now used against him, for the confidential clerk, and, if there was need, the broken-nosed
reporter, were on hand to testify to all that had been said. The young man made no attempt
to conceal, but tried to explain more fully the circumstances which led to the act, hoping
that in them the justice would find such extenuating elements as would prevent a committal
to prison.

The judge recognized and openly acknowledged the fact that it was not a case of deliberate
wrongdoing, and he ordered the arrest of the superior young gentleman who had introduced the
New York gamblers to their victim; and yet in the eye of the law it was a clear case of embezzlement;
and, as Mr. Arnot's friend, the magistrate felt little disposition to prevent things from taking
their usual course. The prisoner must either furnish bail at once, or be committed until he
could do so, or until the case could be properly tried. As Haldane was a comparative stranger
in Hillaton there was no one to whom he felt he could apply, and he supposed it would require
some little time for his mother to arrange the matter. Upon his signifying that he could not
furnish bail immediately, the judge promptly ordered his committal to the common jail of the
city, which happened to be at some distance from the building then employed for the preliminary
examinations.

It was while on his way to this place of detention that he heard Mrs. Arnot's voice, and encountered
her eyes and those of Laura Romeyn. His first impulse was to end both his suffering and himself
by some desperate act, but he was powerless even to harm himself.

The limit of endurance, however had been reached. The very worst that he could imagine had
befallen him. Laura Romeyn had looked upon his unutterable shame and disgrace. From a quivering
and almost agonizing sensibility to his situation he reacted into sullen indifference. He no
longer saw the sun shining in the sky, nor the familiar sights of the street; he no longer
heard nor heeded the jeering rabble that came tramping after. He became for the time scarcely
more than a piece of mechanism, that barely retained the power of voluntary motion, but had
lost ability to feel and think. When, at last, he entered his narrow cell, eight feet by eight,
the wish half formed itself in his mind that it was six feet by two, and that he might hide
in it forever.

He sat down on the rough wooden couch which formed the only furniture of the room, and buried
his face in his hands, conscious only of a dull, leaden weight of pain. He made no effort to
obtain legal counsel or to communicate his situation to his mother. Indeed, he dreaded to see
her, and he felt that he could not look his sisters in the face again. The prison cell seemed
a refuge from the terrible scorn of the world, and his present impulse was to cower behind
its thick walls for the rest of his life.

CHAPTER XIV

MR. ARNOT'S SYSTEM WORKS BADLY

Mr. Arnot was so disturbed by his wife's visit that he found it impossible to return to the
routine of business, and, instead of maintaining the cold, lofty bearing of a man whose imperious
will awed and controlled all within its sphere, he fumed up and down his office like one who
had been caught in the toils himself. In the morning it had seemed that there could not have
been a fairer opportunity to vindicate his iron system, and make it irresistible. The offending
subject in his business realm should receive due punishment, and all the rest be taught that
they were governed by inexorable laws, which would be executed with the certainty and precision
with which the wheels moved in a great factory under the steady impulse of the motor power.
But the whole matter now bade fair to end in a tangled snarl, whose final issue no one could
foretell.

He was sensitive to public opinion, and had supposed that his course would be upheld and applauded,
and he be commended as a conservator of public morals. He now feared, however, that he would
be portrayed as harsh, grasping, and unfeeling. It did not trouble him that he was so, but
that he would be made to appear so.

But his wife's words in reference to the withdrawal of her large property from his business
was a far more serious consideration. He had learned how resolute and unswerving she could
be in matters of conscience, and he knew that she was not in the habit of making idle threats
in moments of irritation. If, just at this time, when he was widely extending his business,
she should demand a separate investment of her means, it would embarrass and cripple him in
no slight degree. If this should be one of the results of his master-stroke, he would have
reason to curse his brilliant policy all his days. He would now be only too glad to get rid
of the Haldane affair on any terms, for thus far it had proved only a source of annoyance and
mortification. He was somewhat consoled, however, when his confidential clerk returned and
intimated that the examination before the justice had been brief; that Haldane had eagerly
stated his case to the justice, but when that dignitary remarked that it was a clear case of
embezzlement, and that he would have to commit the prisoner unless some one went security for
his future appearance, the young fellow had grown sullen and answered, "Send me to jail then;
I have no friends in this accursed city."

To men of the law and of sense the case was as clear as daylight.

But Mr. Arnot was not by any means through with his disagreeable experiences. He had been a
manufacturer sufficiently long to know that when a piece of machinery is set in motion, not
merely the wheels nearest to one will move, but also others that for the moment may be out
of sight. He who proposes to have a decided influence upon a fellow-creature's destiny should
remember our complicated relations, for he cannot lay his strong grasp upon one life without
becoming entangled in the interests of many others.

Mr. Arnot was finding this out to his cost, for he had hardly composed himself to his writing
again before there was a rustle of a lady's garments in the outer office, and a hasty step
across the threshold of his private sanctum. Looking up, he saw, to his dismay, the pale, frightened
face of Mrs. Haldane.

"Where is Egbert?--where is my son?" she asked abruptly.

At that moment Mr. Arnot admitted to himself that he had never been asked so embarrassing a
question in all his life. Before him was his wife's friend, a lady of the highest social rank,
and she was so unmistakably a lady that he could treat her with only the utmost deference.
He saw with alarm himself the mother's nervous and trembling apprehension, for there was scarcely
anything under heaven that he would not rather face than a scene with a hysterical woman. If
this was to be the climax of his policy he would rather have lost the thousand dollars than
have had it occur. Rising from his seat, he said awkwardly:

"Really, madam, I did not expect you here this morning."

"I was on my way to New York, and decided to stop and give my son a surprise. But this paper--this
dreadful report--what does it mean?"

"I am sorry to say, madam, it is all too true," replied Mr. Arnot uneasily. "Please take a
chair, or perhaps it would be better for you to go at once to our house and see Mrs. Arnot,"
he added, now glad to escape the interview on any terms.

"What is too true?" she gasped.

"I think you had better see Mrs. Arnot; she will explain," said the unhappy man, who felt that
his system was tumbling in chaos about his ears. "Let me assist you to your carriage."

"Do you think I can endure the suspense of another moment? In mercy speak--tell me the worst!"

"Well," said Mr. Arnot, with a shiver like that of one about to plunge into a cold bath, "I
suppose you will learn sooner or later that your son has committed a very wrong act. But,"
he added hastily, on seeing Mrs. Haldane's increasing pallor, "there are extenuating circumstances--at
least, I shall act as if there were."

"But what has he done--where is he?" cried the mother in agony. Then she added in a frightened
whisper, "But the matter can be hushed up--there need be no publicity--oh, that would kill
me! Please take steps--"

"Mr. Arnot," said a young man just entering, and speaking in a piping, penetrating voice,"
I represent the 'Evening Spy.' I wish to obtain from you for publication the particulars of
this disgraceful affair" Then, seeing Mrs. Haldane, who had dropped her veil, and was trembling
violently, he added, "I hope I am not intruding; I--"

"Yes, sir, you are intruding," said Mr. Arnot harshly.

"Then, perhaps, sir, you will be so kind as to step outside for a moment. I can take down your
words rapidly, and--"

"Step outside yourself, sir. I have nothing whatever to say to you."

"I beg you to reconsider that decision, sir. Of course, a full account of the affair must appear
in this evening's 'Spy.' It will be your own fault if it is not true in all respects. It is
said that you have acted harshly in the matter--that it was young Haldane's first offence, and--"

"Leave my office!" thundered Mr. Arnot.

The lynx-eyed reporter, while speaking thus rapidly, had been scrutinizing the veiled and trembling
lady, and he was scarcely disappointed that she now rose hastily, and threw back her veil as
she said eagerly:

"Why must the whole affair be published? You say truly that his offence, whatever it is, is
his first. Surely the editor of your paper will not be so cruel as to blast a young man forever
with disgrace!"

"Mrs. Haldane, I presume," said the reporter, tracing a few hieroglyphics in his note-book.

"Yes," continued the lady, speaking from the impulse of her heart, rather than from any correct
knowledge of the world, "and I will pay willingly any amount to have the whole matter quietly
dropped. I could not endure anything of this kind, for I have no husband to shelter me, and
the boy has no father to protect him."

Mr. Arnot groaned in spirit that he had not considered this case in any of its aspects save
those which related to his business. He had formed the habit of regarding all other considerations
as unworthy of attention, but here, certainly, was a most disagreeable exception.

"You touch my feelings deeply," said the reporter, in a tone that never for a second lost its
professional cadence, "but I much regret that your hopes cannot be realized. Your son's act
could scarcely be kept a secret after the fact--known to all--that he has been openly dragged
to prison through the streets," and the gatherer of news and sensations kept an eye on each
of his victims as he made this statement. A cabalistic sign in his note-book indicated the
visible wincing of the enraged and half-distracted manufacturer, whose system was like an engine
off the track, hissing and helpless; and a few other equally obscure marks suggested to the
initiated the lady's words as she half shrieked:

"My son dragged through the streets to prison! By whom--who could do so dreadful?"--and she
sank shudderingly into a chair, and covered her face with her hands, as if to shut out a harrowing
vision.

"I regret to say, madam, that it was by a policeman," added the reporter.

"And thither a policeman shall drag you, if you do not instantly vacate these premises!" said
Mr. Arnot, hoarse with rage.

"Thank you for your courtesy," answered the reporter, shutting his book with a snap like that
of a steel trap. "I have now about all the points I wish to get here. I understand that Mr.
Patrick M'Cabe is no longer under any obligations to you, and from him I can learn additional
particulars. Good-morning."

"Yes, go to that unsullied source of truth, whom I have just discharged for lying and disobedience.
Go to perdition, also, if you please; but take yourself out of my office," said Mr. Arnot recklessly,
for he was growing desperate from the unexpected complications of the case. Then he summoned
one of his clerks, and said in a tone of authority, "Take this lady to my residence, and leave
her in the care of Mrs. Arnot."

Mrs. Haldane rose unsteadily, and tottered toward the door.

"No," said she bitterly; "I may faint in the street, but I will not go to your house."

"Then assist the lady to her carriage;" and Mr. Arnot turned the key of his private office
with muttered imprecations upon the whole wretched affair.

"Whither shall I tell the man to drive?" asked the clerk, after Mrs. Haldane had sunk back
exhausted on the seat.

The lady put her hand to her brow, and tried to collect her distracted thoughts, and, after
a moment's hesitation, said:

"To the prison."

The carriage containing Mrs. Haldane stopped at last before the gloomy massive building, the
upper part of which was used as a court-room and offices for city and county officials, while
in the basement were constructed the cells of the prison. It required a desperate effort on
the part of the timid and delicate lady, who for years had almost been a recluse from the world,
to summon courage to alight and approach a place that to her abounded in many and indefinite
horrors. She was too preoccupied to observe that another carriage had drawn up to the entrance,
and the first intimation that she had of Mrs. Arnot's presence occurred when that lady took
her hand in the shadow of the porch, and said:

"Mrs. Haldane, I am greatly surprised to see you here; but you can rely upon me as a true friend
throughout this trial. I shall do all in my power to--"

After the first violent start caused by her disturbed nervous condition, Mrs. Haldane asked,
in a reproachful and almost passionate tone:

"Why did you not prevent--" and then she hesitated, as if she could not bring herself to utter
the concluding words.

"I could not; I did not know; but since I heard I have been doing everything in my power."

"It was your husband who--"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Arnot, sadly, completing in thought her friend's unfinished sentence. "But
I had no part in the act, and no knowledge of it until a short time since. I am now doing all
I can to procure your son's speedy release. My husband's action has been perfectly legal, and
we, who would temper justice with mercy, must do so in a legal way. Permit me to introduce
you to my friend, Mr. Melville. He can both advise us and carry out such arrangements as are
necessary;" and Mrs. Haldane saw that Mrs. Arnot was accompanied by a gentleman, whom in her
distress she had not hitherto noticed.

The janitor now opened the door, and ushered them into a very plain apartment, used both as
an office and reception-room. Mrs. Haldane was so overcome by her emotion that her friend led
her to a chair, and continued her reassuring words in a low voice designed for her ears alone:

"Mr. Melville is a lawyer, and knows how to manage these matters. You may trust him implicitly.
I will give security for your son's future appearance, should it be necessary, and I am quite
satisfied it will not be, as my husband has promised me that he will not prosecute if the money
is refunded."

"I would have paid ten times the amount--anything rather than have suffered this public disgrace,"
sobbed the poor woman, who, true to her instincts and life-long habit of thought, dwelt more
upon the consequent shame of her son's act than its moral character.

"Mr. Melville says he will give bail in his own name for me," resumed Mrs. Arnot, "as, of course,
I do not wish to appear to be acting in opposition to my husband. Indeed, I am not, for he
is willing that some such an arrangement should be made. He has very many in his employ, and
feels that he must be governed by rigid rules. Mr. Melville assures me that he can speedily
effect Egbert's release. Perhaps it will save you pain to go at once to our house and meet
your son there."

"No," replied the mother, rising, "I wish to see him at once. I do appreciate your kindness,
but I cannot go to the place which shelters your husband. I can never forgive him. Nor can
I go to a hotel. I would rather stay in this prison until I can hide myself and my miserable
son in our own home. Oh, how dark and dreadful are God's ways! To think that the boy that I
had brought up in the Church, as it were, should show such unnatural depravity!" Then, stepping
to the door, she said to the under-sheriff in waiting, "Please take me to my son at once, if
possible."

"Would you like me to go with you?" asked Mrs. Arnot, gently.

"Yes, yes! for I may faint on the way. Oh, how differently this day is turning out from what
I expected! I was in hopes that Egbert could meet me in a little trip to New York, and I find
him in prison!"

CHAPTER XV

HALDANE'S RESOLVE

It was not in accordance with nature nor with Haldane's peculiar temperament that he should
remain long under a stony paralysis of shame and despair. Though tall and manlike in appearance,
he was not a man. Boyish traits and impulses still lingered; indeed, they had been fostered
and maintained longer than usual by a fond and indulgent mother. It was not an evidence of
weakness, but rather a wholesome instinct of nature, that his thoughts should gradually find
courage to go to that mother as his only source of comfort and help. She, at least, would not
scorn him, and with her he might find a less dismal refuge than his narrow cell, should it
be possible to escape imprisonment. If it were not, he was too young and unacquainted with
misfortune not to long for a few kind words of comfort.

He did not even imagine that Mrs. Arnot, the wife of his employer, would come near him in his
deep disgrace. Even the thought of her kindness and his requital of it now stung him to the
quick, and he fairly writhed as he pictured to himself the scorn that must have been on Laura's
face as she saw him on his way to prison like a common thief.

As he remembered how full of rich promise life was but a few days since, and how all had changed
even more swiftly and unexpectedly than the grotesque events of a horrid dream, he bowed his
head in his hands and sobbed like a grief-stricken child.

"O mother, mother," he groaned, "if I could only hear your voice and feel your touch, a little
of this crushing weight might be lifted off my heart!"

Growing calmer after a time, he was able to consider his situation more connectedly, and he
was about to summon the sheriff in charge of the prison, that he might telegraph his mother,
when he heard her voice as, in the company of that official, she was seeking her way to him.

He shrank back in his cell. His heart beat violently as he heard the rustle of her dress. The
sheriff unlocked the grated iron door which led to the long, narrow corridor into which the
cells opened, and to which prisoners had access during the day.

"He's in that cell, ladies," said the officer's voice, and then, with commendable delicacy,
withdrew, having first ordered the prisoners in his charge to their cells.

"Lean upon my arm," urged a gentle voice, which Haldane recognized as that of Mrs. Arnot.

"O, this is awful!" moaned the stricken woman; "this is more than I can endure."

The pronoun she used threw a chill on the heart of her son, but when she tottered to the door
of his cell he sprang forward with the low, appealing cry:

"Mother!"

But the poor gentlewoman was so overcome that she sank down on a bench by the door, and, with
her face buried in her hands, as if to shut out a vision that would blast her, she rocked back
and forth in anguish, as she groaned:

"O Egbert, Egbert! you have disgraced me, you have disgraced your sisters, you have disgraced
yourself beyond remedy. O God! what have I done to merit this awful, this overwhelming disaster?"

With deep pain and solicitude Mrs. Arnot watched the young man's face as the light from the
grated window fell upon it. The appeal that trembled in his voice had been more plainly manifest
in his face, which had worn an eager and hopeful expression, and even suggested the spirit
of the little child when in some painful emergency it turns to its first and natural protector.

But most marked was the change caused by the mother's lamentable want of tact and self-control,
for that same face became stony and sullen. Instead of showing a spirit which deep distress
and crushing disaster had made almost childlike in its readiness to receive a mother's comfort
once more, he suddenly became, in appearance, a hardened criminal.

Mrs. Arnot longed to undo by her kindness the evil which her friend was unwittingly causing,
but could not come between mother and son. She stooped down, however, and whispered:

"Mrs. Haldane, speak kindly to your boy. He looked to you for sympathy. Do not let him feel
that you, like the world, are against him."

"O no," said Mrs. Haldane, her sobs ceasing somewhat, "I mean to do my duty by him. He shall
always have a good home, but oh! what a blight and a shadow he has brought to that home! That
I should have ever lived to see this day! O Egbert, Egbert! your sisters will have to live
like nuns, for they can never even go out upon the street again; and to think that the finger
of scorn should be pointed after you in the city where your father made our name so honorable!"

"It never shall be," said Haldane coldly. "You have only to leave me in prison to be rid of
me a long time."

"Leave you, in prison!" exclaimed his mother; "I would as soon stay here myself. No; through
Mrs. Arnot's kindness, arrangements are made for your release. I shall then take you to our
miserable home as soon as possible."

"I am not going home."

"Now, this is too much! What will you do?"

"I shall remain in this city," he replied, speaking from an angry impulse. "It was here I fell
and covered myself with shame, and I shall here fight my way back to the position I lost. The
time shall come when you will no longer say I'm a disgrace to you and my sisters. My heart
was breaking, and the first word you greet me with is 'disgrace'; and if I went home, disgrace
would always be in your mind, if not upon your tongue. I should have the word and thought kept
before me till I went mad. If I go home all my old acquaintances would sneer at me as a mean-spirited
cur, whose best exploit was to get in jail, and when his mother obtained his release he could
do nothing more manly than hide behind her apron the rest of his days. As far as I can judge,
you and my sisters would have no better opinion of me. I have been a wicked fool, I admit,
but I was not a deliberate thief. I did hope for a little comfort from you. But since all the
world is against me, I'll face and fight the world. I have been dragged through these streets,
the scorn of every one, and I will remain in this city until I compel the respect of its proudest
citizen."

The moment he ceased his passionate utterance, Mrs. Arnot said kindly and gravely:

"Egbert, you are mistaken. There was no scorn in my eyes, but rather deep pity and sorrow.
While your course has been very wrong, you have no occasion to despair, and as long as you
will try to become a true man you shall have my sympathy and friendship. You do not understand
your mother. She loves you as truly as ever, and is willing to make any sacrifice for you.
Only, her fuller knowledge of the world makes her realize more truly than you yet can the consequences
of your act. The sudden shock has overwhelmed her. Her distress shows how deeply she is wounded,
and you should try to comfort her by a lifetime of kindness."

"The best way I can comfort her is by deeds that will wipe out the memory of my disgrace; and,"
he continued, his impulsive, sanguine spirit kindling with the thought and prospect, "I will
regain all and more than I have lost. The time shall come when neither she nor my sisters will
have occasion to blush for me, nor to seclude themselves from the world because of their relation
to me."

"I should think my heart was sufficiently crushed and broken already," Mrs. Haldane sobbed,
"without your adding to its burden by charging me with being an unnatural mother. I cannot
understand how a boy brought up as religiously as you have been can show such strange depravity.
The idea that a child of mine could do anything which would bring him to such a place as this!"

His mother's words and manner seemed to exasperate her son beyond endurance, and he exclaimed
passionately:

"Well, curse it all! I am here. What's the use of harping on that any longer? Can't you listen
when I say I want to retrieve myself? As to my religious bringing up, it never did me a particle
of good. If you had whipped my infernal nonsense out of me, and made me mind when I was little--There,
there, mother," he concluded more considerately, as she began to grow hysterical under his
words, "do, for God's sake, be more composed! We can't help what has happened now. I'll either
change the world's opinion of me, or else get out of it."

"How can I be composed when you talk in so dreadful a manner? You can't change the world's
opinion. It never forgives and never forgets. It's the same as if you had said, I'll either
do what is impossible or throw away my life!"

"My dear Mrs. Haldane," said Mrs. Arnot, gently but firmly, "your just and natural grief is
such that you cannot now judge correctly and wisely concerning this matter. The emergency is
so unexpected and so grave that neither you nor your son should form opinions or make resolves
until there has been time for calmer thought. Let me take you home with me now, and as soon
as Egbert is released he can join you there."

"No, Mrs. Arnot," said Haldane decidedly; "I shall never enter your parlor again until I can
enter it as a gentleman--as one whom your other guests, should I meet them, would recognize
as a gentleman. Your kindness is as great as it is unexpected, but I shall take no mean advantage
of it."

"Well, then," said Mrs. Arnot with a sigh, "nothing can be gained by prolonging this painful
interview. We are detaining Mr. Melville, and delaying Egbert's release. Come, Mrs. Haldane;
I can take you to the private entrance of a quiet hotel, where you can be entirely secluded
until you are ready to return home. Egbert can come there as soon as the needful legal forms
are complied with."

"No," said the young man with his former decision, "mother and I must take leave of each other
here. Mother wants no jail-birds calling on her at the hotel. When I have regained my social
footing--when she is ready to take my arm and walk up Main street of this city--then she shall
see me as often as she wishes. It was my own cursed folly that brought me to the gutter, and
if mother will pay the price of my freedom, I will alone and unaided make my way back among
the highest and proudest."

"I sincerely hope you may win such a position," said Mrs. Arnot gravely, "and it is not impossible
for you to do so, though I wish you would make the attempt in a different spirit; but please
remember that these considerations do not satisfy and comfort a mother's heart. You should
think of all her past kindness; you should realize how deeply you have now wounded her, and
strive with tenderness and patience to mitigate the blow."

"Mother, I am sorry, more sorry than you can ever know," he said, advancing to her side and
taking her hand, "and I have been bitterly punished; but I did not mean to do what I did; I
was drunk--"

"Drunk!" gasped the mother, "merciful Heaven!"

"Yes, drunk--may the next drop of wine I take choke me!--and I did not know what I was doing.
But do not despair of me. I feel that I have it in me to make a man yet. Go now with Mrs. Arnot,
and aid in her kind efforts to procure my release. When you have succeeded, return home, and
think of me as well as you can until I make you think better," and he raised and kissed her
with something like tenderness, and then placed within Mrs. Arnot's arm the hand of the poor
weak woman, who had become so faint and exhausted from her conflicting emotions that she submitted
to be led away after a feeble remonstrance.

Mrs. Arnot sent Mr. Melville to the prisoner, and also the food she had brought. She then took
Mrs. Haldane to a hotel, where, in the seclusion of her room, she could have every attention
and comfort. With many reassuring words she promised to call later in the day, and if possible
bring with her the unhappy cause of the poor gentlewoman's distress.

CHAPTER XVI

THE IMPULSES OF WOUNDED PRIDE

That which at first was little more than an impulse, caused by wounded pride, speedily developed
into a settled purpose, and Haldane would leave his prison cell fully bent on achieving great
things. In accordance with a tendency in impulsive natures, he reacted from something like
despair into quite a sanguine and heroic mood. He would "face and fight the world, ay, and
conquer it, too." He would go out into the streets which had witnessed his disgrace, and, penniless,
empty-handed, dowered only with shame, he would prove his manhood by winning a position that
would compel respect and more than respect.

Mrs. Arnot, who returned immediately to the prison, was puzzled to know how to deal with him.
She approved of his resolution to remain in Hillaton, and of his purpose to regain respect
and position on the very spot, as it were, where, by his crime and folly, he had lost both.
She was satisfied that such a course promised far better for the future than a return to his
mother's luxurious home. With all its beauty and comfort it would become to him almost inevitably
a slough, both of "despond" and of dissipation--dissipation of the worst and most hopeless
kind, wherein the victim's ruling motive is to get rid of self. The fact that the young man
was capable of turning upon and facing a scornful and hostile world was a good and hopeful
sign. If he had been willing to slink away with his mother, bent only on escape from punishment
and on the continuance of animal enjoyment, Mrs. Arnot would have felt that his nature was
not sufficiently leavened with manhood to give hope of reform.

But while his action did suggest hope, it also contained elements of discouragement. She did
not find fault with what he proposed to do, but with the spirit in which he was entering on
his most difficult task. His knowledge of the world was so crude and partial that he did not
at all realize the herculean labor that he now became eager to attempt; and he was bent on
accomplishing everything in a way that would minister to his own pride, and proposed to be
under obligations to no one.

Mrs. Arnot, with her deep and long experience, knew how vitally important it is that human
endeavor should be supplemented by divine aid, and she sighed deeply as she saw that the young
man not only ignored this need, but did not even seem conscious of it. Religion was to him
a matter of form and profession, to which he was utterly indifferent. The truth that God helps
the distressed as a father helps and comforts his child, was a thought that then made no impression
on him whatever. God and all relating to him were abstractions, and he felt that the emergency
was too pressing, too imperative, for considerations that had no practical and immediate bearing
upon his present success.

Indeed, such was his pride and self-confidence, that he refused to receive from Mrs. Arnot,
and even from his mother, anything more than the privilege of going out empty-handed into the
city which was to become the arena of his future exploits.

He told Mrs. Arnot the whole story, and she had hoped that she could place his folly and crime
before him in its true moral aspects, and by dealing faithfully, yet kindly, with him, awaken
his conscience. But she had the tact to discover very soon that such effort was now worse than
useless. It was not his conscience, but his pride, that had been chiefly wounded. He felt his
disgrace, his humiliation, in the eyes of men almost too keenly, and he was consumed with desire
to regain society's favor. But he did not feel his sin. To God's opinion of him he scarcely
gave a thought. He regarded his wrong act in the light of a sudden and grave misfortune rather
than as the manifestation of a foul and inherent disease of his soul. He had lost his good
name as a man loses his property, and believed that he, in his own strength, and without any
moral change, could regain it.

When parting at the prison, Mrs. Arnot gave him her hand, and said:

"I trust that your hopes may be realized, and your efforts meet with success; but I cannot
help warning you that I fear you do not realize what you are attempting. The world is not only
very cold, but also suspicious and wary in its disposition toward those who have forfeited
its confidence. I cannot learn that you have any definite plans or prospects. I have never
been able to accomplish much without God's help. You not only seem to forget your need of Him,
but you are not even willing to receive aid from me or your own mother. I honor and respect
you for making the attempt upon which you are bent, but I fear that pride rather than wisdom
is your counsellor in carrying out your resolution; and both God's word and human experience
prove that pride goes but a little way before a fall."

"I have reached a depth," replied Haldane, bitterly, "from whence I cannot fall; and it will
be hereafter some consolation to remember that I was not lifted out of the mire, but that I
got out. If I cannot climb up again it were better I perished in the gutter of my shame." 

The women came "all rigged out in their best" which was not bad at all, as the mistresses often
gave them their cast off clothes. Some of these were very fine indeed with their frills and
hoops and many petticoats. Those who had no finery contented themselves with scenting their
hair and bodies with sweet herbs, which they also chewed. Quite often they were rewarded by the
attention of some swain from a distant plantation. In this case it was necessary for their respective
owners to consent to a union. Slaves on the Folsom plantation were always married properly and quite
often had a "sizeable" wedding, the master and mistress often came and made merry with their slaves.

Acie
knew about the war because he was one of the slaves commandeered by the Confederate army for
hauling food and ammunition to different points between Tallahassee and a city in Virginia that
he is unable to remember. It was a common occurrence for the soldiers to visit the plantation
owners and command a certain number of horses and slaves for services such as Acie did.

He thinks that he might have been about 15 years old when he was freed. A soldier in blue came
to the plantation and brought a "document" that Tom, their master read to all the slaves who
had been summoned to the "big house" for that purpose. About half of them consented to remain
with him. The others went away, glad of their new freedom.

Few had made any plans and were content to wander about the country, living as they could. Some
were more sober minded, and Acie's father was among the latter. He remained on the Folsom place
for a short while; he then settled down to share-croping in Jefferson County. Their first year
was the hardest, because of the many adjustments that had to be made.
Then things became better.

By means of hard work and the co-operation of friendly whites the slaves in the section soon
learned to shift for themselves.

Northerners came South "in swarms" and opened schools for the ex-slaves,
but Acie was not fortunate enough to get very far in his "blue back
Webster."

There was too much work to be done and his father trying to buy the land. Nor did he take
an interest in the political meetings held in the neighborhood. His parents shared with him
the common belief that such things were not to be shared by the humble. Some believed that
"too much book learning made the brain weak."

Acie met and married Keziah Wright, who was the daughter of a woman his mother had known in slavery.
Strangely enough they had never met as children.

With his wife he remained in Jefferson County, where nine of their thirteen children were born.

With
his family he moved to Jacksonville and had been living here "a right
good while" when the fire occurred in 1903.

He was employed as a city laborer and helped to build street car lines and pave streets. He
also helped with the installation of electric wiring in many parts of the city. He was injured
while working for the City of Jacksonville, but claims that he was
never in any manner remunerated for this injury.

Acie worked hard and accumulated land in the Moncrief section and
lives within a few feet of the spot where his house burned many years
ago.

He was very sad as he pointed out this spot to his visitor. A few scraggly hedges and an apple
tree, a charred bit of fence, a chimney foundation are the only markers of the home he built
after years of a hard struggle to have a home.

His land is all gone except the scant five acres upon which he lives, and this is only an expanse
of broom straw. He is no longer able to cultivate the land, not even having a kitchen garden.

Kaziah,
the wife, died several years ago; likewise all the children, except
two. One of these, a girl, is "somewhere up Nawth". The son has visited
him twice in five years and seems never to have anything to give the
old man, who expresses himself as desiring much to "quit die unfriendly
world" since he has nothing to live for except a lot of dead memories.

"All
done left me now. Mrs. Arnot did not intend
that she should brood over Haldane until her vivid imagination should weave a net out of his
misfortunes which might insnare her heart. It was best for Laura that she should receive her
explanations of life in very plain prose, and the picture that her aunt presented of Haldane
and his prospects was prosaic indeed. He was shown to be but an ordinary young man, with more
than ordinarily bad tendencies. While she commended his effort in itself, she plainly stated
how wanting it was in the true elements of success, and how great were her fears that it would
meet with utter failure. Thus the affair ended, as far as Laura was concerned, in a sincere
pity for her premature lover, and a mild and natural interest in his future welfare--but nothing
more.

Mr. Arnot uttered an imprecation on learning that his wife had gone security for Haldane. But
when he found that she had acted through Mr. Melville, in such a way that the fact need not
become known, he concluded to remain silent concerning the matter. He and his wife met at the
dinner-table that evening as if nothing unusual had occurred, both having concluded to ignore
all that had transpired, if possible. Mrs. Arnot saw that her husband had only acted characteristically,
and, from his point of view, correctly. Perhaps his recent experience would prevent him from
being unduly harsh again should there ever be similar cause, which was quite improbable. Since
it appeared that she could minister to his happiness in no other way save through her property,
she decided to leave him the one meagre gratification of which he was capable.

The future in its general aspects may here be anticipated by briefly stating that the echoes
of the affair gradually died away. Mr. Arnot, on the receipt of a check for one thousand dollars
from Mrs. Haldane's lawyer, was glad to procure Mr. Melville's release from the bond for which
his wife was pledged, by assuring the legal authorities that he would not prosecute. The superior
young man, who made free drinks the ambition of his life, had kept himself well informed, and
on learning of the order for his arrest left town temporarily for parts unknown. The papers
made the most of the sensation, to the disgust of all concerned, but reference to the affair
soon dwindled down to an occasional paragraph. The city press concluded editorially that the
great manufacturer had been harsh only seemingly, for the sake of effect, and with the understanding
that his wife would show a little balancing kindness to the culprit and his aristocratic mother.
That Haldane should still remain in the city was explained on the ground that he was ashamed
to go home, or that he was not wanted there.

CHAPTER XVII

AT ODDS WITH THE WORLD

Haldane kept his promise to spend an hour with his mother. While he told her the truth concerning
his folly, he naturally tried to place his action in the best light possible. After inducing
her to take some slight refreshment, he obtained a close carriage, and saw her safely on the
train which would convey her to the city wherein she resided. During the interview she grew
much more composed, and quite remorseful that she had not shown greater consideration for her
son's feelings, and she urged and even entreated him to return home with her. He remained firm,
however, in his resolution, and would receive from her only a very small sum of money, barely
enough to sustain him until he could look around for employment.

His mother shared Mrs. Arnot's distrust, greatly doubting the issue of his large hopes and
vague plans; but she could only assure him that her home, to which she returned crushed and
disconsolate, was also his.

But he felt that return was impossible. He would rather wander to the ends of the earth than
shut himself up with his mother and sisters, for he foresaw that their daily moans and repinings
would be daily torture. It would be even worse to appear among his old acquaintances and companions,
and be taunted with the fact that his first venture from home ended in a common jail. The plan
of drifting away to parts unknown, and of partially losing his identity by changing his name,
made a cold, dreary impression upon him, like the thought of annihilation, and thus his purpose
of remaining in Hillaton, and winning victory on the very ground of his defeat, grew more satisfactory.

But he soon began to learn how serious, how disheartening, is the condition of one who finds
society arrayed against him.

It is the fashion to inveigh against the "cold and pitiless world"; but the world has often
much excuse for maintaining this character. As society is now constituted, the consequences
of wrong-doing are usually terrible and greatly to be dreaded; and all who have unhealthful
cravings for forbidden things should be made to realize this. Society very naturally treats
harshly those who permit their pleasures and passions to endanger its very existence. People
who have toilsomely and patiently erected their homes and placed therein their treasures do
not tolerate with much equanimity those who appear to have no other calling than that of recklessly
playing with fire. The well-to-do, conservative world has no inclination to make things pleasant
for those who propose to gratify themselves at any and every cost; and if the culprit pleads,
"I did not realize--I meant no great harm," the retort comes back, "But you do the harm; you
endanger everything. If you have not sense or principle enough to act wisely and well, do not
expect us to risk our fortunes with either fools or knaves." And the man or the woman who has
preferred pleasure or passing gratification or transient advantage to that priceless possession,
a good name, has little ground for complaint. If society readily condoned those grave offences
which threaten chaos, thousands who are now restrained by salutary fear would act out disastrously
the evil lurking in their hearts. As long as the instinct of self-preservation remains, the
world will seem cold and pitiless.

But it often is so to a degree that cannot be too severely condemned. The world is the most
soulless of all corporations. In dealing with the criminal or unfortunate classes it generalizes
to such an extent that exceptional cases have little chance of a special hearing. If by any
means, however, such a hearing can be obtained, the world is usually just, and often quite
generous. But in the main it says to all: "Keep your proper places in the ranks. If you fall
out, we must leave you behind; if you make trouble, we must abate you as a nuisance." This
certainty has the effect of keeping many in their places who otherwise would drop out and make
trouble, and is, so far, wholesome. And yet, in spite of this warning truth, the wayside of
life is lined with those who, for some reason, have become disabled and have fallen out of
their places; and miserably would many of them perish did not the Spirit of Him who came "to
seek and save the lost" animate true followers like Mrs. Arnot, leading them likewise to go
out after the lame, the wounded, and the morally leprous.

Haldane was sorely wounded, but he chose to make his appeal wholly to the world. Ignoring Heaven,
and those on earth representing Heaven's forgiving and saving mercy, he went out alone, in
the spirit of pride and self-confidence, to deal with those who would meet him solely on the
ground of self-interest. How this law works against such as have shown themselves unworthy
of trust, he at once began to receive abundant proof.

He returned to the hotel whence he had just taken his mother, but the proprietor declined to
give him lodgings. It was a house that cherished its character for quietness and eminent respectability,
and a young gambler and embezzler just out of prison would prove an ill-omened guest. On receiving
a cold and peremptory refusal to his application, and in the presence of several others, Haldane
stalked haughtily away; but there was misgiving and faintness at his heart. Such a public rebuff
was a new and strange experience.

With set teeth and lips compressed he next resolved to go to the very hotel where he had committed
his crime, and from that starting-point fight his way up. He found the public room more than
usually well filled with loungers, and could not help discovering, as he entered, that he was
the subject of their loud and unsavory conversation. The "Evening Spy" had just been read,
and all were very busy discussing the scandal. As the knowledge of his presence and identity
was speedily conveyed to one and another in loud whispers, the noisy tongues ceased, and the
young man found himself the centre of an embarrassing amount of observation. But he endeavored
to give the idlers a defiant and careless glance as he walked up to the proprietor and asked
for a room.

"No, sir!" replied that virtuous individual, with sharp emphasis; "you have had a room of me
once too often. It's not my way to have gamblers, bloats, and jail-birds hanging around my
place--'not if the court knows herself; and she thinks she does.' You've done all you could
to give my respectable, first-class house the name of a low gambling hell. The evening paper
even hints that someone connected with the house had a hand in your being plucked. You've damaged
me hundreds of dollars, and if you ever show your face within my doors again I'll have you
arrested."

Haldane was stung to the quick, and retorted vengefully:

"Perhaps the paper is right. I was introduced to the blacklegs in your bar-room, and by a scamp
who was a habitual lounger here. They got their cards of you, and, having made me drunk, and
robbed me in one of your rooms, they had no trouble in getting away."

"Do you make any such charge against me?" bellowed the landlord, starting savagely forward.

"I say, as the paper says, perhaps," replied Haldane, standing his ground, but quivering with
rage. "I shall give you no ground for a libel suit; but if you will come out in the street
you shall have all the satisfaction you want; and if you lay the weight of your finger on me
here. I'll damage you worse than I did last night."

"How dare you come here to insult me?" said the landlord, but keeping now at a safe distance
from the incensed youth. "Some one, go for a policeman, for the fellow is out of jail years
too soon."

"I did not come here to insult you, I came, as every one has a right to come, to ask for a
room, for which I meant to pay your price, and you insulted me."

"Well, you can't have a room."

"If you had quietly said that and no more in the first place, there would have been no trouble.
But I want you and every one else to understand that I won't be struck, if I am down;" and
he turned on his heel and strode out of the house, followed by a volley of curses from the
enraged landlord and the bartender, who had smirked so agreeably the evening before.

A distorted account of this scene--published in the "Courier" the following day, in connection
with a detailed account of the whole miserable affair--added considerably to the ill repute
that already burdened Haldane; for it was intimated that he was as ready for a street brawl
as for any other species of lawlessness.

The "Courier," having had the nose of its representative demolished by Haldane, was naturally
prejudiced against him; and, influenced by its darkly-colored narrative, the citizens shook
their heads over the young man, and concluded that he was a dangerous character, who had become
unnaturally and precociously depraved; and there was quite a general hope that Mr. Arnot would
not fail to prosecute, so that the town might be rid of one who promised to continue a source
of trouble.

The "Spy" a rival paper, showed a tendency to dwell on the extenuating circumstances. But it
is so much easier for a community to believe evil rather than good of a person, that mere excuses
and apologies, and the suggestion that the youth had been victimized, had little weight. Besides,
the world shows a tendency to detest weak fools even more than knaves.

After his last bitter experience Haldane felt unwilling to venture to another hotel, and he
endeavored to find a quiet boarding-place; but as soon as he mentioned his name, the keepers,
male and female, suddenly discovered that they had no rooms. Night was near, and his courage
was beginning to fail him, when he at last found a thrifty gentlewoman who gave far more attention
to her housewifely cares than to the current news. She readily received the well-dressed stranger,
and showed him to his room. Haldane did not hide his name from her, for he resolved to spend
the night in the street before dropping a name which now seemed to turn people from him as
if contagion lurked in it, and he was relieved to find that, as yet, it had to her no disgraceful
associations. He was bent on securing one good night's rest, and so excused himself from going
down to supper, lest he should meet some one that knew him. After nightfall he slipped out
to an obscure restaurant for his supper.

His precaution, however, was vain, for on his return to his room he encountered in a hallway
one of the loungers who had witnessed the recent scene at the hotel. After a second's stare
the man passed on down to the shabby-genteel parlor, and soon whist, novels, and papers were
dropped, as the immaculate little community learned of the contaminating presence beneath the
same roof with themselves.

"A man just out of prison! In the meantime, my friends, consider that such means as you have suggested
for alleviating the hardships with which I so profoundly sympathise
are not things to be lightly rushed into.

You will agree with me doubtless. You will show that fine sense of the propriety of your lots
innate in the breast of every Briton, by agreeing with me that canals, for instance, are not
things to be lightly rushed into. Emigration, my friends, is not a thing to be lightly rushed
into.


But, then, "business is business." Poor Haldane was but one uncertain lodger, and here were
a dozen or more "regulars" arrayed against him. The sagacious woman was not long in climbing
to the door of the obnoxious guest, and her very knock said, "What are you doing here?"

Haldane's first thought was, "She is a woman; she will not have the heart to turn me away."
He had become so weary and disheartened that his pride was failing him, and he was ready to
plead for the chance of a little rest. Therefore he opened the door, and invited the landlady
to enter in the most conciliating manner. But no such poor chaff would be of any avail with
one of Mrs. Gruppins' experience, and looking straight before her, as if addressing no one
in particular, she said sententiously:

"I wish this room vacated within a half-hour."

"If you have the heart of a woman you will not send me out this rainy night. I am weary and
sick in body and mind. I wouldn't turn a dog out in the night and storm."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, sir," said Mrs. Gruppins, turning on him indignantly;
"to think that you should take advantage of a poor and defenceless widow, and me so inexperienced
and ignorant of the wicked world."

"I did not take advantage of your ignorance: I told you who I was, and am able to pay for the
room. In the morning I will leave your house, if you have so much objection to my remaining."

"Why shouldn't I object? I never had such as you here before. All my boarders"--she added in
a louder tone, for the benefit of those who were listening at the foot of the stairs--"all
my boarders are peculiarly respectable people, and I would not have them scandalized by your
presence here another minute if I could help it."

"How much do I owe you?" asked Haldane, in a tone that was harsh from its suppressed emotion.

"I don't want any of your money--I don't want anything to do with people who are lodged at
the expense of the State. If you took money last night, there is no telling what you will take
to-night."

Haldane snatched his hat and rushed from the house, overwhelmed with a deeper and more terrible
sense of shame and degradation than he had ever imagined possible. He had become a pariah,
and in bitterness of heart was realizing the truth.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE WORLD'S VERDICT--OUR KNIGHT A CRIMINAL

A few moments before his interview with the thrifty and respectable Mrs. Gruppins, Haldane
had supposed himself too weary to drag one foot after the other in search of another resting-place;
and therefore his eager hope that that obdurate female might not be gifted with the same quality
of "in'ards" which Pat M'Cabe ascribed to Mr. Arnot. He had, indeed, nearly reached the limit
of endurance, for had he been in his best and most vigorous condition, a day which taxed so
terribly both body and mind would have drained his vitality to the point of exhaustion. As
it was, the previous night's debauch told against him like a term of illness. He had since
taken food insufficiently and irregularly, and was, therefore, in no condition to meet the
extraordinary demands of the ordeal through which he was passing. Mental distress, moreover,
is far more wearing than physical effort, and his anguish of mind had risen several times during
the day almost to frenzy.

In spite of all this, the sharp and pitiless tongue of Mrs. Gruppins goaded him again to the
verge of desperation, and he strode rapidly and aimlessly away, through the night and storm,
with a wilder tempest raging in his breast. But the gust of feeling died away as suddenly as
it had arisen, and left him ill and faint. A telegraph pole was near, and he leaned against
it for support.

"Move on," growled a passing policeman.

"Will you do me a kindness?" asked Haldane; "I am poor and sick--a stranger. Tell me where
I can hire a bed for a small sum."

The policeman directed him down a side street, saying, "You can get a bed at No. 13, and no
questions asked."

There was unspeakable comfort in the last assurance, for it now seemed that he could hope to
find a refuge only in places where "no questions were asked."

With difficulty the weary youth reached the house, and by paying a small extra sum was able
to obtain a wretched little room to himself; but never did storm-tossed and endangered sailors
enter a harbor's quiet waters with a greater sense of relief than did Haldane as he crept up
into this squalid nook, which would at least give him a little respite from the world's terrible
scorn.

What a priceless gift for the unhappy, the unfortunate--yes, and for the guilty--is sleep!
Many seem to think of the body only as a clog, impeding mental action--as a weight, chaining
the spirit down. Were the mind, in its activity, independent of the body--were the wounded
spirit unable to forget its pain--could the guilty conscience sting incessantly--then the chief
human industry would come to be the erection of asylums for the insane. But by an unfathomable
mystery the tireless regal spirit has been blended with the flesh and blood of its servant,
the body. In heaven, where there is neither sin nor pain, even the body becomes spiritual;
but on earth, where it so often happens, as in the case of poor Haldane, that to think and
to remember is torture, it is a blessed thing that the body, formed from the earth, often becomes
heavy as earth, and rests upon the spirit for a few hours at least, like the clods with which
we fill the grave.

The morning of the following day was quite well advanced when Haldane awoke from his long oblivion,
and, after regaining consciousness, he lay a full hour longer trying to realize his situation,
and to think of some plan by which he might best recover his lost position. As he recalled
all that had occurred he began to understand the extreme difficulty of his task, and he even
queried whether it were possible for him to succeed. If the respectable would not even give
him shelter, how could he hope that they would employ and trust him?

After he had partaken of quite a hearty breakfast, however, his fortunes began to wear a less
forbidding aspect. Endowed with youth, health, and, as he believed, with more than usual ability,
he felt that there was scarcely occasion for despair. Some one would employ him--some one would
give him another chance. He would take any respectable work that would give him a foothold,
and by some vague, fortunate means, which the imagination of the young always supplies, he
would achieve success that would obliterate the memory of the past. Therefore, with flashes
of hope in his heart, he started out to seek his fortune, and commenced applying at the various
stores and offices of the city.

So far from giving any encouragement, people were much surprised that he had the assurance
to ask to be employed and trusted again. The majority dismissed him coldly and curtly. A few
mongrel natures, true to themselves, gave a snarling refusal. Then there were jovial spirits
who must have their jest, even though the sensitive subject of it was tortured thereby--men
who enjoyed quizzing Haldane before sending him on, as much as the old inquisitors relished
a little recreation with hot pincers and thumb-screws. There were also conscientious people,
whose worldly prudence prevented them from giving employment to one so damaged in character,
and yet who felt constrained to give some good advice. To this, it must be confessed, Haldane
listened with very poor grace, thus extending the impression that he was a rather hopeless subject.

"Good God!" he exclaimed, interrupting an old gentleman who was indulging in some platitudes
to the effect that the "way of the transgressor is hard"--"I would rather black your boots
than listen to such talk. What I want is work--a chance to live honestly. What's the use of
telling a fellow not to go to the devil, and then practically send him to the devil?"

The old gentleman was somewhat shocked and offended, and coldly intimated that he had no need
of the young man's services.

A few spoke kindly and seemed truly sorry for him, but they either had no employment to give,
or, on business principles, felt that they could not introduce among their other assistants
one under bonds to appear and be tried for a State-prison offence that was already the same
as proved.

After receiving rebuffs, and often what he regarded as insults, for hours, the young man's
hope began to fail him utterly. His face grew pale and haggard, not only from fatigue, but
from that which tells disastrously almost as soon upon the body as upon the mind--discouragement.
He saw that he had not yet fully realized the consequences of his folly. The deep and seemingly
implacable resentment of society was a continued surprise. He was not conscious of being a
monster of wickedness, and it seemed to him that after his bitter experience he would rather
starve than again touch what was not his own.

But the trouble is, the world does not give us much credit for what we think, feel, and imagine,
even if aware of our thoughts. It is what we do that forms public opinion; and it was both
natural and just that the public should have a very decided opinion of one who had recently
shown himself capable of gambling, drunkenness, and practical theft.

And yet the probabilities were that if some kind, just man had bestowed upon Haldane both employment
and trust, with a chance to rise, his bitter lesson would have made him scrupulously careful
to shun his peculiar temptations from that time forward. But the world usually regards one
who has committed a crime as a criminal, and treats him as such. It cannot, if it would, nicely
calculate the hidden moral state and future chances. It acts on sound generalities, regardless
of the exceptions; and thus it often happens that men and women who at first can scarcely understand
the world's adverse opinion, are disheartened by it, and at last come to merit the worst that
can be said or thought.

As, at the time of his first arrest, Haldane had found his eyes drawn by a strange, cruel fascination
to every scornful or curious face upon the street, so now he began to feel a morbid desire
to know just what people were saying and thinking of him. He purchased both that day's papers
and those of the previous day, and, finding a little out-of-the-way restaurant kept by a foreigner,
he "supped full with"--what were to him emphatically--"horrors"; the dinner and supper combined,
which he had ordered, growing cold, in the meantime, and as uninviting as the place in which
it was served.

His eyes dwelt longest upon those sentences which were the most unmercifully severe, and they
seemed to burn their way into his very soul. Was he in truth such a miscreant as the "Courier"
described? Mrs. Arnot had not shrunk from him as from contamination; but she was different
from all other people that he had known; and he now remembered, also, that even she always
referred to his act in a grave, troubled way, as if both its character and consequences were
serious indeed.

There was such a cold, leaden despondency burdening his heart that he felt that he must have
relief of some kind. Although remembering his rash invocation of fatal consequences to himself
should he touch again that which had brought him so much evil, he now, with a reckless oath,
muttered that he "needed some liquor, and would have it."

Having finished a repast from which he would have turned in disgust before his fortunes had
so greatly altered, and having gained a little temporary courage from the more than doubtful
brandy served in such a place, he obtained permission to sit by the fire and smoke away the
blustering evening, for he felt no disposition to face the world again that day. The German
proprietor and his beer-drinking patrons paid no attention to the stranger, and as he sat off
on one side by himself at a table, with a mug of lager before him, he was practically as much
alone, and as lonely, as if in a desert.

In a dull, vague way it occurred to him that it was very fitting that those present should
speak in a foreign and unknown tongue, and act and look differently from all classes of people
formerly known to him. He was in a different world, and it was appropriate that everything
should appear strange and unfamiliar.

Finding that he could have a room in this same little, dingy restaurant-hotel, where he had
obtained his supper, he resolved that he would torture himself no more that night with thoughts
of the past or future, but slowly stupefy himself into sleep.

CHAPTER XIX

THE WORLD'S BEST OFFER--A PRISON

After a walk in the sweet April sunshine the following morning, a hearty breakfast, and a general
rallying of the elastic forces of youth, Haldane felt that he had not yet reached the "brink
of dark despair."

Indeed, he had an odd sense of pride that he had survived the ordeal of the last two days,
and still felt as well as he did. Although it was but an Arab's life, in which every man's
hand seemed against him, yet he still lived, and concluded that he could continue to live indefinitely.

He did not go out again, as on the previous day, to seek employment, but sat down and tried
to think his way into the future somewhat.

The first question that presented itself was, Should he in any contingency return home to his
mother? 

His father, he says, used to spend hours after the candles were out telling him and his brothers about
his capture and subsequent slavery.

Adam was a native of the West Coast of Africa, and when quite a young man was attracted one
day to a large ship that had just come near his home. With many others he was attracted aboard
by bright red handkerchiefs, shawls and other articles in the hands
of the seamen. Shortly afterwards he was securely bound in the hold
of the ship, to be later sold somewhere in America. The probability, also, that Laura would learn of such
an appeal for aid made him scout the very thought.

Should he go away among strangers, change his name, and commence life anew, unburdened by the
weight which now dragged him down?

The thought of cutting himself off utterly from all whom he knew, or who cared for him, caused
a cold, shivering sense of dread. It would, also, be a confession of defeat, an acknowledgment
that he could not accomplish what he had promised to himself and to others. He had, moreover,
sufficient forethought to perceive that any success which he might achieve elsewhere, and under
another name, would be such a slight and baseless fabric that a breath from one who now knew
him could overturn it. He might lead an honorable life for years, and yet no one would believe
him honorable after discovering that he was living under an alias and concealing a crime. If
he could build himself up in Hillaton he would be founded on the rock of truth, and need fear
no disastrous reverses from causes against which he could not guard.

Few can be more miserable than those who hold their fortunes and good name on sufferance--safe
only in the power and disposition of others to keep some wretched secret; and he is but little
better off who fears that every stranger arriving in town may recognize in his face the features
of one that, years before, by reason of some disgraceful act, fled from himself and all who
knew him. The more Haldane thought upon the scheme of losing his identity, and of becoming
that vague, and, as yet, unnamed stranger, who after years of exile would still be himself,
though to the world not himself, the less attractive it became.

He finally concluded that, as he had resolved to remain in Hillaton, he would keep his resolution,
and that, as he had plainly stated his purpose to lift himself up by his own unaided efforts,
he would do so if it were possible; and if it were not, he would live the life of a laborer--a
tramp, even--rather than "skulk back," as he expressed it, to those who were once kindred and
companions.

"If I cannot walk erect to their front doors, I will never crawl around to the back entrances.
If I ever must take to keep from starving, it will be from strangers. I shall never inflict
myself as a dead weight and a painfully tolerated infamy on any one. I was able to get myself
into this disgusting slough, and if I haven't brains and pluck enough to get myself out, I
will remain at this, my level, to which I have fallen."

Thus pride still counselled and controlled, and yet it was a kind of pride that inspires something
like respect. It proved that there was much good metal in the crude, misshapen ore of his nature.

But the necessity of doing something was urgent, for the sum he had been willing to receive
from his mother was small, and rapidly diminishing.

Among the possible activities in which he might engage, that of writing for papers and magazines
occurred to him, and the thought at once caught and fired his imagination. The mysteries of
the literary world were the least known to him, and therefore it offered the greatest amount
of vague promise and indefinite hope. Here a path might open to both fame and fortune. The
more he dwelt on the possibility the more it seemed to take the aspect of probability. Under
the signature of E. H. he would write thrilling tales, until the public insisted upon knowing
the great unknown. Then he could reverse present experience by scorning those who had scorned
him. He recalled all that he had ever read about genius toiling in its attic until the world
was compelled to recognize and do homage to the regal mind. He would remain in seclusion also;
he would burn midnight oil until he should come to be known as Haldane the brilliant writer
instead of Haldane the gambler, drunkard, and thief.

All on fire with his new project, he sallied forth to the nearest news-stand, and selected
two or three papers and magazines, whose previous interest to him and known popularity suggested
that they were the best mediums in which he could rise upon the public as a literary star,
all the more attractive because unnamed and unknown.

His next proceeding indicated a commendable amount of shrewdness, and proved that his roseate
visions resulted more from ignorance and inexperience than from innate foolishness. He carefully
read the periodicals he had bought, in the hope of obtaining hints and suggestions from their
contents which would aid him in producing acceptable manuscripts. Some of the sketches and
stories appeared very simple, the style flowing along as smoothly and limpidly as a summer
brook through the meadows. He did not see why he could not write in a similar vein, perhaps
more excitingly and interestingly. In his partial and neglected course of study he had not
given much attention to belles-lettres, and was not aware that the simplicity and lucid purity
of thought which made certain pages so easily read were produced by the best trained and most
cultured talent existing among the regular contributors.

He spent the evening and the greater part of a sleepless night in constructing a crude plot
of a story, and, having procured writing materials, hastened through an early breakfast, the
following morning, in his eagerness to enter on what now seemed a shining path to fame.

He sat down and dipped his pen in ink. The blank, white page was before him, awaiting his brilliant
and burning thoughts; but for some reason they did not and would not come. This puzzled him.
He could dash off a letter, and write with ease a plain business statement. Why could he not
commence and go on with his story?

"How do those other fellows commence?" he mentally queried, and he again carefully read and
examined the opening paragraphs of two or three tales that had pleased him. They seemed to
commence and go forward very easily and naturally. Why could not he do the same?

To his dismay he found that he could not. He might as well have sat down and hoped to have
deftly and skilfully constructed a watch as to have imitated the style of the stories that
most interested him, for he had never formed even the power, much less the habit, of composition.

After a few labored and inconsequential sentences, which seemed like crude ore instead of the
molten, burning metal of thought left to cool in graceful molds, he threw aside his pen in despair.

After staring despondently for a time at the blank page, which now promised to remain as blank
as the future then seemed, the fact suddenly occurred to him that even genius often spurred
its flagging or dormant powers by stimulants. Surely, then, he, in his pressing emergency,
had a right to avail himself of this aid. A little brandy might awaken his imagination, which
would then kindle with his theme.

At any rate, he had no objection to the brandy, and with this inspiration he again resumed
his pen. He was soon astonished and delighted with the result, for he found himself writing
with ease and fluency. His thoughts seemed to become vivid and powerful, and his story grew
rapidly. As body and mind flagged, the potent genii in the black bottle again lifted and soared
on with him until the marvellous tale was completed.

He decided to correct the manuscript on the following day, and was so complacent and hopeful
over his performance that he scarcely noted that he was beginning to feel wretchedly from the
inevitable reaction. The next day, with dull and aching head he tried to read what he had written,
but found it dreary and disappointing work. His sentences and paragraphs appeared like clouds
from which the light had faded; but he explained this fact to himself on the ground of his
depressed physical state, and he went through his task with dogged persistence.

He felt better on the following day, and with the aid of the bottle he resolved to give his
inventive genius another flight. On this occasion he would attempt a longer story--one that
would occupy him several days--and he again stimulated himself up to a condition in which he
found at least no lack of words. When he attained what he supposed was his best mood, he read
over again the work of the preceding day, and was delighted to find that it now glowed with
prismatic hues. In his complacence he at once despatched it to the paper for which it was designed.

Three or four days of alternate work and brooding passed, and if various and peculiar moods
prove the possession of genius, Haldane certainly might claim it. The next week he was cooking in a
lumber-camp for his board. That's Thomas Jefferson--or, rather, that's what he was.

And now we're coming to the girl who killed the bug in Thomas Jefferson--and
rescued the king. She was born swell. These causes alone were sufficient to make
mental serenity impossible; but the after-effects of the decoction from which he obtained his
inspiration were even worse, and after a week's work the thought occurred to him more than
once that if he pursued a literary life, either his genius or that which he imbibed as its
spur would consume him utterly.

By the time the first two stories were finished he found that it would be necessary to supplement
the labors of his pen. He would have to wait at least a few days before he could hope for any
returns, even though he had urged in his accompanying notes prompt acceptance and remittance
for their value.

He went to the office of the "Evening Spy," the paper which had shown some lenience toward
him, and offered his services as writer, or reporter; and, although taught by harsh experience
not to hope for very much, he was a little surprised at the peremptory manner in which his
services were declined. His face seemed to ask an explanation, and the editor said briefly:

"We did not bear down very hard on you--it's not our custom; but both inclination and necessity
lead us to require that every one and everything connected with this paper should be eminently
respectable and deserving of respect. Good-morning, sir."

Haldane's pre-eminence consisted only in his lack of respectability; and after the brave visions
of the past week, based on his literary toil, this cool, sharp-cut statement of society's opinion
quenched about all hope of ever rising by first gaining recognition and employment among those
whose position was similar to what his own had been. As he plodded his way back to the miserable
little foreign restaurant, his mind began to dwell on this question:

"Is there any place in the world for one who has committed a crime, save a prison?"

CHAPTER XX

MAIDEN AND WOOD-SAWYER

Before utterly abandoning all hope of finding employment that should in some small degree preserve
an air of respectability, Haldane resolved to give up one more day to the search, and on the
following morning he started out and walked until nightfall. He even offered to take the humblest
positions that would insure him a support and some recognition; but the record of his action
while in Mr. Arnot's employ followed him everywhere, creating sufficient prejudice in every
case to lead to a refusal of his application. Some said "No" reluctantly and hesitatingly,
as if kindly feelings within took the young man's part; but they said it, nevertheless.

For the patient resolution with which he continued to apply to all kinds of people and places,
hour after hour, in spite of such disheartening treatment, he deserved much praise; but he
did not receive any; and at last, weary and despondent, he returned to his miserable lodgings.
He was so desperately depressed in body and mind that the contents of the black bottle seemed
his only resource.

