But that third proposition as to the Fugitive Slave Law and the faithful execution of that
law by the Northern and Western States would, if acceded to by Mr. Lincoln's party, have amounted
to an unconditional surrender of everything.  What!  Massachusetts and Connecticut carry out
the Fugitive Slave Law?  Ohio carry out the Fugitive Slave Law after the "Dred Scott" decision
and all its consequences?  Mr. Crittenden might as well have asked Connecticut, Massachusetts,
and Ohio to introduce slavery within their own lands.  The Fugitive Slave Law was then, as
it is now, the law of the land; it was the law of the United States as voted by Congress, and
passed by the President, and acted on by the supreme judge of the United States Court.  But
it was a law to which no free State had submitted itself, or would submit itself.  "What!"
the English reader will say, "sundry States in the Union refuse to obey the laws of the Union--refuse
to submit to the constitutional action of their own Congress?"  Yes.  Such has been the position
of this country!  To such a dead lock has it been brought by the attempted but impossible amalgamation
of North and South.  Mr. Crittenden's compromise was moonshine.  It was utterly out of the
question that the free States should bind themselves to the rendition of escaped slaves, or
that Mr. Lincoln, who had just been brought in by their voices, should agree to any compromise
which should attempt so to bind them.  Lord Palmerston might as well attempt to reenact the
Corn Laws.

Then comes the question whether Mr. Lincoln or his government could have prevented the war
after he had entered upon his office in March, 1861?  I do not suppose that any one thinks
that he could have avoided secession and avoided the war also; that by any ordinary effort
of government he could have secured the adhesion of the Gulf States to the Union after the
first shot had been fired at Fort Sumter.  The general opinion in England is, I take it, this--
that secession then was manifestly necessary, and that all the blood-shed and money-shed, and
all this destruction of commerce and of agriculture might have been prevented by a graceful
adhesion to an indisputable fact.  But there are some facts, even some indisputable facts,
to which a graceful adherence is not possible. Could King Bomba have welcomed Garibaldi to
Naples?  Can the Pope shake hands with Victor Emmanuel?  Could the English have surrendered
to their rebel colonists peaceable possession of the colonies?  The indisputability of a fact
is not very easily settled while the circumstances are in course of action by which the fact
is to be decided.  The men of the Northern States have not believed in the necessity of secession,
but have believed it to be their duty to enforce the adherence of these States to the Union.
The American governments have been much given to compromises, but had Mr. Lincoln attempted
any compromise by which any one Southern State could have been let out of the Union, he would
have been impeached.  In all probability the whole Constitution would have gone to ruin, and
the Presidency would have been at an end.  At any rate, his Presidency would have been at an
end.  When secession, or in other words rebellion, was once commenced, he had no alternative
but the use of coercive measures for putting it down--that is, he had no alternative but war.
It is not to be supposed that he or his ministry contemplated such a war as has existed--with
600,000 men in arms on one side, each man with his whole belongings maintained at a cost of
150l. per annum, or ninety millions sterling per annum for the army.  Nor did we when we resolved
to put down the French revolution think of such a national debt as we now owe.  These things
grow by degrees, and the mind also grows in becoming used to them; but I cannot see that there
was any moment at which Mr. Lincoln could have stayed his hand and cried peace. It is easy
to say now that acquiescence in secession would have been better than war, but there has been
no moment when he could have said so with any avail.  It was incumbent on him to put down rebellion,
or to be put down by it.  So it was with us in America in 1776.

I do not think that we in England have quite sufficiently taken all this into consideration.
We have been in the habit of exclaiming very loudly against the war, execrating its cruelty
and anathematizing its results, as though the cruelty were all superfluous and the results
unnecessary.  But I do not remember to have seen any statement as to what the Northern States
should have done--what they should have done, that is, as regards the South, or when they should
have done it.  It seems to me that we have decided as regards them that civil war is a very
bad thing, and that therefore civil war should be avoided.  But bad things cannot always be
avoided.  It is this feeling on our part that has produced so much irritation in them against
us--reproducing, of course, irritation on our part against them.  They cannot understand that
we should not wish them to be successful in putting down a rebellion; nor can we understand
why they should be outrageous against us for standing aloof, and keeping our hands, if it be
only possible, out of the fire.

When Slidell and Mason were arrested, my opinions were not changed, but my feelings were altered.
I seemed to acknowledge to myself that the treatment to which England had been subjected, and
the manner in which that treatment was discussed, made it necessary that I should regard the
question as it existed between England and the States, rather than in its reference to the
North and South.  I had always felt that as regarded the action of our government we had been
sans reproche; that in arranging our conduct we had thought neither of money nor political
influence, but simply of the justice of the case--promising to abstain from all interference
and keeping that promise faithfully.  It had been quite clear to me that the men of the North,
and the women also, had failed to appreciate this, looking, as men in a quarrel always do look,
for special favor on their side.  Everything that England did was wrong.  If a private merchant,
at his own risk, took a cargo of rifles to some Southern port, that act to Northern eyes was
an act of English interference--of favor shown to the South by England as a nation; but twenty
shiploads of rifles sent from England to the North merely signified a brisk trade and a desire
for profit.  The "James Adger," a Northern man-of-war, was refitted at Southampton as a matter
of course.  There was no blame to England for that. But the Nashville, belonging to the Confederates,
should not have been allowed into English waters.  It was useless to speak of neutrality. 
No Northerner would understand that a rebel could have any mutual right.  The South had no
claim in his eyes as a belligerent, though the North claimed all those rights which he could
only enjoy by the fact of there being a recognized war between him and his enemy the South.
The North was learning to hate England, and day by day the feeling grew upon me that, much
as I wished to espouse the cause of the North, I should have to espouse the cause of my own
country.  Then Slidell and Mason were arrested, and I began to calculate how long I might remain
in the country.  "There is no danger.  We are quite right," the lawyers said.  "There are Vattel,
and Puffendorff, and Stowell, and Phillimore, and Wheaton," said the ladies.  "Ambassadors
are contraband all the world over--more so than gunpowder; and if taken in a neutral bottom,"
etc.  I wonder why ships are always called bottoms when spoken of with legal technicality?
But neither the lawyers nor the ladies convinced me.  I know that there are matters which will
be read not in accordance with any written law, but in accordance with the bias of the reader's
mind.  Such laws are made to be strained any way.  I knew how it would be.  All the legal acumen
of New England declared the seizure of Slidell and Mason to be right.  The legal acumen of
Old England has declared it to be wrong; and I have no doubt that the ladies of Old England
can prove it to be wrong out of Yattel, Puffendorff, Stowell, Phillimore, and Wheaton.

"But there's Grotius," I said, to an elderly female at New York, who had quoted to me some
half dozen writers on international law, thinking thereby that I should trump her last card.
"I've looked into Grotius too," said she, "and as far as I can see," etc. etc. etc.  So I had
to fall back again on the convictions to which instinct and common sense had brought me.  I
never doubted for a moment that those convictions would be supported by English lawyers.

I left Boston with a sad feeling at my heart that a quarrel was imminent between England and
the States, and that any such quarrel must be destructive to the cause of the North.  I had
never believed that the States of New England and the Gulf States would again become parts
of one nation, but I had thought that the terms of separation would be dictated by the North,
and not by the South. I had felt assured that South Carolina and the Gulf States, across from
the Atlantic to Texas, would succeed in forming themselves into a separate confederation; but
I had still hoped that Maryland, Virginia, Kentucky, and Missouri might be saved to the grander
empire of the North, and that thus a great blow to slavery might be the consequence of this
civil war.  But such ascendency could only fall to the North by reason of their command of
the sea.  The Northern ports were all open, and the Southern ports were all closed.  But if
this should be reversed.  If by England's action the Southern ports should be opened, and the
Northern ports closed, the North could have no fair expectation of success.  The ascendency
in that case would all be with the South.  Up to that moment--the Christmas of 1861--Maryland
was kept in subjection by the guns which General Dix had planted over the City of Baltimore.
Two-thirds of Virginia were in active rebellion, coerced originally into that position by her
dependence for the sale of her slaves on the cotton States.  Kentucky was doubtful, and divided.
When the Federal troops prevailed, Kentucky was loyal; when the Confederate troops prevailed,
Kentucky was rebellious.  The condition in Missouri was much the same.  These four States,
by two of which the capital, with its District of Columbia, is surrounded, might be gained
or might be lost.  And these four States are susceptible of white labor--as much so as Ohio
and Illinois--are rich in fertility, and rich also in all associations which must be dear to
Americans.  Without Virginia, Maryland, and Kentucky, without the Potomac, the Chesapeake,
and Mount Vernon, the North would indeed be shorn of its glory!  But it seemed to be in the
power of the North to say under what terms secession should take place, and where should be
the line.  A Senator from South Carolina could never again sit in the same chamber with one
from Massachusetts; but there need be no such bar against the border States.  So much might
at any rate be gained, and might stand hereafter as the product of all that money spent on
600,000 soldiers.  But if the Northerners should now elect to throw themselves into a quarrel
with England, if in the gratification of a shameless braggadocio they should insist on doing
what they liked, not only with their own, but with the property of all others also, it certainly
did seem as though utter ruin must await their cause.  With England, or one might say with
Europe, against them, secession must be accomplished, not on Northern terms, but on terms dictated
by the South.  The choice was then for them to make; and just at that time it seemed as though
they were resolved to throw away every good card out of their hand.  Such had been the ministerial
wisdom of Mr. Seward.  I remember hearing the matter discussed in easy terms by one of the
United States Senators.  "Remember, Mr. Trollope," he said to me, "we don't want a war with
England.  If the choice is given to us, we had rather not fight England.  Fighting is a bad
thing.  But remember this also, Mr. Trollope, that if the matter is pressed on us, we have
no great objection.  We had rather not, but we don't care much one way or the other."  What
one individual may say to another is not of much moment, but this Senator was expressing the
feelings of his constituents, who were the legislature of the State from whence he came.  He
was expressing the general idea on the subject of a large body of Americans.  It was not that
he and his State had really no objection to the war. Such a war loomed terribly large before
the minds of them all. They know it to be fraught with the saddest consequences.  It was so
regarded in the mind of that Senator.  But the braggadocio could not be omitted.  Had be omitted
it, he would have been untrue to his constituency.

When I left Boston for Washington, nothing was as yet known of what the English government
or the English lawyers might say.  This was in the first week in December, and the expected
voice from England could not be heard till the end of the second week.  It was a period of
great suspense, and of great sorrow also to the more sober-minded Americans.  To me the idea
of such a war was terrible. It seemed that in these days all the hopes of our youth were being
shattered.  That poetic turning of the sword into a sickle, which gladdened our hearts ten
or twelve years since, had been clean banished from men's minds.  To belong to a peace party
was to be either a fanatic, an idiot, or a driveler.  The arts of war had become everything.
Armstrong guns, themselves indestructible but capable of destroying everything within sight,
and most things out of sight, were the only recognized results of man's inventive faculties.
To build bigger, stronger, and more ships than the French was England's glory.  To hit a speck
with a rifle bullet at 800 yards distance was an Englishman's first duty.  The proper use for
a young man's leisure hours was the practice of drilling.  All this had come upon us with very
quick steps since the beginning of the Russian war.  But if fighting must needs be done, one
did not feel special grief at fighting a Russian.  That the Indian mutiny should be put down
was a matter of course.  That those Chinese rascals should be forced into the harness of civilization
was a good thing.  That England should be as strong as France--or, perhaps, if possible a little
stronger--recommended itself to an Englishman's mind as a State necessity.  But a war with
the States of America!  In thinking of it I began to believe that the world was going backward.
Over sixty millions sterling of stock--railway stock and such like--are held in America by
Englishmen, and the chances would be that before such a war could be finished the whole of
that would be confiscated.  Family connections between the States and the British isles are
almost as close as between one of those islands and another.  The commercial intercourse between
the two countries has given bread to millions of Englishmen, and a break in it would rob millions
of their bread.  If in such a war we beat the Americans, they with their proud stomachs would
never forgive us.  If they should be victors, we should never forgive ourselves.  I certainly
could not bring myself to speak of it with the equanimity of my friend the Senator.

I went through New York to Philadelphia, and made a short visit to the latter town.  Philadelphia
seems to me to have thrown off its Quaker garb, and to present itself to the world in the garments
ordinarily assumed by large cities--by which I intend to express my opinion that the Philadelphians
are not, in these latter days, any better than their neighbors.  I am not sure whether in some
respects they may not perhaps be worse.  Quakers--Quakers absolutely in the very flesh of close
bonnets and brown knee- breeches--are still to be seen there; but they are not numerous, and
would not strike the eye if one did not specially look for a Quaker at Philadelphia.  It is
a large town, with a very large hotel--there are no doubt half a dozen large hotels, but one
of them is specially great--with long, straight streets, good shops and markets, and decent,
comfortable-looking houses.  The houses of Philadelphia generally are not so large as those
of other great cities in the States.  They are more modest than those of New York, and less
commodious than those of Boston.  Their most striking appendage is the marble steps at the
front doors.  Two doors, as a rule, enjoy one set of steps, on the outer edges of which there
is generally no parapet or raised curb-stone.  This, to my eye, gave the houses an unfinished
appearance--as though the marble ran short, and no further expenditure could be made.  The
frost came when I was there, and then all these steps were covered up in wooden cases.

The City of Philadelphia lies between the two rivers, the Delaware and the Schuylkill.  Eight
chief streets run from river to river, and twenty-four principal cross-streets bisect the eight
at right angles.  The cross-streets are all called by their numbers.  In the long streets the
numbers of the houses are not consecutive, but follow the numbers of the cross-streets; so
that a person living on Chestnut Street between Tenth Street and Eleventh Street, and ten doors
from Tenth Street, would live at No. 1010.  The opposite house would be No.  1011.  It thus
follows that the number of the house indicates the exact block of houses in which it is situated.
I do not like the right-angled building of these towns, nor do I like the sound of Twentieth
Street and Thirtieth Street; but I must acknowledge that the arrangement in Philadelphia has
its convenience.  In New York I found it by no means an easy thing to arrive at the desired
locality.

They boast in Philadelphia that they have half a million inhabitants.  If this be taken as
a true calculation, Philadelphia is in size the fourth city in the world--putting out of the
question the cities of China, as to which we have heard so much and believe so little.  But
in making this calculation the citizens include the population of a district on some sides
ten miles distant from Philadelphia.  It takes in other towns, connected with it by railway
but separated by large spaces of open country. American cities are very proud of their population;
but if they all counted in this way, there would soon be no rural population left at all. 
There is a very fine bank at Philadelphia, and Philadelphia is a town somewhat celebrated in
its banking history. My remarks here, however, apply simply to the external building, and not
to its internal honesty and wisdom, or to its commercial credit.

In Philadelphia also stands the old house of Congress--the house in which the Congress of the
United States was held previous to 1800, when the government and the Congress with it were
moved to the new City of Washington.  I believe, however, that the first Congress, properly
so called, was assembled at New York in 1789, the date of the inauguration of the first President.
It was, however, here in this building at Philadelphia that the independence of the Union was
declared in 1776, and that the Constitution of the United States was framed.

Pennsylvania, with Philadelphia for its capital, was once the leading State of the Union, leading
by a long distance.  At the end of the last century it beat all the other States in population,
but has since been surpassed by New York in all respects--in population, commerce, wealth,
and general activity.  Of course it is known that Pennsylvania was granted to William Penn,
the Quaker, by Charles II.  I cannot completely understand what was the meaning of such grants--how
far they implied absolute possession in the territory, or how far they confirmed simply the
power of settling and governing a colony.  In this case a very considerable property was confirmed;
as the claim made by Penn's children, after Penn's death, was bought up by the commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for 130,000l., which, in those days, was a large price for almost any landed
estate on the other side of the Atlantic.

Pennsylvania lies directly on the borders of slave land, being immediately north of Maryland.
Mason and Dixon's line, of which we hear so often, and which was first established as the division
between slave soil and free soil, runs between Pennsylvania and Maryland.  The little State
of Delaware, which lies between Maryland and the Atlantic, is also tainted with slavery, but
the stain is not heavy nor indelible.  In a population of a hundred and twelve thousand, there
are not two thousand slaves, and of these the owners generally would willingly rid themselves
if they could. It is, however, a point of honor with these owners, as it is also in Maryland,
not to sell their slaves; and a man who cannot sell his slaves must keep them.  Were he to
enfranchise them and send them about their business, they would come back upon his hands. Were
he to enfranchise them and pay them wages for work, they would get the wages, but he would
not get the work.  They would get the wages; but at the end of three months they would still
fall back upon his hands in debt and distress, looking to him for aid and comfort as a child
looks for it.  It is not easy to get rid of a slave in a slave State.  That question of enfranchising
slaves is not one to be very readily solved.

In Pennsylvania the right of voting is confined to free white men. In New York the colored
free men have the right to vote, providing they have a certain small property qualification,
and have been citizens for three years in the State, whereas a white man need have been a citizen
but for ten days, and need have no property qualification--from which it is seen that the position
of the negro becomes worse, or less like that of a white man, as the border of slave land is
more nearly reached.  But, in the teeth of this embargo on colored men, the constitution of
Pennsylvania asserts broadly that all men are born equally free and independent.  One cannot
conceive how two clauses can have found their way into the same document so absolutely contradictory
to each other.  The first clause says that white men shall vote, and that black men shall not--which
means that all political action shall be confined to white men.  The second clause says that
all men are born equally free and independent.

In Philadelphia I for the first time came across live secessionists--secessionists who pronounced
themselves to be such. I will not say that I had met in other cities men who falsely declared
themselves true to the Union; but I had fancied, in regard to some, that their words were a
little stronger than their feelings.  When a man's bread--and, much more, when the bread of
his wife and children--depends on his professing a certain line of political conviction, it
is very hard for him to deny his assent to the truth of the argument.  One feels that a man,
under such circumstances, is bound to be convinced, unless he be in a position which may make
a stanch adherence to opposite politics a matter of grave public importance.  In the North
I had fancied that I could sometimes read a secessionist tendency under a cloud of Unionist
protestations.  But in Philadelphia men did not seem to think it necessary to have recourse
to such a cloud.  I generally found, in mixed society, that even there the discussion of secession
was not permitted; but in society that was not mixed I heard very strong opinions expressed
on each side.  With the Unionists nothing was so strong as the necessity of keeping of Slidell
and Mason; when I suggested that the English government would probably require their surrender,
I was talked down and ridiculed.  "Never that--come what may."  Then, within half an hour,
I would be told by a secessionist that England must demand reparation if she meant to retain
any place among the great nations of the world; but he also would declare that the men would
not be surrendered.  "She must make the demand," the secessionists would say, "and then there
will be war; and after that we shall see whose ports will be blockaded!"  The Southerner has
ever looked to England for some breach of the blockade quite as strongly as the North has looked
to England for sympathy and aid in keeping it.

The railway from Philadelphia to Baltimore passes along the top of Chesapeake Bay and across
the Susquehanna River; at least the railway cars do so.  On one side of that river they are
run on to a huge ferry-boat, and are again run off at the other side.  Such an operation would
seem to be one of difficulty to us under any circumstances; but as the Susquehanna is a tidal
river, rising and falling a considerable number of feet, the natural impediment in the way
of such an enterprise would, I think, have staggered us. We should have built a bridge costing
two or three millions sterling, on which no conceivable amount of traffic would pay a fair
dividend.  Here, in crossing the Susquehanna, the boat is so constructed that its deck shall
be level with the line of the railway at half tide, so that the inclined plane from the shore
down to the boat, or from the shore up to the boat, shall never exceed half the amount of the
rise or fall.  One would suppose that the most intricate machinery would have been necessary
for such an arrangement; but it was all rough and simple, and apparently managed by two negroes.
We would employ a small corps of engineers to conduct such an operation, and men and women
would be detained in their carriages under all manner of threats as to the peril of life and
limb; but here everybody was expected to look out for himself.  The cars were dragged up the
inclined plane by a hawser attached to an engine, which hawser, had the stress broken it, as
I could not but fancy probable, would have flown back and cut to pieces a lot of us who were
standing in front of the car.  But I do not think that any such accident would have caused
very much attention.  Life and limbs are not held to be so precious here as they are in England.
It may be a question whether with us they are not almost too precious.  Regarding railways
in America generally, as to the relative safety of which, when compared with our own, we have
not in England a high opinion, I must say that I never saw any accident or in any way became
conversant with one.  It is said that large numbers of men and women are slaughtered from time
to time on different lines; but if it be so, the newspapers make very light of such cases.
I myself have seen no such slaughter, nor have I even found myself in the vicinity of a broken
bone.  Beyond the Susquehanna we passed over a creek of Chesapeake Bay on a long bridge.  The
whole scenery here is very pretty, and the view up the Susquehanna is fine.  This is the bay
which divides the State of Maryland into two parts, and which is blessed beyond all other bays
by the possession of canvas-back ducks.  Nature has done a great deal for the State of Maryland,
but in nothing more than in sending thither these webfooted birds of Paradise.

Nature has done a great deal for Maryland; and Fortune also has done much for it in these latter
days in directing the war from its territory.  But for the peculiar position of Washington
as the capital, all that is now being done in Virginia would have been done in Maryland, and
I must say that the Marylanders did their best to bring about such a result.  Had the presence
of the war been regarded by the men of Baltimore as an unalloyed benefit, they could not have
made a greater struggle to bring it close to them. Nevertheless fate has so far spared them.

As the position of Maryland and the course of events as they took place in Baltimore on the
commencement of secession had considerable influence both in the North and in the South, I
will endeavor to explain how that State was affected, and how the question was affected by
that State.  Maryland, as I have said before, is a slave State lying immediately south of Mason
and Dixon's line.  Small portions both of Virginia and of Delaware do run north of Maryland,
but practically Maryland is the frontier State of the slave States.  It was therefore of much
importance to know which way Maryland would go in the event of secession among the slave States
becoming general; and of much also to ascertain whether it could secede if desirous of doing
so.  I am inclined to think that as a State it was desirous of following Virginia, though there
are many in Maryland who deny this very stoutly.  But it was at once evident that if loyalty
to the North could not be had in Maryland of its own free will, adherence to the North must
be enforced upon Maryland.  Otherwise the City of Washington could not be maintained as the
existing capital of the nation.

The question of the fidelity of the State to the Union was first tried by the arrival at Baltimore
of a certain Commissioner from the State of Mississippi, who visited that city with the object
of inducing secession.  It must be understood that Baltimore is the commercial capital of Maryland,
whereas Annapolis is the seat of government and the legislature--or is, in other terms, the
political capital.  Baltimore is a city containing 230,000 inhabitants, and is considered to
have as strong and perhaps as violent a mob as any city in the Union.  Of the above number
30,000 are negroes and 2000 are slaves.  The Commissioner made his appeal, telling his tale
of Southern grievances, declaring, among other things, that secession was not intended to break
up the government but to perpetuate it, and asked for the assistance and sympathy of Maryland.
This was in December, 1860.  The Commissioner was answered by Governor Hicks, who was placed
in a somewhat difficult position.  The existing legislature of the State was presumed to be
secessionist, but the legislature was not sitting, nor in the ordinary course of things would
that legislature have been called on to sit again.  The legislature of Maryland is elected
every other year, and in the ordinary course sits only once in the two years.  That session
had been held, and the existing legislature was therefore exempt from further work--unless
specially summoned for an extraordinary session.  To do this is within the power of the Governor.
But Governor Hicks, who seems to have been mainly anxious to keep things quiet, and whose individual
politics did not come out strongly, was not inclined to issue the summons.  "Let us show moderation
as well as firmness," he said; and that was about all he did say to the Commissioner from Mississippi.
The Governor after that was directly called on to convene the legislature; but this he refused
to do, alleging that it would not be safe to trust the discussion of such a subject as secession
to "excited politicians, many of whom, having nothing to lose from the destruction of the government,
may hope to derive some gain from the ruin of the State!"  I quote these words, coming from
the head of the executive of the State and spoken with reference to the legislature of the
State, with the object of showing in what light the political leaders of a State may be held
in that very State to which they belong.  If we are to judge of these legislators from the
opinion expressed by Governor Hicks, they could hardly have been fit for their places.  That
plan of governing by the little men has certainly not answered.  It need hardly be said that
Governor Hicks, having expressed such an opinion of his State's legislature, refused to call
them to an extraordinary session.

On the 18th of April, 1860, Governor Hicks issued a proclamation to the people of Maryland,
begging them to be quiet, the chief object of which, however, was that of promising that no
troops should be sent from their State, unless with the object of guarding the neighboring
City of Washington--a promise which he had no means of fulfilling, seeing that the President
of the United States is the commander-in-chief of the army of the nation, and can summon the
militia of the several States.  This proclamation by the Governor to the State was immediately
backed up by one from the Mayor of Baltimore to the city, in which he congratulates the citizens
on the Governor's promise that none of their troops are to be sent to another State; and then
he tells them that they shall be preserved from the horrors of civil war.

But on the very next day the horrors of civil war began in Baltimore.  By this time President
Lincoln was collecting troops at Washington for the protection of the capital; and that army
of the Potomac, which has ever since occupied the Virginian side of the river, was in course
of construction.  To join this, certain troops from Massachusetts were sent down by the usual
route, via New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore; but on their reaching Baltimore by railway,
the mob of that town refused to allow them to pass through,--and a fight began.  Nine citizens
were killed and two soldiers, and as many more were wounded.  This, I think, was the first
blood spilt in the civil war; and the attack was first made by the mob of the first slave city
reached by the Northern soldiers.  This goes far to show, not that the border States desired
secession, but that, when compelled to choose between secession and Union, when not allowed
by circumstances to remain neutral, their sympathies were with their sister slave States rather
than with the North.

Then there was a great running about of official men between Baltimore and Washington, and
the President was besieged with entreaties that no troops should be sent through Baltimore.
Now this was hard enough upon President Lincoln, seeing that he was bound to defend his capital,
that he could get no troops from the South, and that Baltimore is on the high-road from Washington
both to the West and to the North; but, nevertheless, he gave way.  Had he not done so, all
Baltimore would have been in a blaze of rebellion, and the scene of the coming contest must
have been removed from Virginia to Maryland, and Congress and the government must have traveled
from Washington north to Philadelphia.  "They shall not come through Baltimore," said Mr. Lincoln.
"But they shall come through the State of Maryland.  They shall be passed over Chesapeake Bay
by water to Annapolis, and shall come up by rail from thence."  This arrangement was as distasteful
to the State of Maryland as the other; but Annapolis is a small town without a mob, and the
Marylanders had no means of preventing the passage of the troops.  Attempts were made to refuse
the use of the Annapolis branch railway, but General Butler had the arranging of that.  General
Butler was a lawyer from Boston, and by no means inclined to indulge the scruples of the Marylanders
who had so roughly treated his fellow-citizens from Massachusetts.  The troops did therefore
pass by Annapolis, much to the disgust of the State. On the 27th of April, Governor Hicks,
having now had a sufficiency of individual responsibility, summoned the legislature of which
he had expressed so bad an opinion; but on this occasion he omitted to repeat that opinion,
and submitted his views in very proper terms to the wisdom of the senators and representatives.
He entertains, as he says, an honest conviction that the safety of Maryland lies in preserving
a neutral position between the North and the South. Certainly, Governor Hicks, if it were only
possible!  The legislature again went to work to prevent, if it might be prevented, the passage
of troops through their State; but luckily for them, they failed.  The President was bound
to defend Washington, and the Marylanders were denied their wish of having their own fields
made the fighting ground of the civil war.

That which appears to me to be the most remarkable feature in all this is the antagonism between
United States law and individual State feeling.  Through the whole proceeding the Governor
and the State of Maryland seemed to have considered it quite reasonable to oppose the constitutional
power of the President and his government.  It is argued in all the speeches and written documents
that were produced in Maryland at the time, that Maryland was true to the Union; and yet she
put herself in opposition to the constitutional military power of the President.  Certain Commissioners
went from the State legislature to Washington in May, and from their report it appears that
the President had expressed himself of opinion that Maryland might do this or that "as long
as she had not taken and was not about to take a hostile attitude to the Federal government!"
From which we are to gather that a denial of that military power given to the President by
the Constitution was not considered as an attitude hostile to the Federal government.  At any
rate, it was direct disobedience to Federal law.  I cannot but revert from this to the condition
of the Fugitive Slave Law.  Federal law, and indeed the original constitution, plainly declare
that fugitive slaves shall be given up by the free-soil States.  Massachusetts proclaims herself
to be specially a Federal law-loving State.  But every man in Massachusetts knows that no judge,
no sheriff, no magistrate, no policeman in that State would at this time, or then, when that
civil war was beginning, have lent a hand in any way to the rendition of a fugitive slave.
The Federal law requires the State to give up the fugitive, but the State law does not require
judge, sheriff, magistrate, or policeman to engage in such work, and no judge, sheriff or magistrate
will do so; consequently that Federal law is dead in Massachusetts, as it is also in every
free-soil State,--dead, except in as much as there was life in it to create ill blood as long
as the North and South remained together, and would be life in it for the same effect if they
should again be brought under the same flag.

On the 10th of May, the Maryland legislature, having received the report of their Commissioners
above mentioned, passed the following resolution:--

"Whereas, the war against the Confederate States is unconstitutional and repugnant to civilization,
and will result in a bloody and shameful overthrow of our constitution, and while recognizing
the obligations of Maryland to the Union, we sympathize with the South in the struggle for
their rights; for the sake of humanity we are for peace and reconciliation, and solemnly protest
against this war, and will take no part in it.

