Picked up at Sea; or, The Gold Miners of Minturne Creek, by John Conroy Hutcheson.

This is good book, well written, and interesting throughout.  It starts off at sea, aboard
the Susan Jane, when a piece of floating wreckage is seen.  A body is found on it, that of
a boy of fifteen or so, badly injured, and struck dumb, and apparently unaware of what is going
on. Yet when Seth, one of the men on board, is in danger, the boy springs to his aid.  When
they get to America it is time for the vessel to have a full refit, so some of the crew and
the only passenger, Mr Rawlings, together with the boy, now known as Sailor Bill, go off to
work a mine that Rawlings has bought.

Eventually, after all sorts of adventures and misadventures, the boy recovers his senses, and
recognises a man and a dog in the camp as old family friends.  The dog, of course, had previously
mystified the camp by apparently recognising the boy, but this had been put down to a doggy
sympathy with those not so well mentally endowed.

The mine is successful, and all go home as wealthy as they could wish.

Here we are working from the first edition, while some later editions had only the above story.
There are actually three further stories, all with a nautical flavour, but totalling only half
the length of the first story.  They are also interesting, and it is sad that they got left
out from those later editions.  You will enjoy them, either to read or in the spoken form.

PICKED UP AT SEA; OR, THE MINERS OF MINTURNE CREEK, BY JOHN CONROY HUTCHESON.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER ONE.

THE GOLD-MINERS OF MINTURNE CREEK.

THE "SUSAN JANE."

"Sail-ho on the weather-bow!"

"What do you make it?"

"Looks like a ship's mast, with the yard attached, and a man a-holding on to it and hailing
us for help--leastways, that's what it seems to me!"

"Jerusalem!  On the weather-bow, you say?  Can we forereach him on this tack?"

"I reckon we can jist about do it, boss, if you put the helm up a bit kinder nearer the wind,"
drawled out the lookout from his post of observation in the main-top, where he had stopped
a moment on catching sight of the object floating in the water ahead of the vessel, as he was
coming down from aloft after restowing the bunt of the main-topgallantsail that had blown loose
from its lashings.

The Susan Jane of and for Boston, Massachusetts, with a cargo from London, had been caught
at the outset of her passage across the Atlantic by what her American skipper termed "a pretty
considerable gale of wind;" and she now lay tossing about amid the broken waves of the boisterous
Bay of Biscay, on the morning after the tempest, the full force of which she had fortunately
escaped, trying to make some headway under her jib, close-reefed topsails, and storm staysails,
with a bit of her mainsail set to steady her, half brailed up--although the task was difficult,
with a nasty chopping cross-sea and an adverse wind. 

By Love itself I swear, my ways are straitened upon me! An ye would know my case, give ear and
hearken to my tale And all be dumb, on every side, in this our company. Take heed unto my speech,
for lo! therein a warning is; Ay, and my words no leasing are, but naked verity. I am a man of
passion slain, the victim of desire, And she who slew me fairer is
than all the stars to see.

A bright black eye she hath, whose glance is as an Indian sword, And from her eyebrows' bended
bows full many a shaft shoots she. My heart forebodes me that 'mongst you the Khalif of the
age, Our Imam[FN#147] is, of high descent and noble pedigree, And that the second of you he,
that's known as Jaafer, is, His vizier and a vizier's son, a lord of high degree. Yea, and
the third of you Mesrour the eunuch is, I ween, The swordsman of
his vengeance.

So, if true my saying be, I have of this my case attained to all for which I hoped And hearts'
content from every side is come, indeed, to me.

When they heard this, Jaafer swore to him a dissembling oath that
they were not those he named; whereupon he laughed and said, 'Know,
O my lords, that I am not the Commander of the Faithful and that I
do but style myself thus, to get my will of the people of the city.

My real name is Mohammed Ali son of Ali the Jeweller and my father
was one of the chief men [of the city].

When he died, he left me great store of gold and silver and pearls and coral and rubies and
chrysolites and other jewels, besides houses and lands and baths and gardens and orchards
and shops and brickfields and slaves, male and female. One day, as I sat in my shop, surrounded
by my slaves and servants, there came up a young lady, riding on
a mule and attended by three damsels like moons.

She alighted at my shop and seating herself by me, said to me, "Art thou Mohammed the jeweller?"
"Yes," answered I, "I am he, at thy service."

"Hast thou a necklace of jewels fit for me?" asked she, and I replied, "O my lady, I will show
thee what I have; and if any please thee, it will be of thy slave's
good luck; if not, of his ill-fortune."

I had by me a hundred necklaces and showed them all to her; but none of them pleased her and
she said, "I want a better than those I have seen."

Now I had a small necklace, that my father had bought for a hundred thousand dinars and the
like whereof was not to be found with any of the great kings; so I said to her, "O my lady, I
have yet one necklace of fine stones, whose like none possesseth,
great or small." "Show it me," said she.

So I showed it her and she said, "This is what I sought and what I have wished for all my life. What
is its price?" Quoth I, "It cost my father a hundred thousand dinars;"
and she said, "I will give thee five thousand dinars to thy profit."

"O my lady," answered I, "the necklace and its owner are at thy service and I cannot gainsay
thee [in aught]." "Not so," rejoined she; "needs must thou have the profit, and I am still
much beholden to thee."

Then she rose and mounting the mule in haste, said to me, "O my lord, in God's name, favour us
with thy company, to receive the money; for this thy day is a milk-white day[FN#148] with us."


"Right ahead.  Just a trifle to leeward, boss."

"How far off?"

"A couple of cables' lengths, I guess, Cap'en.  Better send a hand forrud in the chains to
sling him a rope, or we'll pass him by in a minnit."

"Right you are," was the reply of the good-hearted skipper, as he rushed along to the forecastle
himself with a coil over his arm, that he might fling it to the man in the water as soon as
he floated within reach.

It was a task that had to be deftly performed, for the ship was forging through the sea, and
plunging her bowsprit under water as she rose and fell in her progress, one minute describing
a half-circle through the air with her forefoot as she yawed to the heavy rolling waves, the
next diving deep down into the billows and tossing up tons of water over her forecastle, where
the skipper stood, watching his opportunity, as the broken spars, on which he could now plainly
see that the figure of a man was lashed, swept nearer and nearer on the crest of a wave that
bore them triumphantly on high above the storm-wrack and foam.

While the wreckage was yet out of reach he could notice, too, that the figure was perfectly
motionless and still.

What the topman had taken to be an outstretched hand, waving a handkerchief or some fluttering
object, was only the ragged end of a piece of the sail that was still attached to the yard
and a part of the topmast of some vessel, which had been torn away by the violence of the gale
and cast adrift, with the unfortunate seaman who was clinging to it.

"Poor chap!" thought the American captain aloud, "I'm afraid there's not much life left in
him now; but if there is any, I reckon we'll save him."  And, as he uttered the words, he dexterously
threw one end of the coil of rope, which he had already formed into a running bowline knot,
over the spars as they were swept past the side of the Susan Jane, while he fastened the other
end fast in-board, slackening out the line gradually, so as not to bring it up too tight all
at once and so jerk the man off the frail raft.

"Easy there,"--he called out to the men aft.  "Let her head off a bit now, and brail up that
mainsail again.  Easy!  Belay!"

"Thank God, we've got him!" ejaculated.  Mr Rawlings, the solitary passenger on board the Susan
Jane.

By this time, the waif from the wreck was towing safely alongside the Susan Jane, in the comparatively
smooth water of the ship's lee; and in a few seconds the rough seamen who went to their captain's
assistance had detached the seemingly lifeless form of the survivor from the spars to which
he had been securely lashed, and lifted him, with the gentleness and tender care almost of
women, on board the vessel that had come so opportunely in his way.

"Slacken off those lee braces a bit, and haul in these to the weather-side!" said the captain,
as soon as he had got back to his proper place on the poop again.  "I think the wind is coming
round more aft, and we can lay her on her course.  Keep her steady.  So!"--he added, to the
man at the wheel.  "But easy her off now and then, if she labours."

And then he went below to the cabin, down to which the rescued sailor had been carried, and
where the mate, Mr Rawlings, and the negro steward, were trying to bring him back to life by
rolling him in blankets before the stove.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWO.

RESCUED.

"Waal, how's the man getting on now?" asked the skipper as he entered the cuddy.

"Man?" said Mr Rawlings, looking up on the captain's entrance.  "It isn't a man at all.  Only
a lad of sixteen summers at best."

"Poor chap!" said the other sympathisingly.  "Man or boy, I guess he's had a pretty rough time
of it out thaar!"

"Just so," answered the passenger.  "And it's a wonder he's still alive."

"Is he?  I was afraid he was gone!" said the captain.

"No, sah.  Um berry much alibe, sah, yes sah," said the steward, who, having seen many half-drowned
persons before, had known how to treat the present patient properly.  "See, sah, him chest
rise and fall now, sah. When jus' lilly time back um couldn't hear him heart beat!"

It was as the man said, and a tinge of colour appeared also to steal into the thin, blanched
face of the lad, or boy, who seemed even younger than the mate had said, and who looked very
delicate and ill--more so, indeed, than his long exposure to the violence of the waves and
the terrible peril in which he had been, quite warranted.

"He'll come round now, I think," said the skipper, expressing more his hopes than his actual
belief; for the boy had not yet opened his eyes, and his breath only came in convulsive sighs,
that shook his extended frame "fore and aft," as a seaman would say.

"Yes, sir, he'll do.  But it was a narrow squeak for such a slim youngster."

"So it must have been, Seth," replied the skipper to the mate, who had last spoken.  "But his
time hadn't come yet, as it had for many a brave fellow bigger and stronger than him!  Look,
Seth!--he's opening his eyes now!  I'm blest if they aren't like a girl's!"

The boy, whose lids had been previously closed, the long lashes resting on his cheek, had raised
them; and the large blue orbs, fixed in a sort of wondering stare on the face of the American
captain, bore out his remark in some sense, as they appeared feminine in character, although
wanting in expression and intelligence more strangely.

"Seems dazed to me, Cap'en Blowser," observed the mate.

"So he does.  But no wonder, Seth," replied the skipper.  "Get him a drop of brandy, steward.
That may bring him to himself more than he is at present."

The steward fetched the brandy quickly in a glass, and putting it to the boy's lips, as he
raised his head from the locker on which he had been laid, made him drink a few drops, causing
the faint colour to return more strongly to his face.  But that was all, however, for he still
gazed alternately at the captain and mate, and the steward who had just ministered to him,
with the same fixed, expressionless gaze.

"He has seen death, Cap'en Blowser," said the mate, solemnly.  "I've noticed that same look
on a chap's face before, when he was dug out of a mine, where he had been banked up with others
through its falling in, and never expected to see God's daylight again!  He'd jest that same
identical expression in his eyes, though they warn't as big nor as handsome as this poor lad's--jest
as if he was a lookin' through you at somethin' beyant!"

"It kinder skearts me," said the captain, turning away from the boy with a slight shiver. 
"Let's come on deck, Seth.  I guess he'll do now, with a bit of grub, and a good sleep before
the stove.  Mind you look after him well, steward; and you can turn him into my cot, if you
like, and give him a clean rig out."

"Yes, sah, I hear," replied the steward, who had been trying to get some more of the spirit
down the boy's throat.

But he started up before the others left the cabin.

"Him wounded, Cap'en Blowser," said the man in an alarmed voice. "Crikey!  I nebber see such
a cut!"

"Where?" exclaimed the skipper and mate almost simultaneously, turning round from the door
of the cuddy and coming back to the side of the locker, on which the boy still lay stretched.

"Here," said the steward, lifting, as he spoke, the long clustering curls of hair from the
forehead of the rescued lad, and laying bare a great gash that extended right across the frontal
bone, and which they must have seen before but for the encrustation of salt, from the waves
washing over him, which had matted the bright brown locks together over the cut and likewise
stopped the bleeding.

"Jerusalem!  It is a sheer, and no mistake!" ejaculated the skipper.

"You bet," chimed in the mate; "but for the wash of the water a stopping it, he would have
bled to death!  Have you got a needle and thread handy, Jasper?"

"Sartain, Massa Allport," answered the steward.

"Then bring it here sharp, and a piece of sponge, or rag, and some hot water, if you can get it."

"Sure I can, Massa Allport.  De cook must hab him coppers full, sah. Not got Cap'en's breakfass,
you know, sah, yet."

"I forgot all about breakfast!" laughed the skipper, "I was so taken up with running across
this young shaver here.  But what are you going to do, Seth, eh?  I didn't know as you had
graduated in medicine, I reckon."

"Why, Cap'en Blowser, I served all through the war after Gettysburgh as sich."

"Waal, one never knows even one's best friends, really!" said the captain musingly.  "And to
think of your being a doctor all this time, and me not to be aware of it, when I've often blamed
myself for going to sea without a surgeon aboard."

"That's just what made me so comfortable under the loss of one!" chuckled the mate.

"Ah! you were 'cute, you were," replied the skipper.  "Kept it all to yourself, like the monkeys
who won't speak for fear they might be made to work!  But here's the steward with your medical
fixin's; so, look to the poor boy's cut, Seth, and see if you can't mend it, while I go up
and see what they are doing with the ship, which we've left to herself all this while."

Washing away, with gentle dabs of the saturated rag that the steward had brought in the bowl
of warm water, the salt and clotted blood that covered over the wound, the mate soon laid it
bare, and then proceeded with skilful fingers to sew it up, in a fashion which showed he was
no novice in the art.

"Golly, Massa Allport!  I didn't know you was so clebbah!" said the steward admiringly.

"You don't know everything, you see, Jasper," said the other good-humouredly.  "There, I think
that will do now, with a strip or two of plaster which I have here," producing some diachylon
from a pocket-book.  "How do you feel now?" he added, addressing himself to the boy, who had
kept his eyes fixed on his face in the same meaningless stare as when he had first opened them.
"Better?"

But he got no reply.

The boy did not even move his lips, much less utter a sound, although he was now well warmed,
and there was life in his rigid limbs and colour in his face, while his faint breathing was
regular, and his pulse even.

"He looks very strange," Mr Rawlings said.  "Concussion of the brain, I should say."

The sailor-surgeon was puzzled.

"I guess he's dumb, and deaf too," he said to the passenger who had been acting as his medical
assistant, and watching the mate's operations with much interest.  "But no," he added presently;
"a boy with such eyes and such a face could never be so afflicted!  I've seen scores of deaf-mutes,
and you could never mistake their countenances.  I know what it is, he has received such a
shock to the system that it has paralysed his nerves--that's it!"

"It's either that or concussion," the passenger argued.

And the steward, who did not know what to say, and would indeed now have endorsed any opinion
that the mate had propounded after what he had seen of his practical skill, gave a confirmatory
nod, expressive of his entire approval of the other's dictum.

"Yes, Jasper," replied the other, "it's only a temporary shock to the system, and rest and
attention will work it off in a short time."

It was a peculiarity with Mr Seth Allport, the first mate of the Susan Jane, that when he spoke
on medical topics and subjects, which formed the only real education he had received, his mode
of speech was refined and almost polished; whereas, his usual language when engaged in seafaring
matters--his present vocation--was vernacular in the extreme, smacking more of Vermont than
it did of Harvard and college training.

"I'm certain my diagnosis is correct," he said again to Mr Rawlings-- after seeing the lad
clothed in a flannel shirt and thick pair of trousers of the skipper's, into whose cot he was
then carefully placed, and wrapped up, the little fellow closing his eyes at once and sinking
into a sound sleep--"and when he wakes up he'll be all right, and be able to tell us all about
himself."

"I hope you may be right," Mr Rawlings said, doubtfully.  "Sleep may do much for him; at any
rate, I will remain in the cabin to watch him for a while."

So saying, he took his seat by the boy, while the mate proceeded to go on deck and rejoin the
skipper, and the steward went to work to prepare breakfast.

The wind had now got well abeam of the Susan Jane and lessened considerably, although still
blowing steady from the southwards and eastwards; and the sea being also somewhat calmer, the
good ship was able to spread more sail, shaking the reefs out of her topsails and mainsail,
while her courses were dropped, and the flying-jib and foresail set to drive her on her way
across the Atlantic.

"I guess picking up that boy brought us luck, Seth!" said the skipper, rubbing his hands gleefully
as the mate came to his side and joined in the quick quarter-deck he was taking, varied by
an occasional look aloft to see that everything was drawing fair.  "I think we might set the
topgallants now, eh?"

"You're not a slow one at piling on the canvas, I reckon!" answered the other with a laugh.
"No sooner out of one gale than you want to get into another.  Look at those clouds there ahead,
Cap'en," pointing to a dark streak that crossed the horizon low down right in front of the
vessel.  "I guess we aren't out of it yet!"

"Waal, if we've got to have another blow," replied the skipper, "we'd better make some use
of the wind we have, specially as it looks like chopping round.  What is she going now?" he
asked of the quartermaster or boatswain, one individual performing both functions in the Yankee
craft.

"Close on nine knots, Cap'en," answered the man, who had just hove the log over the stern,
and now stood, minute-glass in hand, calculating the result.

"Nine knots with this breeze?  That will never do.  Away aloft there, and shake out the topgallant
sails!  Now, men, stir yourselves in proper man-o'-war's fashion; and let us see it done in
ship-shape style! That's your sort, men.  Johnson shall shell out some grog presently to splice
the main brace."--He continued aloud, as the hands came down the ratlins again without losing
time, after lowering the sails,--"Now, hoist away at the halliards.  Cheerily, men! cheerily
ho!  The Boston girls have got hold of our tow-rope; up with the sticks with a will!"

The Susan Jane plunged through the waves with redoubled speed, leaning over until the water
foamed over her gunwale and was knee-deep in her scuppers, an occasional billow topping over
her foc's'le, and pouring down into the waist in a cataract of gleaming green sea and sparkling
spray, all glittering with prismatic colours, like a jumble of broken rainbows.

"What does she make now, Johnson?" asked the skipper again of the quartermaster.

"Eleven knots, I reckon, sir, good."

"Ah, that's more like it!  The poor dear thing! she was crippled without her wings, that she
was!  She'll do twelve-knots yet, eh, Seth?"

"I don't doubt that, sir," replied the mate, who was much more cautious than his captain; "but
it ain't quite safe with those gentlemen there gathering together ahead, like a mass meeting
in Faneuil Hall."

"Oh, never mind the clouds," rejoined the delighted skipper, whose thoughts were filled with
the fond belief that the Susan Jane would make the most rapid run across the herring-pond ever
known for a sailing-ship.  "Guess we'll beat the Scotia, if we go on like this."

"Yes, if we don't carry away anything!" interposed the mate cautiously.

"Oh, nonsense, Seth!  We've got a smart crew, and can take in sail when it's wanted!  How's
your patient getting on?" continued the skipper, turning to Mr Rawlings, who had come up, the
boy being in a profound sleep.

"Well, I hope," he answered; "he is resting very tranquilly."

"That means, I suppose, that he's all right, and having a good caulk in my cot."

"Exactly so, Cap'en; and when he wakes by and by, I hope he'll be himself again."

"That's good news!  Did he tell you who he was before he dropped to sleep?"

"No," answered Mr Rawlings, "he did not speak."

"Not speak!" said the captain.  "Why didn't he?"

"He couldn't," replied the other.  "Whether from the cut on his forehead, or what, I can't
tell; but he has had such a shock that his nerves seem paralysed.  You noticed his eyes, didn't
you?"

"Yes," said the captain, "but I thought that was from fright or a sort of startled awe, which
would soon go off.  I'm sorry I didn't have a look at those spars before we cast them off;
we might have learned the name of the ship to which he belonged.  Don't you think, Seth, though,
that he will recover his speech and be able to tell us something?"

"Certainly, Cap'en, as Mr Rawlings says, I believe he'll wake up all right."

"Well, then, we'd better go below for breakfast now--here's the steward coming to call us.
Davitt can take charge of the deck,"--hailing the second mate as he spoke, and telling him
to "keep his weather-eye open, and call him immediately should any change occur, but not to
reduce sail on any account."

"I wouldn't have given him that order, if I were you, Cap'en," said the mate, as they went
down the companion together.

"Oh, Davitt isn't a fool," replied the skipper lightly; and the two entered the cuddy together,
where they were welcomed by a hospitably spread table that spoke well for the cook's culinary
skill.

"Josh is a splendid chap for fixing up things," said the skipper heartily, as he popped a portion
of a capital stew into his capacious mouth with much gusto.  "I'd back him against one of those
French what-do-you-call-'ems any day!" alluding, possibly, to the chef of the hotel in Bordeaux
at which he had been staying on the Susan Jane's previous voyage.

"So would I," echoed the mate, who was performing equally well with his knife and fork; but,
what he would have further observed must remain unrecorded, for at that moment a tremendous
crash was heard on deck, and a heavy sea pooped the ship, flooding the cabin, and washing the
two, with the debris of the breakfast table, away to leeward, where they struggled in vain
to recover their footing, until the ship righted again--the steward coming to their assistance
and being likewise thrown down on the floor, to add to the confusion.  Then Seth Allport darted
up the companion.

The contretemps was so sudden that the skipper was quite startled; but what startled him more
was the sight of the boy who had been saved, and who was supposed to be sound asleep, standing
at the open door of his cabin, with his light brown hair almost erect, and his blue eyes starting
out of his head with a look of unspeakable terror, and the blood streaming down his face, and
dropping with a sort of hissing sound into the water that surged about the cuddy floor and
over his feet, from the terrible cut across his forehead.

"Mercy upon us, Rawlings, look there!" exclaimed Captain Blowser, trying to regain his feet,
and almost forgetting what might be going on on deck at the sight before him.  "Is he gone
mad, or what?"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER THREE.

TAKEN ABACK.

"What is the matter?" exclaimed the passenger, clutching hold of the steward's leg under the
idea that it was the cuddy table, and contriving to get into a sitting position on the cabin
floor, as the Susan Jane lurched to and fro, swishing the water backwards and forwards, along
with the plates and dishes and broken crockery, amongst them, mixed up with bits of meat and
vegetables and bread in the most inharmonious sort of medley,--"What's the matter, Cap'en?"

"Struck by a squall," said the skipper, getting on his feet at last, and holding on tightly
to a brass rail outside the door of one of the berths, that he might not get floored again.
"But, look at your patient, the boy!  Is he mad, or what?"

"Golly!" ejaculated the steward, also finding his legs again, Mr Rawlings having released them
as soon as he sat up.  "Me tink him goin' hab fit!"

The captain's professional instincts roused him even more rapidly than did a loaf of soppy
bread which at that moment was dashed in his face by the counter swish of the water against
the side of the cabin, and he sprang up ready for action as cool and collected as possible,
considering the circumstances.

Before Mr Rawlings or the skipper--who both rushed forward at once to where the boy was standing--could
reach him, however, or the negro steward, who was directly in his way, but was too dumfoundered
to prevent him, he made one leap over the table and rushed out of the cabin, with the same
set look of terror, or some unearthly expression which they could not absolutely define, on
his face, the blood streaming down from under the bandage across his forehead, making his appearance
ghastly and uncanny, as the Scotch say, in the extreme.  He resembled, more a galvanised corpse
than anything else!

The skipper and passenger followed him instanter, Jasper, who had recovered from his first
astonishment at the apparition, being not far from their heels; but when the two gained the
deck, the confusion that was reigning there, and the perilous position of the ship, made them
forget for the while the object that had called them forth.

Captain Blowser's passion for "carrying on," in the face of the treacherous weather the Susan
Jane had already experienced in the Bay of Biscay, with the prospect of more to come, as the
mate had pointed out from the warning look of clouds along the horizon in front, had brought
its own punishment; for the ship had been taken aback through the wind's shifting round, before
the second mate Davitt, who had obeyed the skipper's injunctions to the letter, had time to
take in sail, even if he had endeavoured to do so without calling him first, as he had been
enjoined on his leaving the deck.

The results of this recklessness were most unfortunate for the Susan Jane, as the fore-topmast
had soon snapped off sharp at the cap like a carrot, bringing with it, of course, the fore-topgallant
mast as well, and the main-topgallant mast, with their respective yards and other spars, and
the jib-boom as well.  The ship was consequently broached to, and tons of water were poured
on to her from the mountainous waves that seemed to assail her on all sides at once, which,
but for the fact of the hatches being closely battened down, would have soon filled her hold
and caused her to founder.

Fortunately, there were no men aloft at the time the wind chopped so suddenly, or they must
have been swept overboard with the wreck of the top-hamper, that was now grinding against the
vessel's side to leeward right under her quarter, and bumping with such force against her timbers
as to threaten to stove them in.  Altogether, with the whistling of the storm, that had risen
up again as if imbued with fresh life, and the roaring of the sea, and the horrible creaking
and crashing of the broken spars alongside, combined with the shouts of the men, who seemed
lost for the moment how to act, and running here and there, purposelessly, without a guiding
voice or hand to direct their efforts,--the scene was a regular pandemonium of disorder!

If he had been reckless, however, Captain Blowser was a thorough seaman, and knew how to command,
and enforce his directions when the necessity arose, as certainly was the case here.

Snatching a speaking-trumpet from the lanyard by which it was attached to the mizzen mast,
he issued an order which called at once the scattered wits of the crew together, and set them
about repairing the damages that had arisen, and preventing the further perils that stared
them in the face; while the second mate at the same moment sprang to the wheel, which was revolving
as it liked, now to starboard now to port as the waves met the rudder below, the poor helmsman
who had previously controlled its action lying senseless on the deck, whither he had been thrown
by the sudden concussion when the ship was taken aback.

"Down with the helm hard!" shouted the skipper, through the speaking-trumpet, his voice penetrating
every part of the ship, fore and aft, above the roar of the elements and the noise on deck.
"Clew up the courses," was the next command; followed by an order to brace round the yards.
And the Susan Jane eased a bit, running before the wind with the aid of her main-topmast and
topgallant sail, mizzen-staysail and foresail, besides the remnants of her mainsail, that was
split into fluttering rags.  All the rest of her canvas so recently set being carried away,
and floating alongside in a tangled wreck of spars and sails and ropes and rigging, matted
together in an inextricable mass, Captain Blowser now gave orders to have cut away, without
further delay, as the men could be spared for the duty. 

If at least he could have roamed on horseback through the forest of pines! But no; the autumn
rains, even in this lovely climate, last for weeks. In the absolute solitude of a town like Ravenna,
imprisoned, so to say, within his own apartment, how could he avoid some emotions of sadness? He
was thus assailed; and, as it always happened where he himself was concerned, he mistook its
causes. Engrossed by an affection that was amply returned, feeling strong against the injustice
of man and the hardships of fate, having become well-nigh inaccessible
to ennui, he was astonished at the sadness that always seemed to return
in autumn, and imagined that it might be from some hereditary malady
inherent to his temperament.

"This season kills me with sadness," he wrote to Madame G----, on the 28th of September; "when
I have my mental malady, it is well for others that I keep away. I thank thee, from my heart, for
the roses. Love me! My soul is like the leaves that fall in autumn, all yellow."

And then, as if he almost reproached himself with being sad without
some cause existing in the heart, and, above all, not wishing to pain
Madame G----, he wound up with a joke, saying:--"Here is a cantator;"
a conventional word recalling some buffooneries in a play, and which
signified:--"Here is a fine sentence!"

Certainly, the autumnal season, sad and rainy as it is, must have had great influence over him.
Could it be otherwise with an organization like his? From this point of view, his melancholy,
like his temperament, might be considered as hereditary. But would it have been developed without
the aid of other causes?

Let us observe the date of the letter, wherein he blames the season, and the dates of those received
from London, or those he addressed thither. The coincidence between them will show clearly that
when he called himself melancholy, and accused the season, it occurred precisely on the day when
he was most wearied and overwhelmed by a host of other disagreeable things. For instance, Murray,
whose answers on several points he had been impatiently expecting,
was seized with a new fit of silence. "There you are at your tricks."[186]

And
then, when the silence was broken, the letters almost always brought
him disagreeable accounts.

And so the crew all agreed when they heard from the steward Jasper his account of how the boy
had started out of the captain's cot, where he had him in a sound sleep, and came out of the
cabin straight to help Seth--the negro's version of the story losing nothing, it need hardly
be mentioned, through his telling it with much pantomimic action, and his frequent affirmation,
"Golly, massa, I tell you for true!"

Mr Rawlings considered that the boy had been awakened by the crash of the water pooping the
ship and the bleeding bursting out again from his wound, both of which recalled some fleeting
thoughts, probably, of the shipwreck in which he had temporarily lost his reason.  But the
men would not hear of this at all, ascribing Seth's rescue to some supernatural foresight on
the part of poor "Sailor Bill," as the boy was unanimously dubbed, and looked on thenceforth
with the same respectful, pitying care with which the Indians regard any imbecile person, by
everybody on board, from the cook Josh--another negro like Jasper, of whom he was intensely
jealous, calling him, on the principle of "the pot and the kettle," a "nigerant puss-proud
black fellow"--up to the captain, who, to tell the truth, shared some of the superstitious
regard of the men for their protege!

For the poor boy had, without doubt, lost his senses.  He neither spoke, nor laughed, nor cried,
nor was any perceptible emotion of pleasure or pain displayed by him under any circumstances.

He did not once arouse from the lethargy that seemed to press down upon his brain again after
he had so fortunately and so wonderfully come to the assistance of Seth Allport.

One thing, however, was noticeable in him afterwards, and that was, that from that moment he
appeared to attach himself to the seaman, just as a dog attaches himself to some master whom
he elects for himself, and was never easy out of Seth's sight, following him everywhere about
the ship, except at night, when he slept in the cabin.

Seth Allport, talking it over with the skipper and Mr Rawlings, gave a scientific explanation
from his medical lore.  He said that Sailor Bill's mental affliction was due to some psychological
effect, which would wear away in time, and probably completely disappear if the boy had to
undergo a shock precisely similar to that which had caused it. But, as neither he nor any one
else knew what that shock was, of course they could not expedite Sailor Bill's cure, nor do
anything, save make him the dumb pet of the ship.

In the meantime the damages of the Susan Jane were made good, and in a day or two there were
few signs of the mishap which had befallen her.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER FOUR.

DERELICT.

The weather was now fair, and the wind favourable, and they were in high spirits, for they
hoped soon to recover the time lost by the accident.

The captain walked up and down the deck with the first mate, rubbing his hands as he watched
the full sails, and the water gleaming past her sides.

"We shall do, Seth, we shall do," he said, "and make a quick voyage of it after all."

"Mustn't carry on too much, though, Cap'en!" said the mate with a knowing twinkle of his eye,
which the skipper could read plainly enough.

"Stow that, Seth," said he chuckling.  "I s'pose you'll never let me hear the last of that
buster I went t'other day.  Don't you be skeart, old man; you won't catch this coon napping
twice.  The breeze is splendid, though, Seth, ain't it?  Guess we'll make a good run of it
after all!"

"So think I, Cap'en," replied the mate with corresponding heartiness. "It will last, too,"
he added, after another glance round the horizon; "and I reckon we'll not get any more nasty
weather; the gale has about blowed itself out!"

"Right you are," said Captain Blowser, slapping him on the back in his jovial way when he felt
especially good-tempered; "an' we'll have an extra glass of old Bourbon come dinner-time on
the strength of it, old boss!  How the beauty does walk, to be sure!  I wouldn't swap a timber
of her for the best Philadelphia-built clipper out of the Delaware!"

"Nor I," acquiesced the mate, whose opinion the skipper valued so highly that this encomium
of his as to the transcendent merits of the Susan Jane, which was really a splendid craft in
her way, and a capital sea boat, completed the sum of his happiness; and he had just called
out to Jasper, the steward, to bring up an Angostura cocktail to cement their feelings of friendship
and get up an appetite for dinner, which would not be ready for another hour, when the voice
of Tom Cannon was heard hailing the deck from the foretop.

"Darn that chap, he's allers hailing!" exclaimed the skipper.  "What the dickens does he want now?"

"He don't call out for nothin'," said the mate.  "He's too cute a seaman for that!  When Tom
Cannon hails, you may depend on it, Cap'en, it's time to look out for squalls!"

"Blow your squalls!" said the captain good-humouredly.  "You don't want me to take in sail
surely with this wind, you old Mother Carey's chicken?  But let's listen to what Tom says.
He's a smart man, I reckon, sure enough--the smartest sailor we've got in the ship; and I was
only jokin' when I said that about his hailing!"

Tom Cannon's favourite place of resort when the ship was at sea, and there was nothing for
him to do, especially when he was in the watch off duty, was the foretop, whither he would
climb up, blow high or blow low, and ensconce himself, sometimes for hours, until his services
were required on deck, or else the rattling of pannikins and mess-kits warned him that something
was "going on in the grub line below," when he would descend the rattlins, swiftly or leisurely
as the case might be, and take his turn at either grub or duty "like a man!"

On this day the captain had not long taken the sun, and "made it eight bells"--twelve o'clock--so
the men had all had their dinner, and Tom gone up to his accustomed post of observation or
reflection, for he couldn't read, and never slept when he was in the top, although he could
have done so comfortably enough if he had wanted to.

He was standing erect, looking out ahead, for he was a careful seaman, as both the captain
and mate could vouch for, and possessed the keenest eyesight of any man in the ship--a natural
gift for which he was very thankful in his way, and of which it must be said he was also very
proud.

"Sail-ho!" he shouted, catching sight of something not long after he had taken up his position
in the foretop and began to look out mechanically in front of the ship's course, as was his
natural wont.

"Not another ocean waif, like the boy, eh?" asked the skipper in a chaffing sort of way, while
he waited for the seaman to give some further information, as to what he had seen, as he thought
would be the case presently without his putting the question to him.

"Nary a one," was Tom's answer, as he looked down on the face of Sailor Bill, which was upturned
to his without a vestige of animation in it, although the boy's attention had been attracted
by the sound of his voice; "couldn't find another like you, I guess."

"What sort o' sail?" hailed the captain again, as he did not hear the response to his question,
the seaman having spoken in a low tone as to himself.

"A water-logged hull of some vessel or other, I reckon, boss!"

This time Tom's answer was heard plainly enough below.

"Where away?" rejoined the skipper aloud, adding under his voice to the mate, "Guess I woke him!"

"Right ahead--about three miles off, more or less."

"See anybody on board?"

"Nary a soul!  The hull's low down in the water and the decks awash."

"Well, we'll soon come up to her at our rate of going," shouted out the captain in the same
pitch of voice, which might have been heard a mile away at the least; for, although there was
a strong breeze the wind did not make much noise, and the Atlantic waves were only frisking
about in play without any great commotion.  "Mind you pilot us right: it would spoil the Susan
Jane's figure-head, I reckon, to run aboard a water-logged hull!"

"Ay, ay," responded the seaman from aloft, "I'll steer you safe enough, sir.  Keep her steady
as she is, full and bye!"

"Steady!" repeated the skipper to the helmsman; whose "Steady it is!" showed his prompt attention
to the command.

"Luff a bit!" said Tom after a few minutes, when the Susan Jane had almost traversed the distance
which he had previously said lay between her and the submerged vessel, and was close on to
her--at least, must have been so.

"Luff!" repeated the skipper; and--"Luff it is!" echoed the man at the wheel mechanically as
he put the helm up; and a moment afterwards the ship glided by the derelict hull, her speed
lessening as she came up to the wind and her canvas quivering, like a bird suspending its flight
in the air with wings outstretched!

There is no more melancholy sight to be met with on the ocean than a deserted ship.  Everybody
knows how dismal an empty house with closed-up shutters looks on land, especially when the
shutters are inside ones, as is usually the case with town dwellings, and the panes have been
riddled with stones, while the walls are bedaubed with mud from the missiles of mischievous
persons, mostly, it is to be feared, of the class juvenis, and the garden in front overgrown
with grass and weeds, luxuriating in the rankest of vegetation, and completing the picture
of desolation and decay.

Well, a derelict vessel, such as is to be frequently met with at sea, presents a ten times
more miserable appearance, if that be possible, than an empty and deserted house.  Instead
of being a picture of desolation, it is desolation itself!

The battered hull, scarred with the wounds caused by the pitiless waves, its timbers gaping
open here and there, and the rent copper-sheathing showing, as it rolls sluggishly on the waste
of waters--where it has been left to linger out the last days of a decrepit existence, with
masts and sails and bulwarks and everything washed away, presenting such a contrast to what
it was in its pride, when it swam the waters "like a thing of life"--is painful in the extreme
to contemplate.

This was what those on board the Susan Jane noticed now, as she passed by the floating remnants
of what had once been a gallant ship, as they could tell from her size and length.  But Captain
Blowser saw something more with his glass--for the Susan Jane could not approach very near
to the water-logged hull that was almost level with the surface of the sea, for fear of colliding
through the "scud" of the waves--something that made him take in the clipper's lighter sails,
despite his anxiety to take advantage of every breath of the wind and make a rapid passage
to Boston, and lay the ship to; while he had a boat lowered, and went to inspect the derelict
hulk more closely.

Mr Rawlings, the passenger, accompanied the skipper, so did also Seth Allport; and naturally,
as Seth went, Sailor Bill followed his protector, or adopted master, dog-fashion as usual,
taking his seat in the boat as a matter of course!

On boarding the abandoned vessel a horrible sight presented itself. Three corpses were stretched
on the afterpart of the deck near the wheelhouse--which had been wrenched away, along with
the binnacle and bulwarks, and the cabin skylight, while the hull was full of water and kept
afloat only by the buoyant nature of the cargo, although they could not discover what that
was, as it was completely submerged.  But those three corpses told a tale of some deadly struggle,
as there was a knife still tightly clutched in the dead hand of the one, an empty revolver
in that of another, while the third had a rope tied round his throat as if he had been strangled
by the other two.

The bodies of all, which exhibited signs of emaciation through starvation, being almost skeletons,
showed also numerous wounds, while their clothing was rent into tatters from cuts and slashes
apart from the wash of the water, which had, of course, swept away most of the blood that had
probably flowed from the wounds, although there was a large dark blotch on the deck close to
the after hatch, testifying that some gory pool had been there.

"I guess there's been some of the devil's work here!" said the skipper gravely.

"You bet," chimed in Seth Allport, whose keen eye was looking out for some evidence of the
nationality of the ship.  "She ain't a foreigner, and Britishers don't murder one another like
this.  S'pose there was a muss on board, or something like a mutiny, eh, Cap?" he added presently.

"Yes," answered Captain Blowser, who was also looking keenly about with the same motive as
Seth; and he was quicker too than the shrewd seaman in this instance, for he noticed forward,
under the legs of one of the corpses, a loose piece of wood, on which he pounced.

Pulling it out as quick as thought, he turned it over, and the secret of the derelict hull
was disclosed; for there, printed in letters of gold, showing that the piece of wood was probably
part of the stern of one of the vessel's boats, as its shape also suggested, was the name "Dragon--."
Something was apparently wanting, for the wood was broken off just at the end where the name
was painted.

"Dragon?" said Seth.  "I remember a ship called the Dragon King, that used to sail regularly
to the East Indies.  I saw her last time I was in Liverpool!"

"Waal," said the skipper, "we can only report what we've seen when we get home; for we can't
get down below to examine her papers or anything, and must leave the old hulk to float till
she sinks. That all, who shall hereafter be admitted, when they commence Sophimores, shall have the
addition of frogs to the button holes of their coats, the cuff of the sleeve to be plain.

That when they commence Junior Sophisters, their coats shall have the further addition of frogs
on the button-side,--continuing the plain cuff; and they shall also provide themselves with black
gowns, having a close sleeve and slit cuff, to be made according to the direction of the Corporation.

That,
when they commence Senior Sophisters, they shall have the further addition of buttons and frogs
to the cuff of their coat, and shall also have black gowns, with a wide sleeve,--the mode to be
determined by the Corporation.

That when they are admitted to the Bachelor's degree, they shall appear
in like gowns and clothes as are prescribed for the Senior Sophisters.

That the Seniors and Juniors shall wear their black gowns, on all publick occasions, and whenever
they shall publickly declaim in the Chapel.

That no Undergraduate, to whom these injunctions may extend, be permitted to appear within the
limits of the College, or town of Cambridge, in any other dress than
is before described, unless he has on a night gown, or an outside
garment be necessary over his coat.

That no part of the dress of the Undergraduates be made of silk;--and that it be recommended
to them, to clothe themselves in home manufactures, as far as may
be.

That these regulations be extended to all who shall hereafter
be admitted into the University;--and that it be recommended to such
as are already Members, to conform thereto, upon principles of economy,
as far as may consist with their present supply of clothing.
I only had a few, but I was spry and handy, you see, and I worked up till I got to be boss,
or what you would call manager.  The lode paid well for a while; then it fell off, and I got
to longing for the sea again; so I just chucked it up, and made tracks from `Frisco.'"

"If you would like another spell at mining, Seth, I can put you in the way of it," said Mr
Rawlings.  "I am on my way out to Dakota, to prospect a mine there.  I will tell you how it
has come about.  I had a cousin, a wild young fellow, who left home in the early days of the
Californian gold fever, and was not heard of for many years.  Eighteen months ago he returned.
His father and mother were long since dead, and having not a friend in the world he hunted
me up, for we had been great chums in our boyhood.  He was a broken man, and I did not think
he had long to live.  I took him in, and he lingered on for fifteen months, and then died.
He told me all his history during the twenty years he had been mining, and a strange, wild
story it was--at one time almost starving, at another wealthy enough to have come home and
lived in comfort.  The most important part, and that which is of most interest at present,
is that in a valley in the heart of Dakota he had discovered what he believed to be a most
valuable gold mine.  Among the hills he had found some lumps of very valuable ore.  He had
traced down the outcrop of the lode, which on the surface looked poor enough, to a point near
the river.  Here another lode intersected it, and believing this to be the richest point, he
began with four comrades to sink a shaft.  For a long time the lode was poor, but at a depth
of eighty feet they came upon ore of immense richness.  Three days after they had made the
discovery a band of Indians fell upon them.  Ned's four comrades were killed, but he managed
to escape.  The Indians burnt the hut and destroyed the surface-workings, and then left.  Alone
and penniless, Ned could do nothing.  He made his way back to the settlement, and then worked
on the railway.  He was afraid to tell any one his secret, and was in no hurry, as he had no
fear of any chance miners discovering the spot, which he said looked by no means a promising
one.  Then he fell ill, and a yearning for England seized him, and so he came to me. Before
he died he told me the story, and gave me the fullest directions for finding the spot where,
he said, a great fortune awaited me.  I was by profession a civil engineer and knew a little
of mining, so I determined to undertake the adventure.  I was preparing to start, having made
arrangements for a prolonged absence, when in London I met my old friend Captain Blowser, and
mentioning to him that I was about to take a passage in a Cunarder for America, he said that
he was sailing for Boston in a few days, and would be glad of my company.  I accepted his invitation,
and here I am.  I have sufficient capital to open the mine and carry on operations for a year.
I should be glad of an energetic man whom I could trust, and who understands the country and
mining.  I might travel far before I found one who would so thoroughly suit my views as yourself,
Seth; so if you will throw in your lot with me, as working manager of the affair, we shall
have no difficulty whatever in coming to terms."

"I'm your man," Seth said, holding out his hand.  "Yes, sir, I reckon that this venture is
just the thing that will suit me.  I'm all there, you bet."

And so the agreement was made, and before arriving at the end of the voyage Seth had selected
four of the best and most trustworthy men on board to join the party.  It was arranged that
each, in addition to his pay, should receive a small share in the undertaking, should it turn
out a success; and, with the prospect of an adventure that might render them independent for
life, they gladly "signed articles," as they called putting down their names to an agreement
which the mate had drawn out, binding those who expressed their willingness to embark in the
enterprise to be true to Mr Rawlings to the last, and obey his directions; he on his part promised
that the treasure, should they succeed in finding it, would be divided share and share alike
amongst their number.  And thus the list was filled.

The band consisted so far of Tom Cannon and Black Harry, two of the foremast hands; Jasper
the black steward, and Josh the cook, another darkey, as has been already mentioned; besides
Seth and Sailor Bill, whom Seth stoutly declared his intention, with Mr Rawlings' consent,
of taking with him, declining the skipper's proposal of giving him up to the British Consul
when they arrived at Boston, so that he might be sent home to England as a lunatic sailor at
the government expense.

"Nary a bit," said Seth; "whar I goes, thaar goes he, poor chap!  Under Providence, he saved
my life; and under Providence I'll never desart him, Cap, till he chooses to cast off the hawser
hisself!"

Mr Rawlings encouraged the seaman in his resolution; for he took great interest in the lad,
and looked forward to noting any change in his mental condition, whom he firmly believed would
some day be suddenly restored to his senses by some similar mode to that by which he had been
deprived of the proper use of his faculties.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER SIX.

MINTURNE CREEK.

When the Susan Jane's anchor was dropped, and the longshore men came on board to unload cargo,
the little party of Mr Rawlings' followers went on shore, drew their pay, and took their discharge;
and then, after a few days' stay, took rail for Chicago, where Mr Rawlings was to join them,
to make the final preparations for their start to the Far West.

They reached Chicago before the "Boss," as they called Mr Rawlings, as that gentleman had several
business arrangements to make in New York.

At Chicago, Seth met an old western friend of his, Noah Webster, who had just returned from
a mining expedition in Arizona.

After much talk of their Californian days, Seth told him that he was going as lieutenant to
an English gentleman who was getting up a mining expedition to Dakota.

"I want eight or ten good miners, afraid neither of work nor Indians."

"What pay?"  Noah asked laconically.

"Two dollars a day each, and all grub; double to you, Noah, if you will get a good gang together
and come with us."

"It's a bargain," said Noah.  "I could put my hand on twenty good men to-morrow; half of 'em
were out with me.  I will pick you ten of the best.  And they ought to be that, for it will
be no child's play; the Injins of Dakota are snakes upon miners."

Seth had received full authority from Mr Rawlings to engage a strong party, and the "Boss"
was greatly pleased upon his arrival to find that a band of stalwart and experienced miners
had already been collected.

Previous to quitting Chicago, Mr Rawlings, acting under the advice of Seth and Noah Webster,
purchased a complete outfit of mining tools, and stores of all kinds: picks, drills, pumps,
buckets, windlasses, ropes-- and, indeed, everything that would be required in carrying out
their undertaking properly.

They did not overburden themselves, however, with provisions, or any such things as they would
be likely to get cheap in the back settlements at the end of the point where they would have
to leave the railway--not far off the town of Bismark, on the Missouri, the extremest station
of the northern branch of the Union Pacific line.

And so, one fine morning, they started, full of hope, for some wonderful accounts were in circulation
before they set out from Chicago, as to the enormous finds of the Excelsior mine and other
kindred speculations in or near Dakota.

Passing over their railroad journey, during which nothing of interest occurred worthy of notice,
and their temporary stay in the last frontier town--to lay in a stock of provisions, and hire
teams and waggons for the transport of their mining plant and general belongings; besides engaging
a half-breed Indian to guide them to their destination, a copper-coloured gentleman who had
lived for years in New Mexico, and spoke a broken Spanish patter which he called "Ingliz,"
and was afterwards a faithful member of the expeditionary party--we will come to the period
when, after a month's march across the wilds of north-western Dakota, they had arrived at the
place which "Moose," the Indian half-breed, declared with a multitude of "carramboes!" was
the spot which had been indicated on the map which Mr Rawlings had received from his cousin.

"Waal, boys, this is bully!" exclaimed Seth, as soon as the party had come to a halt, gazing
round him with the air of a landlord taking possession of his property.

The scene was a beautiful one, and well merited the seaman's exclamation.

They were in the centre of a vast semicircular valley, surrounded on all sides but one by a
chain of mountains, over which one especial peak towered far above the rest, lifting up a crest
that was crowned with eternal snow and formed a landmark for miles away.

Into this valley, which appeared to be the general watershed of the district, ran several small
streams, that united in the middle of it in one deep gulch, which overflowed in winter with
a foaming torrent-- although there was now little or no water, and the grass and shrubs around
seemed parched and withered for want of moisture.  The "location," however, was a pleasant
one, possessing all the proper requisites for a stationary camp such as they contemplated;
for, within hand-reach they could have wood, water, and forage for their baggage animals. 
The teams they had hired were at once unloaded and started back to the settlement, but there
remained with them twelve pack-mules, which Mr Rawlings had purchased in order to have means
of sending down for provisions whenever required.

Gold mining, it may be mentioned, is almost if not quite as precarious as that of silver. 
The former metal is found over a very extensive tract of country in California west of the
Sierra Nevada Mountains, while silver is found in Nevada, Utah, and in fact over a vast expanse
of country stretching almost down to the south of Mexico.  Silver seldom is found in a lode
extending with any great regularity.  The lode, indeed, may be traced for long distances, but
whereas one mine may be fabulously rich, those lying on the lode on either side of it may not
find enough gold to pay expenses.  It lies, in fact, in great "pockets," as English miners
would call them, or in "bonanzas," as they are termed in Nevada.  So long as these pockets
last a mine will pay enormously; when they are cleared out it becomes worthless, as English
shareholders in these mines have often found to their cost.  In "Mineral Hill" and the "Emma"
hundreds of thousand pounds' worth of ore were taken out in a few months, and then the mines
were not worth working.

East of the Rocky Mountains, in Colorado and Dakota, gold is found as well as silver.  It is
found in quartz veins, and wherever there is quartz, some, although often an almost infinitesimally
small amount of gold, is found; while in other places patches of quartz are struck containing
immensely rich deposits of the precious metal.

No search was made for the exact spot indicated on the map, so long as the teamsters who had
brought up the mining' stores remained.  These believed that it was a mere exploring party,
and although they wondered at the quantity of mining materials brought up, they had put this
down to the folly of the "Britisher" who had organised the party!

When the mining party alone remained, a diligent search was at once begun for the shaft which
had been sunk.  This they knew was near the river.

Three days were spent and no signs of the shaft were discovered, when Seth came across a short
stump of charred wood at the edge of the river bed.

He led Mr Rawlings and Noah Webster to the spot, and they agreed that this was probably the
site upon which the dwelling-house had stood.

"The river, you see, has changed its course a bit," Noah said.  "These streams come down in
big floods in winter, and carry all before them, often changing their beds.  If it came across
the mouth of the shaft it would fill it up with boulders and gravel in five minutes.  Waal,
what we've got to look for is a filled-up hole hereabouts.  Mostly, the rock lies just under
the surface gravel, so if we get crowbars and thrust down we shall find it sure enough."

A few hours' search, now that the clue was obtained, led to the discovery of the lost shaft.
The lode was now traced extending either way, and as it was at once agreed that it would not
do to commence another so near the river, a place was fixed upon a hundred yards back from
the old shaft, and the whole of the stores and tools were removed to this spot.

Then the whole force set to to get up a large hut of galvanised iron, which they had brought,
with its framework, from Chicago.

Timber is sometimes scarce in these regions, and it would not have done to have relied upon
it.  The hut contained a large general room where all would take their meals together, a store-room,
a bed-room for the men, and a smaller one for Mr Rawlings, Seth, Noah, and Sailor Bill.  A
small "lean-to" as a kitchen was erected against the hut, and layers of coarse turf, eighteen
inches thick, were built up against the outer wall all round for additional protection, as
the winter would be bitterly cold, and a great thickness of material would be required to resist
its inclemency.

There was an equal partition of labour.  The black cook took possession of his kitchen, Jasper
was to act as general attendant, and Seth assumed the position of manager of the works, with
Noah Webster under him as deputy, while the men were divided into three gangs, each of which
would work eight hours a day at the work of sinking the shaft.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER SEVEN.

FIGHTING THE ELEMENTS.

The miners at Minturne Creek had a hard time of it, and their life was monotonous enough after
they had settled down to work in earnest.

Winter came--the stern hard winter that can only be experienced to the full in the northern
regions of the Far West, backed up seemingly by all the powers of nature--to try and cramp
the energies of the party, and arrest their labours; but, neither the severity of the weather,
nor the languor which the excessive frigidity of the atmosphere produced-- although it sent
them to sleep of a night after their day's toil, without the necessity of an opiate--were sufficient
to deter them from their purpose.

Winter passed by, and still they worked on steadily, notwithstanding that as yet they had met
with no substantial success to encourage them, hoping, however, that they had surmounted the
gravest part of their undertaking.  Spring arrived, and their hopes of an easy season of it
were demolished in an instant; for the snow melted on the hills, and the ice melted in the
valley, and the iron bands of the river were broken, causing a foaming torrent to dash through
the gulch--a torrent that swelled each hour with the fresh accretions of water from the higher
rocks, and, spreading wide in the valley, threatened to annihilate the whole party, as well
as the results of their handiwork during the past months of bitter toil.

The very elements warred against them; but, under the noble example of their indomitable leader,
whom nothing appeared to dishearten, they braved the elements, and were not discouraged.

The torrent grew into a flood, tossing huge rocks about as if they were corks, and swelled
and foamed around the dam they laboriously raised when the floods began, to protect the shaft;
but they fought the newly created flood with its own weapons, hurling buttresses at it to support
their artificial embankment, in return for its rocks, and pointing the very weapons of the
enemy against itself.

They had not to contend with water alone.

The winds, let loose apparently by the thawing of the huge glaciers by which they were confined
in the cavernous recesses of the mountain peaks, stormed down into the valley, there meeting
other and antagonistic currents of air coming up the canon--and met and fought, relentless
giants that they were, on the neutral ground of the miners' camp, tearing off the iron sheets
of their house, and sending them flying away on the wings of the storm to goodness knows where.
Still, the hardy adventurers would not be beaten; but fought the wind, as they had fought the
water.

Spreading buffalo skins over their unroofed cabin to keep out the wet, they piled on them rocks
and timber that they had kept in reserve for service in the mine, weighing their ends down
with some of the ponderous rocks with which the flood had assailed them--so making a temporary
provision against the weather until they should be able to build their log shanty afresh.

By these means the winds were conquered, stopping their onslaught presently and making a truce,
which in time was lengthened into a treaty.  But it was a mighty battle while it lasted; a
fight of the Titans with the gods; man opposed to nature; the material to the immaterial--self-reliant,
well-husbanded, carefully-applied strength matched against purposeless force.

Man does not generally win in such contests, but did in this instance. The powers of the water
and air were powerless against a systematic resistance, and were compelled to succumb.  The
miners suffered, certainly--who comes out of a fray scathless?  But they were victorious; and
being such, could at last laugh at their losses.  Beyond, also, the consciousness of having
fought a successful fight, they were encouraged by the certainty that they had met and encountered
with success the extremity of peril to which they would be subjected; and that thenceforth
Nature could only be a passive enemy to them, with no terrors now to daunt them with, albeit
she struggled against them still in the bowels of the earth, that refused as yet to give up
those hidden riches which they were confident were there.  Refuse?  Ay, but only for a time;
they would, in the end, conquer that refusal, as they had met and overcome nature's more active
opposition!

Their house was in ruins; their provisions mostly spoilt by the elements they had battled--fire
had only been wanting to complete the sum of their calamities; whilst the staging around their
mine-shaft was broken down and tons of water upon tons poured down the embouchure.

They reviewed their position, and grasped its salient points, not a single faint heart among
them:--hope, trust, energy, made them think and act as one man.

There was the iron hut and shanty to rebuild, the mine-shaft and its supports to repair, the
dam to mend and remake in its weaker places, the mine to pump out.

Thus they thought; and, what is more, they acted upon the thought.  Some men think, and others
work.  They did both; and, through their strenuous efforts, ere the early buds of spring had
given a palpable green tinge to the shrubs and trees that clothed the slopes of the hills and
dotted the valley of Minturne Creek here and there, or the snow had quite vanished from the
topmost mountain peaks, and the river that ran through the gulch subsided down into its proper
proportions, all traces of the storm ravages had been cleared away, and the snug little camp
of the Boston exploring party looked itself again, "as neat and trim as a new pin, I reckon!"
as Seth Allport said.

The miners themselves allowed, however, that the victory might not have been theirs had they
not had the assistance of a visitor--and that a most unexpected one, as the spring was not
sufficiently advanced to have cleared away all the snow from the back track to the settlements
and made the roads passable, so as to allow the diggers to return to their claims on the hills.

Strangers are rare birds amongst the squatters out West, and are generally regarded with much
suspicion by travellers on the prairies and in the mountain fastnesses.

The rougher part of the restoration of the camp belongings having been accomplished and not
so many hands being now required for the further repairs needed, while the day was especially
fine and suggestive of "sport," the hunters were out on the hills, under the leadership of
Mr Rawlings, who had proved himself by this time one of the best shots in camp.

There were other reasons for the hunters' activity besides the fact of the day being fine and
signs of sport apparent.

"The hull crowd, from the Boss down to Sailor Bill, who wouldn't say nay if he could kinder
express himself," as the ex-mate observed before the setting out of the expedition--"were dog-tired
of pork and fixin's,"-- and their stomachs craved after game, or fresh meat of any sort.

Besides their having lived through the whole of the winter on salt pork, it had not been improved
in quality by its contact with the flood-water that had submerged their cabin at one time;
but, whether damaged or not, it must be acknowledged that even to the most easy-going and contented
palate, a never-varying diet of fried pork and damper cakes--that resembled somewhat the unleavened
bread of the Israelites in their passage through the wilderness--will prove somewhat wearying
and monotonous in the long run!  Thus, their anxiety for some change in their food can only
be realised by those who have been compelled to live on salt provisions for any length of time.

Signs of sport, as has been already mentioned, were apparent enough; for traces of deer had
been discovered by the Indian half-breed in the early morning, leading from the bank of the
river as it entered the canon below the camp from the hills; and thus, therefore, it was with
all the eagerness of semi-starving; men that the best shots of the party were picked out at
once, and despatched to follow up the trail of the game; the others who remained behind going
on with the rebuilding with all the greater ardour through the prospect of an unwontedly good
dinner before them--that is, should the hunters prove successful.

Along with Mr Rawlings was Noah Webster, who was a better hunter almost than he was a miner;
Moose, the half-breed Indian, and Josh the cook-- Jasper stopping behind by the express orders
of Seth, although he was madly jealous at his brother-darkey being preferred before him.

Upwards and onwards, through the scrub and brushwood and budding branches of trees, struggling
over the trunks of fallen monarchs of the forest, that had been rooted up by the wind or struck
down by lightning, and lay across their path, over rough volcanic rocks, and through ravines
that trickled down tiny streams to swell the river below, they made their way slowly and tediously
towards the probable lair of the deer, as the traces of their antlered prey grew fresher and
more distinct every step, the slot being sometimes plainly visible in the moist soil, although
for all they could otherwise see and hear they might be as far off from the wished-for prize
as ever.

Presently, as they were emerging from a thicker growth of brushwood than they had yet passed
through, they noticed, to their joy, right in front of them, feeding on a small grassy plateau
under the lee of a jutting cliff, a head of what the Indian half-breed immediately declared
to be a species of ibex, or mountain-sheep, that are commonly met with amid the peaks of the
Rocky Mountains and its chains, far from the haunts of civilisation and men.  It was only owing,
indeed, to the fact that the hill diggers were away in the settlements, and from the scarcity
of forage in their more secluded retreats, that they had approached so near to the miners' camp.

Caution was now the order of the day; and, Mr Rawlings still leading, with the Indian next
him, and then the others one after the other in file, Josh proudly bringing up the rear, they
stepped forwards with the utmost care, keeping the wind in their faces so that they should
not be betrayed by the scent of their clothing reaching the timid animals, to do which, they
had to execute a considerable detour, and take advantage of every chance of cover.

By degrees, they gradually got within a fair range of about eighty yards--for, although long-distance
shooting may be very nice as a test of shooting at the Wimbledon targets, it is quite a different
matter when your dinner depends on the success of your shot; for, with that consideration in
view, even the surest of marksmen likes to get within easy reach of his game.

Mr Rawlings and Noah Webster, the two best shots of the party, levelled their rifles together--after
a brief nod from the Indian half-breed which seemed to say "Now's your time"--and fired simultaneously,
aiming at two of the wild sheep.

At the very moment they did so, the report of a third shot was heard, that seemed like the
echo of their own double discharge, pinging through the keen rarefied air; and when the smoke
had cleared off, and the reverberations of the sound had died away, rolling in fainter and
fainter waves amongst the mountain hollows in the distance, three of the sheep were observed
to be stretched lifeless on the plateau where they had been so recently feeding in peace, while
the remainder of the flock were bounding away from peak to peak, seeking refuge in their native
fortresses in the crags above.

Mr Rawlings did not notice anything unusual at first, as he had not heard the third rifle-shot;
but Noah Webster and the half-breed, who were much better accustomed to woodcraft--having had
their senses sharpened by dangers which seamen never have to encounter--were alive at once
to the perception of something being wrong.

"Injuns, I reckon!" muttered Noah Webster under his breath, to which the half-breed growled
a characteristic "Ugh," and the two sank down closer amid the grass, dragging down Mr Rawlings
with them, Noah stopping his expostulations by clapping his hand across his mouth, and looking
at him warningly, while he motioned to the rest behind them to follow their example.

All huddled together in the grass and tangled brushwood, hardly breathing for fear their presence
might be discovered by some possible foe, they looked out carefully, awaiting the development
of the situation.

It was only a minute or two at most, but it appeared hours to one or two, especially to poor
Josh, who, in his fright of being scalped by a possible Indian, would have cheerfully given
up all his chances of gold in the mine and everything, to have swapped places with the envious
Jasper and been safe in camp.

The listeners, however, did not have to wait so very long.

In a little while they heard the sound of twigs being broken near them, as if some one were
making his way through the copse.  Soon they could distinguish, in addition, the heavy tramp
of footsteps--they sounded as heavy as those of elephants to them, with their ears to the ground--
trampling down the thick undergrowth and rotten twigs in the thicket before them; and they
could also hear a sort of muttering sound, like that caused by somebody speaking to himself
in soliloquy.

The situation, if an exciting one, was not of any long duration, for while they were listening
the denouement came.

A nondescript-clad figure came out of the brushwood into the open clearing, walking towards
the spot where the mountain-sheep lay stretched on the sward, which was partly covered with
the snow that remained unmelted under the lee of the cliff; and a voice, without doubt appertaining
to the figure, exclaimed in unmistakable English accents--

"Well, I'm hanged if I ever heard of such a thing before in my life!  I know I am a tidy shot,
but if I were to mention this at home they would say I was telling a confounded lie!  To think
of killing three of those queer creatures at one shot!  By Jove, who'd believe it?"

The listeners burst into a simultaneous roar of laughter.

"It's only a Britisher!" said Noah Webster; and they all rose from their covert and sallied
out into the open, to the intense astonishment of the new-comer, whose surprise was evidently
mixed with a proportionate amount of alarm, for he clutched his gun more tightly at the sight
of them, and stood apparently on the defensive.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER EIGHT.

AN UNEXPECTED COINCIDENCE.

"We are friends," Mr Rawlings said, "some of us your countrymen, if, as I judge by your accent,
you are an Englishman.  We are working a mine in this neighbourhood.  My name is Rawlings,
and I am the proprietor of the mine."

"My name is Wilton--Ernest Wilton," the stranger said, taking the hand that Mr Rawlings held
out.  "I am glad indeed to meet with a party of my countrymen.  Some little time since I started
from Oregon with a prospecting party that was organised to hunt up various openings for the
employment of capital in mining, and other speculative enterprises. With this party I crossed
the Rocky Mountains, and went about from place to place, until about three days ago, when,
while shooting amongst these hills of yours, either I lost them or they lost me, and here I
have been wandering about ever since by myself, and would probably have come to grief if I
had not met you.  By profession I am a mining engineer, but the mine I had come from England
to work turned out badly, and I accepted another engagement, thinking to do a little sporting
and exploring on my own account before returning to England--nice sport I've found it, too!"

Mr Rawlings gave the stranger an earnest invitation to spend a day or two with them down at
the creek.

The visitor readily accepted; and the game being lifted and slung on poles, the party started
for the camp, Mr Rawlings strolling on with his new acquaintance, and the others following,
talking earnestly together.

Arrived at the house, Mr Rawlings laughingly apologised for its state of dilapidation, but
assured the visitor that it was far more comfortable than it looked.

Seth came to the doorway, and the other miners gathered round, to inspect both the welcome
supply of fresh food and the stranger.

"This is Seth Allport, my lieutenant and manager," Mr Rawlings said. "Seth, this is Mr Wilton,
an English mining engineer."

"Jerusalem!" exclaimed Seth.  "Now, who would have thought that?"

"You seem surprised at my being an engineer," said Ernest Wilton, laughing at Seth's exclamation:
for even the hungry miners, who had been previously clustered in groups around Josh and Jasper,
surveying the cooking arrangements of the two darkeys with longing eyes, appeared to forget
the claims of their appetites for the moment on the announcement of what evidently was a welcome
piece of news, as they incontinently abandoned the grateful sight of the frizzling mutton,
that was also sending forth the most savoury odours, and joined the leaders of the party who
were interviewing the young Englishman.  "I shouldn't have thought one of my profession by
any means a strange visitor."

"It isn't the surprise, mister," replied Seth cordially.  "No, that ain't it, quite, I reckon.
It's the coincidence, as it were, at this particular time, mister.  That's what's the matter!
Jehosophat! it is queer, streenger!"

"I'm sure I ought to feel greatly honoured at such an imposing reception," said Ernest, still
rather perplexed at the ovation, which seemed unaccountable to him.  "It is not such a very
uncommon thing for an engineer to be travelling through these regions, is it now? especially
when you consider that it has been mainly through the exertions of men of my craft, and the
railways that they have planned, following in their wake, that the country has been opened
up at all.  I should have thought engineers almost as common nowadays out west as blackberries
in old England."

"You are right there," said Mr Rawlins's, hastening to explain the circumstances that had caused
his arrival to be looked upon as such a piece of good fortune, quite apart from the friendly
feelings with which they regarded him as a forlorn stranger whom they were glad to welcome
to their camp.  "But, you see, your coming, as Seth Allport has just remarked, has been almost
coincident with a loss, or rather want, which we just begin to feel in our mining operations
here.  Your arrival has happened just in the nick of time, when we are nearly at a standstill
through the want of a competent superintending engineer, like yourself, experienced in mines
and mining work.  Hands we have in plenty--willing and able hands, too," added Mr Rawlings,
with an approving glance round at the assembled miners, who acknowledged the compliment with
a hearty cheer for himself and Seth Allport;--"but we want a head to suggest how our efforts
can be best directed, and our gear utilised, towards carrying out the object we all have in
view.  I and Seth have done our best; but, what with the overflow of water in the mine, and
the necessity we think there is now for running out side cuttings from the main shaft, so as
to strike the lode properly, we were fairly at our wits' end."

"I see," said Ernest Wilton musingly, "I see."

"An' if yer like to join us in that air capacity," interposed Seth, thinking that the other
was merely keeping back his decision until he heard what terms might be offered him, and that
a practical suggestion about money matters would settle the matter, "why, mister, we sha'n't
grumble about the dollars, you bet!  As yer knows, the Kernel kinder invited yer jest now,
when we had no sort o' reckonin' as to who and what yer were.  Tharr'll be no worry about yer
share ov the plunder, neow--no, sir."

"Oh, pray don't mention that," exclaimed Ernest Wilton, pained at the interpretation put upon
his reticence in accepting the offer of the position made him.  "Nothing was further from my
thoughts.  I am too well acquainted with the open-handedness of the mining fraternity in the
Golden State and elsewhere to dream of haggling about terms as to the payment of my poor services."

"What, then?" said Seth.  "We don't want to bind you down to any fixed sort o' 'greement, if
yu'd rather not."

"I was only considering," replied Ernest, vexed at his own hesitancy, "whether I could fairly
give up the party with whom I started from Oregon, as I was under a species of engagement,
as it were, although there was no absolutely signed and sealed undertaking.  It wouldn't be
right, I think, to leave them altogether without notice."

"Nary mind the half-hearted lot," said Noah Webster, at this juncture putting his spoke in
the wheel.  "Didn't they leave yer out alone in the mountains?  I wouldn't give a red cent
for sich pardners, I guess, boss. Raal mean skunks I calls 'em, and no mistake, sirree!"

"But I promised to stay with these fellows till we got over to the settlements on this side,"
said Ernest Wilton, smiling at Noah's characteristic vehemence against those half-hearted companions
of his who had held back while he had gone forward by himself, "and I like to keep my word
when I can, you know--at all events I ought to send and let them know where I am."

"We sha'n't quarrel about that," said Mr Rawlings kindly, to put the other at his ease, for
some of the rough miners did not appear to like the Englishman's hanging back from jumping
at their leader's offer.--"A man who is so anxious to keep his word, even with people who left
him in the lurch, will be all the more likely to act straightforwardly towards us.  Don't,
however, let that fret you, for you will be able to communicate as easily with your friends,
and more so, by stopping here with us, as by going on to the nearest frontier township.  As
soon as the snow has melted, and the roads become passable again, there will be plentiful supply
of half-breeds, like Moose there, and other gentry with nothing particular to do, come hanging
round us, who will gladly carry any message or letter for you across the hills--for a leetle
consideration, of course!" added Mr Rawlings, with his bluff, hearty laugh.

"Ay, that there'll be," said Seth Allport.  "Don't you trouble about that, mister; but jine
with us a free heart, and run our injine for us, and we'll be downright glad, I guess!"

"That we will, sure!" chorussed the miners in a body, with a shout.  And so, pressed with a
rough but hearty cordiality, Ernest Wilton consented to be a member of the mining party in
the same frank spirit, and was now saluted as one of the Minturne Creek adventurers in a series
of ringing cheers that made the hill-sides echo again, and the cavernous canon sound the refrain
afar.

Jasper and Josh, now quite reconciled after some "little bit of unpleasantness" between them,
that had resulted in operations tending towards a lowering of the wool crop, as far as each
was personally concerned, were unfeignedly glad the rather prolonged conference was over. 
They had been gazing at the group gathered around the young Englishman with a sort of puzzled
wonder, and listening to what scraps of conversation they chanced to overhear, without being
able to make out what the matter was about, with feelings of mingled expectancy and impatience
at the length of the debate.  But, now it was all settled, as they could see from the dispersal
of the group, their joy was great, especially that of Master Jasper, who felt his dignity hurt,
as a former steward and present butler in ordinary, on account of the neglect paid to his intimation
that the viands were ready and "dinner served!"

"Hooray!" shouted out Josh, throwing up his battered straw-hat into the air, and capering round
the improvised caboose, in response to the miners' ringing cheers on Ernest's consent to join
the party and act as engineer of the mine.  "Me berry glad Massa Britisher now am one of us,
for sure!  Golly, we nebbah hab to put up with dat nasty salt pork no more now, yup, yup! 
Massa Britisher um berry good shot, su-ah!  Um shoot tree sheep at one go.  Golly, Jasper,
you no laugh.  I tell you for true!"--And the negro cook grinned himself, to the full extent
of his wide mouth and glistening ivory teeth, while administering this rebuke to his darkey
brother.

"Shoo! go way wid yer nonsenz, and don't bodder me," responded the hungry and aggrieved Jasper,
who did not appreciate the joke, the young Englishman's humorous mistake as to the result of
his rifle-shot not having yet been promulgated for the benefit of those in camp.  "Am none
ob you gentlemens comin' to dinnah, hey?"--he called out more loudly,--"Massa Rawlins me tellee
hab tings ready in brace o' shakes; and now tings fix up tarnation smart, nobody come.  Um
berry aggerabating--can't oberstand it, no how!"

"None o' your sass," said Seth gruffly, although the lurking smile on his face took off from
the effect of his words, "none o' your sass, Jasper, or I'll keelhaul you, and make you fancy
yourself aboard ship once more!"

"Me not sassy, Massa Seth.  I'se hab too much respect for myself, sah, for dat!  I only tells
you as de meat's done and gettin' cool, dat's all, while yous be all jabberin' way jus like
passul monkeys.  No imperance in dat, massa, as I sees!"

"Stow that, you ugly cuss," said Seth good-humouredly, for he was used somewhat to Master Jasper's
"cheek" by this time.  "You're jest about as bad as a Philadelphy lawyer, when you've got your
jaw tackle aboard! Now, boys," he added, hailing the miners, who were nothing loth to obey
the signal, "the darkey says the vittles are ready, and you as wants to feed had better fall to!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER NINE.

CONCERNING SAILOR BILL.

During this little interlude, Ernest Wilton had been closely engaged in watching the actions
of the poor boy, "Sailor Bill."

His face had attracted him from the first moment he caught sight of him; but when he had more
leisure to observe him, after the palaver with Mr Rawlings and the miners was over, and he
noticed certain peculiarities about the object of his attention which had previously escaped
his notice, his interest became greatly heightened.

Sailor Bill had altered very much in appearance since the day he had been picked up in the
Bay of Biscay and taken on board the Susan Jane, a thin, delicate-looking boy with a pale face
and a wasted frame.  The keen healthy air and out-of-doors life out west had worked wonders
with him, and he was now rosy and stalwart, his body having filled out and his cheeks grown
much fatter, while he was even considerably taller than he had been some six months previously.

His bright golden-brown hair was, of course, the same, and so were the long dark lashes to
the blue eyes that had so especially appealed to Captain Blowser's fancy when he had spoken
about the boy's resemblance to a girl, for they yet bore the same peculiar far-away look as
if they belonged to a person walking in his sleep, without intelligence or notice in them whatever.

As on board ship, Sailor Bill stuck to Seth Allport as his shadow, moving where he moved, stopping
where he stopped, with the faithful attachment of a dog, albeit wanting in that expression
of sagacity, which even the dullest specimen of the canine race exhibits on all occasions.
Seth Allport seemed to be the mainspring of the boy's action, and after a time it became almost
painful to watch the two, although the sailor had now grown accustomed to being followed about
in so eccentric a fashion--as had, indeed, the rest of the party, who were not so distinctly
singled out by the poor boy's regard; but it was all new and strange to Ernest Wilton as he
watched and wondered.

"What is the matter with the boy?" asked he presently of Mr Rawlings, who, from the fixed observation
of his companion, had been expecting the question.  "Poor fellow, he doesn't seem all right
in his mind--and a healthy, nice-looking boy, too!"

"Yes," said Mr Rawlings, tapping his forehead expressively, and speaking feelingly as he looked
affectionately at Sailor Bill, whom all had learnt to like as they would have done a pet dog;--"something
wrong there, although I hope in time he will get over it in the same way as he came by it,
if God so wills it!"

"I suppose he's got some story attached to him, eh?" said Ernest Wilton.

"No doubt," answered Mr Rawlings; "but nobody but himself knows it!"

"How strangely you pique my curiosity!  Besides, his face seems quite familiar to me, somehow
or other.  Yes, it's really quite familiar," he repeated.

"Does it?" said Mr Rawlings eagerly, hoping that the young engineer might be able to tell something.

"Yes," replied the other, "and I cannot tell how or where I have seen somebody like him before.
But I will recollect presently, I have no doubt, after a little more reflection."

"We picked up the poor chap at sea, half-drowned, and bleeding from a very terrible cut across
the forehead; and such a slender thin shaving of a boy that you would not have known him to
be the same as he is now!"

"Indeed!" said Ernest Wilton with greater interest even than he had displayed before; and thereupon
Mr Rawlings told the whole story of Sailor Bill's rescue, and how he afterwards saved the life
of Seth Allport, to whom he had thenceforward attached himself; and how the worthy sailor had
refused to part with him, and brought him out west.

The young engineer had been carefully noting all the points of the narrative while the other
was speaking; and seemed to revolve the whole circumstances of Sailor Bill's history in his
mind with a view to solving the mystery.

"I shouldn't be surprised," said he, when Mr Rawlings had completed his yarn, "if he belonged
to that deserted ship which you subsequently came across; and that in the mutiny, or whatever
else occurred on board, he got wounded and thrown into the sea."

"That is possible," said Mr Rawlings, "but not quite probable, considering the time that elapsed
after our saving him to meeting with the water-logged vessel, and the distance we traversed
in the interval. Besides, the boy was lashed to the spar that supported him in the water, and
he couldn't have done that, with the wound he had received, by himself; so that gets rid of
the theory of his being half-murdered and pitched overboard.  Altogether, the story is one
of those secrets of the sea that will never be unravelled, unless he comes to his senses at
some time or other and tells us all about it!"

"And you don't know his name, or anything?"

"No, only just what I have told you."

"Had he no marks on his clothing, or anything in his pockets, that might serve for identification,
should any one claim him by and by?" said Ernest Wilton, pursuing his interrogatories like
a cross-examining barrister fussy over his first case.

"He had nothing on but his shirt and trousers, I tell you," said Mr Rawlings, laughing at what
he called the badgering of the other, just as if he were in a witness-box, he said, "and boys
don't carry many letters or documents about them, especially in their trousers' pockets; at
all events, they didn't do so when I was a boy.  Stay--" he added, bethinking himself suddenly
of one item of the story he had apparently forgotten till then,--"I certainly passed over something."

"What?" said Ernest, still looking at Sailor Bill steadfastly, as if trying in vain to summon
up the recollection of his features from the hazy depths of his memory; for the face of the
boy seemed more and more familiar to him the longer he looked.

"Well," replied Mr Rawlings, with a little hesitation, "I don't suppose you want to know about
the boy merely to satisfy an idle curiosity at seeing the poor, bereaved, young creature to
be out of his mind?"

"Certainly not," said Ernest Wilton.  "What you have already told me, besides his own innocent,
guileless look, has interested me strangely in him; and, in addition to that, I'm sure I know
something about him or somebody extremely like him, which I cannot at present recall to my
recollection."

"I believe you honestly," replied Mr Rawlings, stretching forth his hand in token of good faith,
which the other cordially grasped; "and, that being the case, I can tell you something more,
which only Seth Allport and myself know about, and which we have kept to ourselves as a matter
of confidence on the poor boy's behalf.  Of course, Captain Blowser of the Susan Jane knows
about it, too, as he was entitled to by rights, from having picked the little chap up; but
he's at sea, and it doesn't matter whether he divulges it or not, as it wouldn't be of much
consequence to the boy; here on land, however, where anybody might track him out from interested
or other motives, it is a very different matter; so I must ask you on your word of honour to
keep the circumstance to yourself."

"Most decidedly," said Ernest Wilton heartily; "I pledge you my word I will--until, at all
events, you think it best, should things so happen, that it ought to be divulged."

"All right," responded Mr Rawlings, trusting implicitly in the other's discretion.  "Now, I'll
tell you.  When I said that the boy had only his shirt and trousers on in the way of garments,
and that there was nothing in his pockets to disclose his identity, I related you only the
simple truth, for there was nothing to trace him by; and I remember that Captain Blowser, of
the Susan Jane, regretted afterwards that the spar to which we found him lashed had been cut
adrift, without any one having examined it carefully to see whether there might not have been
the name of the ship painted on the yard, or a portion of the canvas, or something else in
the top along with the boy--for there was the topmast and yard, and all the gear of the whole
mast complete, as if it had been carried away in a moment.  But you recollect what I told you,
of the boy's dashing out of the cabin as if he had been taken with a sudden frenzy, and going
to rescue Seth Allport when he was swept over the side by the broken topsail-halliards in that
squall?"

"Yes, quite well," answered Ernest Wilton.

"Well, after that he fainted away almost dead again for some time; and when I was bending over
him trying to rouse him, I noticed a thin silken string round his neck, which I hadn't noticed
previously, nor had Jasper the steward, although his shirt had been opened there, and his bosom
bared in our efforts to resuscitate him, when he first took him down into the cabin."

"A fine silken string?" repeated the other, as Mr Rawlings paused for a moment in his recital;
"a fine silken string round his neck?"

"Yes; and on drawing out the end of it I found a small parchment parcel, carefully sealed up
with red sealing-wax, and an official kind of stamp over it which had been before concealed
in an inside pocket cunningly secreted in the waist-part of the boy's flannel shirt."

"And this parcel contained?" said the young engineer with breathless attention.

"Ah! that's what I just don't know," said Mr Rawlings with provoking coolness.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TEN.

A CONUNDRUM.

Ernest Wilton felt almost inclined to be vexed at first, thinking that the speaker had deliberately
led him on with the intention, finally, of "selling" him, or perpetrating an April fool trick
at his expense, it just being about that time of year.  But after one steadfast glance at Mr
Rawlings' unmoved face, which bore an expression of honest sincerity that could not be doubted,
he laughed off his annoyance, for he could perceive that his companion was perfectly guiltless
of any attempt at a joke, and had said what he did in serious confidence.

"Did you not open the packet?" said he, when he had stifled his laughter, which increased all
the more from Mr Rawlings' unconsciousness of having done or said anything to provoke it.

"No, I didn't do it at the time, thinking it might be some little keepsake or love-token which
the boy would not have liked any prying eyes to look into if he were in the full possession
of his faculties; and afterwards, when I wanted to, thinking that it might disclose his identity,
Seth wouldn't allow it."

"Hullo!" said that worthy, coming up at the moment, with Sailor Bill in close attendance behind
him as usual, "what are you two chaps a conspiring about?  I guess," he continued, with the
broad smile that seemed to illumine the whole of his rugged countenance and give it such a
pleasant, cheery look, "you're up to some mischief about me, hey?  I kalkerlate I heard my
name kinder mentioned."

"We were talking about the boy, Seth," said Mr Rawlings, smiling too.

"Speakin' 'bout my b'y, wer' yer?" said he, turning half round as he spoke, to pat Sailor Bill's
head kindly.  "Poor feller! yer might ha' sunthin' a sight worse ter talk about, I reckon!
He's a chap as can't do harm to none whatsomdever, if he can't do 'em no good, as he once did
to me, I guess."

"You can't forget that, Seth?" said Mr Rawlings.

"No, nor won't as long as this chile draws breath nether," answered the ex-mate of the Susan
Jane, feelingly, with a look of almost parental fondness at the boy.

"Mr Wilton here was wondering, Seth," continued Mr Rawlings, "why you would not let me open
that package round poor Sailor Bill's neck, to see whether it would give us any clue to who he is."

The smile faded instantly from Seth Allport's face, which reassumed its normal grim, firm look,
just as if some one had dealt him what he would have called a "back-hander."

"Mr Wilton may wonder, and you too, Mr Rawlings, but I jest won't that, siree, not if I know
it.  Nary a soul shall look upon it, I guess, till that thar b'y opens it hisself.  I said
that months agone, Rawlings, as you knows well, and I say it now agin."

"I wish I could recollect whom he resembles, really," said Ernest Wilton, to give a turn to
the conversation, which had got into such an unpleasant hitch.  "There is nothing so worrying
as to try and puzzle over a face which you seem to remember and which you cannot place."

"Yes," said Mr Rawlings; "like a name sometimes seems to hover right on the tip of your tongue,
and yet you can't get it out, try what you may. I suppose you left England only lately?"

"I?" replied the young engineer.  "Why, it's nearly four years since I left Liverpool for America--quite."

"Perhaps you keep up communication, however, with the tight little island, eh?" said Mr Rawlings.
"I daresay some one was sorry to lose you."

"Not they," said Ernest Wilton carelessly.  "`I care for nobody, no, not I, and nobody cares
for me,'" he hummed in a rich baritone voice, although there was a tone of sadness in it that
belied the tenor of the words.  "I assure you," he added presently, in one of those sudden
bursts of confidence in which some of us are apt to indulge sometimes when we get a sympathetic
listener, "that I haven't written home or heard from thence for more than three years, and
they will have thought me dead by this time!  I've no doubt there is a large parcel of letters
and papers awaiting me now in New York, where I told them to address me when I came to America;
for I've not been back there either since the day I landed, when I started straight across
the continent for California, with a gentleman who had an interest in some mines there, with
whom I came over in the same steamer from Liverpool; and I have never been eastwards again,
or turned my face thither till I came through Oregon as far as this place, which is still considerable
to the west, I think, eh?"

And he laughed lightly, as if he did not care to talk much of home or its associations.

"I don't think it's quite right, though," suggested Mr Rawlings in his grave, kind way, "altogether
to abandon one's relatives and friends in that fashion."

"No?" said the young man inquiringly; and then added more frankly, impressed by the manner
of the other, "Well, perhaps it isn't quite the right thing to do; but I have been a rover
almost all my life, and a wanderer from home.  Besides, my parents are both dead, and there's
nobody now who particularly cares about me or my welfare in old England."

"Not anybody?" persisted Mr Rawlings, who thought it strange that such a nice, handsome fellow
as the young engineer appeared should be without some tie in the world to hold him to his country.

"I certainly have an uncle and aunt and some cousins," said Ernest Wilton, acknowledging his
relatives as if he were confessing some peccadillo; "and my aunt used to be fond of me as a
boy, I remember well."

"Then I should write to her," said Mr Rawlings.  "When you get as old as I am, you won't like
to feel yourself alone amongst strangers, and without some one to connect you with the past
of your childhood."

"I will write to my aunt, then, as you have reminded me of my shortcomings," said Ernest Wilton,
laughing.  "I promise you that at any rate."

"That's a good fellow.  I'm sure you won't regret it afterwards," said Mr Rawlings, who was
then proceeding to ask the young engineer something about his journey from California to Dakota
when Seth, who had listened patiently to their conversation so far, now interrupted them.

"Come, mister," said he, addressing Ernest Wilton, "I suggest--"

"Do call me by my right name, please," interposed the good-humoured young fellow, speaking
in such a sort of pleading way that Seth could not take offence.

"Waal, thin, ef yer are so partick'ler," replied that worthy, with a very bad pretence of being
angry, "kim along, Wilton, thaar now! and see to this mine of ourn that you've now got to look
arter.  How does yer like that style anyhow?"

"Decidedly better," responded the young engineer, with his frank, light-hearted laugh, in which
Mr Rawlings joined.

And the four then proceeded in the direction of the shaft, Seth leading the way, with Sailor
Bill, as usual behind him.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A ROUNDABOUT ROUTE.

"It must have been a rough journey for you, all the way from Oregon in almost the depth of
winter," said Mr Rawlings, as he and Ernest Wilton followed after Seth Allport, seizing the
opportunity of proceeding with the conversation which the ex-mate had interrupted.

Mr Rawlings had taken a strong fancy to the young Englishman from the first, and the more he
saw of his frank, open nature, the more he liked him.

The feeling, too, was evidently mutual, the younger man being attracted by the bluff, hearty,
honest outspokenness of the other, who could not conceal his unaffected delight at once more
coming across one from the old country, with whom he could converse on a different footing
than he could with the rough miners who composed the majority of his camp party--men who, with
the exception of Seth Allport, were totally uneducated and uncultivated.  Of course, Mr Rawlings
was used to these, and got along with them well enough; but, that was no reason why he should
not enjoy a chat with a person more of his own class and status in life, was it?

Rather the reverse, one would think; for, to Mr Rawlings, the conversation of Ernest Wilton,
after the usual style of talk to which he had now been habituated for months, came as grateful
as water to a thirsty land--or, to use a parallel which those who had been accustomed to living
on board ship will readily appreciate, as pleasant to the taste as fresh bread, or "soft tack,"
when one has been eating nothing but hard sea biscuits for some time previously.

To Ernest Wilton, also, it was a matter of gratification to be able to speak freely with a
fellow-countrymen, after his recent companionship with half-breeds and Indians; and he was
nothing loth to accept the other's overtures towards a friendly chat, to pave the way for future
intimacy, such as he saw would probably result between them, should they remain long together,
a possibility which recent events clearly prognosticated and which he cordially welcomed.

"Yes, it was a rough journey, with a vengeance," he replied, in answer to the implied question
in Mr Rawlings' remark, "such a journey as I certainly never anticipated; and my only wonder
is, how I accomplished it.  But then, you know, over here in the New World--and it is new to
me, every inch of it, the more I see of it--they don't measure distances the same as people
do in Europe.  Why, a degree of latitude or longitude is less thought of than a furlong by
those at home; and, in some of the backwood settlements, neighbours are as far-away from each
other as the capital cities of the continent are separated."

"That is true," said Mr Rawlings.  "The space appears so illimitable that one's ideas as to
measurement expand in a similar way, and the agriculturists calculate by the square mile instead
of the acre in all their estimates of the land.  But, about your journey?  I'm curious to know
what route you took to come from Oregon here."

"You may well ask," replied the young engineer, breaking into a hearty laugh, which was so
catching, that Mr Rawlings followed suit, and even Seth thought it incumbent on him to look
back over his shoulder and grin, "for it was, I believe, the most roundabout trip ever planned.
But, in order to understand it properly, you must learn what sort of a party accompanied me.
While in California, I got mixed up with all sorts of persons, engaged in companies started
to carry out everything under the sun, and even under the earth: scientific men with hobbies,
capitalists with money to spend, and speculators with nothing, who wished to enrich themselves
from the pockets of the unwary; and, while at a dinner one day in Sacramento, where a lot of
directors and shareholders of the Alba Eldorado were enlarging on the good fortune attending
mining schemes in general, and their own especial venture in particular, a proposal was made
that, as such fabulous reports had been circulated of the Bonanza mine in Montana, some of
the surplus capital of the company should be expended in looking after another lode in the
same vicinity.  The proposal was eagerly accepted, and as I happened to be present I was asked
to join the expedition."

"But that was in California," suggested Mr Rawlings, smiling, "and you needn't have gone through
all Oregon to get to Montana, surely--eh?"

"Certainly not," said Ernest Wilton; "and that's exactly what I wish to explain.  It was all
those scientific men with their hobbies that led us such a dance!  You see, it was a party
of rich people, whose time was at their own disposal, and they could do pretty nearly as they
liked.  At the very first start, it was arranged that our first point of destination should
be the Warm Springs in the centre of Oregon; and so to the Warm Springs we went.  I believe
the principal capitalist of the party thought they might be utilised for the purposes of a
Universal Bath Company, Limited, to `ablutionise'--that was his word, I assure you--the whole
world."

"Nonsense, you are joking!" said Mr Rawlings, thinking the other was trying to chaff him.

"Not a bit of it--`that's a fact,' as our American friend there would say," replied the young
Englishman, nodding in the direction of Seth Allport to show that he had already noticed his
pronunciation and mode of speech.

"All right," said Mr Rawlings.  "I can credit your financier coining the new word ablutionise;
but I can't exactly stomach the `Universal Bath Company' quite!  I am an old soldier, however;
so proceed, and I promise not to be very much surprised at any of your traveller's tales!"

"Really, I am not exaggerating at all," said Ernest Wilton.  "That ignorant purse-proud fellow
wished to start a company for almost everything we came across in our route.  I need not add
that he wasn't an American."

"No, it's only Englishmen that make themselves such fools over here," replied Mr Rawlings,
heaving a sigh, as if he thought himself one of the number for having anything to do with the
Minturne Creek venture. "If they have any bad points at home, they get them more developed
by the passage across the ocean.  What is the old Latin adage we used to learn at school--eh?"

"`Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt,'" quoted the young engineer.  "`Those who
travel abroad may change their scene of action, but can't alter their own minds.'"

"Yes, that's it," replied Mr Rawlings.  "But go on with your journey."

"Well," continued the other, "when we had done the Warm Springs, one of the scientific gentlemen,
who wanted to make soap cheap, I presume, suggested that the exploring party should proceed
to the celebrated Alkali Desert in Idaho, which I daresay you've heard of?"

"I have," answered Mr Rawlings.  "It's to the south of the Snake River, just below Boise City
and the Salmon River Mountains.  My poor cousin Ned was there a year or two prospecting, he
told me."

"Indeed!" said the young engineer.  "Then I've no doubt you liked the place as little as I
did.  And as for those Snake Indians, they're the worst lot I ever came across yet."

"They are so," said Mr Rawlings.  "Born thieves, every one--at least, I have got Ned's word
for it."

"I was grateful to them for one thing, however," said Ernest Wilton, laughing again at the
recollection.  "They so disgusted our great English company-starting capitalist that he would
come no further with us; and we were well rid of his bumptious airs and vulgarity for the rest
of the journey."

"I suppose you then came in a bee-line through Wyoming?" said Mr Rawlings.

"Oh dear, no," answered the engineer.  "We were doomed to execute a series of right-angled
triangles all through our erratic course.  From the Alkali Desert--or rather, Three Forks Camp,
which was our halting-place--we made for the Rocky Mountains, so as to reach the Yellowstone
River on this side.  And that was where we had such a terrible time of it."

"I expect so," said Mr Rawlings; "the Rocky Mountains are no joke in winter time, for they
are not easy by any means even in summer."

"We lost a lot of animals and nearly all our baggage," continued Ernest Wilton; "so when we
got to Virginia City, on the Yellowstone, the majority of our party stopped there.  I would
have stopped too, I must confess, but a very energetic scientific gentleman suggested our pushing
on, to explore some oil wells that were reported to be situated to the south of the Big Horn
range."

"I know that place well," said Mr Rawlings eagerly.  "The petroleum springs are by Poison Spring
Creek, as the Indians call it."

"Do they?" said Ernest Wilton.  "We couldn't see any creek at all; and even the scientific
gentleman got tired out, and went back to Virginia City to join the others, and recruit, before
investigating the mining districts of Montana.  I was so sick of the lot, however, that I determined
to push on to Bismark, and strike the line of the Northern Pacific, waiting till the spring
came before I undertook any further exploring work."

"And that's how you came to us?" said Mr Rawlings.

"Yes.  Two of us started to cross the Black Hills from Wyoming, along with the Indians who
engaged to guide us.  According to the map I had with me, our route would have been to strike
the north fork of the Cheyenne River, and follow it up till it emptied itself into the Missouri,
when we could have pursued the left bank of the latter due north, until it took us right into
the town of Bismark, which is, I believe, the terminus of the railway."

"Bless you! why it runs more than 100 miles farther west already," said Mr Rawlings; "and if
you wish still to communicate with your friends, who, I can perceive from your story, there
is every reason for you to be pained at your separation from, why, you'll be able to join them
in Virginia City itself, in a short trip by the cars from Bismark."

"Thanks," said Ernest Wilton, appreciating the other's sly allusion to those dear companions
of his with whom he had so little in keeping.  "As I will be within easy reach of them in case
of need, I shall be all the better pleased to remain with you, as then I'll have two strings
to my bow!  But, to finish my narrative:--the weather was so bad after we left the supposed
site of the oil wells, that we could make no headway at all; and on our arriving at Fort Phil
Kearney, which, to our mortification, was deserted, my solitary white companion, who had accompanied
me faithfully so far, turned tail with two of the remaining Indians--of the Crow tribe, of
course, rascally fellows, just like the birds from whom they are named!"

"You like those chaps," said Mr Rawlings with a smile, "dearly, eh?"

"I do `muchly,' as Artemus Ward says," responded Ernest.  "I should like to pay them out! 
But to make a long story short, with the remaining two Indian guides--who only came with me
after I promised them a small fortune on my reaching a settlement--I managed to lose my way
utterly; and then having lost the guides also, I wandered about hungry and cold until I met
your hunters amongst the mountains, when all my troubles were ended."

"Thank goodness they met you!" said Mr Rawlings cordially.  "But those Indians must have deserted,"
he continued musingly.  "They are much too knowing to have lost their way."

"Yes, I know it," said Ernest Wilton.  "They were afraid of encountering any of the Sioux,
who are near you, I think."

"Yes, too close to be pleasant," said Mr Rawlings.  "But we have not had any trouble with them
yet."

"And I hope you won't at all," responded the other with much heartiness. "Those Crow Indians
with me were continually talking about Red Cloud and Spotted Tail.  I think those were the
names of the chiefs they mentioned."

"Yes," replied Mr Rawlings, "both have Indian reservations in Dakota."

"Is that so?  I thought that might be only their yarring when they said so; but they mentioned
those two chiefs in particular, I remember now, and asserted that they intended `digging up
the hatchet,' as they termed it in their euphonious language, as soon as the spring came round!
However, I wouldn't place much credence in their statement, I assure you.  Those Crows are
such curs that they would say anything rather than venture `within measurable distance,' as
the phrase goes, of a possible enemy."  And Ernest Wilton laughed.

"I have heard some similar rumours myself," said Mr Rawlings more gravely.  "The last scout
that came here from the township, just before the winter set in regularly, brought word that
the Sioux were preparing for the war-path, or something to that effect; and, as the red men
themselves say, there is never much smoke without fire.  I hope to goodness, though, that it
is only rumour!  An Indian war is a terrible thing, my boy.  I've seen the effects of one,
years since, and never forgotten it,"--and Mr Rawlings laid his hand on Ernest Wilton's shoulder,
as if to impress his words more strongly.  "It wouldn't be pleasant for us here were another
to break out now, and we so far from the settlements."

"Isn't there a military station near this of the United States troops?" asked the young engineer.

"About a hundred miles off, or so," replied Mr Rawlings.

"Oh, that's pretty close for the backwoods!" said Ernest Wilton lightly, as he quickened his
steps to join Seth Allport, who had hailed out to the two stragglers to "hurry up," for the
"lazy lubbers" that they were; the ex-mate of the Susan Jane having awaited with some considerable
impatience, for a rather unconscionable length of time, the end of the interview between the
two Englishmen, although he was too good-hearted, and had too much good taste, to interrupt
them before he saw that their chat was finished.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWELVE.

"LOVE'S LABOUR LOST."

"Now, mister," said Seth Allport, when the young engineer closed-up to his side, "I guess you've
seed our location, and you've seed ourselves:--now, see the mine afore you.  What d'ye think
of it, hey?"

The "location" looked as favourable a one for mining purposes as it was charming to the eye;
but appearances are not everything to those who toil beneath the surface of the earth, and
so Ernest Wilton well knew.

"What strata have you passed through?" asked he of Seth.

"I s'pose yer mean the sile, don't yer?" said Seth Allport.

The young engineer nodded an affirmative reply.

"Black mould--gravel--sand and clay--black sand by itself--and then quartz reef," replied Seth,
laconically, repeating the words as if he were saying a lesson he had learnt from a book.

"And what have you got to now?" continued Ernest Wilton, pursuing his inquiry.

"Water," said Seth Allport in the same laconic way.

Ernest Wilton's face fell, albeit he had previously felt inclined to smile at the ex-mate's
queer manner and abrupt speech.

Water!  It was the cruellest, most persistent enemy with whom the miner has to deal.  Foul
air and gas can be got rid of, but water, proceeding from invisible springs, ever welling up,
and the more the quantity pumped up the greater the yield from the inexhaustible fountains
of the earth, was an opponent that could not be conquered, an enemy of the most potent powers
for ill indeed--a very vampire that sucked the blood of energy.

Delving down, day after day, with superhuman exertions, through the various strata, they had
met with no sight as yet of that rich vein of gold which they confidently hoped to encounter,
although there were occasional traces of an auriferous deposit here and there to encourage
them on, their hopes and hearts had never failed them until now.  No wonder that Ernest Wilton's
arrival was hailed as an omen of good luck; and that he was regarded by all as having arrived
"just in the nick of time" to extricate them from their difficulty!

"How long is it since you met with water?" asked the young engineer, before he descended the
shaft in order to inspect the works personally below.

Mr Rawlings answered this time, while Seth Allport and Noah Webster confirmed his statements
by their looks, which were expressive enough!

"That is a question that none of us can reply to satisfactorily."

Ernest Wilton was surprised.  He thought he had made one of the simplest inquiries possible;
and he looked his astonishment at the answer given him before he said anything more.  The idea
of a practical man, as he regarded Mr Rawlings, speaking so!

"How is that?" said he, after a pause.  "I should think you would have no trouble in telling
me?"--and he looked from Mr Rawlings to Seth Allport with some curiosity.

"Some things that appear simple enough," said Mr Rawlings somewhat pragmatically, "are more
difficult to answer, my clear fellow, than most people would think; and you ought to know that
from your engineering experience!"

"Certainly," replied the other; "but here's a mine with men working in it from day to day,
and digging through each separate stratum in turn, and knowing at the close of each day the
result of that day's labour. Surely, one would think that the day on which they struck water
they would not forget it?"

"Granted, my dear fellow," answered Mr Rawlings, who dearly loved a bit of argument when he
could come across a foeman worthy of his steel.  "I accede in toto to your premises; but your
deduction is somewhat a little too rapid, for there are other circumstances to be considered
which I have not yet brought to your notice, and which, I have no doubt, will alter your decision."

"By Jove!" said Ernest Wilton, with a laugh, "I must treat it as a conundrum, and give it up.
I am certain that I cannot solve it."

"Stop a minute," said Mr Rawlings, "and you'll soon see how it is. During the winter we had
a hard time of it to keep the roof of our house over our head, let alone preserving the mine
in working order!  The snow, the ice, the stormy gales, that seem to haunt the vicinity of
the Rocky Mountains and their outlying ranges, each in turn assailed us: and then, on the melting
of the snow at the first breath of approaching spring, the floods, which were the most virulent
antagonists with whom we had to grapple, almost overwhelmed us!  There was `water, water everywhere,'
as Coleridge says in his `Ancient Mariner.'  The whole valley, almost as far as you can see,
was one vast foaming torrent, that bore down all our puny protections in the shape of ramparts
and stockades.  It nearly swept away our rough dwelling bodily; it did more, it demolished
the dam we had erected across the gulch just there,"-- pointing to the spot as he spoke--"and
wrecked the heading of the shaft, filling the mine as a matter of course."

"And up to then, in spite of all your digging, you had met with no water?" asked Ernest Wilton.
"Was that so?"

"Not a drop, which I very much wondered at, considering that we are almost in the centre of
the tributaries of the Cheyenne and Missouri-- any number of tiny streams rising amongst these
hills, and gaining additional body as they proceed onward to join the greater rivers from fresh
sources that cross their course at different angles."

"And after the floods?"

"Why, we set to work like men, I can tell you:--Seth, there, will bear me out."

"We did so, sirree," said that worthy, with a most emphatic nod.

"Yes," continued Mr Rawlings, "we first renovated the dam, and dug out a channel for the overplus
of water on either side of the shaft; and then we started pumping out the mine."

"An' it were a job!" said Seth, taking up the thread of the story. "I've been in a vessel as
sprung a leak, and where the hands were pumping day and night, with nary a spell off, so as
to kip a plank atween us and the bottom of Davy Jones's looker; but, never, in all my born
days, have I seed sich pumpin' as went on in that thaar week!"

"As Seth says," resumed Mr Rawlings, "we were like mariners pumping at the hold of a water-logged
ship, as if for life.  We pumped, and pumped, and pumped; but, in spite of all our efforts,
only succeeded in just keeping the enemy in check, that's all."

"Can't get the mine dry, eh?"

"No, not for any length of time.  What we gain in the day, we lose again at night.  In concise
terms, I may put it, that by keeping the hose constantly at work, which of course interrupts
the progress of excavation, we barely manage to hold our own, neither gaining nor losing an inch."

"That's a bad lookout!" said Ernest Wilton, shaking his head.

It was.  It meant ruin to all their hopes and expectations; the inglorious end of the expedition;
the sacrifice of all their toil and perseverance throughout those terribly arduous winter months;
their waste of energy in struggling with the powers of nature.  It meant all that, and more!

Such a state of things would never do to last.

Difficulties were only made for men to overcome, according to the maxim which had hitherto
guided Mr Rawlings and Seth Allport, and which they had preached to the more faint-hearted
members of their party; and, Ernest Wilton was a thorough disciple of their creed, for he was
not one to be daunted by obstacles, no matter how grievous and apparently insurmountable they
were;--no, not he.

The young engineer went down the mine to look for himself, and to form his own opinion as to
what was best to be done in the emergency.

He went down looking grave enough, but he returned with a more hopeful expression on his face,
which at once cheered up the somewhat despondent spirits of those awaiting him above--for he
preferred descending alone.

"Well?" inquired Mr Rawlings, interrogatively.

"It might be worse," said the young engineer smiling.

"That sounds good," said Seth Allport, his countenance, which had previously been grimmer than
ever, beaming over its whole expanse, as if the sun was trying to shine through overhanging
clouds and fog.  Seth's phiz was as expressive as a barometer any clay.

"I think I see a way out of the difficulty," said Ernest Wilton to ease their anxiety, which
he could readily sympathise with after what he had seen.

"I am sure you would not say so unless you had some hopes of its success," said Mr Rawlings,
whom the good news seemed to affect more than all the previous trials had done, for he looked
quite pale, and almost trembled with eagerness as he questioned the bearer of the welcome tidings.

"No," said Ernest Wilton joyously, for he was very glad to be able to communicate the intelligence
to those who had succoured him in his own distress, and now appealed to him for assistance.
"There's a chance for the mine yet; and you need not despair of having spent your toil in vain."

"Bully for you!" exclaimed Seth Allport.  "Didn't I say now--ask anybody present if I didn't
anyhow--that you'd brought us good luck?"

"I rejoice to hear you say so," said Mr Rawlings, a little more calmly, although his whole
fortune had been at stake, as it were; for if the mine had turned out a failure he would have
been ruined, and had to begin the world over again.  "It would have been hard that all our
labour should have gone for nothing."

"Well, my dear sir," said Ernest Wilton cheerfully, "you need not complain now.  It is not
a case with you of `Love's labour lost,' as in Shakespeare's play of that title."

STORY ONE, CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

COUNTERMINING.

"What do you think of doing?" asked Mr Rawlings, drawing a long breath of relief on hearing
Ernest Wilton's cheering words.  "We have tried almost everything to stop the flow of water
and failed--Seth and I; and although you appear so sanguine, I hardly see what can be done,
myself." And he sighed again, as if he were returning to his previous state of despondency.

"Did you ever hear the old Irish saying that `there's more ways of killing a pig besides hanging
him?'" asked Ernest Wilton, instead of answering the other's question at once.

"Yes," laughingly replied Mr Rawlings.

"Then," said the young engineer, "I am going to carry that precept into practice regarding
your mine."

"How?"

"You have tried pumping without avail, have you not?" said Ernest Wilton.

"That's a fact," said Seth Allport, with the full power of his down-east nasal intonation.
"Yer couldn't hit nearer the mark than thaat, I guess, sirree."

"And you could never get the water lower than fifty feet off the bottom of the shaft?" pursued
the young engineer, stating his case, "could you?"

"No, not a foot lower," said Mr Rawlings.

"Then what think you of a countermine?"

"I don't quite understand you," said Mr Rawlings.

"Don't you?" said Ernest Wilton, smiling, "and yet it is easy enough to answer, as you told
me just now, when I wondered how you did not know when the water came into the shaft."

"Pray explain," replied Mr Rawlings.  "I didn't keep you in suspense, you know, when you confessed
your inability to answer the question."

"No," said the other, "and I'll treat you as fairly now.  You see, at present there is only
an intervening wall, of about one hundred yards in gross thickness, dividing the shaft from
the channel of the gulch outside.  The upper part of the stratum is mere gravel, for as you
found, in winter the river extends beyond the point where you are sinking.  Judging by the
eye, I should say that the mouth of the shaft is twenty feet above the level of the water in
the river.  So far you would naturally find no water.  When you began work the water in the
river must have been ten feet at least lower than it is at present, consequently it was no
higher than the solid rock where you began to work down in the quartz.  So long as the river
was below that level you naturally would meet with no water whatever, however deep you might
sink, but directly it rose so that it was higher than the level of the rock, it would penetrate
through the gravel like a sieve, and will fill your shaft as fast as you can pump it out. 
Gradually the river will sink as the dry season comes on, and in the autumn will be again below
the level of the rock.  You can't wait for that, and must therefore carry your shaft from the
top of the bed rock to the level of the water in the stream, say twelve-feet in all, but of
course we will get the levels accurately."

"That sounds right," Seth nodded approvingly.  "What's go ter be done?"

"The job is by no means a difficult one," Ernest Wilton answered.  "In the first place, we
must widen the shaft by a foot down to the level of the rock, that will give six inches all
round.  Then we must square off and level the top of the rock, which will then be a level shaft
six inches wide all round.  While you are doing this we must make a drum ready.  That is easily
made.  We must make four circular frameworks, fasten twelve-feet planks, carefully fitted together,
and pitched outside them so as to make it perfectly water-tight.  We ought to have a layer
of hydraulic lime or cement laid on the rock for the drum to rest on; but if we have not got
them, some well-puddled clay will do as well. Then when the drum is in position in the shaft
of rock, its upper end will be higher than the level of the water in the river, and if the
rock is compact and free from fissures we shall be perfectly dry however deep we may sink.
How are you off for strong planks?  They must be strong to resist the pressure of the water
and gravel."

"I fear that we have no planks of that thickness whatever," Mr Rawlings said.  "We only brought
enough timber for the scaffolding over the mine, and a little for framework if it wanted lining.
You see, we did line it down to the rock.  I think we have one balk of nine-inch timber left."

"Let us measure it and see how many two-inch planks it will make."

It was thirty-two feet long.  Eight feet was therefore useless for planks, but would come in
for the framework.  Twenty-four feet would make eight planks of a little over two inches thick,
nine inches wide, and twelve-feet long.

"This is less than a fifth of what we require," Ernest Wilton said. "The shaft is eight feet
in diameter, so we shall need some thirty-two nine-inch planks.  However, there are trees about,
not very large and not very high, but big enough to get one or two nine-inch planks twelve-feet
long from each.  The first thing to do is to get a supply of them."

"And you feel quite sure that by lining this portion of the mine with a drum, as you describe,
we shall get over our difficulty with the water?" Mr Rawlings said.

"Quite sure," Ernest Wilton replied; "providing always that the rock is solid."

"Then it's as good as done," Seth said emphatically.  "You have put us on the right track,
Wilton, and we'll carry it through.  I never thought about the river, and kept on wondering
why that darned gravel kept letting the water through when it was as dry as bones when we drove
through it."

While the preparations were being made and parties scouring the country for timber the young
engineer bent his mind to the task of inventing some better mode of getting rid of the water
than by manual labour--the mine being sadly deficient in a lot of necessary gear, besides steam-power,
as Ernest Wilton had quickly perceived, although he had refrained from commenting on the fact.

"You see," said Mr Rawlings, in apology, "I undertook too big an enterprise with the little
capital I had: and, consequently, have been unable to work it properly.  Indeed," he continued
confidentially, "if we don't hit upon a good lead soon I shall have to give up, for my funds
now will hardly suffice to pay the hands what I promised them; and if we continue working,
I should have to get more stores and planks, and lots of things, which I certainly cannot afford
unless we strike visible gold."

"I have a few hundred dollars of my own--" began Ernest; but Mr Rawlings stopped him at once.

"No, no, my dear fellow," said he impulsively, "your natural kindness of heart shall not lead
you into throwing away your hard-earned money on my venture.  I shall sink or swim on my own
bottom, as the saying goes, although I thank you sincerely all the same.  But about the mine,"
he continued, veering away from the delicate subject, "I'm sorry we haven't got a steam-engine;
but that was all Seth's fault.  He would believe that a mine could be pumped out as easily
as a vessel's bilge."

"That's me," said Seth, not a whit annoyed at the imputation.  "I hate them donkey enjines.
They mostly chokes the pumps, and I'd liefer any day have hand gear an' a decent crew to clear
ship with."

"Well, whether you like it better or not," said Ernest Wilton, with good humour and good sense
combined, "you haven't one, and we'll have to make the best of a bad bargain."

"That's so!" said Seth, with much satisfaction apparently.

"And that being the case," continued the young engineer, "we'll teach our enemy to beat itself,
or in other words, make water fight water."

"Jerusalem!" exclaimed Seth admiringly.  "How on airth will you get to do that, mister?"

"Look before you," said Ernest Wilton, pointing to the foaming stream that was dashing along
the valley.  "Look at the waste of energy there! Why, with a good undershot wheel that water-power
is worth more than a hundred additional hands at the pumps."

If Seth had looked at the speaker admiringly before, no words could express his pleased astonishment
now.  He seemed to glow all over with gratification.

"I'm jiggered!" he ejaculated, gazing at Ernest Wilton from the tip of his boots to the top
of his head.  "You air a screamer, an' no mistake!"

Even Mr Rawlings, generally so sedate of demeanour, in contrast to Seth Allport, who usually
went into extremes, became enthusiastic.

"My dear boy," said he, grasping both of Ernest's hands and shaking them with much heartiness,
"you'll be the making of us all."

"I shall try to be," said the young engineer; "for I certainly don't intend to be content with
merely clearing the mine of water.  You don't know half the value of your property yet; why,
that quartz there," waving his hand towards a heap of the debris that had been extracted from
the shaft and cast aside as waste, "if passed through a crushing mill would yield a handsome
premium."

"I know," said Mr Rawlings sadly.  "But I couldn't afford the machinery."

"We'll soon manufacture it, with a little help from the nearest town, where we can get some
of the articles we can't make," said Ernest Wilton sanguinely; "we've got the power to drive
the machinery, and that's the main thing, my dear sir.  We'll soon manage the rest."

"I'm sure I hope so," replied Mr Rawlings; but he had received such a chock from the mine already,
on account of its turning out so differently to his expectations, that he could not feel sanguine
all at once, like the young engineer who had not experienced those weary months of waiting
and hope deferred, as he had.

Not so Seth, however.  His tone of mind was very opposite to that of Mr Rawlings.

The ex-mate was as confident of their success now as when they had started from Boston, before
he or the rest knew the perils and arduous toil they would have to undergo.  All those trials
vanished as if by magic from his memory, as quickly as the winter snow was now melting away
from the landscape around them, and he thought he could see the golden future right in front
of his mental gaze, all obstacles being cleared away in a moment by Ernest Wilton's hopeful words.

"Hooray, Rawlings!" he exclaimed excitedly, twirling his "cheese-cutter" cap round his head,
and executing a sort of hop, skip, and jump of delight.  "The Britisher's the boy for us! 
I guess we'll strike ile now, and no flies, you bet, sirree!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A HAPPY HUNTING-GROUND.

Within a few days after Ernest Wilton had joined the miners of Minturne Creek, the winter seemed
to vanish away at once, the "chinook wind" coming with its warm breath from the Pacific through
the gaps and passes of the Rocky Mountains far-away to the west, and dissolving the last remaining
evidences of Jack Frost's handiwork.

The region of the Black Hills, as the young engineer had now the opportunity of observing,
as the mountains and valleys shook off their snowy mantle and became clothed anew in the fresh
green verdure of spring, is one of the most picturesque in the States, partaking alike of the
lofty grandeur and rough magnificence of the sierras of the north, and the spreading landscape
features to be met with in the middle of the continent adjacent to the watersheds of the Missouri
and Mississippi, where the open country extends like a panorama on either side for miles.

The Black Hills proper partly lie in Dakota, occupying the south-west extremity of that state,
and partly in Wyoming, and are almost encircled by the Cheyenne river, the principal fork of
that stream extending in a curve right round the northern limit of the region, to where it
joins the lesser tributary, which similarly skirts the southern side of the hills.  On the
north-east, the two branches then unite in one large river, styled by way of contrast "The
Big Cheyenne," which ultimately falls into the vast rolling tide of the Missouri, some hundred
miles further on due east, at a place called Fort Bennett.

The branches of the Cheyenne are not the only streams of the region, for many others, some
of considerable dimensions and volume, and others mere tiny brooklets, wander in every direction
through the country.  The Black Hills are divided from the adjacent prairie by a series of
valleys some two to three miles across; while, away back from the more elevated points, the
land rolls off into a series of undulating plains, covered with grasses of every hue, and timbered
along the banks of the rivers that transect them with the useful cottonwood tree, the ash and
the pine, mingled with occasional thickets of willow and the wild cherry, and briars and brushwood
of every description.

The operation of timbering the shaft making satisfactory progress, and Ernest Wilton's water-wheel,
that was to do such wonders, having been "got well under weigh," as Seth expressed it, the
chief members of the party determined to have an "outing" into the open land lying beyond their
own especial valley, in search of game; for the cry for fresh meat had again arisen in the
camp and urged them on to fresh exertions to supply the larder, quite apart from their own
inclinations to have another day off the dreary work of the mine, which seemed to fall most
upon Mr Rawlings and Seth, as it was at their mutual suggestion that they went a "hunting,"--as
a shooting expedition is termed in the New World.

Having so determined, they carried their determination into effect, and started.

"I should think you had plenty of game here?" said Ernest Wilton, when they had left Minturne
Creek some distance behind them, and entered upon an extensive prairie, that stretched before
them, in waves of grass as far as the eye could reach, to the horizon.

"I should think so," said Mr Rawlings.  "Why, it swarms with it."

"What sort?" asked the other.  "Any deer?"

"Every variety you can almost mention.  Deer, elk, moose--although these are to be found more
to the northwards--antelope, mountain-sheep--as you know already--grizzly bears--if you relish
such customers--and buffalo as soon as the sweet summer grasses crop up here, and the pasturage
to the south loses its flavour for them."

"That's a pretty good catalogue," said Ernest, who was a keen sportsman. "Any birds?"

"The most uncommon slap-up flying game, I guess, in creation," said Seth, "if yer cares to
tackle with sich like; though I prefers runnin' game, I does."

"Seth is right," said Mr Rawlings; "you will have a varied choice there likewise: grouse, partridge,
prairie-fowl, wild geese, ducks--these two, however, are more to be met with in the winter
months, and will be off to the Arctic regions soon--all sorts, in fact.  And as to fishing,
the salmon and trout--the latter of which you'll find in every stream in the neighbourhood--beat
those of England."

"Well," said Ernest, laughing, "if your report be true, as I see no reason to doubt, you must
have discovered those happy hunting-grounds to which all good Indians go when they die."

"Don't talk of Injuns," said Seth with a shiver and a shake.  "That's the worst part of the
hull thing, I reckon.  If it warn't for them, the place would be a kinder paradise--it would
so, sirree; but those Injuns spile it all."

"What he says is true enough," observed Mr Rawlings.  "We are in the very heart of the Indian
country, with Blackfeet, Crows, and Sioux, not to mention lesser fry, within striking distance;
and if there should be a rising amongst them, as it is threatened this spring or summer, it
would be a bad thing for the people in the sparse and scattered settlements in Dakota."

"But the United States' army has stations about here, eh?" inquired Ernest.

"Few and far between," replied Mr Rawlings.  "As I told you some little time since, the nearest
one to us is at least a hundred miles away. Besides that, the detachments quartered here and
there are so attenuated in their numbers that five or six of the so-called companies have to
be concentred together from the different outlying depots in order to muster any respectable
contingent that could take the field against the Indians should they rise in force."

"An' them Sioux under Spotted Cloud, or whatever else they call their precious chief, ain't
to be despised, I guess, in a free fight," said Seth.

"Pray don't talk any more about them," said the young engineer, laughing, as he took off his
wideawake and ran his fingers through his curly brown hair.  "I declare my scalp feels quite
ticklish already."

"Them redskins 'ud tickle it a sight worse if they got holt of it," said Seth grimly, cocking
his rifle as he spoke.  "But I reckon I heerd somethin' russlin' about thaar to the back of
yer, mister," he added suddenly, gazing intently in the direction he had intimated, to the
rear of the young engineer, where the prairie-grass had already grown to some height.

"What was it?" said Mr Rawlings, likewise preparing his weapon, and telling Ernest to follow
suit.  "Did you see it at all?"

And he peered anxiously about to the right and left.

"Yes, jist for a minnit," responded the ex-mate.  "It wer a longish sorter animale; a catamount
or a wolf, maybe.  Thaar!  Thaar!  I seed it again!  Jerusalem!  I have it!" 

A fair one, Allah had a mind t' extinguish from his cheek One ravishment, and straight, instead,
another sprang to light. Whenas my censors speak of him, I cavil at their word, Feigning as if
I did mislike the mention of the wight; Yea, and I hearken, when
they speak of other than of him, Though for the thought of him, nathelesse,
I am consumed outright.

Prophet of beauty, all in him 's a very miracle Of grace, and greatest of them all his face's splendid
sight. The sable mole upon his cheek hath taken up its stead, Against the troubles of this life
to ward his forehead bright. The censors, of their ignorance, bid
me forget; but I From true- believer cannot turn an infidel forthright.

We

were ravished by the sweet music she made and the beauty of the verses she sang and the other damsels
went on to sing, one after another, till ten had done so; when the lady Dunya took the lute
and playing a lively measure, sang these verses:

By the softness
of thy graceful-gaited shape I swear, For estrangement from thy presence
the pangs of hell I bear.

Have pity on a heart that burns i' the hell-fire of thy love, O full moon in the darkness of
the night that shinest fair!

Vouchsafe to me thy favours, and by the wine-cup's light To blazon forth thy beauties, henceforth,
I'll never spare. A rose hath ta'en me captive, whose colours varied are, Whose charms outvie
the myrtle and make its thorns despair.

When she had finished, I took the lute and playing a quaint prelude, sang the following verses:

Glory to Him who gave thee all beauty in earth and skies So I'm become of thy bondsmen for ever and
thy prize.

Thou that art gifted with glances that make mankind thy slaves, Pray
we may come off scathless from the sorcery of thine eyes.

Two opposites, fire, incarnate in shining splendour of flame, And water, thy cheek uniteth,
conjoined in wondrous wise. How dulcet and yet how bitter thou art to my heart, alack! To which
thou at once and ever art Hell and Paradise!

When she heard this, she rejoiced with an exceeding joy; then, dismissing
her women, she brought me to a most goodly place, where they had spread
us a bed of various colours.

She did off her clothes and I had a lover's privacy of her and found her an unpierced pearl and a
filly no man had ridden. So I rejoiced in her and repeated the following verses:

Stay with us, Night, I prithee! I want no morning white; The face of my beloved sufficeth me for
light. I gave my love, for chin-band, my palm spread open wide And eke for ringdove's collar,
my arms about him dight. This is indeed th' attainment of fortune's topmost height! We clip
and clip and care not to stir from our delight.

Never in my life knew I a more delightful night than this, and I abode with her a whole month,
forsaking shop and home and family, till one day she said to me,
"O light of my eyes, O my lord Mohammed, I have a mind to go to the
bath to-day; so sit thou on this couch and budge not from thy place,
till I return to thee."

"I hear and obey," answered I, and she made me swear to this; after
which she took her women and went off to the bath.

But, by Allah, O my brothers, she had not reached the end of the street, when the door opened
and in came an old woman, who said to me, "O my lord Mohammed, the lady Zubeideh bids thee
to her, for she hath heard of thine elegance and accomplishments and skill in singing." "By
Allah," answered I, "I will not rise from my place, till the lady
Dunya come back."

"O my lord," rejoined the old woman, "do not anger the lady Zubeideh with thee and make an enemy
of her. Come, speak with her and return to thy place."

So I rose and followed her into the presence of the princess, who said to me, "O light of the eye,
art thou the lady Dunya's beloved?" "At thy service," answered I. Quoth she, "He spoke sooth who
reported thee possessed of grace and beauty and good breeding and
all good qualities; indeed, thou surpassest report; but now sing to
me, that I may hear thee."

"I hear and obey," answered I. So she brought me a lute, and I sang the following verses:

The heart of the lover is weary with loving and striving in vain,
And even as a spoil is his body in the hands of sickness and pain.

Who should there be, 'mongst the riders on camels with haltered head, Save a lover whose dear-beloved
the camel-litters contain! A moon, in your tents that rises, to Allah I commend, One my heart
loves and tenders, shut in from the sight of her swain. Anon she is kind, anon angry: how goodly
her coquetry is!

For all that is done of a loved one must needs to her lover be fain.

When I had finished, she said to me, "God assain thy body and sweeten thy voice! Verily, thou
art perfect in beauty and good breeding and singing. But now rise and return to thy place, ere the
lady Dunya come back, lest she find thee not and he wroth with thee." So I kissed the earth before
her and the old woman forewent me to the door whence I came. I entered and going up to the couch,
found that my wife had come back and was lying asleep there.

So I sat down at her feet and rubbed them; whereupon she opened her eyes and seeing me, drew
up her feet and gave me a kick that threw me off the couch, saying, "O traitor, thou hast
been false to thine oath and hast perjured thyself. Thou sworest to me that thou wouldst not
stir from thy place; yet didst thou break thy promise and go to the
lady Zubeideh.

By Allah, but that I fear scandal, I would pull down the palace over
her head!"

Then said she to her black slave, "Harkye, Sewab, arise and strike off this lying traitor's
head, for we have no further need of him." So the slave came up to me and tearing a strip from
his skirt, bound my eyes with it and would have cut off my head; but all her women, great and
small, came up to her and said to her, "O our lady, this is not the first who hath erred: indeed,
he knew not thy humour and hath done nothing deserving of death." "By Allah," replied she,
"I must needs set my mark on him." And she bade beat me; so they beat me on my sides, and the
marks ye saw are the scars of that beating. Then she bade them put me out, and they carried
me to a distance from the house and cast me down.

I rose and dragged myself little by little to my own house, where
I sent for a surgeon, who dressed my wounds and comforted me.

As soon as I was recovered and my pains and sickness had left me, I went to the bath and thence
betaking myself to my shop, sold all that was therein. With the proceeds, I bought four hundred
white slaves, such as no king ever got together, and caused two hundred of them ride out with
me every day.

Then I made me yonder barge, on which I spent five thousand dinars,
and styled myself Khalif and appointed each of my servants to the
charge and clad him in the habit of some one of the Khalif's officers.

Moreover, I let cry abroad, "Whoso goeth a-pleasuring on the Tigris
[by night], I will strike off his head without mercy;" and on this
wise have I done this whole year past, during which time I have heard
no news of the lady neither happened upon any trace of her.' And he
wept copiously and repeated the following verses:

By Allah, I will
never all my life long forget her, my dear; And those only will I
tender, who shall bring her to me to draw near.

Now glory to her Maker and Creator be given evermore! As the full moon in the heavens, in
her aspect and her gait she doth appear. She, indeed, hath made me weariful and wakeful, full
of sorrow, sick for love; Yea, my heart is all confounded at her beauty, dazed for trouble
and for fear.

When Er Reshid heard the young man's story and knew the passion and
transport and love-longing that afflicted him, he was moved to compassion
and wonder and said, 'Glory be to God who hath appointed to every
thing a cause!' Than they craved the young man's leave to depart;
which being granted, they took leave of him, the Khalif purposing
to do him justice and entreat him with the utmost munificence, and
returned to the palace of the Khalifate, where they changed their
clothes for others befitting their station and sat down, whilst Mesrour
stood before them.

After awhile, the Khalif said to Jaafer, 'O Vizier, bring me the young man with whom we were
last night.' 'I hear and obey,' answered Jaafer, and going to the youth, saluted him, saying,
'The Commander of the Faithful calls for thee.' So he returned with
him to the palace, in great concern by reason of the summons, and
going in to the Khalif, kissed the earth before him.

Then said he, 'Peace be on thee, O Commander of the Faithful and Protector of the people of
the Faith!' And offered up a prayer for the endurance of his glory and prosperity, for the accomplishment
of his desires and the continuance of his bounty and the cessation of evil and punishment, ordering
his speech as best he might and ending by repeating the following
verses:

Still may thy threshold as a place of adoration[FN#149] Be
sought and on men's brows its dust bespeak prostration, That so in
every land be made this proclamation, "Thou, thou art Abraham and
this his very station."[FN#150]

The Khalif smiled in his face and
returned his salute, looking on him with the eye of favour.

Then he bade him draw near and sit down before him and said to him, 'O Mohammed Ali, I wish thee to
tell me what befell thee last night, for it was rare and passing strange.' 'Pardon, O Commander
of the Faithful!' replied the youth. 'Give me the handkerchief of immunity, that my trouble
may be appeased and my heart set at rest.' Quoth the Khalif, 'Thou art safe from fear and trouble.'
So the young man told him his story from first to last, whereby the Khalif knew him to be
a lover and severed from his beloved and said to him, 'Wilt thou that I restore her to thee?'
'This were of the bounty of the Commander of the Faithful,' answered the youth and repeated the
following verses:

Kiss thou his finger-tips, for no mere fingers they, But keys to all the goods by God to men assigned;
And praise his deeds no less, for no mere deeds are they, But jewels to adorn the necks of
humankind.

Thereupon the Khalif turned to Jaafer and said to him, 'Bring me thy sister the lady Dunya.' 'I
hear and obey,' answered he and fetched her forthright. When she stood before the Khalif, he said
to her, 'Dost thou know who this is?' 'O Commander of the Faithful,' answered she, 'how should women
have knowledge of men?' The Khalif smiled and said, 'O Dunya, this
is thy beloved, Mohammed ben Ali the jeweller.

We are acquainted with his case, for we have heard the whole story, from beginning to end,
and apprehended its inward and its outward; and it is no more hidden, for all it was kept secret.'
'O Commander of the Faithful,' rejoined she, 'this was written in the book of destiny. I crave
the forgiveness of the Most High God for that which I have done and beseech thee to pardon me
of thy favour.' At this the Khalif laughed and summoning the Cadi
and the witnesses, renewed the marriage-contract between Dunya and
her husband, whereby there betided them the utmost of felicity and
those who envied them were mortified.

Moreover, he made Mohammed Ali one of his boon- companions, and they abode in joy and cheer and gladness,
till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies.

ALI THE PERSIAN'S STORY OF THE KURD SHARPER

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid, being more than commonly restless one night, sent for his Vizier
and said to him, 'O Jaafer, I am sore wakeful and heavy at heart
to-night, and I desire of thee what may cheer my spirit and ease me
of my oppression.' 'O Commander of the Faithful,' answered Jaafer,
'I have a friend, by name Ali the Persian, who hath store of tales
and pleasant stories, such as lighten the heart and do away care.'
'Fetch him to me,' said the Khalif.

'I hear and obey,' replied Jaafer and going out from before him, sent for Ali the Persian and
said to him, 'The Commander of the Faithful calls for thee.' 'I hear and obey,' answered Ali
and followed the Vizier into the presence of the Khalif, who bade him be seated and said to him,
'O Ali, my heart is heavy within me this night and I hear that thou hast great store of tales and
anecdotes; so I desire of thee that thou let me hear what will relieve my oppression and gladden
my melancholy.' 'O Commander of the Faithful,' said he, 'shall I tell thee what I have seen with
my eyes or what I have heard with my ears?' 'An thou have seen aught [worth telling],' replied
the Khalif, 'let me hear that.' 'Know then, O Commander of the Faithful,'
said Ali, 'that some years ago I left this my native city of Baghdad
on a journey, having with me a boy who carried a light wallet.

Presently, we came to a certain city, where, as I was buying and selling, a rascally thief of a
Kurd fell on me and seized my wallet, saying, "This is my bag, and all that is in it is my property."
Thereupon, "Ho, Muslims all," cried I, "deliver me from the hand of the vilest of oppressors!"
But they all said, "Come, both of you, to the Cadi and submit yourselves to his judgement."
I agreed to this and we both presented ourselves before the Cadi, who said, "What brings you
hither and what is your case?" Quoth I, "We are men at difference, who appeal to thee and submit
ourselves to thy judgement."

"Which of you is the complainant?" asked the Cadi. So the Kurd came forward and said, "God
preserve our lord the Cadi! Verily, this bag is my bag and all that is in it is my property. It was
lost from me and I found it with this man." "When didst thou lose it?" asked the Cadi. "But yesterday,"
replied the Kurd; "and I passed a sleepless night by reason of its
loss."

"If it be thy bag," said the Cadi, "tell me what is in it."

Quoth the Kurd, "There were in my bag two silver styles and eye-powders and a handkerchief,
and I had laid therein two gilt cups and two candlesticks. Moreover it contained two tents
and two platters and two hooks and a cushion and two leather rugs and two ewers and a brass tray and
two basins and a cooking-pot and two water-jars and a ladle and a sacking-needle and a she-cat
and two bitches[FN#151] and a wooden trencher and two sacks and two saddles and a gown and two
fur pelisses and a cow and two calves and a she-goat and two sheep and an ewe and two lambs
and two green pavilions and a camel and two she-camels and a she-buffalo
and two bulls and a lioness and two lions and a she-bear and two foxes
and a mattress and two couches and an upper chamber and two saloons
and a portico and two ante-rooms and a kitchen with two doors and
a company of Kurds who will testify that the bag is mine."

Then said the Cadi to me, "And thou, what sayst thou?" So I came forward, O Commander of the
Faithful (and indeed the Kurd's speech had bewildered me) and said, "God advance our lord the
Cadi! There was nothing in this my wallet, save a little ruined house and another without a
door and a dog-kennel and a boys' school and youths playing dice and tents and tent-poles and
the cities of Bassora and Baghdad and the palace of Sheddad ben Aad[FN#152] and a smith's forge
and a fishing net and cudgels and pickets and girls and boys and a thousand pimps, who will testify
that the bag is my bag." When the Kurd heard my words, he wept and wailed and said, "O my lord
the Cadi, my bag is known and what is in it is renowned; therein are castles and citadels and
cranes and beasts of prey and men playing chess and draughts. Moreover, in this my bag is a
brood-mare and two colts and a stallion and two blood-horses and two long lances and a lion
and two hares and a city and two villages and a courtezan and two
sharking pimps and a catamite and two gallows-birds and a blind man
and two dogs and a cripple and two lameters and a priest and two deacons
and a patriarch and two monks and a Cadi and two assessors, who will
testify that the bag is my bag."

Quoth the Cadi to me, "And what sayst thou, O Ali?" So, O Commander of the Faithful, being
filled with rage, I came forward and said, "God keep our lord the Cadi!


"Very good," said Mr Rawlings; "please yourself.  You go that way, and I'll go this, and the
sooner we separate and each follow his own course, the better chance of sport we'll have. 
Only, mind, Wilton, don't you shoot poor Seth and Sailor Bill at one discharge of your rifle,
the same as you did those three mountain-sheep the other day, eh?"

And Mr Rawlings chuckled as he strolled off up stream with the negro.

"And don't you bring down Jasper under the idea he's a blackbird," retorted Ernest Wilton before
Mr Rawlings had got out of earshot, as he started down the river-bank with Wolf following closely
at his heels, in the manner befitting well-trained dogs of high degree like himself.

Then followed a long silence, only broken, as far as each hunter was concerned, by the rustling
of leaves and trampling of twigs as he pursued his way through the thick undergrowth, pausing
every moment to examine the ground beneath his feet and the thickets he encountered, in search
of deer tracks to and from the water, and giving an occasional glimpse at the prairie beyond
when the trees opened a bit and their branches lifted enough to afford a view of the surrounding
country, which only happened now and then, as vegetation was vigorous along both banks of the
river.

Mr Rawlings, it may be mentioned before going any further, was decidedly unlucky in his quest,
not catching sight of a single moving creature, although the fact must be taken into consideration
that the direction he took was somewhat over the same ground that the whole party had already
traversed, and that whatever game might have been in the vicinity, must have been pretty well
nearly scared away before he tried his sportsman's cunning alone; Ernest Wilton, however, was
more successful.

Shortly after parting from Mr Rawlings and Jasper, as he was creeping stealthily through the
tall prairie-grass that bordered the grove of fine trees along the bank of the river, with
Wolf following closely behind him, he noticed suddenly a movement in the undergrowth amidst
the timber, just like the branch of a tree being moved slowly up and down.

Watching the spot carefully, he subsequently thought he could distinguish two little round
objects that glared like the eyes of some animal; so aiming steadily between these latter,
after a brief pause he fired.

His suspicions proved correct; for, almost at the same instant that the report of his rifle
rang out in the clear air, a magnificent wapiti stag, with wide branching antlers, leaped from
the covert, and bounded across his line of sight towards the hills on the right; although from
the halting motion of the animal he could see that his shot had taken effect.

"At him, Wolf!" cried he to the dog.  But Wolf did not require any command or encouragement
from his master: he knew well enough what to do.

Quick as lightning, as soon as the wounded stag had jumped out from amidst the brushwood the
dog leaped after him, and, in a few strides, was at his quarters.  The chase was not of very
long duration, for Ernest's bullet had touched some vital spot; and, within a hundred yards
of where he had been struck, the wapiti dropped on his knees, made a faint attempt to stagger
again to his feet, and an equally unsuccessful effort to gore Wolf, who wisely kept without
his reach; and then, with a convulsive tremor running over all his vast frame, fell over on
his side, dead!

"Hurrah!" shouted Ernest, so loudly that Mr Rawlings, who was not very far off, heard his shout
as well as Wolf's deep baying, and was soon on the spot, where mutual congratulations were
exchanged at the noble game the young engineer had brought down so unexpectedly.

"Golly, massa!" exclaimed Jasper, his face expanding into one of his customary huge grins that
seemed to be "all ivory and eye-balls," as Seth used to say--"why, um will serb de camp in
meat um whole week!"

"You're not far wrong," said Mr Rawlings, as he surveyed the heavy carcase of the wapiti, which
was as big as an ordinary-sized pony, with a splendid pair of branching antlers; "and you'll
have to go back and fetch the small waggon and a team of mules, Jasper, to take it home. It's
a very fine animal, Wilton," he continued, turning to the latter, "and I almost envy you your
shot!"

The young engineer made some chaffing answer, ascribing the credit of taking the game to Wolf,
who stood panting guard over his prostrate prey, when the attention of both Mr Rawlings and
himself was suddenly distracted from all thoughts of hunting, and everything pertaining to
it, by the faint echo of a rifle-shot in the distance, again followed rapidly by another; and
then, immediately afterwards, the sound of Seth Allport's voice appealing to them for aid,
in ringing accents that rose above the report of the last shot.

"Help!  Ahoy, there! help!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

SAILOR BILL CAPTURED.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Mr Rawlings, as he and Ernest Wilton looked at one another for a
second in blank consternation--"I hope nothing serious has happened!"  And he was just about
to dash into the river and wade across to the other side, in the direction from whence Seth's
shout for succour came, when the young engineer stopped him.

"You'd better wait a minute," said Ernest.  "The prairie is a wide place, and sounds seem to
come from one point when in reality they emanate from an entirely different spot; so, in hurrying
thus to Seth's assistance, you may take the longest way to reach him.  Let us return to the
place where he and the boy crossed the stream; and, as soon as we reach the other bank opposite
and find their track I'll put Wolf on the scent, and we'll come up with them much more quickly
than you could do by crossing here and spending some time perhaps in hunting about in the brushwood
over there before you could find any trace of his footsteps."

"You're right," said Mr Rawlings.  "Two heads are better than one. But, pray lose no time about
it," he added, as Seth's call was again heard, sounding more loudly than before--

"Help! ahoy, there!  Help!"

The path back to where the entire party had halted on the bank of the river before separating,
according to Mr Rawlings' suggestion, was not difficult to trace.  Then, fording the stream
at the point where Seth and Sailor Bill had waded across, they searched about for their tracks
up and down a short distance until they were likewise found, when their task became comparatively
easy, as the dog's aid was now of use.

"Hi, Wolf!" said Ernest Wilton, drawing his hand over the footmarks of Seth's heavy boots,
where they entered the dense mass of brushwood below the pine-trees.  "Good dog!  Fetch 'em
out!  Hi!"

Wolf was all attention in an instant.

Looking up into his master's face with a low whine of inquiry as if to learn what he exactly
meant him to do, and then putting down his nose with a significant sniff, as Ernest Wilton
again drew his hand across Seth's track, he gave a loud yelp expressive of his intelligent
comprehension of the duty that lay before him; bounding on in advance through the thick shrubbery,
and going at such a pace that Mr Rawlings and Jasper had hard work to do to keep up with Ernest,
who followed close behind the dog at a run almost.

"Steady, boy, steady!" said Ernest Wilton in a low tone, every now and then, as Wolf would
turn back his head to see whether his master was near him or no, and then the sagacious animal
would give an eager bark in answer, as if to say--

"I'm going on all right, old man.  Don't be alarmed, I'm making no mistake about the scent."

Presently the trail diverged from underneath the timber and brushwood by the river-bank, and
struck off at an angle into the open prairie, as if Seth had got tired of fighting his way
amongst the overhanging branches and projecting trunks of the pine-trees.

From this point the footprints gradually led up to a little plateau above the valley through
which the streamlet ran; and, arrived at the top of this, Wolf gave vent to a louder and more
triumphant bark than previously, and halted in his tracks, as if waiting for Ernest to join
him before proceeding any further.

The young engineer was by the dog's side in a moment, and one rapid glance round enabled him
to see that the prairie extended beyond the plateau in a vast plain as far as the eye could
reach, being bounded on the extreme verge of the horizon by a low range of hills or wooded
heights, most probably marking, he thought, the southward course of the great Missouri river,
although, as he reflected the moment after, they were much too far to the westward for that.

His attention, however, was not much given to the scenery and the picture which the spreading
vast plain presented.  A figure in the foreground, some little distance from the higher level
on which he was standing, was gesticulating frantically towards him, and Seth's voice assured
him of his identity, if he had any lingering doubt on the subject, by shouting out as soon
as he had come into sight across the sky line--

"Hyar, ahoy, man!  Hurry up thaar an' help a feller, can't you?"

"Here he is!" shouted out Ernest back to Mr Rawlings and Jasper, who were a few yards behind
him, and, without waiting for them to come up, he hastened down the slightly shelving ground
towards where the ex-mate seemed to be in some predicament, as he did not stand up, but was
half-sitting, half-lying on the ground, resting his head on one arm as he waved the other to
the young engineer.

"Hullo! what's the matter?" asked Ernest, calling out before he reached him.

"Injuns--been wounded," said Seth, in his usual curt, laconic way.

"Gracious me!" exclaimed Ernest, quite taken aback by the announcement. "Indians!  And where
is Sailor Bill?"

"The durned cusses have carried him off!" said Seth with a sob.  "I'd a follered and got him
back," added the ex-mate to Mr Rawlings, who now came up, with Jasper at his heels--the negro
almost turning white with terror at the very name of the Indians being mentioned, and shaking
in his shoes,--"I'd a follered an' got him back, yes sir!  But them durned cusses have sent
an arrowhead through my karkuss, and well-nigh broken my fut as well!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

ON THE TRAIL.

"Where are you wounded?" asked Mr Rawlings, bending over Seth, who seemed to suffer considerable
pain, although he endeavoured stoically to suppress all expression of it.

"In my side, haar," replied the other, pointing to where the feathered end of an arrow could
be seen protruding from his shirt; "and if yer cut off the tail of the cussed thing, I reckon
you ken pull it slick through, as the head's comed out ahint me.  But it's only a flesh wound,
and ain't up to much, for it didn't touch my ribs."

"Well," said Mr Rawlings, "you're a bit of a doctor, Seth, and ought to know if anybody does."

"Yes, it's only a scratch, I'm sartain, or I would ha' felt it more.  My fut's the wussest
of the two.  But, lor' sakes!" added Seth, trying to get on his legs, and quivering with excitement,
although the attempt was futile, and he had to sink back again into his half-sitting, half-kneeling
posture with a groan--"don't you stop here a consulting about me, Rawlings, when that poor
boy's life's in peril.  You and Wilton had best skate off at once and foller up them redskins
as has Sailor Bill.  I ken bide waal enuf till you gits back again, old man, along with Jasper,
who can do all I wants."

"We won't neglect the boy," said Mr Rawlings, struck with Seth's unselfishness in ignoring
his own wounded condition under the consciousness of his protege's danger, "but we must think
of you all the same first."  And kneeling down by the injured man's side, he proceeded, with
Ernest Wilton's assistance, to cut away Seth's shirt, and then the end of the arrow, holding
it firmly the while so that it should not wriggle about, and hurt him more than they could
help, after which the barbed head was drawn out of the wound--which was just between the third
and fourth ribs, and not very serious, as the ex-mate had thought-- stanching the blood, and
binding up the place with a silk handkerchief, which the young engineer had taken from round
his neck for the purpose.

Mr Rawlings was immensely relieved to find that Seth was not so dangerously hit as he had at
first supposed.  When he saw the arrow sticking out of his side, he thought it was all up with
his poor comrade; so now that the case appeared more hopeful, he was better able to consider
what course should be adopted for Sailor Bill's rescue.

After a moment's deliberation, during which Seth gazed at him with a look of piteous entreaty
on his face, but did not interrupt him with a word, guessing what was passing through his mind,
Mr Rawlings' line of action was decided on.

"Here, Jasper," said he to the negro steward.

"Iss, massa."

"You must run back to the camp as hard as you can, and tell Noah Webster to pick out five or
six of the men who can use their rifles well, and come back here with them and Moose--he wouldn't
forget to bring him--to pursue the Indians.  You must also bring a team of mules with the small
waggon with you, the same as I told you about just now, although I did not then think to what
a sad use we should put it, to take home Mr Seth in; and look sharp now--why, what's the matter?"

Jasper had started up to go at Mr Rawlings' first words; but when that gentleman spoke about
the Indians while giving his directions, his alacrity and courage seemed to disappear together
in company, as, instead of rushing off, as Mr Rawlings supposed, almost before he could finish
speaking, there he stood, twirling his battered straw-hat about in his fingers, and looking
the picture of cowardly irresolution.

"What, massa?" he tremblingly said, in answer to Mr Rawlings' interrogation, his teeth chattering
with fear, and his countenance wearing a most hang-dog expression.  "Me go back 'lone cross
de prairee, all dat way to camp?  Suppose the Injuns scalp pore niggah same as massa Seth!
Golly, Massa Rawlins, um can't do it.  I'se afeared!"

"You durned skunk!" exclaimed Seth, his indignation heightened probably by the pain of his
wounds.  "You jest make tracks at once, as Mister Rawlings says, or else I'll--" and he shook
his fist expressively to complete the sentence.

"Perhaps I had better go," said Ernest Wilton at this juncture.  "Jasper seems to be so frightened
that he might lose his way; and, at all events, he would probably have forgotten half your
instructions when he got to the creek, and give only a garbled account of what has happened.
I think I would make the best messenger, unless you would prefer me to remain with you in case
the Indians should return in force before we get help."

"Go by all means," answered Mr Rawlings.  "I needn't tell you to hurry, my boy, you know the
necessity of that, on every account!  Jasper shall stop here and help defend us in case the
savages assail us before you get back;" and Mr Rawlings could not help smiling as he spoke,
in spite of their perilous position, at the comical idea of the cowardly Jasper acting as a
protector.

"Bress us and sabe us, Massa Rawlings!" ejaculated the negro in mortal terror, about which
there was no pretence or affectation.  "Don't say dat, don't now! mebbe it come out for true!
I'se rader go 'th Mass' Willerton, an' bring back the waggin for Mass' Seth, iss, sah."

"No you won't," said Mr Rawlings.  "You hesitated to go when I told you, and now you shall
stop here whether you like it or not!" emphasising his words by laying his hand on the darkey's
shoulder, in such an impressive manner that he could not but submit to the command. But long
before the question of Jasper's staying behind or going off with the young engineer was settled,
Ernest had started off on the back track towards Minturne Creek at a brisk run, and was shortly
out of sight behind the top of the plateau they had just descended from.

Prior to leaving, however, Ernest considerately ordered Wolf to remain in his place, as he
would be of much service in the event of an Indian attack, telling the sagacious animal to
lie at Seth's feet, with a "Hi, watch there; old man!" an order which the dog at once obeyed,
while his master was off and away in an instant.

"Well, Seth," said Mr Rawlings, when the young engineer had disappeared from their gaze, "you
haven't yet told me how this catastrophe occurred? But let me see your foot now, and I can
examine it, and see what I can do to that while you are telling me all about it."  And Mr Rawlings
proceeded to cut away a portion of Seth's boot with his clasp knife--the same as he had had
to do to his shirt before extracting the arrow, as it caused the poor fellow too much pain
to pull it off--while the other went on with his yarn.

"Thaar ain't much to tell," began Seth.  "I an' Sailor Bill beat up the bush alongside that
ther stream, arter partin' with you, and then, when we seed nothin' thaar, made tracks for
this yere paraira, as I diskivered, when I got to the top o' that risin' ground yonder, some
elk a feedin' down hyar.  There was a herd of seven of 'em or more, an' soon as I gets near
enuf I lets drive at 'em; and just then, hullabaloo!  I heart a screech like somethin' awful,
an' a Injun starts up, just like a deer a walkin' on his hind legs."

"That's an artful dodge they have of putting on the skin of some animal, and approaching unsuspiciously
within shooting range without alarming their game."

"Waal, this hyar Injun," continued Seth, without noticing Mr Rawlings' explanatory interruption,
"rushed on to me like a mad bull in fly time, and seein' as how he meant bizness; I drawed
the trigger again, but missed him, and he flung his tommyhawk, which cotched my fut, and brought
me to the ground as slick as greased lightnin', you bet!"

"And gave you a bad wound, too," said Mr Rawlings, who by this time had managed to take off
Seth's boot and disclose the extent of the injury, a pretty deep cut right across the instep,
which would probably lame the ex-mate for life, as far as he could judge.

"Waal, it do hurt some," said Seth, when Mr Rawlings proceeded to bandage up the foot in the
same way as he had done the poor fellow's side previously.  "But I dersay I'll git over it
soon, gineral.  Ef I seed Sailor Bill agin I wouldn't care a cent about it, I guess!"

"How was it that they carried him off, and you escaped alive?  I can't think how they let you
off when you were once down and at their mercy?"

"Oh, I made a pretty good fit of it, I reckon, with the butt-end of my rifle, and giv' both
them red devils somethin' to remember Seth Allport by!--For there was two on 'em at me, as
soon as Sailor Bill rushed in atween me an' the fust Injun."

"Did the boy really help you?" said Mr Rawlings in some surprise; for, as has been previously
related, Sailor Bill had never exhibited any trace of emotional feeling from the time of his
being picked up at sea, save on that memorable occasion immediately afterwards, when, it may
be remembered, he rushed out of the cabin when the ship was taken aback.

"He did so," answered Seth, "an' the curiosest part of it wer he looked jest the same frightened
like as when he saved me aboard the Susan Jane, with his har all on end--jes so."

"It's very extraordinary," said Mr Rawlings; "and then they carried him off?"

"Waal, I was making a good fit of it as I told you, an' when Sailor Bill rushes to help me
a second Injun started up and collars him; and then I heard that air blessed dawg bark, and
I knowed what it wer, an' so did the Injuns too; for as I shouted out to let yer know whar
we wer, they made tracks with pore Bill, lugging him off atween them over thaar," said Seth,
pointing eastwards, where, however, nothing could now be seen.  "And that's all you know about
it?" said Mr Rawlings.

"Jes so," replied Seth.

At the same moment the negro Jasper, who had been gazing fixedly in the direction in which
Ernest Wilton had gone for aid, uttered an exclamation of frenzied delight, and began to caper
about.

"Golly, Massa Rawlings," cried he, "dere dey is! dere dey is!"

The negro was right.  As he spoke Mr Rawlings and Seth could see a body of men advancing over
the crest of the plateau, accompanied by a waggon drawn by a pair of mules.  The young engineer
had accomplished his mission well.  Instead of publishing his news aloud, and thereby creating
a commotion amongst the miners who would have all wished to rush off en masse to the assistance
of Mr Rawlings and Seth Allport, both much liked by all, and the rescue of Sailor Bill, whom
the men had got also attached to in the same way as the crew of the Susan Jane, Ernest drew
Noah Webster on one side, and briefly told him what had occurred and what Mr Rawlings had ordered
to be done.

Noah was equally prompt and discreet.

Mustering one of the gangs, who had completed their shift in sinking the new shaft and had
had a rest, he told them to get their rifles quietly and accompany him to the prairie, when
he mentioned casually, in a way they appeared to understand, the boss and manager had come
across some "red game" and wanted their help.

At the same time the backwoodsman ordered Josh, who was nothing loth to have the chance of
abandoning his caboose duties for a while, to have a couple of mules hitched to the waggon;
while he beckoned Moose, the half-breed, who apparently suspected something was in the wind,
to come towards him, when the two conferred, while the miners and Josh were getting ready.

The whole thing, indeed, was so well managed, that within ten minutes of Ernest Wilton's arrival
in camp, the rescuing party had started for the spot where Mr Rawlings and Seth and the terror-stricken
Jasper were awaiting their approach: a band of strong, well-armed, resolute men, consisting,
besides the young engineer himself and Noah Webster, of Moose the half-breed, Black Harry--one
of the former crew of the Susan Jane, a muscular giant who would have been a match for three
Indians in himself--and five of the miners, old "Californian stagers," used to frontier life
and rough and tumble fighting--in addition to Josh, of course, who drove the mule waggon.

As soon as the scene of the fray was reached, Seth was lifted carefully into the waggon and
sent back to Minturne Creek, under the care of Jasper--who took the place of Josh as teamster,
that darkey displaying considerably more pluck than the former, and evincing as much eagerness
to encounter the Indians as Jasper did to avoid them--while the rescuing party followed on
the trail of Sailor Bill's abductors.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

RISING CLOUD.

"Silenza!" said the half-breed warningly, hearing Black Harry talking rather loudly and threatening
what he would do in case a hair of the poor boy was injured,--"Silenza!  Senors must go soft,
or Sioux hear mens speak!"

This happened just as they started, and from that moment not a word was further spoken amongst
the party, the men preserving a solemn silence and marching one after the other in single file,
Moose and Noah Webster leading the way, and tracking the course of the Indians like sleuth-hounds,
seeing traces of the passage of those of whom they were in pursuit in places where, as in the
rocky bottom of a dry ravine they presently came across, no footprints were perceptible like
as they were when the trail led through the prairie-grass, in a manner most unaccountable both
to Mr Rawlings and the young engineer.

On and on, mile after mile, went the gallant little band, at one time treading downward towards
some bottom or valley, at another their route lying upwards along some ascending plateau, until
the afternoon grew dusky and night approached, when they had travelled over a considerable
distance of ground from their starting-point.

The prairie still stretched before them, the fringe of trees on the horizon which Ernest Wilton
had perceived some hours before still far off, but much nearer than they were then, although,
as he saw now, they certainly could not indicate the banks of the Missouri, as he had then
thought; while between this distant bank of timber, that stood out here under the shades of
evening more strongly against the sky line, were sundry little timbered islands as it were
amidst the vast ocean of spreading plain on which they were.

As it got darker, the half-breed, who was unacquainted with Wolf's sagacity, that equalled
his own in following a trail, made them understand that they must give up the pursuit until
the morning light, or moon, should it not be obscured, enabled the trail to be deciphered;
but Wolf's master showing him what to do, and a sort of leash being attached to the dog so
that he should not go too fast on the scent and be lost sight of in the gathering gloom, the
expedition started on again, after a brief halt, as untiringly as ever.

"Ugh!" ejaculated Moose, when they had continued their quest through the darkness with Wolf's
aid for about an hour, more or less--"Hist!  Light yonder!  Stay here, I go see!" and he disappeared
from amongst them, while the others halted on the spot, from whence they could faintly perceive
the glimmer of firelight shining amidst trees in front of them: so they were evidently near
one of those little wooded islands they had observed in the distance.

After an absence which seemed unconscionably long to those who remained behind, the half-breed
returned, and from what he said Mr Rawlings divided the band into two portions, one of which
he ordered to follow Moose, whose object was to take the Indians in the rear, while the main
body attacked them in front, thus causing them to surrender probably at the display of their
overwhelming numbers, the two parties acting together by a concerted signal, without any recourse
to their weapons, which would most likely endanger the life of poor Sailor Bill whom they had
come to save.

All proceeded satisfactorily up to a certain point.

The half of the band that accompanied Moose stole forward, skirting round the trees so as to
get the Indians in a line between themselves and Mr Rawlings' party; and presently the solitary
note of the melancholy whip-poor-will was heard from amidst the trees, to warn the others that
Moose and his companions were in position, and they were to close in nearer to the Indian camp
before the half-breed should give the second intimation that it was time for the final rush.

Black Harry's indiscretion, however, at this juncture spoilt Moose's plan of surprising the
Indians and effecting their object without bloodshed.  As they approached nearer the light
that glimmered from amid the trees, they could see that three Indians were seated round it,
while close adjoining them was poor Sailor Bill lashed tightly to a tree, like a poor lamb
that was to be slaughtered in some butcher's shop.

The sight was too much for the unthinking but gallant seaman, so, despite Mr Rawlings' strict
injunctions to the contrary, he levelled his rifle and fired point-blank into the group of
Indians huddled over the fire.

The savages started up with a yell of alarm; and, seizing their arms hurriedly, one of them
darted towards the motionless figure of Sailor Bill with an uplifted hatchet in his hand.

At that moment Mr Rawlings, seeing the imminent jeopardy of the boy, fired, and the Indian's
arm fell as if broken by the bullet, the hatchet dropping from his hand; in another second,
however, the savage picked up the weapon again and would have brained Sailor Bill, being in
the act of hurling it at him with a malignant aim, when Wolf, who had stolen forward at the
first outburst, dashed at the Indian's throat with a low growl of vengeance, and brought him
to the ground.

"Don't kill them!" shouted Mr Rawlings, in a voice that made itself heard above the melee;
and after a brief struggle, the two remaining Indians were secured and firmly bound, although
it took all Black Harry's strength to overcome the one he grappled, who turned out to be the
chief of the party, while the one Wolf had brought down suffered terribly from the grip of
the dog on his throat.

After all had cooled down from the contest, which had lasted some little time, Mr Rawlings
directed Moose to ask the Indian chief--who, the half-breed said, was a leading warrior of
the Sioux tribe, rejoicing in the sounding title of "Rising Cloud,"--why he had attacked an
innocent settler and miner like Seth Allport, and stolen away the boy that was with him?

The Indian, however, did not seem to require the services of an interpreter, for he answered
Mr Rawlings as if he thoroughly comprehended the gist of the question Moose was deputed to ask him.

"Paleface lie!" he said angrily, in broken English, which he mastered much better indeed than
the half-breed did in his half-Spanish patter. "Rising Cloud was hunting on the lands of his
tribe when tall paleface hunter shoot him as if he were a beast of the forest.  The red man
isn't a dog to be trodden on, so he gave the paleface a lesson, to remind him Rising Cloud
could have killed him if he had willed it."

"But why steal the boy?" asked Mr Rawlings, thinking that perhaps the Indian had some right
on his side in assailing Seth after he had fired at him first.

"Boy jump at Rising Cloud like grizzly bear.  Boy grow up fine warrior. Rising Cloud take him
to his wigwam to make him big Sioux chief by-and-by and fight the paleface dogs."

"That's a very pleasant way of appropriation," said Ernest Wilton, under his voice, to Mr Rawlings.
"But what's that he says, about fighting the palefaces?"

"I thought there was peace between the red man and the children of the Great Father at Washington?"
said Mr Rawlings, alluding to the current legend in frontier life that all the settlers out
west are the progeny of the President of the United States for the time being.

"No peace long," said the Sioux chief defiantly, a savage smile lighting up his expressive
features.  "Hatchet dug up already.  War soon--in 'nother moon."

"Well, that's a pleasant prospect to look forward to!" said Ernest, in a half-serious, half-comic
way, as he usually regarded most things.  "But what's to be done with these fellows now?  Sailor
Bill is none the worse for his temporary captivity, and I suppose Seth will be all right in
a few days, after his wounds get better.  I suppose we shall have to let them go?"

"Yes," said Mr Rawlings; "but I must consult Noah Webster first."

After consultation with that worthy, it was determined that the whole party should take advantage
of the Indians' bivouac and remain there till the morning, when they would have had a good
rest; but the Indians must be kept bound, and one taken with them on the back track next day
until they had accomplished half their return journey home, when he would be released, and
sent back free to unloose his comrades.  This, Noah Webster said, was the only course they
could adopt in order to avoid any treachery with the redskins, Noah saying that he would not
trust them farther than he could see them, and laughing at Mr Rawlings' idea of releasing them
at once on parole.

"Why, if yer did so," said he, "none of us would ever git back to Minturne Creek to tell the tale!"

Accordingly, Noah's plan was adopted.  The little band that had accomplished Sailor Bill's
rescue so satisfactorily, rested after their labours till the morning, when, leaving two of
the Indians bound to trees in a similar way as they had discovered poor Seth's protege, they
started back for the camp, taking with them the chief, Rising Cloud, whom they did not release
until they reached the spot where the original row had occurred, where the chief had his arms
unpinioned and was told he might go and free his companions.

The Indian did not take a very affectionate farewell of his escort.  As Mr Rawlings and Ernest
untied his hands and told him he might go, he pointed first towards the sky, then towards the
east from whence they had just come, and then in the direction where Minturne Creek lay.

"Yes, white man master now!  Rising Cloud go home to his tribe; but by-and-by he come back
again with a thousand warriors at his back, and wipe out the white men, robbers of the red
man's land.  Yes, by the Manitou of the palefaces Rising Cloud swears it!"

And the Indian spat on the ground with a savage gesture as he spoke.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER NINETEEN.

GOLD AT LAST--EUREKA!

When Jasper and the mule waggon appeared at Minturne Creek, some time after the departure of
Noah Webster and the rescue party, the miners who had been left at work under the charge of
Tom Cannon, as Noah's deputy, greeted the arrival with a cheer, as they had been kept in ignorance
of what had really happened, and imagined that the waggon had been sent for, as well as a few
additional good shots from their party, in order to bring in an unexpected supply of game which
the hunters had come across.

Jasper's conveyance certainly did carry something in the game line, the negro having mentioned
to Seth about the wapiti deer that Ernest Wilton had shot, and being directed by him to stop
and cart it home with them, as it lay in their road to the camp; but the main cargo of the
waggon, their wounded manager, whom Jasper hailed them to come and help him lift out, was a
double surprise to the men, and a grief as well, as may be readily understood when it is considered
how much Seth was liked by the hands under him.

They vowed vengeance against the Indians; and it required all the exercise of Seth's authority
to prevent another party from sallying off to aid the first in the rescue of Sailor Bill. 
But, after a time, the excitement calmed down, and they waited with as much patience as they
possessed the return of the others; although nothing that Seth could say would persuade them
to turn in all that weary night, during which time they were in a state of suspense as to the
fate of their comrades; and they were equally disinclined to resume work in the mine.

They seemed capable of doing nothing, until they should learn how the matter was settled, one
way or other; and--heedless even of the welcome addition of fresh meat to their scanty fare,
in the fine wapiti that they possessed through the precision of the young engineer's rifle,
which at another time would have roused equally their enthusiasm and their appetites--remained
grouped round impromptu log-fires that they had lit to hail the absentees when they came back,
looking to their arms and ammunition so as to be ready for anything that might happen, and
considering amongst themselves as to what was best to be done in the event of the non-arrival
of the rescue party within a reasonable limit; Seth fretting and worrying himself the while
as much as any, although he tried to preserve a quiet demeanour in order to reassure the rest,
and exclaiming against the "paltry wounds," as he called them--which gave him much pain in
spite of Jasper continually soaking the bandages around them with cold water in pursuance of
his directions--that prevented him from taking an active part in his protege's recovery, instead
of waiting idly there while others went bravely to the fore, as he should have done.

Be the night however weary, and watching long, the morning comes at last:--thus it was now
with the miners of Minturne Creek.

Daylight is a wonderful panacea for those gloomy thoughts and anxieties which are nourished
and magnified during the dark hours of the night; so, when the sun arose next morning, after
the weary watch of Seth and the others, in the expectation that they might receive every moment
the news of some disaster to their comrades who had been gone so long, instead of their fears
being increased by the knowledge that the rescue party had not yet returned, they felt inclined
to take a much more sanguine view of the situation--a view that Seth not only endorsed but
was the prime agent in promulgating, possibly through the pain of his wounds having considerably
lessened and caused him to look on things in a more hopeful way.

"Tha'are all right b'ys, I reckon," said he.  "No noos is good noos; fur ef anythin' had kinder
happen'd to 'em, we should have heert afore."

"So thinks I," said Tom Cannon; "and let's set to work agin, mates, at the shaft, to let the
boss see, when he comes back, that we ha'n't been idle in his absence; p'raps, too, we'll have
something to show him in the gold line, as I don't think as how we're far off the lode now."

"That's yer sort," echoed Seth, from amidst the pile of buffalo rugs alongside one of the fires
in the open space before the hut, where he would persist in staying, to be the first to receive
the rescue party on their return, and where he said he could nurse his injuries far better
than going to bed in the anxious frame of mind he was in.  "That's yer sort, b'ys!  Tackle
to the job with a will, my hearties; it'll be a durned sight better nor restin' on your oars
and doin' nothin', as I'm forced to do, like the battered old hulk I am!"

These cheery words from Tom Cannon and Seth had the desired effect of restoring a little more
activity to the scene around the creek; and the small band of the remaining miners, dividing
their attenuated forces into two gangs and taking short shifts turn about at intervals, worked
with such praiseworthy diligence, that when Mr Rawlings and the other adventurers arrived in
safety near mid-day, escorting the recovered Sailor Bill scatheless in triumph back to the
camp, they had got through a surprising amount of work.  The tubbing had been put into position
two days before, and had been found to act admirably; the water had been pumped out, and the
men at work were driving to the left, as Ernest Wilton thought that they were at present only
on the wall of the lode, which was a very strong one, and that it would be found much richer
upon the other wall.

As soon as mutual congratulations had been interchanged amongst the leaders, and the joy of
the whole party at being once more reunited had somewhat subsided, Tom Cannon, and one of the
leading miners who had been last down the new shaft, approached the spot where Mr Rawlings,
Ernest Wilton, and Noah Webster were grouped, chatting together, with Seth--behind whom Sailor
Bill had taken up his usual place, on his return to camp, with his customary apathetic air,
the boy not exhibiting the slightest increase of animation, despite all the excitement and
unwonted scenes through which he had recently passed, or any return to that sudden change of
demeanour, almost amounting to a fit of frenzy, which he had again displayed for an instant,
as Seth asserted, when he interposed to save his life from the onslaught of the savage, on
the prairie, as he had done when he came forward in a similar way to rescue him on board the
Susan Jane on the ship's being taken aback the previous year.

"I guess thaar's sunthin' up now," said Noah Webster, as the two men came towards him and the
others, noticing a slight assumption of mystery on the part of Tom Cannon and his companion,
a man who was familiarly styled "Left Bower" amongst the miners, from the fact not only of
his surname being Bower, but on account of the singular dexterity he exhibited in the great
American card game of euchre.

"Guess so," said Seth, sotto voce.  "They've been downright busy since you've been gone, workin'
like hosses, that they have!  Waal, b'ys," he added aloud for the benefit of the coming deputation,
"what's the rumpus neow?  Panned out anythin' tall?"

"See!" said Tom Cannon, opening his closed fist and displaying a little tiny heap of gold dust
lying in the palm of his hand.  "All that came out o' one lump o' quartz taken out of the gravel
in the heading we've begun.  We can see it everywhere in the rock, and it was getting richer
every inch we got in."

"Ay," put in Left Bower, "heaps, I reckon, boss," addressing himself to Mr Rawlings, who turned
as pale at the receipt of the news as if he were going to faint.  "We've struck the lode at
last, mister, and run slick inter a bonanza if ever they were one; may I never see Frisco again,
if we haven't!"

"Hooray!" shouted Seth, attempting to rise and wave his hat as he was wont to do in moments
of triumph, but quickly quieting down again as the pain of his foot reminded him of having
been wounded.  "Didn't I say so--ask any a one in camp if I didn't--that we'd find the gold
at last? Hooray!" he repeated aloud at the pitch of his voice, his cheer being taken up instantly
by the main body of the miners, who were gossiping in front of Josh's caboose, with a heartiness
that resounded through the valley and even made the hills echo again; while Jasper, who had
been under a sort of cloud ever since his cowardly conduct on the prairie, joined Josh in an
exciting pas a deux before the latter's culinary sanctum, and repeating ever and anon his jubilant
song, "Golly, massa, um told yer so!"

"And you are not through the vein yet?" asked Ernest Wilton when he was able to speak calmly,
he and Mr Rawlings hurrying towards the head of the new workings in company with Noah Webster
and the first discoverers of the ore; the rest of the miners following after at a distance;
eager to set to work again at once as soon as their leaders should give orders to that effect.
Seth, seeing himself thus deserted, and not wishing to be "left out in the cold," therefore
requisitioned the aid of the two darkeys, and made them carry him in the rear of the procession,
which put a summary stop to their dancing, but delighted them equally as well, for they were
thus enabled to learn all that was going on without the annoyance of having their ears perchance
boxed for listening without permission: consequently there was a general move all round.

"No sign of the other wall," said Tom Cannon as spokesman, "we're nigh four feet in from the
bottom of the shaft.  The richest is that near the river."

"That is just what we expected from the statement of Mr Rawlings' original discoverer.  He
found it rich in the little shaft he sank there, and that is at the point where the two lodes
run into each other. I expect we shall find it richer every foot we go in that direction. If
so, it will be one of the richest finds we know of."

So saying, Ernest, full of eagerness and expectation, was lowered away into the mine by the
men.  He did not stop very long below the surface; and on his return his face seemed to glow
with the goods news he brought.

"It's all right," he gasped out, almost before he got out of the shaft; "you've hit on the
richest lode I ever saw in my experience.  We ought to get tons of gold out of that quartz.
We have just struck the centre of a pocket, I think, which must extend to the old workings
of your cousin Ned.  Mr Rawlings, I congratulate you; your luck has changed at last, and if
all turns out as I expect, you'll be the wealthiest man in Dakota!"

"Hooray, b'ys!" shouted out Seth, almost choking poor Josh and Jasper by gripping their necks
with his muscular arms in his excitement, the darkeys supporting him, as if in a chair with
their hands clasped beneath him, on which he sat with his arms resting on their shoulders,
although he now shifted his hold unwittingly to their necks.  "Hooray! I sed the Britisher
were the b'y for us; an' so he air!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY.

INDIAN ALARMS.

The men now worked with unflagging vigour.  The cross-cut was first pushed across the vein,
which was found to extend thirteen feet beyond the side of the shaft.  It was not unbroken
quartz, as here and there the rock came in, but seemed to consist of four separate veins, which
sometimes joined together, sometimes were separated by partitions of rock.  The richest portion
of the vein was two feet from the farthest wall, and here the gold was everywhere thickly scattered
through the quartz.  Now, they drove right and left along the course of the lode, and found
that in both directions the walls were coming closer together.

"It is only a pocket," Ernest Wilton said.  "You will see that in about five fathoms either
way the quartz will finish in to its usual width, and become poor.  However, we must not mind
that; if it holds for a few fathoms in depth there will be half a million pounds' worth at
least. Twenty tons of quartz like this we see would suffice to make us all rich men, and we
know that there is double that at least."

As the young engineer predicted, the lode fell away to its original width, and soon ceased
to carry visible gold.

Then they began to sink deeper.  Twenty feet lower the walls of the lode again began to approach
each other, and there was now a possibility of calculating the amount of quartz in the "pocket."

"I am of opinion," Ernest Wilton said, "that there will be fifty tons of the richest stuff,
and nearly two hundred of what I may call second class, but which is still exceedingly rich.
But it is time now that we should carry out our plans.  We must get up a small mill with five
stamps, with a wheel to be worked by water from the mountain stream.  It is likely enough that
such a set could be got in one of the mining-camps, and I must make a short journey to Bismark
and perhaps further west in search of gear.  While I am away, the men will have to cut a leet
to bring the water along the side of the hill from the torrent, and get all the quartz out
of the mine."

All this time, however, even with the confident expectation of untold wealth being now almost
within his grasp, not one of the party had forgotten the parting threat of Rising Cloud, and
his warning that, ere many months were over, the camp at Minturne Creek would be assailed by
the Sioux tribe in full force.

Indeed, if Mr Rawlings or Seth, or Noah especially, who had had such a long experience of the
dangers of backwoods life away from the settlements, and thoroughly appreciated the old adage
that "he who is forewarned is forearmed," were at all inclined to laugh at the Indian's declaration
as an empty boast, many circumstances would have constrained them to alter their opinion, and
make them be prepared for anything that might happen.

In the first place, a stage used to run from Bismark to the Black Hills at stray intervals,
when they first camped at Minturne Creek--although it did not come within some miles of their
own valley--and continued running until the winter set in; but when the spring developed, and
the roads got in working order again, no stage was to be met with; and rumour had it that it
had been "frightened off the track by the Injuns."

In the early months of summer this rumour received additional confirmation by the arrival of
some scouts from the settlements, with the news that the Sioux had declared war against the
United States authorities, and that all the outlying settlers had been warned to withdraw into
the townships, where they could join together and resist any attack made on them.

And, later still, a special messenger from one of the military stations on the Missouri, where
"Uncle Sam's" troops were quartered, brought them word that intelligence had been received
that Rising Cloud had published his intention of attacking the Minturne Creek miners especially,
and that his band of warriors had already started on the war-path--although the commander of
the detachment at Fort Warren assured them that he was following up the Indians, and would
revenge them should they happen to get "wiped out" before he came up with the redskins!

This, naturally, was no very cheering intelligence; but the miners were not discouraged, although
they took every wise precaution so that their wary foe should not catch them napping; and so,
whether they were working in the mine or went hunting--as they did more frequently when the
buffalo came northwards later on, led from the southern plains, which form their more common
habitat throughout the year, by the rich blue grass, and other prairie delicacies which these
bovine beasts loved, that flourished among the valleys of the Black Hills; or whether they
were digging in the kitchen garden that Josh and Jasper had improvised at the back of the little
hut where they all lived--every man went armed or had his arms handy.  In addition to this,
sentinels were posted through the day at the entrance of the Creek, to warn them of the approach
of any suspicious strangers to the camp; while Seth caused as rigid a watch to be kept at night,
taking the first and fourth turns himself, as if he were still a first mate with the responsibilities
of a ship on his hands and walking the deck of the Susan Jane.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE WAR-WHOOP.

Having levelled the line for the watercourse, Ernest Wilton prepared for his journey.

The news of the Indian raids made travelling very dangerous, and Mr Rawlins's urged Ernest
to let him go in his stead.  But to this Ernest strongly objected, advancing all sorts of reasons
but the right one against Mr Rawlings starting for Bismark, stating amongst other arguments
that if the worthy leader of the party went, the miners might think he was running away from
the Creek for fear of the Indians attacking them.

"No, no, my boy!" laughed Mr Rawlings; "you cannot wheedle me by using such an argument as
that, Wilton!  It is too absurd, for the miners know me too well for that, and so do you; besides,
it is far more perilous to venture out into the open, as you are about to do, than to remain
here, where, united together as we are in a phalanx of stout, able-bodied men, in an almost
impregnable position, we could resist any formidable attack in force.  No, no, my boy; you
may tell that to the marines.  But do inform me, Wilton, what is your real motive in wishing
to go yourself? I consent certainly to your going, as you press the matter; but I should like
to know your ulterior object, if only to satisfy my curiosity."

"Well," said Ernest, laughing too, "I didn't like to tell you at first for fear of wounding
your sensibilities.  To tell you the truth, I think I am more competent to get what I want
than you are, as, if I do not see any of the things I require exactly, I may be able to pick
up makeshifts that will answer my purpose as well, while you would be trying to procure impossibilities,
perhaps, just because I mentioned them in the list of my requirements, and would be satisfied
with nothing else."

"Very good, have your way," said Mr Rawlings, satisfied with the reason advanced, and handing
the young engineer at the same time a roll of greenbacks that represented all his available
capital.  "But you must be economical in your purchases, my boy.  This is all the money I can
spare you for your expenses and everything.  I think you had better take a few rich specimens
with you, and should your funds run short they may give you credit if you tell them you have
fifty tons of it ready for the mill."

"All right," said Ernest cheerfully, pocketing the parcel, and making an inward resolution
the while to supply any deficiency in that respect from his own funds--which, indeed, was his
true motive for undertaking the commission in person, although he concealed it from Mr Rawlings;
for he was aware that the latter had got near the end of his resources, and would have been
indignant if he had offered to be his temporary banker in order to buy all that was now needed
for the mine, which he had made up his mind to be, whether he liked it or not, without his
knowing it; and he chuckled to himself as he told Mr Rawlings that the money would do amply. 

Part of the technic study period is always given to Bach.

"I began my studies in Vienna with Mme. Bree, to get the preparatory foundation, but before
long combined her lessons with those of the professor, and later went to him entirely."

"Just here I should like to mention a trifling point, yet it seems one not understood in America
by those who say they are teachers of the Leschetizky method. These teachers claim that the
professor wishes the fingers placed on a straight line at the edge of the keys, and in some
cases they place the tip of the thumb in the middle of its key, so
that it extends considerably beyond the tips of the other fingers.

Is this the position taught by the Vorbereiters, or favored by Leschetizky?"

Miss Spencer's laugh rang out merrily.

"This is the first I have ever heard of the idea! Such a position must seem very strained and unnatural.
Leschetizky, on the contrary, wishes everything done in the most
easy, natural way.

Of course, at first, when one is seeking to acquire strength and firmness of hand and fingers,
one must give time and thought to securing an arched hand and steady first joints of fingers.
Later, when these conditions have been thoroughly established, the
hand can take any position required.

Leschetizky's hand often lies quite flat on the keys. He has a beautiful piano hand; the first
joints of the fingers have so long been held firmly curved, that they always keep their position, no
matter what he is doing; if he only passes his fingers through his hair, his hand is in shape.

"Leschetizky
is indeed a wonderful teacher! The player, however, must divine how to be receptive, how to enter
into the master's thought, or it may go hard with him.

If he does not understand, nor grasp the master's words he may suffer terribly during the ordeal
of the lessons. I have witnessed such scenes! Those who are equal to the situation receive
most illuminative instruction.

"I trust I do not give you the impression of being so devoted to, and enthusiastic in, the work
I enjoyed with my venerated master that I wish to exclude other masters and schools. I think
narrowness one of the most unpleasant of traits, and one I should dread to be accused of. I see
so much good in others, their ways and ideas, that, to me, all things
great and beautiful in art seem very closely related.

MEMORIZING

"How do I memorize a composition? I first play it over a few times
to become somewhat familiar with its form and shape.

Then I begin to analyze and study it, committing it by phrases, or ideas, one or two measures
at a time. I do not always take each hand alone, unless very intricate; sometimes it is easier
to learn both hands together. It is a good thing to study out the melodic line, to build each
phrase, to work with it till you get it to suit you. Then come the larger proportions, the big
climaxes, which have to be thought out and prepared for in advance. A composition should be
so thoroughly your own that you can play it at any time, if your hand is in condition. Or, if it
has been laid aside for a long time, a couple of days should bring
it back.

"The subject of forming a repertoire is one often overlooked
or not understood. The repertoire should be comprehensive and built
on broad lines. A pupil intending to make music a profession should
know the literature of the piano, not only the small and unimportant
works of the great composers (as is too often the case), but the big
works as well. If one is well grounded in the classics at an early
age, it is of great benefit afterwards.

POWER AND VELOCITY

"For
gaining power, heavy chords are very beneficial; combinations of five
notes that take in all the fingers are most useful.

"Ah," said Mr Rawlings, "that corroborates the warning we got from the commander of the United
States troops at Fort Warren when you were away. We certainly must keep a careful look now,
for it would not do to repeat all of my poor Cousin Ned's experiences, and have the result
of our toil snatched from our grasp by those relentless fiends of the prairie when it was just
within our reach, as it was in his, poor fellow!"

Mr Rawlings then went on to tell Ernest what they had heard, and give an account of what had
transpired during his absence at the settlements; after which the whole party proceeded to
examine their defences in detail, the young engineer suggesting that they should entrench the
camp in a systematic way, and also the machinery which would be erected on the river's bank.

There were but two directions from which they could be attacked; for the precipitous range
of the Black Hills, standing behind Minturne Creek with its semicircular rampart, protected
their rear and sides, so that they had only their front face to guard, along the course of
the stream, following the gulch.

The same safeguards which they had adopted before were redoubled in the face of the second
warning they received by the account Ernest Wilton brought back with him of the Indian savages
in their neighbourhood, their day and night watch being maintained with the strictest regularity.

The teams were soon unloaded and started on their return journey, and with the exception of
the men engaged in clearing out the quartz from the mine, all hands set to to erect the water-wheel
and stamps, which operation, as all the pieces of timber were fitted and numbered, was an easy
and rapid one.

In three weeks afterwards all was ready for a start.  Five hundredweight of quartz was then
weighed out and carried down to the stamps, the gear which connected the machinery with the
great wheel which was revolving in the river was connected, and the stamps began to rise and
fall with a heavy regular rhythm.

The quartz was thrown in beneath the stamps shovelful by shovelful, and in an hour and a half
the last fragment was used up.  For another half hour the stamps rose and fell, then the water
running through them was no longer milk-white, and the stamps were stopped.  Then the blankets
spread upon the ways by which the mud-charged gold had flowed were taken up and washed, the
quicksilver was taken out of the concentrators and passed through wash-leather bags, in which
great rolls of amalgam remained.  These were placed in large crucibles to drive off the quicksilver,
and then removed from the furnace and the gold placed in the scale.  To this was added the
fine gold from the blankets.  Ernest Wilton added the weights, and around him stood Mr Rawlings
and all the miners off duty.

"Just a hundred ounces," he said, "five hundred ounces to the ton; speaking roughly, 1800 pounds
a ton."

"Hurrah!" shouted Seth Allport, his ringing voice making itself heard above the sound of the
rushing water and the echoing chorus of the men's cheers; but, an instant after, his exclamation
of delight was changed to one of dismay, as a flight of arrows and the ping of rifle bullets
whistled around the party, while the dread war-whoop of their Indian assailants burst forth
in all its shrill discordancy.

"Who--ah--ah--ah--ah--oop!"

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A FIGHT FOR LIFE!

In the excitement of starting the stamps, the usual precautions which had been previously practised,
of posting sentinels and keeping their arms ready, were for the moment forgotten; but after
the first startle of surprise at being so unexpectedly attacked passed over, there was a general
rush to cover of all the members of the party, behind the breastwork of earth that the young
engineer had caused to be thrown up round the spot facing the river all along its right bank,
the men catching up their rifles and cartridge-pouches--which lay here and there about as they
had dropped them in their expectancy while waiting the result of the weighing--as they ran
to shelter themselves and prepared to return the fire of their foes.

All the miners rushed to the breastwork save one, and that was Seth.

At the instant he turned, like his comrades, to seek the protection of the rampart, towards
which the others hastened, an arrow struck Sailor Bill slanting-wise across his forehead, and,
tossing up his hands, the poor boy, who was standing on the timber which led to the wheel,
tumbled over into the foaming water below that was seething like a whirlpool.

Uttering a frenzied ejaculation of anguish and grief, Seth plunged into the flood, and an instant
after dragged forth Sailor Bill's body, heedless of the arrows and bullets of the Indians,
the former of which darkened the air in their passage around him, while the latter whistled
through his garments.

The intrepid fellow seemed to bear a charmed life, for not a shot nor a barbed head of the
savages' feathered missiles reached him as he pulled the poor boy's apparently lifeless body
from the water, Seth not being content until he had hauled it up beneath the breastwork; when
with a shout of vengeance he seized his rifle and set to work to aid the others in dealing
death on those who had, as he thought, killed his protege.

It was a terrific fight whilst it lasted.

Mingled with the war-whoop of the Sioux, which was repeated ever and anon, as if to excite
them anew to the carnage, came the fierce exclamations of the miners, and the calm word of
command from Mr Rawlings occasionally, to restrain the men from getting too flurried.-- He
certainly showed himself worthy of the post of leader then!

"Steady, boys!  Don't waste your fire.  Aim low; and don't shoot too quickly!"

"Ping! ping!" flew the bullets through the smoky medium with which they were surrounded, while
an occasional "thud" evinced the fact that one of their assailants had fallen:--"ping, ping,
ping!" it was a regular fusillade;--and the miners delivered their fire like trained soldiers
from behind the breastwork that had so providentially been erected in time!

Presently there was a rush of the redskins, and the besieged party could hear the voice of
Rising Cloud encouraging his warriors, and taunting those he attacked.

"Dogs of palefaces!" cried the chief, "your bones shall whiten the prairie, and your blood
colour the buffalo grass, for your treatment of Rising Cloud in the morn of the melting of
the snow!  I said I would come before the scarlet sumach should spring again on the plains;
and Rising Cloud and his warriors are here!"

Then came the fearful war-whoop again, with that terrible iteration at its end "Who--ah--ah--ah--ah--oop!"
like the howl of a laughing hyaena.

The river alone interposed between the whites and their enemy, and gave them a spell of breathing
time, but in spite of this protection, the odds were heavy against them; for what could even
sixteen resolute men, as the party now numbered--for one had been mortally wounded by a chance
shot, and although Josh the negro cook could tight bravely and did, Jasper was not of much
use--do in a hand-to-hand struggle with hundreds of red-skinned human devils thirsting for
their blood?

The river, however, was a great help, especially now that it had been converted into a mill-race,
and flooded beyond its usual proportions; for, when the Indians rushed into the water to wade
across and assault the camp at close quarters, as the shallowness of the stream at that season
of the year would previously have easily enabled them to have done, they found, to their astonishment,
first that the current, which they did not expect to be more than a foot deep, rose above their
waist-belts, then above their armpits, and finally above their heads, as, pushed onwards by
their companions behind, they were submerged in the flood; while the miners, still sheltered
by Ernest Wilton's trenched rampart above, rained down a pitiless hail of bullets into the
half-drowned mob, whose very strength now proved their principal weakness.

"Give it 'em, b'ys: remember poor Sailor Bill!" shouted Seth, his blood up to fever heat with
passion, and the murderous spirit of revenge strong in his heart.  "Give 'em goss, an' let
nary a one go back to tell the story!"

"Steady, men, and fire low!" repeated Mr Rawlings.

And the miners mowed the redskins down by the score with regular volleys from their repeating
rifles, although twenty fresh Indians seemed to spring up in the place of every one killed.

The fight was too severe to last long, and soon a diversion came.

As Rising Cloud, raising his tomahawk on high, and, leading the van of his warriors, was bringing
them on for a decisive charge, several sharp discharges, as if from platoon firing, were heard
in the rear of the Indians.

Just then, a bullet from Ernest Wilton's rifle penetrated the chief's brain, and he fell dead
right across the earth rampart in front of the young engineer.  The platoon firing in the rear
of the savages was again repeated; the United States troops had evidently arrived to the rescue;
and, taken now between two fires, and disheartened by the fall of Rising Cloud, the Sioux broke,
and fled in a tumultuous mass towards the gorge by which they had entered the valley of Minturne
Creek.

The struggle over, the miners had time to count casualties, and see who amongst their number
had fallen in the fray.

Thanks to Ernest Wilton's breastwork, their losses had not been very heavy.

Noah Webster was slightly wounded, and Black Harry badly; while the only one killed outright
was Tom Cannon, the whilom keen-sighted topman of the Susan Jane, who would never sight wreck
or sail more, for Sailor Bill was only wounded, and not dead, after all.

Jasper, who had been hiding beneath the embankment beside the boy's supposed lifeless body,
had perceived signs of returning animation in it, to which he immediately called the attention
of Seth and also Mr Rawlings, and the three were bending over the figure in a moment.  Just
almost a year before they were bending over Sailor Bill in precisely the same way in the cabin
of the Susan Jane.  The Indian's arrow had ploughed under the skin of the boy's forehead nearly
at the same place that bore the scar of his former wound when he had been picked up at sea,
and could not have inflicted any dangerous injury; it was evidently the shock of falling into
the foaming torrent from the tunnel, as it rushed into the river, that had rendered Sailor
Bill senseless for the time being.

He was now coming back to himself, for his limbs twitched convulsively, and there was a faint
tremor about the eyelids.

Just then Ernest Wilton came up and stood by the side of Mr Rawlings, while Seth was rubbing
the boy's bared chest vigorously with his brawny hand to hasten the restoration of the circulation;
and at that moment Sailor Bill opened his eyes--eyes that were expressionless no longer, but
with the light of reason in their hidden intelligence--and fixed his gaze on the young engineer
as if he recognised him at once.

"Ernest!" the boy exclaimed wonderingly, "what brings you here?  Why, where am I?"

And he looked from one to the other of the group around him in a half-puzzled way, "Jerusalem!"
ejaculated Seth, jumping to his feet and turning to the young engineer.  "He knows you, mister.
Ken you rec'lect him?"

"By Jove!" said Ernest, "I do believe it's my cousin, Frank Lester, now I hear his voice.  Frank!"

"Yes, Ernest," answered the boy, heaving a sigh of relief.  "Then it is you after all.  I thought
I was dreaming."

And he sank back into a calm sleep as if he were in bed.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

AFTER THE BATTLE.

"Now didn't I say so, Rawlings?" said Seth triumphantly, turning to that gentleman.  "I leave
it to any one if I didn't diagnose the boy's symptoms correctly!  I said ef he can meet with
a similar shock to that which cost him his reason, he'd get it back again.  I told you that
from the first on board the Susan Jane."

"You certainly did," replied Mr Rawlings.  "It's the most curious case I ever heard or read
of!  Do you think, Seth, when he wakes up he'll be still all right here?" tapping his forehead
expressively.

"Sartain as thaar's snakes in Virginny!" said the ex-mate, returning for a moment to his vernacular
mode of speech; although, his medical instincts asserting themselves again presently, he spoke
more formally and in professional style in continuation of his reply to Mr Rawlings. "He is
still in a semi-comatose condition, as that somnolent fit assures us; but he will sleep it
off, and rouse up by and by in the proper possession of his faculties, a glimpse of which we
observed just now."

"I'm right glad to hear it," said Mr Rawlings.  "What a difference that look of intelligence
in his eyes made in him!  I declare I would hardly have known him to be the same boy!"

"You're right there," said Seth.  "I've read in some book of the eyes bein' called `the windows
of the soul;' an' I believe it's pretty near the mark."

"Golly, massa Rawlings," put in Jasper at this juncture--the darkey had been dying to speak
for a long time--"p'raps him turn out to be gran' fine genelmun, for sure, 'sides bein' massa
Willerton's cuzzing, hey?"

"P'raps I'll souse you in the river if you don't make tracks and bring down somethin' as we
can take poor Sailor Bill up to the hut in," said Seth, speaking again in his customary way
and in a manner that Jasper plainly understood, for he disappeared at once, returning shortly
in company with Josh, the two bearing a mattress between them, on which the boy was placed,
still asleep, and carried up to the house, where he was softly put down on Mr Rawlings' bed
and left, with Seth watching by his side until he should wake up, as the latter expected, in
his proper senses.

The camp was in a state of tremendous excitement, as may be supposed, for no less than three
thrilling episodes of interest had occurred all in one day, any one of which would have been
sensational enough in itself to have afforded matter for gossip for a month.

The starting of the stamps--the attack and repulse of the long-dreaded Indian band--the fact
of Sailor Bill recovering his lost senses--all happening at once, all coming together!

It was too much for even the most apathetic of the miners to contemplate calmly.  And when,
after the final departure of the American soldiery-- whose commander returned, after pursuing
the Sioux for some distance amongst the Black Hills, to report that no further attack need
be feared from the band, which was now thoroughly dispersed and incapable of assailing the
camp a second time, that year at least--Minturne Creek resumed its normal quietude, and seemed
duller than ever after such stirring events as had recently been witnessed, the excited gold-diggers
gathered together in twos and threes, thinking over and talking about what had happened.

Beyond the stirring events that had happened they had also to mourn the loss of two of their
number, as gallant comrades as men ever had--for, ere long, Black Harry had followed the smart
foretopman to the silent land, succumbing to the dangerous wound he had received towards the
end of the struggle from an Indian tomahawk wielded by a powerful arm, which had almost cleft
the poor fellow's skull in twain; and, after so many months of close companionship, the death
of the two sailors was keenly felt.

The best way to banish painful thoughts, however, as Mr Rawlings knew from sad experience,
was to engage in active employment; so he did not allow the men to remain idle, although he
gave them ample time for a rest after the fight was over.

Summoning to his aid Noah Webster, who, like some of the others who had received trivial wounds,
made light of the bullet hole through his arm, he mustered the hands late in the afternoon
of the eventful day, and delivered a short practical address to them before resuming operations--
a speech which, being to the point, had the desired effect of making the men go back to their
work with a will.

"Now, lads," said he, "we must be up and going.  Sitting there talking will not bring back
the poor fellows that have gone.  I mourn our comrades just as much as you do, for they worked
steadfastly, like the honest, true-hearted men they were, through the hard time of toil and
trouble we had till recently, and at the last fought and died bravely in the defence of the
camp.  But, crying over them won't help them now; all we can do is to bury them where they
so nobly fell, and then turn our hands to carry on our work to the end that is now so near
in view, just as they would have insisted on doing if they had been alive still and with us!"

There was no more lethargy after Mr Rawlings' exhortation: as Solomon says,--"A word in season,
how good it is!"

The men sprang up with alacrity to set about what he had suggested rather than ordered; and,
as soon as graves had been dug in the shelter trench of the rampart that Tom Cannon and Black
Harry had held so courageously against the Indians, and their bodies interred with all proper
solemnity, Mr Rawlings himself reading the burial service over their remains, the miners grasped
their picks and shovels with one hand as they wiped away a tear with the other, and went back
to the mine, some of them possibly with the reflection that, all things considered, their slain
mates were perhaps after all now better off than themselves!

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

SAILOR BILL'S STORY.

After the sad ceremony which he had just performed, Mr Rawlings did not feel much inclined
for gold-seeking or any worldly affairs, although he went towards the mine as a matter of duty;
and when he reached the stamps he found Ernest Wilton already standing there, but looking pale
and perturbed, as if anxious about something.

"What is the matter?" said Mr Rawlings.  "You seem out of sorts, beyond what the loss of these
poor fellows would have affected you?"

"Yes, I am," replied the other.  "I can't help thinking of that cousin of mine, and why I did
not recognise him when I first saw him; but then he was quite a little boy at school, and who
would have dreamt of your picking him up at sea?"

"Strange things do happen sometimes," said Mr Rawlings.  "When was it that you last saw him
in England?"

"Four years ago last Christmas, if I recollect aright.  He was then a little schoolboy not
half his present size.  How on earth did he manage to get to sea? my aunt had a perfect horror
of a sailor's life, and would never have let him go willingly.  But, there, it only serves
me right for my selfish neglect!  As you told me before, I ought to have kept up my communication
with my family, and then I should have known all about it.  I can't help now fancying all sorts
of queer things that may have occurred.  My poor aunt, who used to be so fond of me, may be
dead; and my uncle, who was of a roving nature kindred to mine, may--"

"Nonsense!" said Mr Rawlings, good-naturedly, interrupting him.  "If you go on like that, you'll
imagine you're the man in the moon, or something else!  Sailor Bill, or rather your cousin
Frank, as we must now call him, will wake up presently and enlighten us as to how he came to
be in his present position--or rather in the Bay of Biscay, where we picked him up; for we
all know his subsequent history; and then you'll learn what you are now puzzling your brains
about, without any bother. I confess I am curious in the matter too, for I wish to know the
secret of that mysterious packet round his neck; but we must both wait with patience, and dismiss
the subject for the present from our minds.  Come along with me now, my boy," he added, as
the body of the miners hastened up after paying their last tribute of respect at their comrades'
graves. "I'm just going to have a look at your sluices, and see whether the stuff is coming
out as rich as before."

This invitation at once caused the young engineer to brighten up, as the idea of action had
aroused the miners from dwelling on what had happened.

The yield upon being examined proved fully as rich as before the first experiment.

"You see, Mr Rawlings," said Ernest, cordially holding out his hand for a friendly grip, "the
lead has turned out just as I fancied it would do, and my efforts to open it out proved successful.
You are now, as I told you would be the case, the richest man in this State, or in Montana
either, for that matter, with all their talk of Bonanza Kings there."

"You bet," chimed in Noah Webster, who felt equally proud and delighted with the young engineer
at the result of their joint operations; but Mr Rawlings could say little.

The Indian attack had hitherto prevented his realising this sudden change of fortune, and now
that he was fully conscious of it, all he could do was to silently shake Ernest Wilton's hand
first, and then Noah Webster's; and after that each of those of the miners who pressed near
him for the purpose, full of sympathy with "the good luck of the boss," and forgetting already
the fate of their lost comrades in the sight of the glittering metal before them--their natural
good spirits being perfectly restored a little later on, when Mr Rawlings assured them, on
his recovering his speech, that he fully intended now keeping to the promise he had given when
the venture was first undertaken, and would divide half the proceeds of the mine, share and
share alike, among the men, in addition to paying them the wages he had engaged to do.

The ringing hurrahs with which the jubilant miners gave vent to their gladness on the reiteration
of Mr Rawlings' promise, were so loud that they reached the ears of Seth, who was watching
by the sleeping boy, and the latter woke up immediately with a frightened air, as if suffering
from the keenest terror.

"It's all right, my b'y, all right," said Seth soothingly; and at the same time Wolf, who had
entered the house and crept up by the side of the bed, leapt up on the boy and licked his face.

"Where am I, Sam?" he said to Seth, the dog's greeting having apparently calmed him down as
well as the ex-mate's kindly manner; "are they after me still, Sam?"

"You are here with us," saith Seth, puzzled at the boy's addressing him so familiarly; "but
my name arn't Sam, leastways, not as I knows on."

The boy looked in his face, and seemed disappointed.

"No, you are not Sam, though you are like him.  Oh, now I recollect all?" and he hid his face
in his hands and burst into a passionate fit of crying, as if his heart would break.

"There, there," said Seth, patting him on the back, "it's all right, I tell you, my b'y; an'
when Seth says so I guess he means it!"

But the boy would not stop weeping; and Seth, thinking that some harm might result to his newly-awakened
reason if he went on like that, strode to the door and summoned help, with a stentorian hail
that rang through the valley as loudly as the cheer of the miners had done one instant before.

"Ahoy there, all hands on deck!" he shouted, hardly knowing what he was saying, adding a moment
afterwards, "Wilton, you're wanted!  Look sharp."

"Here I am," cried Wilton, hurrying up, with Mr Rawlings after him. "What is the matter now, Seth?"

"I can't make him do nothing" said that worthy hopelessly.  "He takes me to be some coon or
other called Sam, an' then when I speaks he turns on the water-power and goes on dreadful,
that I'm afeard he'll do himself harm.  Can't you quiet him, Wilton; he kinder knowed you jest
now?"

"I'll try," said Ernest; and kneeling by the boy's side, he drew his hands away from his face
and gently spoke to him.

"Frank! look at me: don't you know me?"

"Ye-e-es," sobbed he, "you--you are Ernest.  But how did you come here? you weren't on board
the ship.  Oh, father! where are you, and all the rest?"

And the boy burst out crying again, in an agony of grief which was quite painful to witness.

Presently, however, he grew more composed; and, in a broken way, Ernest managed to get his
story from him--a terrible tale of mutiny, and robbery, and murder on the high seas.

This was his story, as far as could be gathered from his disconnected details.

Frank Lester, much against his mother's wishes, had persuaded his father to take him with him
in the early part of the previous year to the diamond fields in South Africa, whither Mr Lester
was going for the purpose of purchasing some of the best stones he could get for a large firm
who intrusted him with the commission.  The object of the journey had been safely accomplished,
and Mr Lester and Frank reached Cape Town, where they took their return passage to England
in a vessel called the Dragon King.

Seth nudged Mr Rawlings at this point.

"Didn't I say that was the name of the desarted ship?" he asked in a whisper.

And Mr Rawlings nodded his assent.

The Dragon King--to continue Frank's, or Sailor Bill's story--was commanded by a rough sort
of captain, who was continually swearing at the men and ill-treating them; and, in the middle
of the voyage a mutiny broke out on board, started originally by some of the hands who wished
merely to deprive the captain of his authority, and put the first mate, who was much liked
by the men, in his place; but the outbreak was taken advantage of by a parcel of desperadoes
and ne'er-do-weels, who were returning home empty handed from the diamond diggings, and were
glad of the opportunity of plundering the ship and passengers--whence the mutiny, from being
first of an almost peaceful character, degenerated into a scene of bloodshed and violence which
it made Frank shudder to speak about.

His father, fearing what was about to happen, and that, as he was known as having been up the
country and in the possession of jewels of great value, the desperadoes would attempt to rob
him first, placed round Frank's neck, in the original parchment-covered parcel in which he
had received them from the bank at the diamond fields, the precious stones he had bought, with
all his own available capital as well as his employers' money, thinking that that would be
the last place where the thieves would search for them.

"And now they are lost," added the boy with another stifled sob, "and poor mother will be penniless."

"Nary a bit," said Seth; and pulling out the little packet by the silken string attached round
his neck--which the poor boy had not thought of feeling for even, he was so confident of his
loss--he disclosed it to his gaze.  "Is that the consarn, my b'y?" he asked.

"Oh!" exclaimed Frank in delighted surprise.  "It is, with the bank seal still unbroken, I
declare!"

And opening the parchment cover he showed Ernest and the rest some diamonds of the first water,
that must have been worth several thousand pounds.

After his father had given the parcel into his care, Frank went on to say, events transpired
exactly as he had anticipated.  Most of the passengers were robbed, and those that objected
to being despoiled tranquilly, murdered.  Amongst these were his father, whom the ruffians
killed more out of spite from not finding the valuables they expected on him.  He, Frank, escaped
through the kindness of one of the sailors, who took a fancy to him, and hid him up aloft in
the ship's foretop when the men who had possession of the ship would have killed him.

"This sailor," said Frank, "was just like that gentleman there," pointing to Seth.

"Waal neow, that's curious," said Seth.  "Was his name Sam?"

"It was," said the boy.

"This is curious," said Seth, looking round at the rest; "it is really. I wouldn't be at all
surprised as how that's my brother Sam I haven't heerd on for this many a year, or seed, although
he's a seafarin' man like myself, an' I oughter to 'ave run across his jib afore now.  Depend
on it, Rawlings, that the reason the boy stuck to me so when he hadn't got his wits, and came
for to rescue me aboard the Susan Jane, and arterwards, was on account of my likeness to Sam."

And as nobody could say him nay, it may be mentioned here that that was Seth's fervent belief
ever after.

The last recollection that Frank had of the ship and the mutineers was of an orgie on board
the Dragon King in the height of a storm, and of one of the murderous villains finding out
his retreat in the foretop, where the sailor who protected him lashed him to the rigging, so
that he could not tumble on deck if he should fall asleep.  He remembered a man with gleaming
eyes and great white teeth swearing at him, and making a cut at him with a drawn sword.  After
that, all was a complete blank to him till he had just now opened his eyes and recognised Ernest.

"An' yer don't recollect being picked up at sea an' taken aboard the Susan Jane, and brought
here, nor nuthin'?" inquired Seth.

"Nothing whatever," said Frank, who showed himself to be a remarkably intelligent boy now that
he had recovered his senses.  "I don't remember anything that happened in the interval."

"Waal, that is curious," observed Seth.

That was all the story that Frank Lester could tell of the mutiny on board the Dragon King,
and his wonderful preservation.

All the mutineers, and some of their victims too most probably, met their final doom shortly
afterwards in the storm that had dismasted the ship, leaving it to float derelict over the
surface of the ocean; all but the three whose corpses the visiting party from the Susan Jane
had noticed on the submerged deck.  These must have survived the tempest only to perish finally
from each other's murderous passions, after having lingered on in a state of semi-starvation
possibly--although Frank said that the desperadoes from the diamond fields, who were the ringleaders
on board, were originally the most attenuated, starved-looking mortals he had ever seen in
his life.

STORY ONE, CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

HOMEWARD-BOUND.

The work at the mine went on steadily.  The "pocket" was cleared of the quartz it contained,
and the whole, amounting to two hundred and fifty tons, passed through the stamp.

The soldiers, on their return from their victory over the Sioux, had spread the news of the
wonderful find of gold at Minturne Creek, and miners had flocked up in hundreds.  When the
pocket was emptied, a debate arose whether a heading should be driven along the course of the
lode to the spot where Mr Rawlings' cousin had struck gold, and where it was probable that
another pocket existed.  It was, however, decided to accept the offer of a body of wealthy
speculators, who offered 100,000 pounds for the set.  This was indeed far less than they would
have gleaned from it had the second pocket turned out as rich as the first, for the gold, when
all the quartz was crushed, amounted in value to 350,000 pounds.  Half of the total amount
was divided by Mr Rawlings, according to his promise, among the miners.  Seth receiving three
shares, Noah Webster two, and the men one each.  To Ernest Wilton he gave one-fourth of his
own share of the proceeds.

Then, starting from the spot where they had toiled so hard, the little band set out for the
haunts of civilisation once more, leaving behind, where they had found a solitary valley, a
place dotted with huts and alive with busy men.

At Bismark the men separated, some to proceed back to their beloved California, to star it
among their fellows with their newly acquired wealth, others to dissipate it in riotous living
in the nearest frontier towns, while others again, struck with the greed of gold, thought that
they had not yet got enough, and proceeded rapidly to gamble away what they had.

Mr Rawlings went eastwards towards Boston, intending to take steamer thence to England, which
he resolved never to leave again in the pursuit of adventure now that fortune had so generously
befriended him; and with him came Ernest Wilton, taking charge of his recovered cousin; and
Seth, who could not bear to lose sight of his former protege.

Josh and Jasper had been left behind, the two darkeys sinking their mutual jealousy, and determining
to start a coloured hotel on the Missouri, for the benefit of travelling gentlemen of their
own persuasion; so too had Noah Webster, who said he liked hunting better than civilisation,
and intended to pass the remainder of his days out west in the company of Moose, who was as
eager after game as he was himself and as fearless of the Indians, should they again trouble
them, after their Minturne Creek experiences.

Wolf, however, was one of the homeward-bound party.  He certainly could not be abandoned after
all his faithful services, and the wonderful instinct he had displayed, more than his master
had done, in recognising Frank, whom he had not seen since puppyhood, when Ernest Wilton's
aunt, Frank's mother, gave him to the young engineer.

As luck would have it, on the arrival of Mr Rawlings and his party at Boston whom should they
meet accidentally at the railway depot but Captain Blowser, of the Susan Jane, as hearty and
jolly as of yore, and delighted to see them!  His ship he "guessed" was just going to Europe,
and he would be only too glad of their taking passage in her.

Need it be mentioned that the captain's offer was accepted; and that, long before Frank Lester--the
"Sailor Bill" whom Seth loved, and the crew of the Susan Jane and the gold-miners of Minturne
Creek had regarded with such affection--had arrived in England to gladden his mother's heart
by his restoration, as if from the dead, when he had long been given up for lost, together
with his father's property which he carried with him, he had learnt every detail, as if he
had been in his right senses at the time, of how he had been "Picked up at Sea?"

STORY TWO, CHAPTER ONE.

GREEK PIRATES AND TURKISH BRIGANDS.  A TALE OF ADVENTURE BY SEA AND LAND.

IN BEYROUT HARBOUR.

"It's a thundering shame our sticking here so long; and I'm sick of the beastly old place,"
said Tom Aldridge in a grumbling tone, as he leant over the bulwarks listlessly, crumbling
bits of biscuit into the sea to attract the fish, which would not be attracted, and gazing
in an idle way at the roof of the pacha's palace, that glittered under the rays of the bright
Syrian sun.  "I'm sick of the place, Charley!" he repeated, more venomously than before.

"So am I, Tom," said Charley Onslow, his fellow-midshipman on board the Muscadine, an English
barque of some seven or eight hundred tons, that lay, along with several foreign vessels of
different rig, in the bay of Beyrout--as pretty a harbour as could be picked out in a score
of voyages, and about the busiest port in the whole of the Levant.

"So am I, Tom," said Charley with the utmost heartiness.  "I am as tired of it as I am of the
eternal dates and coffee, coffee and dates, on which these blessed Arab beggars live, and which
everybody makes a point of offering to one, if a chap goes ashore for a minute; while, on board,
we've nothing now to do but to check off the freight as it comes alongside before it's lowered
in the hold, and look out at the unchanging picture around us, which is so familiar that I
believe I could paint it with my eyes shut if I were an artist.  Talk of the beauty of Beyrout,
indeed!  To my taste, it's the most monotonous hole I was ever in in my life, and I hate it!"

And yet, in spite of Charley Onslow's peevish criticism, the scene around him and his companion
was charming enough.

The Muscadine was anchored out in the roads, close to the jutting promontory on which the lazaretto
buildings were lately erected, that stretched out like an arm into the harbour; and the view
from her deck presented a beautiful panorama of the semi-European, semi-Oriental town, nestling
on the very edge of the blue waters of the Mediterranean, and surrounded by gently-undulating
hills, that were terraced with symmetrical rows of trim olive-trees and vineyards, rising tier
upon tier, the one above the other; amidst which, occasionally peeped out slily the white cupola
of some suburban villa belonging to one of the wealthy merchants of the port, or the minaret
of a Moslem mosque, standing out conspicuously against the shrubbery of foliage formed of different
tints of green, from the palest emerald shade to the deepest indigo, that culminated finally
in the cedar-crowned heights of the mountains of Lebanon in the purple distance.

It was not a quiet scene either, as might have been imagined from the idle ennui of both the
young sailors, whom it seemed to have well-nigh bored to death.  On the contrary, to an unprejudiced
looker-on it was quite the reverse of being inactive.

In the foreground the harbour was lively enough, with boats and caravels, and other Turkish
craft of all sizes and shapes, darting here and there like great white-winged dragon-flies,
as they were wafted swiftly one moment by some passing whiff of air, or lying still on the
surface of the sea as the wind fell and they were temporarily becalmed, until another gust
came from the hills to rouse them out of their noontide sluggishness.

Amongst them, too, were ships' boats belonging to the different vessels, anchored, like the
Muscadine, out in the roads, being pulled to and from the shore, anon laden with merchandise,
anon returning for more; while, of course, the dingy black smoke and steady paddle-beat of
the inevitable steamer, that marks the progress of Western civilisation in the East, made themselves
seen and heard, to complete the picture and make the contrast the more striking.

"Tom," said Charley presently, after the two had remained silent for some time, still standing
in the shade of the awning aft, that protected them from the burning heat of the sun, which
was at its most potent point, it being just mid-day.

"Yes," said the other grumpily, as if disinclined even for conversation.

"It has just gone eight bells."

"Can't I hear as well as you, Charley?  What's the use of bothering a fellow?  Do leave me alone."

"I only wanted to say, Tom, that the skipper said we might go ashore this afternoon if we liked,
as soon as the second mate came on board; and there he is coming off in the jolly-boat now."

"I don't care whether Tompkins comes off or not," replied Tom Aldridge in the same peevish
tone as he had spoken at first.  "What's the good of going ashore?"

"Oh, lots of good," said Charley Onslow more cheerily.  "Better than stopping here cooped-up
like a fowl and being grilled in the sun."

"Well, I can't see the difference between getting roasted ashore and roasted on board, for
my part," retorted Tom.  "It's six of one and half-a-dozen of the other."

"You lazy duffer!" said Charley laughing; "you are incorrigible.  But do come along with me,
Tom.  We haven't landed now for two days, and I can't stand the Muscadine any longer."

"I suppose you'll have your way, as you always do," grumbled the other, turning away at last
from his listless contemplation of the prospect with which he had owned himself so disgusted.
"I don't know how it is, Charley, but you seem to manage me and everybody here just as you
like; you can come round the skipper even, when you set your mind to it, and that is what no
one else can do!"

"You forget Mr Tompkins."

"I don't count him at all," said Tom Aldridge indignantly.  "He's a sneak, and gets his way
by wheedling and shoe-scraping!  But you, Charley, go to work in quite a different fashion.
Why, I'm hanged if you don't cheek a fellow when you want to get something out of him. It's
your Irish impudence that does it, my boy, I expect."

"Sure, an' it's a way we have in the ould counthry," said Charley, putting on the brogue so
easily that it seemed natural to him--which indeed it was, as he was born not twenty miles
from Cork, in the neighbourhood of which is situated the far-famed "Blarney stone," that is
supposed to endow those who kiss it with the "gift of the gab;" and Charley must have "osculated
it," as a Yankee would say, to some purpose.

"Be jabers, thin, ye spalpeen," laughed Tom--who had got out of his grumpy state quickly enough;
for his disposition was almost as light-hearted as that of his friend, and it was only the
heat and the confinement on board ship when in harbour that had previously oppressed his spirits--"let
us look smart, and be off.  Here's that fellow Tompkins just coming up the side, and I don't
want any more of his company than I can help!  Tell him we're going by the captain's permission,
Charley.  I don't want to say a word to him after that row this morning.  You are still on
speaking terms with him, and I'm not. And while you are settling matters with the old sneak,
I'll get the dinghy ready, and fetch up the bottle of brandy I promised that jolly old Turk
at the coffee-shop."

"You'd better water it a bit, Tom," said Charley, as the other was diving down the companion-stairs.
"It's awfully strong; and you know Mohammedans are not accustomed to it."

"Not a drop of it, my boy," replied he, disappearing for a moment from view, and his voice
receding in the distance.  "I promised the old infidel that he should have the real stuff,
and I'll let him see that a giaour can keep his word."

In a second or two he came up again, the bottle, however, concealed in the pocket of his reefer
of light blue serge.  And hauling in the painter of the boat, which was floating astern, while
Charley was still confabulating with the second officer, who had come on board in the meantime,
he sat himself down in her, and waited patiently till his chum had done with the obnoxious
Mr Tompkins, who seemed to have a good deal to say, and that of a not very pleasant character.
"Bother the chap!" said Charley, when he was at length released, and, shinning down a rope,
sat down in the stern-sheets of the dinghy, as Tom Aldridge took up the sculls and shoved off
from the ship.  "He's got as much to say as Noah's great-grandmother.  And the gist of it all,
fault-finding, of course."

"What can you expect from a pig, eh?" said Tom, philosophically, when the boat was well clear
of the Muscadine, setting to work leisurely and pulling to shore, while Charley reclined at
his ease on the cushions which he had taken the trouble to fix up for himself, and--did nothing,
as usual.

It was the general sort of "division of labour" amongst them.

However, they were fast friends, and, as Tom didn't complain, nobody else has any right to
find fault.

"A grunt, I suppose," replied Charley, in answer to Tom's conundrum. "At least, from a Welsh
pig, like Tompkins.  An Irish one, bedad! would have better manners."

"Bravo, Charley!" exclaimed Tom, bursting out into a laugh in which his companion as heartily
joined.  "You stick to your country, at all events, which is more than can be said for our
leek-eating friend.  He always wishes to deny that he belongs to the land of the Cymri and
hails from Swansea, as he does.  The sneak!  I'm sure a decent Welshman would be ashamed to
own him.  But, don't let us worry ourselves any longer about Tompkins; it's bad enough to have
him with us on board, without lugging him ashore, too; hang him!"

"Ay, ay, so say I," sang out Charley, in the best accord.

And then, after a few more vigorous strokes from the sculls, propelled by Tom's muscular arms,
the bow of the dinghy stranded on the sandy shore, and the two boys landed in the highest glee,
without a trace of the ill-humour and despondency in which they had been apparently plunged
not an hour or so before.

STORY TWO, CHAPTER TWO.

THE COFFEE-SHOP IN BEYROUT.

Pushing past the crowds of busy and idle people, Greeks, Turks, Armenians, Maronites, Arabs,
Frenchmen, and a few English, like themselves, who thronged the narrow streets, which were
lined on either side with stores built in the American fashion for the disposal of European
goods; narrow Eastern shops, and bazaars and caravanserais, hung with carpets, and displaying
grapes and figs, and all sorts of fruit in true Oriental style; they made their way towards
a Turkish coffee-house that was situated not far from the waterside, and much patronised by
those who, like themselves, had to do with ships and seafaring concerns--although, they did
not arrive very quickly at their destination, for the time for the noonday halt having passed
by, the usual caravans from Damascus and the interior were coming in, long trains of camels,
asses, and mules, laden with coffee, raw silk, rhubarb, untanned leather, figs, aromatic gums,
and all the varied merchandise that comes through Arabia and Persia to the ports of the Levant;
and, consequently, the main thoroughfares were so blocked with these commercial pilgrims from
the desert, that it was as much as Tom and Charley could do to get along.

They did it at length, however, by dint of shoving themselves unceremoniously through the lookers-on
who congregated to see the caravans pass, taking no notice of the many invocations to Allah
to curse them, as "dogs of Christians," who profaned the sacred presence of the followers of
Islam by breathing the same air as themselves; finally reaching the courtyard of Mohammed's
khan, after much jostling and struggling and good-natured expostulation and repartee, enlivened
with many a hearty laugh as some donkey driver came to grief with his load, or when a venerable
Arab sheikh on a tall dromedary sputtered with rage at finding the way impassable and his dignity
hurt.

The Turk who kept the khan, or coffee-house, was a middle-aged man, who had seen a good deal
of all sorts of life in knocking about the world, and was so cosmopolitan in his character
that he was almost denationalised.  He had a round, good-humoured face, that told as plainly
as face could tell that he was no ascetic, or rigid Mussulman bound to the edicts of the Koran,
but one who liked good living as well as most folk.

Tom's description of him hit him off exactly; he was decidedly "a jolly old Turk"--nothing
more nor less.

On seeing the boys come in, he at once made places for them beside him on the divan, where
he sat on a pile of cushions smoking a long chibouque, with a coffee-cup beside him on a little
tray, that also contained sweetmeats, from which he took an occasional sip in the intervals,
when he removed the stem of his pipe from his lips and emitted a vast volume of tobacco-smoke
in one long puff.

"Aha, my young capitan!" said he to Tom Aldridge, when they had seated themselves, cross-legged,
as he was, and accepted the chibouques brought to them immediately by an Arab boy, "you ver
long time coming to see me. I tinks I nevare see yous no more!"

He spoke broken English, but with his genial manner and broad smile of welcome made himself
readily understood.

"I couldn't come before," said Tom.  "But I didn't forget you all the same, for I've brought
what I promised, the bottle of--"

"Hush-h!" interrupted old Mohammed, with a warning gesture, placing his hand before Tom's mouth.
"De med-i-seen for my leg?  Ah, yase, I recollects.  I am ver mooch oblige.  Tanks.  You'll
have some cafe?"

"No, thank you," replied Tom.  "I and my friend here are sick of coffee; let us have some sherbet
instead, although we don't want anything.  We only came to have a chat with you and a smoke,
that's all."

"That is all raite, my frens.  I don't like mooch coffees myselfs.  De med-i-seen is mooch
bettaires," said Mohammed, patting his stomach and grinning again, as he winked knowingly at
Tom, in a manner that would have shocked a true believer, while he shouted out an order to
the Arab boy.  "But, de sheerbeet is goot for de leetle boys, O yase."

"Cunning old rogue," said Charley, aside to Tom.  "He wants all the brandy for himself, although
he wouldn't like his fellow-religionists to know that he drank it.  I suppose if we wished
for some, we would have to ask for a drop of the med-i-seen."

"Oh, he's not a bad sort," replied Tom.  "He has offered me wine many a time, and he's a generous
old chap, I should think.  Well, Mohammed," he continued, aloud, "and how's business?"

"Ver bad, ver bad inteet," said that worthy.  "I nevare did no worse in my loife.  I shall
have to shoot up de shop soon."

"That's a good one!" exclaimed Tom.  "You can tell that to the marines. I bet you've got a
snug little pile of piastres stowed away somewhere."

"P'raps I haive," said the old Turk, nodding his head as he smiled complacently; "and if you
young shentlemens should be vat you call `ard oop,' I could lend you some moneys.  But don't
talk so loud," he added cautiously, casting a glance at a group of Greek sailors who were gabbling
away near them, and scanning Tom and Charley curiously, "I don't like de look of dose fellows
dere, and dey might hear us talk if dey leesten, and vill remembers."

"What of that?" asked Charley; "I don't suppose they would understand us."

"Aha, so you tink," said Mohammed warily.  "But dose Grecs are ver knowing and oop to every
ting.  Dey are bad, ver bad, every one."

As he spoke two of the Greeks separated themselves from the group, and came over to where they
were sitting, as if sent for the purpose.

"I understand," said one, who acted as spokesman, and addressed them in the most perfect English,
"that your captain is in want of hands?"

The question was pertinent enough, as more than half the crew were laid up in the Beyrout hospital,
or lazaretto, with a sort of malarial fever, and the Muscadine was only waiting for their recovery,
or until enough hands could be shipped, to enable her to pursue her voyage to her next port,
Smyrna, where she was to complete her cargo, and then sail for England.

The boys of course knew this well enough, but they did not see it was any business of the Greeks,
and after Mohammed's hint as to their character they resented the inquiry as a piece of impudence.

"How do you know which is our ship?" said Charley, in Irish fashion asking another question,
in lieu of answering the one addressed to him; "and if you do, whether she wants hands or not?"

He spoke rather uncivilly, but the man replied to him with studied politeness.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said he, "but the Muscadine is the only English ship in the harbour,
and any one who has travelled like myself could easily tell the nationality of yourself and
your friend.  I am aware, also, that several of your crew are laid up in hospital."

"And supposing such is the case," said Tom Aldridge, taking up the cudgels, "what then?"

"Only, sir," replied the man, even more obsequiously than before, "I and several others here,
who are in want of a ship, would be glad to sign articles with you."

"The others you mention are Greeks like yourself, I suppose?" inquired Tom, still brusquely,
as if he did not care whether he offended his interlocutor or not.

"Yes, sir," said the man, "but my countrymen are generally reckoned to make good sailors, and
ship in all sorts of vessels to all parts of the world."

"That may be," answered Tom, who hardly knew what to say, "but it is no concern of mine.  You
had better speak to Captain Harding about the matter; we can't engage you."

"No?" said the man with a half sneer, half smile on his face, and he seemed about to say something
nasty; but he altered his mind before he uttered the words, and completed his sentence with
another civil inquiry, at which neither Tom nor Charley could take offence.  "And, where can
I and my friends see the captain, sir?"

"On board, any time before ten in the morning or after sunset in the evening," said Tom curtly.

He didn't like the man, but he was at a loss how he could put him off in any other way.

"Thank you, sir, I'm deeply obliged for your condescension," said the Greek, who then regained
his comrades, and the group presently walked out of the khan.

"Bismillah!" ejaculated Mohammed as soon as the Greeks had disappeared. "Can I believe my eyes?
That scoundrel has got the impudence of Sheitan, and must be in league with the spirits of Eblis."

"Who is he? do you know him?" eagerly asked Tom and Charley almost in one breath of the Turk,
who exhibited all the appearance of stupefied astonishment.

"Mashallah! do I know him?" gasped out Mohammed, his emotion nearly choking him.  "Allah is
great and Mohammed is his prophet--do I know him?" he repeated, taking a long draw at his chibouque
as if to calm his nerves, while he lay back for a moment motionless amid his cushions.

"Well, who on earth is he, Mohammed?" demanded Tom abruptly--"that is, unless the a--medicine--has
got into your head."

While the Greek had been talking to Charley in the first instance, it may be mentioned that
Tom had dexterously transferred the bottle of brandy to the keeping of the Turk, who had secreted
it behind his back, after turning half aside and pouring out a pretty good dose into his coffee-cup,
all with the most rapid legerdemain as if he were a practical conjuror.

"Effendi," said Mohammed with dignity, "you insult me by such a remark. The sight of that man--that
Grec, that villainous piratt, quite overwhelmed me."

"Pirate!" said Charley, for Tom was too much abashed by the Turk's rebuke to speak.

"Yes, piratt," repeated Mohammed firmly.  "That would-be simple Grec sailor, as he represented
himself to you, was no one else than Demetri Pedrovanto, better known in the Aegean Sea, as
`The Corsair of Chios.' There's a price of ten thousand piastres on his head.  Mashallah! 
How he dares show himself in Beyrout, amongst the enemy he has plundered, I know not.  However,
kismet! 'tis his fate, I suppose."

"Are you sure?" asked Charley, who was inclined to think that Mohammed was cramming them.

"Effendi, throw dirt on my beard if I lie.  It is Demetri Pedrovanto, sure enough."

"But I never heard of pirates being about in these waters, with so many French and English
cruisers going backwards and forwards in the neighbourhood," observed Tom.

"Aha, you Inglese and Frenchmans don't know everyting!" said the Turk laconically, after emitting
another volume of smoke, which he had been apparently accumulating all the time he had been
speaking previously. "There are alway piratts in dese seas, and always will be, as long as
Grecs are Grecs!"

"Ah, you say that because you are a Turk," said Charley chaffingly.

"No, no, no," replied Mohammed, shaking his head vehemently.  "I'm not one great bigot because
I have been born under the crescent.  I am cosmopolitaine.  You ask your consul, or ze Americans,
dey will tell you the same.  All dose Grecs are piratts, and dem as isn't piratts are brigands,
tiefs, every one."

"Well, you've got a very good opinion of them at any rate," said Tom. "I wonder what the beggar
spoke to us for, eh?  If he is the man you say, I don't suppose he would have the cheek to
go on board the Muscadine."

"No, I should think not," agreed Charley; "and if he does, the skipper will soon overhaul his
papers, and then find him out."

"Aha, ah!" grunted out Mohammed.  "De Grec is one ver clevaire rogue, and would sheet Sheitan
himself."

"Who is he?" asked Charley innocently.  "I heard you mention him before."

"De Debble!" answered the Turk, so gravely that both the young fellows burst out into such
paroxysms of laughter that Mohammed thought they were ridiculing him, and they had much difficulty
in assuring him to the contrary.  Indeed, it was not until late in the evening, after they
had dinner of kebabs and coffee and their host had imbibed several cups of his "med-i-seen,"
that he grew friendly again; and then, he was so cordial that he wept over them at their departure,
and assured them that he loved them as his own children, as his brothers, as his father, nay,
even as his great-grandfather, who had borne the standard of the prophet in the annual pilgrimage
to Mecca!

When Tom and Charley got on board the Muscadine, they saw only the second officer, Mr Tompkins,
who after telling them that they were very late, and that the captain had turned in long since,
said they might go below; which of course, as the ship was in harbour and only an anchor watch
kept, when their services were not required, they were extremely grateful for, and turned in
accordingly, without giving a thought to their rencontre at the khan.

The next morning, however, when they came on deck they saw three or four Greek sailors lounging
about the foc's'le, and Mohammed's warning recurred to there with startling significance.

"Who are those men?" asked Charley of Mr Tompkins, who was in command of the vessel for the
time being, Captain Harding, the skipper, having gone ashore, and the chief mate being invalided
with those of the crew who were in the lazaretto.

"Some new hands the captain shipped last night," answered he; "and if you've any more business
ashore, Master Onslow, you'd better look sharp about it, as we're going to sail as soon as
we've obtained pratique, which will be about four bells, I reckon."

"But, does Cap'en Harding know about them?" asked Tom, sinking his objection to having any
conversation with the second officer in the urgency of the occasion.

"You mind your own business, you young dog," said Tompkins, glad to have the opportunity of
snubbing Tom.  "I suppose you would like to command this ship, but you sha'n't while I'm on board."

"You cad!" muttered Tom under his breath, as he walked away forward to look at the men more
closely.  "I wish I had you on land for a quiet half hour, and I'd soon take the starch out
of you!"

"None of your jaw," shouted the second mate as a parting shot.  "I hear you, and if you speak
another word I'll have you put in irons for mutiny," swearing also a fearful oath.  So Tom
had to put up with the other's language and nurse his wrath until the skipper came on board.

When Charley joined him presently, they took note of the new additions to the crew, who were
altogether eight in number; but to their surprise they did not see the Greek among them whom
Mohammed had indicated as being the far-famed corsair; and on their comparing their views they
both agreed that the worthy Turk must have been "slinging the hatchet" at their expense, or
else mistaken about the supposed pirate.

On Captain Harding coming off, however, they thought it their duty to tell him what they heard;
but the skipper, who was a bold bluff English sailor, laughed the Turk's warning to scorn,
and joked the young fellows for taking any notice of it.

"What!  Mohammed told you, the keeper of the khan by the Capuchin monastery.  My dear boys,
he was only humbugging you.  I saw the old rascal this very morning hauled up before the cadi,
for being drunk and kicking up a row.  He must be able to spin a fine yarn when he has a mind
to.  There are no pirates nowadays in the Mediterranean; and if we do come across any, I believe
the Muscadine will be able to give a good account of them.  Pirates! bless my soul, what a
tremendous liar that old Turk must be!  Those Greeks I've shipped are honest sailors enough;
for I've examined their papers, and had them before our consul. Besides, I've told them what
sort of discipline I keep on board my ship; and they are not likely to try and come the old
soldier over me--not if John Harding knows it!"

"But, captain," put in Tom.

The skipper wouldn't hear any more, however.  "Now get to your stations, lads," said he, to
show that the private interview was at an end.  "Mr Aldridge, I must make you acting second
officer in Mr Tompkins' place, as I've promoted him to poor Wilson's berth until he can join
me at Smyrna, as I'm bound to start at once now that I have filled-up the vacancies amongst
my crew.  Charley Onslow, remain aft with me.  All hands up anchor, and make sail!"

In a short time the men working together with a will, and the new hands specially distinguishing
themselves for their activity in so marked a manner as to call forth the approval of the generally
grumbling Mr Tompkins--although, perhaps, he praised them because Tom and Charley had suspected
them--the Muscadine had her anchor at the catheads; and, her topsails having been dropped long
before, was sailing gaily out of Beyrout harbour, under the influence of the land-breeze that
sprang up towards the afternoon, blowing briskly off shore.

When she had got a good offing, and the mountains of Lebanon began to sink below the horizon
in the distance as she bowled along merrily on her north-western course, a long way to the
southward of Cyprus, bearing up direct for the Archipelago, a keen observer on board might
have noticed something that looked strange, at all events on the face of it.

No sooner had the shades of evening begun to fall than a long low suspicious-looking vessel
crept out from the lee of the land, and followed right in the track of the Muscadine, as if
in chase of the English ship.

It was a swift-sailing lateen-rigged felucca, one of those crafts that are common enough in
Eastern waters, especially in the Levant.

She spread a tremendous amount of canvas; and leaping through the sea with the pace of a dolphin,
came up with the doomed merchantman hand over hand.

STORY TWO, CHAPTER THREE.

FRIENDS IN COUNCIL.

The Muscadine when she left England had a crew of some twenty hands, or with the captain, and
first and second mates, and our friends Tom and Charley, twenty-five men altogether--a very
fair average, as the proportion of the seamen usually borne in merchant ships is at the rate
of about three to every hundred tons of the vessel's burthen.

Through the illness, however, of the fust officer, Mr Wilson, an amiable man and a thorough
sailor, whom everybody liked--quite the reverse of the odious Tompkins, Tom's and Charley's
special bete-noir-- and a large number of the seamen, whom they were forced to leave behind
in hospital at Beyrout, the complement of the ship was much reduced, and her crew now mustered,
officers and men, but twenty in number, of which total twelve were Englishmen who had originally
belonged to her, and eight the Greeks whom the captain had so suddenly shipped at the last moment.

"It's a good job that Cap'en Harding didn't get any more of those blessed Greeks aboard: they're
almost equal to us now, man for man," said Tom to Charley, who on this first night of their
being at sea after so long a detention in port was performing an act of not altogether disinterested
friendship in sharing the first watch on deck of the newly-promoted "second mate," as he would
persist in addressing Tom.

"Yes, sir; I think you are about right, sir," replied Charley, with a mock deference, which
made Tom grin in spite of his endeavours to preserve a dignified composure.  "Is there anything
else, sir, you'd like me to say, sir?"

"Only, that I'll kick you in the lee scuppers if you call me `sir' again.  But, Charley, joking
aside, I don't like us having all those Greeks here, and we so short-handed too."

"Don't you see that that is the precise reason why they are here, most sapient of second officers?
if we hadn't been short-handed the cap'en wouldn't have shipped them."

"Yes, yes, I know that," replied the other shortly.  "You don't seem to follow me, Charley,
really.  What I meant to point out was, that there are only twelve of us belonging to the ship
on whom we could rely-- indeed only eleven, for that matter, as I don't count on Tompkins;
a bully like him would be sure to show the white-feather in a scrimmage-- while these Greek
chaps muster eight strong, all of them pretty biggish men, too, and all armed with them beastly
long knives of theirs, which I've no doubt they know how to use."

"Bless you, Tom, Cap'en Harding would be a match for half-a-dozen of them with his revolver;
and you and I would be able to master the other two, without calling for aid on any of the
foremast hands, or relying on your chum Tompkins.  How fond you're of him, Tom!"

"Hang Tompkins, and you too, Charley!  You can't be serious for a moment!"

"Oh yes I can, Tom; and I will be, now!  I tell you what, old chap, your sudden promotion has
disagreed with you, and you are trying to manufacture a mountain out of a molehill.  Those
Greeks are not such fools to attack us unless they gained over the rest of the crew on their
side; and you know that's impossible; for every Englishman forward now in the foc's'le I'd
stake my life on; and so would you, Tom, as they've shipped with old Harding every voyage he
has sailed since he's been captain of the craft.  You've got a fit of the blue-devils or something,
Tom, that makes you so unlike yourself; or else that blessed old Turk's nonsense made a deeper
impression on you than it has on me!"

"You're right, Charley," said Tom Aldridge, giving himself a shake as if to dispel his strange
forebodings.  "I don't know what has come over me to-night.  Of course, if those beggars should
rise, we could whop them easily enough.  To tell you the truth, I shouldn't mind if they did,
if Tompkins only got a knock on the head in the fight!"

"Bravo, Tom! that's more like yourself!  But isn't your watch nearly over?  It must be six
bells by now; the moon is getting up."

"So it is, Charley I wish you would call that beast for me; it's time he was on deck."

"All right!" shouted the other with a laugh, scuttling down, and hammering at the first mate's
cabin-door, so loudly that Tom could hear him plainly above, and also Mr Tompkins' deeply growled
oaths in response to the summons, after it was repeated once more with all the strength of
the middy's fists beating a tattoo.

"He'll be here in a minute," said Charley, as he hurried up the companion in advance of the
gentleman he had called to relieve Tom's watch; although Tompkins came pretty close behind
him, swearing still, and glaring at the two young fellows in the moonlight as if he could "eat
them without salt," as Charley said.

Before going below, Tom gave the first mate the ship's course, as was customary, "nor'-west
and by north," reporting also that all was right and nothing in sight, no vessel had passed
them during the night; and then he and Charley turned into their bunks, with the expectation
of having a better "caulk" than they had had all the time the Muscadine had lain at anchor
in Beyrout Roads, for while there, the heat and lassitude produced by their having almost nothing
to do had so banished sleep that they hardly cared when the time came for their "watch below."
Now, however, it was all different; as what with the bustle of preparation in storing the last
of their cargo, and seeing to those endless little matters which had to be put in ship-shape
manner before the anchor was weighed, and the actual departure itself, their time had been
fully occupied nearly from dawn to sundown, and their feet and hands busy enough in running
about on deck and aloft, directing the crew under the captain's orders, and lending assistance
where wanted.  So it was with the comfortable assurance of having earned their four hours'
rest that they went below that first night at sea.

"I guess old Tompkins will have to rap pretty loud to make me budge at eight bells," said Tom
with a portentous yawn, as he peeled off his reefing jacket and turned in "all standing," as
he expressed it, with the exception of his boots.  He was too tired to undress; and besides,
he thought, in his lazy way, what was the use of his doing so when he would have to turn out
again and relieve the first mate at four o'clock in the morning, just as he was beginning to
enjoy himself.

"By George, a sailor's life is a dog's life!" he muttered out aloud.

"What, eh?" sleepily murmured Charley from the other bunk adjacent, the two occupying one cabin
between them; and, presently, the pair were "wrapped in the arms of Morpheus," and snoring
like troopers in concert, the captain playing a nasal obligato from his state-room in the distance,
whither he had retired a short time before themselves, after being satisfied that the ship
was proceeding well on her course and everything all right.

And all this time the Muscadine was bowling so favourably along at the rate of some eight knots
an hour, carrying with her the fair wind with which she had started from port, the felucca
that had left the Syrian coast shortly after still followed in her track, although hull-down
on the horizon, and her white lateen sails only just dimly discernible to a sharp eye that
was looking out for her, under the rays of the rising moon, which now emerged from the waste
of water that surrounded the two vessels with its fathomless expanse.  But who on board the
merchant ship suspected that they were pursued or looked out for the felucca, dead astern as
she was, and only a tiny speck on the ocean?

STORY TWO, CHAPTER FOUR.

THE STRANGE SAIL.

Mr Tompkins, the late second and now first officer of the Muscadine, besides possessing a nasty,
grumbling, fault-finding temper for the benefit of those under him, and a mean, sly, sneaking
sort of way of ingratiating himself with his superiors, was as obstinate as a mule, and one
of those men who would have his way, if he could, no matter what might be the consequences.
When he was able, as was the case with the men he was unfortunate enough to command, he bullied
those who might differ from him into acquiescence with his views; with those over him in authority
he adopted another course, that of wheedling and slavish "shoe-scraping," as Tom Aldridge termed
it; but in both instances he generally succeeded in carrying his point, and arranging things
in the manner he had previously made up his mind to.

Now, with eight strange hands, and those foreigners, who had lately come on board, any reasonable
person would have naturally divided them four and four in each watch, thus mixing them up with
the eight English able seamen left of the Muscadine's original crew; but no, Mr Tompkins was
of a different opinion, and what was more, carried round Captain Harding to his way of thinking,
much to Tom and Charley's surprise.  It was not on account of the new first mate having any
ulterior designs on the ship or cargo--that idea may be dismissed at once, for he neither had
the villainy nor pluck for such a proceeding.  His real object was, that these new men were
all fresh to the vessel and had not yet any experience of his persuasive ways; unlike the old
hands, who knew Mr Tompkins so well that they hated him and shirked work when he was to the
fore--and by getting them all into his watch matters would be able to go easy with him, and
he would be able to astonish everybody by the way in which he got the duty done when he had
charge of the ship, instead of having to call on the assistance of the skipper when his orders
were not obeyed, as had frequently been the case before.

He did not tell Captain Harding this, however.  His explanation of the proposed plan was, that
the men, being all Greeks, would work better together, as they had already shown when making
sail; and, as he understood Lingua Franca, which all foreign sailors can speak, he could manage
them better than "such a boy as young Aldridge," who might get along well enough with the old
hands who knew him, but would be powerless to exercise any authority over those foreigners,
who wanted a man to drill them.

"Very well, Tompkins," said Captain Harding, when the first mate had well-nigh deluged him
with his reasons.  "I suppose you know best; and as you've got to see to the working of the
ship you can have your own way, though what you can see to prefer those ill-looking beggars
to decent British tars I'm sure I can't understand.  I'm glad you're not afraid of them, at
any rate?"

"Afraid, sir!" repeated Tompkins scornfully, with any amount of braggadocia.  "These foreigners
only want you to let them see you are master, and they're tame enough.  It is only from want
of firmness that any trouble ever breaks out when they're on board an English ship.  They need
a strict hand over them, that's all."

"All right, Tompkins.  Only don't bully them too much, you know!" said the captain good-humouredly,
for he was sufficiently acquainted with the first mate's pleasant way of ordering the men about
to be aware that he did not err on the side of leniency in exercising his authority, as he
complained that his subordinate officer Tom did.

And thus it happened that when Tom and Charley went below and joined Captain Harding in his
slumbers, the deck was left in sole possession of Mr Tompkins and the eight Greek sailors,
with the suspicious-looking felucca creeping up rapidly astern, and getting nearer and nearer
to the Muscadine each hour.

A stern-chase is proverbially a long one.  And so, although the light-winged craft that was
following the ship sailed three feet to her two; yet she had such a long start, and the breeze
was so fair and dead aft--which was all in favour of a square-rigged vessel and against a fore-and-after,
that sails best with the wind abeam--that the felucca was still some five miles off when day
broke and the chief mate first discovered her.

He was not alone in his discovery either, for he noticed that a part of the watch were looking
over the bulwarks at the approaching vessel, and from their gesticulations and rapid speech
in their own language he thought something was up.

Calling one of the Greek sailors, named in the ship's articles "Pollydorry," as the captain
had put him down, whom he thought he could better make understand that version of "Lingua Franca"
which he pretended to know, the mate interrogated him as to what he knew of the felucca, and
what was her intention in trying to overhaul them.  The man, however, only shrugged his shoulders,
and jabbered something which he could make nothing of; and as the group then ceased speaking
together, or paying any attention to the stranger, Mr Tompkins put down their excitable demeanour
to their being only foreigners, and their natural way of going on, so unlike the stolid British
seafaring man, who hardly notices anything except it specially concerns him, and even then
keeps what he thinks to himself.

As it was getting near the time, however, for him to be relieved of his watch and go off duty--although
it still wanted half an hour to four bells, when it was Tom Aldridge's turn to come on deck
again and call up the other men below--he thought he would give Charley Onslow a hail in the
meantime, to come up and keep him company until then.  Not that he was a bit alarmed at the
approach of the felucca, as he said to himself, or that he was anyway at all frightened at
being alone on deck with the Greek sailors when so many more of their comrades might be so
close at hand.  But it was always best to be on the safe side, and there was nothing like a
man in authority, as he was, taking due precaution against any possible danger, no matter how
remote.

Thus trying to cheat his own conscience, Mr Tompkins sang out for Charley down the companion,
awaking him from the soundest sleep he had had for weeks with the echoes of his melodious voice.

"Just like the braying of a jackass afflicted with bronchitis," as Charley said afterwards
ruefully, to his chum.

Much to the first mate's annoyance, he not only awoke Charley, but Tom also; both the lads
coming on deck together.

"I didn't call you, Mr Aldridge," he said angrily.  "My watch is not over yet."

"I'm quite aware of that," said Tom.  "But no fellow could go to sleep after such a hideous
row as you made.  And besides"--looking at his watch--"I'm due in another twenty minutes, so
I thought I had better come up with Charley, since I was woke up.  Hullo! what is that?" he
added, glancing astern at the felucca, which was now almost within speaking distance, and coming
on as if she were going to sheer alongside.  "What the deuce is that piratical-looking craft
running us aboard like that for?  If I were you, Mr Tompkins, I would signal them to stand
off, and call up the captain and the other watch."

"I will thank you to mind your own business, Mr Aldridge," replied the chief mate, not at all
pleased with the suggestion.  "If you are so terribly alarmed at the sight of a common Levantine
coaster, you had better go below again."

And he turned on his heel, leaving Tom burning with indignation at having his courage questioned
and being taunted of being frightened, especially by such a person as Mr Tompkins.

The felucca was barely a cable's length off now, and in another minute she passed underneath
the Muscadine's stern so closely that they could have chucked a biscuit on board her.

"Schooner ahoy!" hailed Mr Tompkins.  "What's the matter?  Do you want anything?"

But no reply was made directly, although the felucca luffed up a bit, and ran for a second
or two almost alongside, the ship's main-yard just touching her reed-like masts, and a voice
uttered a few words rapidly in Greek, which Charley, although he had a smattering of the language,
could not quite understand, although the foreign sailors on board their vessel evidently did,
as they replied in the same tongue.  And then the dapper little craft's lateen sails filled
again as her helm was put down, and she flow away from the Muscadine, sailing on a bowline,
and heeling over to the wind so as to display half her keel as she topped the waves, just as
if the other vessel had been lying still in the water, although she was going a good eight
knots by the log in the same direction.

"Did you see that fellow's face on board the felucca who spoke to our men, Charley?" asked
Tom anxiously.

"No," said Charley.  "But I heard his voice, and that was enough for me."

"Oh, you recognised him, then?"

"Yes.  I could swear, only from his voice, that he was the same man who spoke to us in Mohammed's
coffee-shop at Beyrout.  He had a most peculiar twang in his speech, which I noticed at the time."

"It was the same chap, Charley; I saw him distinctly.  I wouldn't be at all surprised that
Mohammed was right, and that he is a `piratt,' as he called him.  But if he is after us, I
wonder why he didn't board us then.  That felucca was crammed full of men."

"Ah, piracy would be rather risky work in these seas, with lots of men-of-war about; at all
events, in broad daylight, as it is now.  From the distance the ship has run, we can't be very
far off Cyprus, and the pirate, if pirate he be, knows well enough that an English frigate
has been stationed there ever since we occupied the island.  I've no doubt, however, Tom, that
he is after us, for I heard, as well as I could make out, from what I know of the language,
two phrases, `In a couple of nights' time,' and `Look out for the signal,' while the Greek
sailors here said, `It's all right on board,' as if they had arranged everything.  I don't
like it at all, Tom.  What a murderous lot of fellows they are, and what a fool that Tompkins
is to insist on having them all in one watch!"

"We'll tell the captain what we've heard and seen," replied Tom.

But at that moment the first mate, who had gone down into the waist of the ship to confer with
the Greeks, returned, rubbing his hands and with a scornful smile on his face.

"A nice thing it would have been if I had gone below and wakened up the captain to tell him
that a fruit-boat from Rosetta was going to run us down!" said he ironically, speaking at Tom,
although he did not directly address him.

"Rosetta does not lie astern of us," said the latter aside, as if to Charley.  "And they didn't
answer your hail, at all events!"

"Pray, sir, did you understand what they said?" said the mate angrily, speaking this time straight
to Tom.  "No," he replied.

"Well, then, I do, and I will thank you to hold your tongue.  The men have told me all about
it.  Those fellows in the schooner had lost their reckoning and didn't quite know where they
were, and our men, speaking Greek of course, told them."

"And I wonder how they knew?" said Tom.  The first mate was posed for a moment, but he quickly
recovered himself.

"I suppose any one without being a sailor could tell them that as we've run more than a hundred
miles since we left Beyrout yesterday afternoon, and gone in a nor'-westerly course, we must
be a little to the southward of Cyprus.  But, I'll thank you to mind your own business, as
I told you before, Mr Aldridge."

"It is my business," said Tom, "and I'll take care to tell Captain Harding of it."

"Tell the cap'en and be--" said Mr Tomkins in a rage.  "But I'll save you the trouble, I will
tell him myself," he added a moment afterwards, dashing down into the cabin, and leaving Tom
to dismiss his watch and take over the duty without another word.

"That's pretty behaviour!" said Tom to Charley.  "I call that relieving a fellow in proper
style.  No unnecessary ceremony at all."

"Well, you brought it on yourself, Tom," said Charley, with a sympathising grin.  "You will
badger him so.  I suppose, now you are second officer, you intend paying him back for old snubs,
eh?"

"I don't want to notice the beggar at all," replied the other.  "I wouldn't have spoken to
him then if it hadn't been my duty to do so.  He is a pig, though.  I daresay he hasn't told
the captain anything at all, as he hasn't come up."

"You let him alone for making his story right," said Charley.  "Captain Harding hasn't come
on deck because there's nothing to call him; for that mysterious craft is hull-down now and
almost out of sight ahead."

Such was the case; and when the captain did turn out at breakfast time he had heard the first
mate's version of the affair, and as the felucca had now quite disappeared below the horizon,
altogether pooh-poohed Tom's account of having recognised Mohammed's "corsair," even although
Charley backed him up by his statement of what he had heard say in conversation with the stranger.

"Avast there, my dear boys!" said he, speaking good-humouredly to them, as he always did. 
"That rascally old Turk so stuffed you up with his lying yarns, that you've got pirates on
the brain."

Captain Harding, however, did one thing that pleased them, especially Tom, to whom it gave
the greatest satisfaction.

Despite the first mate's protest, he remodelled the two watches into which the crew were divided,
putting four of the Greek sailors with an equal number of English Jack tars in each, so that
should any "little unpleasantness," as he laughingly observed, occur, the foreigners would
not have it all their own way.

Mr Tompkins's chagrin when this was effected was delightful to Tom, although he suffered from
it, as the first mate, ascribing to his suggestion the credit of the new arrangement, vented
his spite on him accordingly, and tried to make his duties as difficult for him as he could.

Nothing was seen further all that day, or the next night, of the felucca, although Tom never
went below for a single watch even when his time for relief came--except for meals, of course--remaining
on deck and keeping a sharp lookout towards every point of the compass, not only during his
own time of duty but in that of the chief mate as well, despite the latter's broad hints and
insulting remarks that his absence would be more agreeable than his company.  So, when the
following day likewise passed without any reappearance of the suspicious stranger, both the
lads began to think that their fear of being attacked by pirates was only a chimera, founded,
as the captain had said, on Mohammed's fabulous narrative; for Charley had been quite as nervous
in the matter as Tom, and had shared his anxious watch with him all through ever since he had
recognised the Greek on board the felucca.

Accordingly, the two, their apprehensions quite allayed, turned in together again on the third
night the Muscadine was at sea, without any greater anticipation of something being about to
happen, beyond the usual disagreeables of a sailor's life, than they had the first evening
after they left port--both quitting the deck about just the same time as then, too, when Tom
was relieved by the first mate at six bells.

"Isn't that a sail out there, Charley, right in the wind's-eye?" said Tom as they turned to
descend the companion-stairs, pointing to what looked like a white speck, far-away off in the
direction he had named.

"A sail be hanged!" exclaimed Charley.  "I never saw such a fellow in my life.  You are like
Don Quixote, who fancied every windmill a giant.  I believe that blessed felucca haunts you
in your sleep!"

"No, really, Charley, I didn't think it was her.  I meant another sort of sail.  But I was
mistaken, for I can see nothing now."

"That's always the way with you, Tom.  It strikes me that all your sails are sells."

At which brilliant piece of wit on Charley's part both lads laughed so loudly that Mr Tomkins
thought they were making fun at his expense, and it was gall and wormwood to him as he paced
the deck on the windward side; and "the two inseparables," as Captain Harding dubbed them,
then turned in without any further palaver save a brief "good-night," being soon wafted happily
into the land of dreams.

A tolerably fast vessel for her size, and in fair sailing trim, as she was only half-loaded--being
unable to complete her cargo at Beyrout, whence her going out of her way, as it were, to Smyrna
from thence--the Muscadine, with the good breeze she had at starting, which had subsequently
increased into a very favourable wind, strong, but not too strong to prevent her carrying all
plain sail, had made such use of her legs, as sailors say, that she had by this time run over
500 miles from her point of departure, and before morning the captain expected they would sight
the southernmost point of Rhodes, and be able to enter the channel between that island and
Scarpanto.

He had therefore issued strict injunctions about a sharp lookout being kept forward, stationing
one of the English crew in each watch there for that purpose--as he said he didn't believe
in any foreigner's eyesight where a ship was concerned--just when he was leaving the deck,
which was shortly before Tom and Charley, giving orders at the same time that he should be
called as soon as anything was perceived; and these instructions Tom, as the second officer,
passed on, as in duty bound, to Mr Tompkins when he relieved him, the first mate receiving
them, as he now invariably did any statement from his junior, with a characteristic grunt!

There is really no other word in the English language to express the meaning of the ejaculative
sound he made, which signified, equally, acquiescence, approval, disapproval, or anything.

It was now midnight.

The captain, Tom and Charley, and one of the English hands who acted as steward, were down
below asleep aft, and three English sailors and four Greeks were supposed to be in the same
somnolent condition in the foc's'le; and, on deck, were the first mate and four more Englishmen,
one of whom was on duty as lookout forward, and another taking his turn at the wheel; while
four of the foreigners and the remaining two British seamen lounged about the waist, or stood
grouped around the mainmast-bitts amidships, attentive to the orders of the officer of the
watch, who, being not in the best of tempers, as usual, did not let them long remain idle for
a spell.

That was the situation when the first mate called out, after glancing at his watch, to "make
it eight bells;" and almost at the same moment the lookout man forward sang out lustily, in
a voice that rang through the ship, "Land ho!"

Whether it was the sound of the ship's bell that gave the signal, evidently preconcerted beforehand,
or the cry that land was in sight, only the Greek sailors knew; but, at all events, it roused
them in a second to action, for with a fierce cry the four foreigners who were amidships rushed
on the two Englishmen that shared their watch, drawing their knives and stabbing them desperately
as they fell upon them.

"Murder!  Help!" sang out the poor Jack tars; but, though caught unawares, they made a hard
fight for their lives, one, a north-countryman, although stabbed in several places, snatching
up a capstan bar and braining the Greek nearest him like a bullock.

At the same time, the four other Greeks who were down below in the forecastle and supposed
to be sleeping, crept up the hatchway forward, slipping on the cover as they got on deck, and
went to the assistance of their companions, who, being thus reinforced, made short work of
the two Englishmen, who presently sank senseless on the deck which was weltering with their
gore, and then rushed aft in a body, brandishing their knives and shouting like demons.

Mr Tompkins showed himself the coward he was, as Tom had anticipated; for, after hammering
on the top of the cabin skylight to rouse those below, with a belaying pin he had grasped hold
of at the sight of the struggle in the waist, he incontinently scuttled up the mizzen shrouds,
displaying an agility of which one would have never thought him capable. The steersman followed
his example; while the lookout man forward, hearing the yells and groans of his comrades, and
seeing what was up, took refuge in the foretop, thus leaving the seven remaining Greeks, one
or two of whom had suffered in the fray, practically masters of the ship, which was yawing
about like a drunken man, and backing and filling as she veered this way and that without any
guidance or control, nobody being at the helm.

Two of the Greeks placing themselves on either side of the cabin hatch to give a warm reception
to the captain and the rest of the Englishmen whom the noise had fully wakened up, for they
were heard stirring below, the remainder distributed themselves in the rigging, and started
an exciting hunt after the three who had sought safety aloft.

The steersman was the first caught, and the sweep of a knife blade across the rope end by which
he had lowered himself from the extreme tip of the mizzen yard-arm, sent him dropping into
the sea with a faint despairing scream; but, the first mate and lookout man led them a fine
dance, up the shrouds on one side and down on the other, and shifting from the mizzen to the
mainmast, and from that to the foretop again by sliding down the stays, or catching hold of
the falls and halliards when the pursuit grew too hot--until both parties, the hunters and
the hunted alike, paused for a moment to draw breath.

As they did so, the two Englishmen who were now together in the mizzen-top, and the Greeks
who were ascending the shrouds on either hand--the former looking down on the quarter-deck
below them, and the latter gazing towards the land that had just been sighted--uttered as if
in chorus an exclamation of joy, the echo of which from the others seemed to bewilder both
the Greeks and Englishmen.

It was a curious coincidence, the opposite causes for the gratulation on either side coming
together as it were, but so it was.

At the very moment the mutineers had stopped in their murderous chase of the first mate and
the remaining British sailor, Captain Harding, holding a revolver in each hand, came up through
the cabin skylight, as if propelled by some hidden machinery below--Tom, Charley, and the steward,
all armed to the teeth, jumping up after him.

"Death to the traitorous scoundrels!" exclaimed Captain Harding, levelling the revolver in
his right hand at one of the Greeks who remained by the companion, paralysed by the unexpected
appearance of those below from a quarter he had never imagined, while he was looking out for
them in a different direction.

A flash.  Bang! and the man fell dead in his tracks; while Tom gave the other Greek sentry
a wipe over the head with a cutlass, which also sent him to the deck.

Just then, however, the felucca, which had been lost sight of so suddenly, and which no one
had seen approaching the ship but the desperadoes aloft, and even they only at the end of the
struggle--seemed to start up out of the deep in some mysterious fashion close to the Muscadine,
and sheered alongside, with a triumphant cheer from the brutal-visaged ruffians who lined her
deck that made Tom and Charley's blood run cold!

STORY TWO, CHAPTER FIVE.

CONQUERED, NOT BEATEN!

The situation had assumed a new phase.

Inspirited by the proximity of the pirate craft, with their comrades on board, the Greek sailors
in the rigging, abandoning their pursuit of the first mate and the lookout man--a brave fellow
named Jack Bower--began to descend the ratlins rapidly, with the view of making an onslaught
on the captain and the others that were in possession of the quarter-deck, Jack, however, following
closely after them now without a trace of fear, resolving to aid his fellow-countrymen in making
a stand, although he had given them leg-bail when he stood alone against them, as the first
mate had abandoned him at the wheel the moment the Greeks rushed aft, and even now remained
trembling in the mizzen-top, instead of backing up Jack, and taking the mutineers in the rear
as they scrambled down the shrouds without looking behind them.

The courage of the latter, however, did not suffice to take them very far.

The foremost man had hardly descended two steps, when "crack!" went Captain Harding's revolver;
and, reeling backwards, his hands cleaving the air vainly for a hold, the Greek sailor toppled
over into the sea with a splash, and sank like a stone to the bottom, dead as a herring!

Another would have followed suit, for the captain had recocked his pistol, and was in the act
of taking aim, when a stern, commanding voice exclaimed, in accents that rang through the ship--

"Hold!"

Captain Harding, without lowering his weapon, looked hastily forward from whence this unexpected
summons appeared to come; and there he saw a sight which might well make even a courageous
man quail.  The felucca had been run alongside the Muscadine forward, under cover of the mainsail,
her bow right under the ship's counter, and a crowd of fierce, bearded ruffians were pouring
on board as fast as they could clamber up the side, led by a tall, athletic fellow, dressed
rather better than themselves, with a crimson sash folded round his waist, who was so much
in advance of his villainous crew that he was close upon the group on the quarter-deck before
they were almost conscious of his presence.  It was his voice, the voice and face of the man
who had accosted Tom and Charley in the Turk Mohammed's coffee-house at Beyrout, and whom they
at once now recognised again, that had arrested the action of the captain-- although only for
an instant, as, undismayed by the numbers now opposed to him, and conscious that his little
band and himself must be defeated in the long run, and meet their death in the struggle, he
shifted his aim, and pointed his revolver without hesitation at the leader.

"Hold!" repeated the pirate chief again in warning accents, before the captain could fire.
"Another shot, and I won't answer for your lives!"

"And who are you, sir, who dares to attack a peaceful merchant vessel on the high seas in this
fashion?" demanded Captain Harding, without faltering, and still keeping his pistol levelled
at the head of the other, who faced it with the utmost sangfroid, although he could perceive
that the English sailor's blood was up and his finger trembling on the trigger.

"One who dares anything and everything, and never embarks in any enterprise unless he has weighed
the consequences and can carry it through to a successful termination!" replied the desperado,
with an assumption of stern dignity that was in harmony with his stalwart form and reckless
air.  "But, come," he continued, sinking his tone of bravado, and speaking in the same easy,
polite manner which Charley had specially noticed when he addressed Tom and himself in the
khan--a manner that showed a very considerably greater amount of breeding than could have been
expected from a common seaman,--"you must see that you are powerless to resist us."

"There are six of us," interrupted Captain Harding, "and we can at all events make a fight for it!"

"To what purpose?" retorted the other.  "You are six, truly; but two of your party are boys,
and one a coward who wouldn't be of much help"-- glancing as he spoke from Tom and Charley,
who stood beside the captain prepared to aid him to their last breath, upward to the mizzen-top,
where the craven-faced Tompkins stood, looking down too much frightened to stir.

"Well, what then?" said the captain, impatiently.  "Be quick with your palaver or I'll fire."

"You'll do so at your peril," retorted the other.  "Captain Harding, you are a brave man, or
I wouldn't waste so many words on you or spare your life.  You are powerless to resist us,
as I said before, for you are but six in number, including your boys and that cur aloft; you
have three other men down in the foc's'le, but they cannot join you.  We are fifty. Show yourselves,
my lads," he cried to his followers, who instantly ranged themselves, across the Muscadine
four deep, exhibiting their full strength, which was even more than he had stated.

"You see!" said the pirate chief, complacently.  "Look, and count them."

"I see that we're outnumbered by a gang of cut-throats," said Captain Harding, bitterly.

"Gently, my friend," said the other, suavely.  "Some of my men understand English like myself,
and might not relish your compliments, although, as a man of the world, I can make excuses
for you--ah--want of tact; yes, that's the word, is it not?"

"Cease your humbugging, sir, and come to the point," said the captain, trying to curb his anger,
which he could hardly control in the face of the pirate's cynical impertinence.  Had it not
been for the sake of the boys by his side he would have let drive at the scoundrel at once,
and risked his fate.

"That's just what I am about to do," said the other coolly, not one whit put out of his even
temper apparently.  "You confess you are outnumbered?  Good!  I, on my part, do not wish for
any further bloodshed, if I can effect my purpose without it.  Besides which, I have conceived
quite an affection for you and those young gentlemen there, whom I first had the pleasure of
meeting at Beyrout.  Good morning, signors," he interposed, taking off his Greek cap and bowing
politely to Tom and Charley.  "It is morning, for it's nearly one o'clock now.  I hope I see
you well?  But to resume, captain.  As I said, there's no further necessity for our fighting
that I can see.  You have killed three of my men, whom I considerately placed on board your
ship before she left port so as to get possession of her without any bloodshed at all, although
the fates willed otherwise; and we, I believe, six of yours; so in losses we may, perhaps,
have the advantage of you, although that fellow there"--pointing to the Greek sailor Tom had
cut down with his cutlass--"won't be worth much more to me, and that gives you only two more
than ourselves in the casualty list.  But I won't grumble.  I'm satisfied to cry quits, and
call a truce to hostilities."

"And, after that?" said the captain.--"I don't suppose you attacked us for nothing!"

"Your remark," said the pirate, smiling, "does credit to your good sense.  I am not in the
habit, strange to say, even in these heroic days, of doing anything for nothing.  Am I, Calchas?"
he added, turning to a ferocious-looking villain at his right hand.

The man evidently did not understand him, as he spoke still in English for the benefit of the
captain's party; but he grinned in sympathy with the smile on the pirate chief's face--such
a cruel, crafty smile as it was!

"You have got possession of the ship," said Captain Harding; "what more do you want, if you
don't wish to murder us like the rest of my poor crew?"

"My dear sir, you certainly use very strong language; and I can't say I like it," said the
pirate, playing carelessly with the handle of a long yataghan that was thrust through his crimson
sash.  "Murder is a nasty word, which should not really be mentioned in the company of gentlemen!
Your men fell in fair fighting."

"Yes, when they were taken unawares by a pack of traitors," put in the captain hotly.  The
other's cool assurance was more than he could stomach.

"Pray don't interrupt me," said the pirate.  "It is, to say the least of it, rude.  But, now
to business.  I have possession of your ship, you say?  That is true without doubt; now, my
difficulty is, how to utilise that possession; and here, Captain Harding, I shall have to claim
your assistance--"

"You may claim away till doomsday," said the captain with grim humour; "but as to my giving
it, that's quite a different matter."

"Allow me to finish my sentence," continued the other--"claim your assistance in return for
the lives of yourself and the remainder of your crew.  Else, I shall be extremely sorry, but
circumstances will compel my wishing you all a speedy adieu."

And the cold-blooded desperado drew his hand across his throat and then pointed to the water
over the ship's side, in a very suggestive way.

"What do you want me to do?" asked Captain Harding curtly.

"Nothing very alarming, or calculated to wound your honourable feelings," replied the pirate.
"I simply want you to remain in command of your vessel."

The bluff, honest sailor stared at the other in amazement; he couldn't make out "what he was
driving at," as he said to himself.

"In ostensible command of the ship, that is," said the pirate, correcting his previous expression.
"I, of course, shall be virtually master, but you will navigate her under my orders, and answer--likewise
under my directions--any curious questions that may be put to us from passing vessels as to
our destination and so on."

"Why, you want me, John Harding, to sail under false colours, and help you to make away with
the ship as I've sailed in, man and boy, ever since I smelt salt water, not to speak of betraying
my owners and their interests.  I'll see you--a--a--shot first!"

As he spoke the captain pulled the trigger of his revolver, and would have settled all the
pirate's chances of present and future booty if he had not with a rapid movement of his quickly-drawn
yataghan struck up the muzzle of the weapon, causing the bullet to expend itself in the air
harmlessly, although it went uncommonly close to the head of the trembling Tompkins above,
who was waiting for a peaceful arrangement of the situation before he descended.

On the shot being fired, the main body of the pirates rushed forward, and would have annihilated
the captain and the two lads, had not their chief stopped them with some harsh word of command,
at which they immediately fell back again.

"I bear no malice, Captain Harding," said the pirate chief, with a magnanimous air, "and I'll
forgive your attempt on my life, especially as the bullet missed its mark.  I will also, as
you have such scruples of conscience, excuse you from acting still as the captain of this vessel,
and promote your chief officer--I believe the gentleman is up aloft--to that post.  I've no
doubt he will prove more accommodating, particularly when I place my reasons strongly before
him.  But I have not done with you yet, captain.  I shall want you presently below with reference
to the ship's papers and cargo.  So now put down your weapons, and order your men to disarm.
I will save your lives, I promise."

"Boys, we must submit; we're in their power, and they are too strong for us," said Captain
Harding, turning to Tom and Charley.  "I don't suppose they'll murder us now in cold blood;
we must trust their word for it-- the word of a pirate," he added aloud, with bitter scorn.

"And you can trust it," replied the pirate chief proudly.  "The word of Demetri, the Corsair
of Chios, is known to be as sacred as his name is feared in the Aegean Sea."

"By Jingo!" exclaimed the captain, looking from Tom to Charley, and back again to the pirate
chief.  "Demetri, the corsair!  Why, that's the very man that Mohammed told you about at Beyrout,
and whom I would not believe in."

And the honest old fellow seemed to reproach himself for not paying more heed to the boys' story.

"The same, at your service," said the corsair, as he had better be called now.  "Now lay down
your arms, and I shall treat you as prisoners on parole."

"And you promise that we shall go free?" said Captain Harding, pleading for terms, although
he felt that they were vanquished.

"Yes, when I've done with you.  Look sharp!  Time is pressing, and I cannot answer for my men
much longer," said Demetri.

So Captain Harding, Tom, and Charley, and the steward, laid on the deck the weapons with which
they had hastily armed themselves when below as soon as the noise of the outbreak reached them,
when they were instantly picked up by one of the Greeks, who stepped forward for the purpose
by his leader's orders.

"We are now at your mercy," said the captain.  "I don't mind about myself, but, Corsair, or
whatever you are, spare the poor boys and my remaining men."

"Their lives are safe, I tell you," said the other impatiently.  "Have I not given my word?
But call your other men down," he added, pointing to Jack Bower, who was still half-way up
the rigging, and Tompkins in the mizzen-top.

Captain Harding summoned them, and Jack Bower at once obeyed his orders; but the first mate
refused to budge, saying, that as he was no longer master of the ship, he was not compelled
to carry out his directions, especially if doing so jeopardised his life.

"The cowardly rascal!" exclaimed the captain, hardly knowing whether to laugh or to be angry;
but Mr Tompkins was really so paralysed with terror that he had not the faintest idea of what
he was saying, "I'll soon make him obey me," said the corsair, cocking the captain's revolver,
which he had taken from him, and pointing it at the frightened occupant of the top above his
head.  "If you are not on deck by the time I count five, you, first officer, or whatever you
call yourself, I'll fire, and you'll descend to Davy Jones's locker quicker than it will take
you to come down the rigging!  One--two--three--"

"Stop, sir, good gentleman, stop, and I'll come down," faltered out Mr Tompkins, roused from
his fright more by the corsair's action than his words, for a pointed pistol has a wonderfully
persuasive way of its own; and, with hesitating feet, he slowly descended the ratlins and placed
himself beside the captain, who looked at him first contemptuously, and then turned his back,
muttering between his teeth--

"If I had had a man in charge of the watch, or even one of these boys, we would never have
been put in this position."

"You are wrong there," said the corsair, "for we would have attacked you all the same."

"Never mind," retorted the captain bravely.  "But we would not have been unprepared, and you
would have had a tussle to get on board, instead of things being made easy for you."

"Have your own way in that," replied the other, shrugging his shoulders, as he gave some unintelligible
order to his men, ten of whom slipped forward, placing themselves on either side of the captain
and the two lads, and the other Englishmen, with the exception of the chief mate-- two Greeks
to each of them.  "I'm sorry, captain," continued the corsair, "but I am compelled to put you
and your countrymen to some little inconvenience, lest you should be tempted to escape, when
it would be the worse for you."

And, at another word of command, all the hands of the whole party were securely lashed behind
their backs.

"As for you," said the corsair, speaking more harshly than he had yet done, as he turned to
Tompkins, "if you dare move without my permission, you are a dead man!  Stop there, and if
any vessel hails you as we pass into the archipelago, mind you answer correctly as if you were
still pursuing your original voyage, for we are going for a time in the same course.  I shall
hear you, so beware!"

And he waved his sharp yataghan before the first mate's eyes in a way which he did not at all
relish, although he took the hint as it was intended.

The corsair now gave the man whom he had sent to the helm after the parley was over, some directions
as to the steering of the Muscadine, which was then entering the channel between Rhodes and
Scarpanto, nearly about the very time that poor Captain Harding had expected, although under
strangely different circumstances; after which, he motioned the captain to precede him down
the companion, while he told the others to remain where they were on deck until he returned,
enforcing his order by placing a guard over them.

"We'll now go below, captain, and overhaul the ship's papers, as I suggested to you just now,"
said the corsair in a politely peremptory tone; and the captain, seeing no help for it, and
no object to be gained by opposing the wish of his captor, obeyed the veiled order, the two
descending to the cabin, where they remained some time, whether in argument or in conference
of course those who were on deck could not guess, although both Tom and Charley would have
bet their last sixpence that the corsair did not get much voluntary information out of their
skipper.

STORY TWO, CHAPTER SIX.

A SELL FOR THE PIRATE.

Acting apparently under instructions previously given, the felucca, after transferring a large
portion of her men to the merchant ship, proceeded some distance ahead of her, as if not to
cause any suspicions by her propinquity should any vessel pass by them in their passage through
the channel.  But she still remained close enough to be signalled by her commander should her
nearer presence be needed.

When the pirate chief and Captain Harding returned on deck from their visit below, Tom and
Charley could see, from the fierce looks of the one and the stolidly stubborn expression of
the other, that their private interview had not been of the most agreeable nature, and they
soon learned the reason.

"I have been deceived, duped, despoiled of my just dues," exclaimed the corsair frantically,
as he gained the deck, speaking in English as if for the special benefit of the two lads and
their unfortunate fellow-countrymen; "and had it not been for my sacred word which I never
break once I have given it, overboard you should go, every one, with your throats cut!"

"But," said Captain Harding, "we have not deceived you as to the value of the ship and cargo.
If anybody is to be blamed, you must look to those agents and spies you employ who have misinformed
you."

"Silence!" shouted out the other, foaming with passion.  "You are a miserable set of impostors,
you English!  How could I tell that a big vessel like this would only be half-loaded with a
lot of trumpery stuff that's not worth the freight; and that her captain had hardly a piastre
to bless himself with?  And yet you English people boast of your wonderful wealth.  I call
it a scandalous imposition, wasting my time in this way, and the lives of my men, for nothing."

And he stamped his feet in his rage as he walked to and fro.

Charley could hardly refrain from laughing at the pirate chief going on in this way about being
taken in.  As he whispered to Tom, when he had the chance, it reminded him of the pickpocket
who had stolen a watch, complaining of being hardly used because the article turned out to
be pinchbeck!

"If you like to let us go, I will give you a bond for the estimated value of the ship and cargo,"
said Captain Harding, wishing to pacify the man--who now appeared capable of going any lengths
in his fury--for he did not place much credence in his loudly vaunted promise of saving their
lives.

His suggestion, however, only seemed to add fuel to the fire.

"Yes, and a nice fool I should be to present it for payment, and have the police upon me. 
Do you take me for an addle-pated idiot?  I tell you what I will do.  I will burn your miserable
old hulk of a ship, and its rotten cargo; and you and she can roast together!"

"And your pledged word as to our lives?" said the captain.

"I told you I wouldn't take them, and my word is good, although I spared your life simply because
I might want your signature.  But if the ship catches fire, and you unfortunately cannot escape
from her, of course it will not be my fault--don't you see?"

And the corsair gave a malignant laugh, that disclosed his real disposition better than words,
and convinced the Englishmen of the futility of appealing to him for pity.

It was now broad daylight, and the Muscadine was working up to windward of the cluster of small
islands that lie to the northward of Scarpanto, having just weathered the channel that separates
it from Rhodes, when the topmasts of a ship could be seen rounding the headland nearest them.

"It's one of our cruisers, boys," whispered Captain Harding, whose keen eyes had distinguished
a pendant flying from the main-truck of the new-comer.--"We are saved! we're saved!"

The pirate captain, however, had ears as quick as the captain's eyes were keen.

"Gag that babbler," he cried to his men--in Greek of course--"and the two boys as well, and
bundle them down into the cabin.  Stay! take those men also, and serve them the same," pointing
to the steward and Jack Bower and the other three seamen.

All the Englishmen were hurried below without any unnecessary delay, with the exception of
Mr Tompkins, whom the corsair next addressed, presenting the captain's cocked revolver as he
did so, and pressing the cold steel muzzle of the pistol against his right temple.

"You coward!" said he with a thrilling hiss on his tongue like a serpent's; "your life trembles
in the balance.  If that vessel now approaching hails us, and you do not answer correctly,
as I have already warned you, this bullet goes through your brain.  Do you hear?"

"I hear.  I--I--I--hear," faltered out the first mate, while the perspiration stood out in
great beads of fright on his forehead.

The vessel in front came nearer and nearer; and presently she rounded-to under the Muscadine's
stern, the old well-known Union Jack of Old England floating up to the masthead the while,
and a hearty voice hailing the merchantman through a speaking-trumpet from her quarter-deck,
not half a cable's length away, in true nautical fashion--

"Ship ahoy!  What ship is that?"

The corsair was standing by the side of Mr Tompkins, close by the taffrail.  Before Captain
Harding had been taken below he had removed his uniform cap and monkey-jacket, and put them
on himself, so that he might pass for one of the ship's officers, and he had likewise directed
the majority of his men to lie down on the deck, lest their numbers might create suspicion.

As the stranger vessel approached nearer with the intention of speaking, as he could understand,
he lowered the revolver which he had held for more than a minute pressed against the first
mate's forehead.  But he had it still in his hand, as the trembling Tompkins was aware, ready
for action, only that its muzzle was now touching his side instead of his temple.

"Now, answer correctly," whispered the corsair in the mate's ear, in a fierce thrilling whisper
that penetrated through every fibre of his body, when the hail of the British man-of-war rang
out in the air.--"Answer as I told you, or you are a dead man, if fifty English frigates were
alongside!"

STORY TWO, CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE LAST OF THE OLD SHIP.

It was not an English frigate, as might have been supposed, from the observation of the pirate
chief, but one of those despatch vessels that we usually keep in eastern waters in attendance
on our Mediterranean fleet; and being a steamer, of course she could arrest her progress, and
remain in proximity to the Muscadine without the necessity of laying-to like a sailing-ship,
or any trouble save slacking speed.

"Answer," repeated the corsair sternly, still in the same melodramatic whisper, enforcing his
order with a dig of the revolver barrel in Tompkins' side.

"The Mus--" began the mate in faltering accents.  But another savage dig of the pistol improved
his articulation, and he shouted out, as loud almost as if he had a speaking-trumpet like the
officer who had hailed them.

"The Muscadine of Bristol," he cried with all the power of his lungs, "from Beyrout to Smyrna
with assorted cargo."

"Any news from the Levant?" was the next query from the ship-of-war. "Stop, I'll send a boat
aboard."

This, however, was the last thing which the corsair desired, and he impressed some whispered
instructions rapidly on Mr Tompkins, with the assistance again of the pistol barrel; and that
worthy spoke equally rapidly, to prevent the other vessel from lowering a boat, which they
were on the point of doing, as they could hear the men piped away by the boatswain's call for
the purpose.

"Fever very bad at Beyrout," sang out the first mate, again, inspired by his tutor.  "Had to
leave half crew in hospital!  Short-handed!  Can you lend us a few men?  Who shall we report
as having met us?"

This answer at once arrested the intention of the commander of the despatch vessel, and prevented
his sending a boat to them--as the corsair had surmised it would, from the fear of his bluejackets
catching the infection, Syrian fevers being as much dreaded in the Mediterranean as the plague--for
the reply shouted back was an apology for non-communication or help.

"Sorry for you, but cannot spare any men!  You'll have to go into quarantine at Smyrna.  Report
H.M.S. Batrachia, from the Dardanelles to Malta."

And then, in obedience to the orders of the officer on the bridge, the despatch vessel circled
round again on her way; and putting on full steam was soon lost to sight in a cloud of black
smoke far-away to leeward.

To the captain and two lads below it was the keenest agony to hear the welcome hail of the
English steamer followed by the mate's prevaricating reply, when they were certain that but
one single word as to the real truth of the case would have summoned their countrymen to their
rescue, and ensured the punishment of their lawless captors.

Of course they knew that Mr Tompkins had acted under intimidation, having been compelled to
give the answers he did and prevented from calling for assistance; but both Tom and Charley
would have died rather than have sacrificed the chance of their comrades' escape through any
morbid fear as to their own personal safety.

They could not speak to each other, being gagged, and having a couple of assassin--looking
scoundrels mounting guard over them in addition, as they lay where they were thrown down on
the floor of the main cabin; but their eyes said, as plainly as eyes could speak, the thoughts
that were uppermost in the mind of each--a feeling of disappointment at the hope of a rescue
being so rudely dispelled when it looked so imminent, and a sense of disgust at the disgraceful
cowardice of the mate.

It may seem strange that the corsair, who had spared the lives of the captain and the remainder
of the crew of the Muscadine, and appeared really on such jovial terms with his prisoners up
to the moment of his going below with Captain Harding to look at the ship's papers, should
all at once change his demeanour and come out in his true colours; but, the matter is easy
enough of explanation.

The corsair had been led to think that the merchant ship was freighted with a valuable cargo
of silk and tobacco, the bulk of which he could have readily transferred to the felucca, as
they were handy of shipment; consequently, when he found out that the vessel was only half-loaded
with wine and fruit, which would require considerable storage room, and be then almost valueless
in the only markets he could command, his rage knew no bounds.  Added to this, Captain Harding,
acting under a sense of duty to his owners, had concealed the fact of his possessing a considerable
sum of money on board in drafts on bankers at Smyrna; while the pirate chief, supposing that
he did have money, looked to find it in specie, and was correspondingly disappointed a second
time. Each will conceive the meaning and interpretation of a composition through the lens of
his own temperament. I endeavor to stimulate the imagination of the pupil through reading,
through knowledge of art, through a comprehension of the correlation of all the arts.

"The musical interpreter has a most difficult, exacting and far-reaching task to perform. An
actor plays one part night after night; a painter is occupied for days and weeks with a single
picture; a composer is absorbed for the time being on one work only. The pianist, on the other
hand, must, during a recital, sweep over the whole gamut of expression: the simple, the pastoral,
the pathetic, the passionate, the spiritual--he is called upon to portray every phase of emotion.
This seems to me a bigger task than is set before any other class of art-workers. The pianist
must be able to render with appropriate sentiment the simplicity and fresh naïveté of the earlier
classics, Haydn, Mozart; the grandeur of Bach; the heroic measures
of Beethoven; the morbid elegance of Chopin; the romanticism of Schumann;
the magnificent splendor of Liszt.

"In choosing musical food for my pupils, I strive to keep away from
the beaten track of the hackneyed.

The mistake made by many teachers is to give far too difficult music. Why should I teach an old
war-horse which the pupil has to struggle over for six months without being really able to master,
and which he will thoroughly hate at the end of that time? The Scherzo
Op.

31, of Chopin, and the Liszt Rhapsodies he can hear in the concert room, where he can become familiar
with most of the famous piano compositions. Why should he not learn to know many less hackneyed
pieces, which do not so frequently appear on concert programs?

"Herein lies one of the great opportunities for the broad-minded teacher--to be individual in
his work. According to his progressive individuality will his work be valued."

XXVII

GERMAINE SCHNITZER

MODERN METHODS IN PIANO STUDY

"It is difficult to define such a comprehensive term as technic, for it means so much," remarked
Germaine Schnitzer the French pianist to me one day, when we were
discussing pianistic problems.

"There is no special sort or method of technic that will do for all players, for every mentality
is different; every hand is peculiar to itself, and different from
every other.

Not only is each player individual in this particular, but one's right hand may differ from
one's left; therefore each hand may require separate treatment.

"An artistic technic can be acquired only by those who have an aptitude
for it, plus the willingness to undertake the necessary drudgery;
practise alone, no matter how arduous, is not sufficient.

Technic is evolved from thought, from hearing great music, from much listening to great players;
intent listening to one's own playing, and to the effects one strives
to make.

It is often said that the pianist cannot easily judge of the tonal
effects he is producing, as he is too near the instrument.

With me this is not the case.

My hearing is so acute that I know the exact dynamics of every tone, every effect of light and
shade; thus I do not have to stand at a distance, as the painter
does, even if I could do so, in order to criticize my work, for I
can do this satisfactorily at close range.

"I hardly know when I learned technic; at all events it was not at
the beginning.

At the start I had some lessons with quite a simple woman teacher. We lived near Paris, and my
elder sister was then studying with Raoul Pugno; she was a good student and practised industriously.
She said she would take me to the master, and one day she did so.

I was a tiny child of about seven, very small and thin--not much
bigger than a fly.

The great man pretended he could hardly see me. I was perched upon the stool, my feet, too
short to reach the floor, rested on the extension pedal box which
I always carried around with me, I went bravely through some Bach
Inventions.

When I finished, Pugno regarded me with interest. He said he would teach me; told me to prepare
some more Inventions, some Czerny studies and the Mendelssohn Capriccio, Op. 22, and come
to him in four weeks. Needless to say, I knew every note of these compositions by heart when
I took my second lesson. Soon I was bidden to come to him every fortnight, then every week, and
finally he gave me two lessons a week.

"For the first five years of my musical experience, I simply played the piano. I played everything--sonatas,
concertos--everything; large works were absorbed from one lesson
to the next.

When I was about twelve I began to awake to the necessity for serious
study; then I really began to practise in earnest.

My master took more and more interest in my progress and career: he was at pains to explain the
meaning of music to me--the ideas of the composers.

Many fashionable people took lessons of him, for to study with Pugno
had become a fad; but he called me his only pupil, saying that I alone
understood him.

I can truly say he was my musical father; to him I owe everything. We were neighbors in a suburb of
Paris, as my parents' home adjoined his; we saw a great deal of him
and we made music together part of every day.

When he toured in America and other countries, he wrote me frequently;
I could show you many letters, for I have preserved a large number--letters
filled with beautiful and exalted thoughts, expressed in noble and
poetic language.

They show that Pugno possessed a most refined, superior mind, and was truly a great artist.

"I
studied with Pugno ten years. At the end of that time he wished me to play for Emil Saur. Saur
was delighted with my work, and was anxious to teach me certain points.

From him I acquired the principles of touch advocated by his master,
Nicholas Rubinstein.

These I mastered in three months' time, or I might say in two lessons.

"According to Nicholas Rubinstein, the keys are not to be struck with high finger action, nor is
the direct end of the finger used. The point of contact is rather just back of the tip, between
that and the ball of the finger. Furthermore we do not simply strive for plain legato touch.
The old instruction books tell us that legato must be learned first,
and is the most difficult touch to acquire.

But legato does not bring the best results in rapid passages, for it does not impart sufficient
clarity. In the modern idea something more crisp, scintillating and brilliant is needed. So
we use a half staccato touch. The tones, when separated a hair's breadth from each other, take
on a lighter, more vibrant, radiant quality; they are really like strings of pearls. Then I also
use pressure touch, pressing and caressing the keys--feeling as it
were for the quality I want; I think it, I hear it mentally, and I
can make it.

With this manner of touching the keys, and this constant search for quality of tone, I can make
any piano give out a beautiful tone, even if it seems to be only a battered tin pan.

TONE WHICH VIBRATES THROUGH THE WHOLE BODY

"Weight touch is of course a necessity; for it I use not only arms and shoulders, but my whole
body feels and vibrates with the tones of the piano. Of course I have worked out many of these
principles for myself; they have not been acquired from any particular
book, set of exercises, or piano method; I have made my own method
from what I have acquired and experienced in ways above mentioned.

ON MEMORIZING

"In regard to memorizing piano music I have no set method. The music comes to me I know not how.
After a period of deep concentration, of intent listening, it is mine, a permanent possession.
You say Leschetizky advises his pupils to learn a small portion,
two or four measures, each hand alone and away from the piano.

Other pianists tell me they have to make a special study of memorizing. All this is not for
me--it is not my way. When I have studied the piece sufficiently to play it, I know it--every
note of it. When I play a concerto with orchestra I am not only absolutely sure of the piano part,
but I also know each note that the other instruments play.

Of course I am listening intently to the piano and to the whole orchestra
during a performance; if I allowed myself to think of anything else,
I should be lost.

This absolute concentration is what conquers all difficulties.

ABSTRACT TECHNIC

"About practising technic for itself alone: this will not be necessary
when once the principles of technic are mastered.

I, at least, do not need to do so.

I make, however, various technical exercises out of all difficult
passages in pieces.

I scarcely need to look at the printed pages of pieces I place on
my recital programs.

I have them with me, to be sure, but they are seldom taken out of their boxes. What I do is
to think the pieces through and do mental work with them, and for this I must be quiet and by
myself. An hour's actual playing at the piano each day is sufficient to prepare for a recital.

"It
must not be thought that I do not study very seriously. I do not work less than six hours a
day; if on any day I fail to secure this amount of time, I make it
up at the earliest moment.

During the summer months, when I am preparing new programs for the next season, I work very hard.
As I said, I take the difficult passages of a composition and make the minutest study of them
in every detail, making all kinds of technical exercises out of a knotty section, sometimes
playing it in forty or fifty different ways.

For example, take the little piece out of Schumann's Carneval, called 'The Reconnaissance.'
That needed study. I gave three solid days to it; that means from nine to twelve in the morning,
and from one to five in the afternoon.

At the end of that time I knew it perfectly and was satisfied with it. From that day to this
I have never had to give a thought to that number, for I am confident I know it utterly. I
have never had an accident to that or to any of my pieces when playing in public. In my opinion
a pianist has a more difficult task to accomplish than any other artist. The singer has to sing
only one note at a time; the violinist or 'cellist need use but one hand for notes. Even the
orchestral conductor who aspires to direct his men without the score
before him, may experience a slip of memory once in awhile, yet he
can go on without a break.

A pianist, however, has perhaps half a dozen notes in each hand to play at once; every note
must be indelibly engraved on the memory, for one dares not make a slip of any kind.

"An artist playing in London, Paris or New York--I class these cities
together--may play about the same sort of programs in each.

The selections will not be too heavy in character.

In Madrid or Vienna the works may be even more brilliant. It is Berlin that demands heavy,
solid meat. I play Bach there, Beethoven and Brahms. It is a severe
test to play in Berlin and win success.

"I have made several tours in America. This is a wonderful country.

I don't believe you Americans realize what a great country you have, what marvelous advantages
are here, what fine teachers, what great orchestras, what opera,
what audiences!

The critics, too, are so well informed and so just.

All these things impress a foreign artist--the love for music that
is here, the knowledge of it, and the enthusiasm for it.

A worthy artist can make a name and success in America more quickly and surely than in any country
in the world.

"For one thing America is one united country from coast to coast,
so it is much easier getting about here than in Europe.

For another thing I consider you have the greatest orchestras in the world, and I have played with the
orchestras of all countries. I also find you have the most enthusiastic audiences to be found
anywhere.

"In Europe a musical career offers few advantages.

People often ask my advice about making a career over there, and I try to dissuade them. It
sometimes impresses me as a lions' den, and I have the desire to
cry out 'Beware' to those who may be entrapped into going over before
they are ready, or know what to expect.

Of course there are cases of phenomenal success, but they are exceptions
to the general rule.

"People go to Europe to get atmosphere (stimmung)--that much abused term! I could tell them they
make their own atmosphere wherever they are.

I have lived in music all my life, but I can say I find musical atmosphere right here in America.
If I listen to the Boston Symphony Orchestra, or to the Kneisel Quartet, when these organizations
are giving an incomparable performance of some masterpiece, I am entirely wrapt up in the music;
am I not then in a musical atmosphere? Or if I hear a performance of a Wagner opera at the
Metropolitan, where Wagner is given better even than in Bayreuth,
am I not also in a musical atmosphere?

To be sure, if I am in Bayreuth I may see some reminiscences of Wagner the man, or if I am in
Vienna I can visit the graves of Beethoven and Schubert. But these facts of themselves do not
create a musical atmosphere.

"You in America can well rejoice over your great country, your fine teachers and musicians and
your musical growth. After a while you may be the most musical nation in the world."

XXVIII

OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH

CHARACTERISTIC TOUCH ON THE PIANO

Arthur Hochman, Russian pianist and composer, once remarked to me, in reference to the quality
of tone and variety of tonal effects produced by the various artists now before the public:

"For me there is one pianist who stands above them all--his name is Gabrilowitsch."

The quality of tone which this rare artist draws from his instrument,
is unforgettable.

I asked him one morning, when he was kind enough to give me the opportunity for a quiet chat,
how he produced this luscious singing quality of tone.

"A beautiful tone? Ah, that is difficult to describe, whether in one hour or in many hours.
It is first a matter of experiment, of individuality, then of experience and memory. We listen
and create the tone, modify it until it expresses our ideal, then
we try to remember how we did it.

"I cannot say that I always produce a beautiful tone; I try to produce a characteristic tone,
but sometimes it may not be beautiful: there are many times when it may be anything but that.
I do not think there can be any fixed rule or method in tone production, because people and
hands are so different. What does for one will not do for another.

Some players find it easier to play with high wrist, some with low. Some can curve their fingers,
while others straighten them out. There are of course a few foundation principles, and one is
that arms and wrists must be relaxed. Fingers must often be loose also, but not at the nail joint;
that must always be firm. I advise adopting the position of hand which is most comfortable and
convenient.

In fact all forms of hand position can be used, if for a right purpose, so long as the condition
is never cramped or stiff. I permit either a high or low position of the wrist, so long as the
tone is good. As I said, the nail joint must remain firm, and never be crushed under by the
weight of powerful chords, as is apt to be the case with young players whose hands are weak
and delicate.

TECHNICAL STUDY

"Yes, I am certainly in favor of technical practise outside of pieces. There must be scale
and arpeggio study, in which the metronome can be used.

But I believe in striving to make even technical exercises of musical value. If scales are played
they should be performed with a beautiful quality and variety of
tone; if one attempts a Czerny étude, it should be played with as
much care and finish as a Beethoven sonata.

Bring out all the musical qualities of the étude. Do not say, 'I'll play this measure sixteen times,
and then I'm done with it.' Do nothing for mechanical ends merely,
but everything from a musical standpoint.

Yes, I give some Czerny to my students; not many études however. I prefer Chopin and Rubinstein.
There is a set of six Rubinstein Studies which I use, including the Staccato Étude.

"In regard to technical forms and material, each player may need a different tonic. I have found
many useful things in a work by your own Dr. William Mason, Touch and Technic. I have used this
to a considerable extent.

To my knowledge he was the first to illustrate the principle of weight, which is now pretty
generally accepted here as well as in Europe.

"An ancient and famous philosopher, Seneca, is said to have remarked
that by the time a man reaches the age of twenty-five, he should know
enough to be his own physician, or he is a fool.

We might apply this idea to the pianist. After studying the piano for a number of years he should
be able to discover what sort of technical exercises are most beneficial;
if he cannot do so he must be a fool.

Why should he always depend on the exercises made by others? There is no end to the list of
method books and technical forms; their name is legion. They are usually made by persons who
invent exercises to fit their own hands; this does not necessarily mean that they will fit
the hands of others. I encourage my pupils to invent their own technical exercises. They have often
done so with considerable success, and find much more pleasure in
them than in those made by others.

"Two of the most important principles in piano playing are: full,
round, exact tone; distinct phrasing.

The most common fault is indistinctness--slurring over or leaving
out notes.

Clearness in piano playing is absolutely essential.

If an actor essays the rôle of Hamlet, he must first of all speak
distinctly and make himself clearly understood; otherwise all his
study and characterization are in vain.

The pianist must likewise make himself understood; he therefore must enunciate clearly.

VELOCITY

"You speak of velocity as difficult for some players to acquire. I have found there is a general
tendency to play everything too fast, to rush headlong through the
piece, without taking time to make it clear and intelligible. When
the piece is quite clear in tone and phrasing, it will not sound as
fast as it really is, because all the parts are in just relation to
each other. As an illustration of this fact, there is a little Gavotte
of mine, which I had occasion to play several times in Paris. A lady,
a very good pianist, got the piece, learned it, then came and asked
me to hear her play it. She sat down to the piano, and rushed through
the piece in a way that so distorted it I could hardly recognize it.
When she finished I remonstrated, but she assured me that her tempo
was exactly like mine as she had heard me play the piece three times.
I knew my own tempo exactly and showed her that while it did not differ
so greatly from hers, yet my playing sounded slower because notes
and phrasing were all clear, and everything rightly balanced.

POWER

"How
do I gain power? Power does not depend on the size of the hand or
arm; for persons of quite small physique have enough of it to play
with the necessary effect. Power is a nervous force, and of course
demands that arms and wrists be relaxed. The fingers must be so trained
as to be strong enough to stand up under this weight of arms and hands,
and not give way. I repeat, the nail joint must remain firm under
all circumstances. It is so easy to forget this; one must be looking
after it all the time.

MEMORIZING

"In regard to memorizing, I have
no special rule or method. Committing to memory seems to come of its
own accord. Some pieces are comparatively easy to learn by heart;
others, like a Bach fugue, require hard work and close analysis. The
surest way to learn a difficult composition, is to write it out from
memory. There is a great deal of benefit in that. If you want to remember
the name of a person or a place, you write it down.  David, on the contrary, was tall and well-built
for his age, about sixteen, with blue eyes and curly brown hair, and the ruddy glow of health
on his cheek; and being a middy of some two years' standing on board the Sea Rover, and full
of fun and "larkishness," to coin a term, assumed a slightly protective air towards Johnny
Liston, the son of one of the cabin passengers, between whom and himself one of those stanch
friendships common to boyhood had sprung up during the voyage to Australia.  "A whale, your
grandmother, Jonathan!" repeated Davy Armstrong in a bantering tone, with all--as his companion
thought he could detect--the conscious superiority of a sucking sailor over a raw landsman,
in his voice.  "Why, you'll be seeing the sea serpent soon if you look smart.  Where is this
wonderful thing you've discovered, Jonathan, my son?  I'm blest if I can see it."

It need hardly be mentioned that, close friends as they had become in a short time, Johnny
Liston rather resented David's patronage and implied superiority, and he hated his calling
him "Jonathan," or addressing him as "my son," just as if he were as old as his father, instead
of being just of an age, as he would indignantly remonstrate, which knowing, David mischievously
made a point of so speaking to him on purpose to tease him, although in good part all the same.

"And you call yourself a sailor!" said Johnny Liston mockingly.  "Why, there it is, as plain
as a pikestaff, on the lift of that wave to the right there!  Where are your eyes, stupid?"

"Why don't you say on the port quarter, you lubber?" answered David good-humouredly; "then
a fellow would know what you meant!  Oh, I see. I think it's a ship's boat floating bottom
upwards; but I'll call the skipper's attention to it, and he'll soon tell us what it is.  Johnny,
my boy, you've got good eyesight, and deserve a leather medal for seeing that before I did,
so I'll let you have the credit of it."

"Thanks, Dave," said the other ironically.  "I'm glad you can allow for once in a way that
you are not infallible, and that somebody else can see as well as yourself."

David meanwhile had crossed over the deck, to where the captain was conversing with a group
of passengers, and having pointed out the object which his friend had discovered, a telescope
being brought to bear soon proved it to be what his quick eye had already assured him it was,
a boat pitching about bottom upwards, probably washed away from some Australian liner like
themselves.  There was no trace, however, to be seen of any one clinging to the keel, and time
was too valuable and the wind too fair for the vessel to be put off her course merely to pick
up an empty boat, which would most likely not be worth the trouble of hoisting on board; so
they passed on, and it was soon hull-down in the distance.

The Sea Rover had made all her southern latitude, descending to the thirty-sixth parallel.
She had passed the Island of Tristan d'Acunha, although at some distance off, a few days before;
and now as she was well below the region sacred to the stormy Cape, and had run down the trades,
her course was set due east for Melbourne, from which she was yet some thousands of miles away.
The wind was fair, almost dead astern, although the sea was high; and as the ship was rather
light, she rocked and rolled considerably, the waves washing over her decks, and occasionally
running over the poop in an avalanche of water, that swept right forward and made any one hold
on that did not wish to be washed off their feet.  The sea had a most winterly look.  It appeared
like a vast hilly country with winding valleys, all covered with sloshy snow just melted, the
extreme tops of the waves looking like frozen peaks in between, with the snow as yet not melted.
The air, too, was as cold as winter, for it blew from the Antarctic ice; and the gusts came
more and more frequent as evening closed in, raising the sea still higher in towering mountains,
that rushed after the ship, which was going from ten to twelve-knots an hour under all plain
sail, as if they would overwhelm her, striking our sides every now and then heavy ponderous
blows, that made; her stagger from her course and quiver right down to her keelson. One gust
of wind came all at once with such startling force that it split the main-topsail up like a
piece of tissue-paper, and then the captain thought it was about time to take in sail.

"I guess we're going to have a rough spell of it, Jonathan," said Davy, as he moved away from
his companion in obedience to the skipper's order, "All hands shorten sail!" and stationed
himself at his post by the mizzen-halliards.

"Will it be serious, Dave?" asked the other, his pale face growing a little paler with apprehension.

"Pooh! no, nothing to speak of, only a squall, Jonathan; so don't be frightened, my boy."

A squall it was with a vengeance.

As the wind had been, right aft, the captain had kept the Sea Rover under her royals and topgallantsails,
without even taking in a reef, in order to make the most of the twelve-knot breeze that was
blowing: it was only at the chief officer's request that a little time before he had been induced
to take in the stunsails; and now the wind seemed to expand so suddenly into a gale, that it
was as much as the seamen could do to get the canvas off her before she was struck with the
squall, that came up astern at the rate of fifty miles an hour, covering the heavens to windward
with great black storm-clouds, and flying wrack like white smoke that drifted before it, and
seemed to herald the heavier metal that lay behind that would come into action soon.

Everything was let fly, and only just in time; for, without the slightest warning, the wind
shifted and struck her on the starboard quarter, and the vessel was almost taken aback, with
the waves slipping in over the bows and on the starboard and port sides as she rolled heavily,
borne down into the trough of the sea by the force of the gale, her timbers groaning, the spars
creaking, blocks rattling, and the wind shrieking and whistling as it tore through the rigging
and flapped the sails heavily against the masts with the noise of thunder, as if it would wrench
them out of the ship bodily.

It was a scene of the utmost confusion while it lasted, with the men running about the deck
here and there and pulling and hauling at the halliards and braces, and the captain yelling
out stentorian orders through his speaking-trumpet, which nobody apparently understood or attended
to; and Davy Armstrong, who had been up aloft to superintend the furling of the mizzen, royal,
and topgallantsails, and close reefing of the topsail, was just congratulating himself on getting
down on deck alongside of Johnny Liston safe once more, when another squall struck the ship
from the opposite quarter, and she heeled over on her side until she buried her topsail-yards
in the billows, broadside on, as if she were going to "turn the turtle."

"Oh!" exclaimed Johnny.  "She's going over!"

"Not a bit of it," shouted out Dave in his ear, for the wind howled so that he could hardly
make his voice heard.  "She'll right in a minute. But that was a stiff blow!"

"Ay, stiffer than the last."

A heavy sea just at the same moment struck the rudder, which, through the ship's lying over
on her side, had been partly raised out of the water, and whirled round the wheel with such
force that the man who was steering was lifted off his feet, and as he grasped the spokes with
desperation, was dashed down on the deck with an awful impetus, which knocked him insensible.
Dave, followed by Johnny, immediately rushed aft, and took the helmsman's place, although it
required all the strength of the two boys to hold on and save the ship from broaching-to, when
her spars would have been swept off like ninepins, and a clean sweep made of her bulwarks,
and everything on her decks fore and aft, if possible, she did not founder.

"Well done, my lads!" shouted out the captain.  "Keep her to it," as he ordered a couple of
men aft to help them.  "Keep her to it, my lads, you'll be relieved in a jiffy.  Hold on for
the life of you, my lads; hold on!"

Their strength, however, was unequal to the struggle.

Another sea struck the rudder again almost in the same place, and David and Jonathan were floored
in an instant.

Round span the wheel with mad velocity, now uncontrolled, jamming poor Davy's leg between the
rudder beam and the wheel post, while Johnny lay sprawling on the deck, holding on like grim
death to a stray end of the mizzen-halliard that had been cast loose from the cleats.  Another
turn of the spokes of the wheel, as the rudder was banged to and fro by the billows, and Davy's
leg was released, although sadly crushed, and he was flung against the binnacle; and then a
gigantic wave pooped the ship, coming in over the stern, and before the captain, or Johnny,
or the men who were hurrying aft as rapidly as the motion of the ship would allow them, could
stretch out a hand to save him, poor Davy was swept over the side to leeward, grasping tightly
with the energy of despair, as he was carried away, a portion of the roof of the wheelhouse,
which had been broken off by the same wave which washed him overboard, as well as part of the
bulwarks.

"Oh, Dave, Dave!" exclaimed Johnny Liston, holding on to the mizzen-halliards still, and scrambling
to his feet after the water flowed over him and the ship righted again, as he saw David torn
away by the remorseless waters, and floating astern on the top of a great mountainous billow,
his hands upheld as if imploring help.

"Oh, Dave, Dave!" exclaimed Johnny Liston, apparently panic-stricken for an instant, adding,
as he turned half round towards the captain, "Why, his leg is broken, and he can't swim!"

And then, without another moment's hesitation, or a single reflection of the hopelessness of
his task, or that he was endangering his own life as well, the brave boy, grasping hold of
one of the life-buoys that hung close to the taffrail where he was supporting himself, as he
watched the wave bearing Dave away, plunged into the sea to his comrade's rescue.

"Hold on, Dave, I'm coming!" he shouted out at the pitch of his voice, to encourage the sinking
David.

And the next minute, ere any one could prevent him, he was over the ship's side, battling with
the powers of the deep.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER TWO.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER TWOCHAPTER TWO.

A VAIN QUEST.

"Man overboard!"

That cry, which those who have once heard it will never forget, echoed far and wide through
the ship, making itself heard above the dull roar of the sea, the whistling of the wind as
it tore through the rigging, the creaking of the timbers, and the trampling of feet up and
down the deck, as the crew bustled to and fro, slackening a sheet here, tightening a brace
there, and preparing for emergencies, ready for anything that might happen.

"Man overboard!"

And, in an instant, every heart palpitated with one thought, every ear was on the qui vive,
every eye turned, intently watching the captain as he gave the necessary orders for bringing
the ship up to the wind--as it was far too squally and risky work for her spars and top-hamper
to wear her, before she could pay off on the other tack--and retrace her course in her own
wake to pick up the two boys, who were now out of sight.

"Stand by the lee braces, and be ready to slacken off on the weather-side!  'Bout ship!  Up
with the helm!  Mainsail haul!" were some of the orders rapidly given and as rapidly attended to.

With a will, the great main-yard swung round to starboard, the Sea Rover paying off handsomely.
And, in another moment, under her reefed topsails and topgallantsails, with her courses dropped,
and her yards sharply braced up, she was going back on her track at even greater speed than
she had been previously travelling towards Australia, the wind having shifted to the southwards
and eastwards after the last squall, and being now well on her beam, which was the clipper's
best sailing point.

There was a lookout on the fore-topmast crosstrees; but almost every one was looking out in
the direction where some trace of David and Jonathan might be discovered.  And the minutes
seemed lengthened into hours as they anxiously peered into the mass of slatey-brown water in
front and around topped with yeasty foam.  But the sky was overcast with storm-clouds and the
darkening of approaching night, and their horizon was now limited so that they could not see
very far in advance of the Sea Rover's bows--not more than a mile at most.

Every voice was hushed on board the ship now, and only the humming of the wind and the swish
of the water could be heard as she dived every now and then over her catheads into the waves,
that fell in a cataract of spray on her forecastle and washed into her waist, while she dashed
onward, gathering speed with every yard of progress that she made.

"Lookout, ahoy, there!" shouted out the captain to the man on the fore crosstrees.  "Do you
see anything of them yet?"

"Not a speck in sight," was the answer; and still the Sea Rover clove through the water on
what they guessed to have been their former course, and the sky and the sea grew darker and
darker and seemed to mingle together, gradually diminishing their area of vision.

"We must have passed the spot by this time," said the captain presently to the chief officer,
when the ship had gone some two miles after coming about.  "Send another lookout into the main-top;
and you, Dawkins," addressing one of the hands standing near, "sky up here in the mizzen-rigging
and see if you can see anything.  Look well round to leeward as well as ahead, for we may have
overrun them."

"Ay, ay," said the man as he scrambled up the shrouds, and quickly made his way, not merely
into mizzen-top, but on the topgallant-yard, where he sat astride and scanned the horizon to
his right and left, to windward and leeward of the vessel's wake.

"On deck there!" he hailed in a little time.  He had the keenest sight of any man on board.

"Ay, ay!" answered the captain.  "Speak out!"

"There is something to windward, two points on the weather-bow."

"How far?"

"About half a mile or more, sir; but it may be less."

"We must get her a couple of points nearer the wind," said the captain to the chief officer.
"Clew up the courses, set the flying-jib, and let us get the mainsail on her, and see what
she can do.  Come, look smart and brace the yards round.  Keep her helm up!" he added to the
men at the wheel, lending them a hand as he spoke.  "Hard!"

The Sea Rover leaned over, gunwales under, and made deep bows to the sea, pitching the water
over her fore-yard, as, her head being brought round a couple of points more, she sailed almost
in the wind's-eye, taking all that two men could do to steer her, besides the captain.

"Aloft there!" shouted the captain once more to the lookout men.  "How's her head now?  Does
she bear towards the object, or is it still to windward?"

"Steady!" was the answer.  "She's right for it now.  Luff a bit, steady, it's right ahead."

"What is it?  Can you see them?" cried the captain, eagerly peering into the distance himself.

"Looks like floating timber, sir.  I can't see anybody as yet; it seems all awash."

A moment further of breathless suspense, and then those on deck could see for themselves what
had attracted the lookout man's notice--a black object, bobbing up and down amidst the waves,
one minute raised aloft on a billowy crest, the next hidden from view in a watery valley that
descended, as it were, into the depths of the ocean.

It was now clear to windward on the weather-bow; and, every now and then, distinctly visible.

"Put the helm down, slack off the sheet!" cried the captain; and, as the Sea Rover rounded-to,
with the floating object under her lee, it could be seen that it was the boat which David and
Jonathan had perceived passing them, bottom upwards, just before they were struck by the squall.
The vessel, therefore, must have gone much further back on their track than they had imagined,
for the boat must have been three or four miles astern of the point at which the boys were
washed overboard. She would of course have drifted farther than the floating wreckage, being
higher out of water, but could not have made up more than a mile of the intervening distance.

It was a grievous disappointment to all on board, crew and passengers alike.  They had made
certain that it was the two boys clinging to the wreckage of the bulwarks and wheelhouse that
had been carried away along with Davy; and the disappointment was all the greater because their
hopes had been so cruelly raised.

"My boy, my boy!" sobbed Mr Liston, who stood with several of the other cabin passengers grouped
around the captain on the quarter-deck watching in breathless suspense.  "My boy, my boy! 
He is lost, he's lost!  I shall never see him again!" and he wrung his hands in agony.

Poor, bereaved father!  He had only that moment been made aware that his son was overboard,
having been below when the accident happened to Davy, and only attracted on deck by the commotion.
Johnny was his only child, his mother having died in giving him birth, and he was the apple
of his eye.  He would have jumped into the sea, too, when, he learnt what had happened, if
he had not been prevented; and his grief was frantic.

"Cheer up, my dear sir!" said Captain Markham, as he gave orders for the ship to back across
her course at right angles, and warned the lookout men aloft to renewed watchfulness.  "We
may pick them up yet.  You know Davy Armstrong was holding on to something when he was carried
away, and your gallant son took a life-buoy with him when he went to his rescue, so they can
keep afloat till we overhaul them.  Why, I was picked up myself once after I had been in the
water for hours and the ship searching for me all the time, when I had been washed overboard
like Davy."

The captain's sanguine anticipations, however, even if he really believed in them, were baseless.

The Sea Rover backed, and wore, and tacked again, sailing, within a radius of a few miles,
in every possible direction the wind would let her, without finding any traces of the lost
ones, or even coming across the pieces of wreckage, which the sombre tint of the sea and sky
prevented their seeing; and then night came on, and they had to abandon their quest, although
they burnt blue lights and cruised about the same spot for hours afterwards, in vain!

"Alas, dear captain, it is hopeless now!" exclaimed Mr Liston mournfully, with the resignation
of despair, drawing away his gaze from the sea, and his head dropping on his breast in despondency.

He was standing almost alone on the deck, the majority of the passengers having gone below--for
the wind was cold and boisterous, and the crew having retired forward to the forecastle excepting
those on duty aft--a tall, thin, pale man, whom the calamity seemed to have aged ten years
in that brief space of time, and bowed with care.

"Only a miracle could have saved them!" he said, as if speaking to himself; and then, turning
to the captain, he added, "I suppose you must give them up now, and proceed with your voyage?"

"Yes, it is useless waiting any longer," said Captain Markham, sinking his voice in sympathy
with the other.  "Poor fellows, I'm afraid they've told the number of their mess long since!
But if they are drowned, poor Davy was lost while doing his duty as a gallant sailor; and your
son, my dear sir, lies in a hero's grave beneath the wave, for he sacrificed his life in trying
to save that of his friend.  It is some slight consolation, Mr Liston, to recollect that; and
I don't think the recording angel above will have forgotten to log it down, either!"

And, as the hardy sailor pointed upwards with a reverent air to where one tiny twinkling star
was peeping out from amidst the mass of fleeting shadowy clouds that still obscured the heavens
and shrouded the horizon from view, he wiped away a tear from his eye with the back of his
hairy hand, bidding the quartermaster a moment or two afterwards, in a strangely gruff tone
quite unlike his usual mode of speech, to set the ship's course once more due east for Australia.

And the Sea Rover went on her way.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER THREE.

A STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.

Half-drowned by the avalanche of water which had swept him overboard, and just catching one
faint glimpse of the hull of the ship through eyes that were blinded with the spray, as it
swept away from him and left him struggling with the waves, although holding on still to the
top of the wheelhouse which he had clutched in desperation as he was carried away, Davy thought
he was dreaming when he heard the voice of his friend shouting out, as if in the distance,
miles and miles away, "Hold on, Dave, I'm coming!"

"Nonsense," he reasoned with himself, amidst the pitiless lash of the billows, and the keenness
of the wind that seemed to take the skin off his face and pierce through his wet clothing as
he was one minute soused down into the water and then raised aloft again on his temporary raft
exposed to the full force of the blast.  "Nonsense!  I'm drowning, I suppose, and this is one
of those pleasant dreams which people say come to one at the last."

It was no dream, however.

After a little while, although it seemed ages to David, the voice sounded nearer.

"Hold on, Dave, old boy.  I'm quite close to you now, and will reach you in a minute!"

"I can't be dreaming," thought David again, getting a bit over the feeling of suffocation which
had at first oppressed him.  "Jonathan's voice sounds too real for that, and I can see that
I am adrift on the ocean, and resting on something.  Oh, how my leg hurts me!  I'll give a
hail, and see whether it is Jonathan's voice or not that I hear.  It must be him!"

"Ahoy, help, ahoy!" he sang out as loudly as he could; but he was already weak, his voice came
only in a faint whisper to Jonathan, who imagined he must be sinking and he would be too late.

"Keep up, Dave, for goodness' sake," screamed out the latter in agony, making desperate exertions
to reach him.  "Don't give way!  Hold on a second longer and you'll be safe!"

Although he was such a slight, delicate-looking little fellow, hardly doing justice in his
appearance to his sixteen years, if there was one accomplishment in which Johnny Liston was
a proficient, it was swimming. Living in the neighbourhood of Kensington Gardens, he had made
a habit of going into the Serpentine every morning during the summer months, and sticking at
it as long as the weather permitted, although he did not go to the lengths of some intrepid
bathers, and have the ice broken for him in winter; and by constant practice, and imitating
the best swimmers amongst whom he bathed, he had learned so much that he could compete even
with professionals for speed and endurance, and made the best amateur time on record for so
young a lad.

His practice now stood him in good stead; and he had, besides, an additional advantage, for
having learned to swim in fresh water, and indeed never having essayed his powers in the sea,
the unaccustomed buoyancy of the waves, which he now experienced for the first time, gave him
a confidence and an ease which seemed surprising to him; he felt that he did not require the
slightest exertion to keep afloat, even without the life-buoy, as he tested by letting go of
it for a short time, and with it he was certain he could almost rival Captain Webb and swim
for hours.

Of course it was rough work for a novice, paddling in such broken water; but after a few strokes
he got used to it, and, by dint of diving under the swelling bosom of some of the more threatening
crests, and floating over the tops of the others whose ridges were yet perfect, he made his
way pretty rapidly towards the spot where he had espied David floating off.

The wind and the set of the sea were both against him, but the answering hail of the middy
assured him he was proceeding in the right direction, and would be soon by his lost friend's side.

Another stroke or two, and as Johnny Liston rose on the crest of a huge mountain of water,
which took him up almost to the sky, he saw below him the broken timbers of the bulwarks rolling
about in the trough of the sea, and he thought they formed part of the wreckage on which David
had been supporting himself, and that he had seen him on them.

His heart sank within him like lead, for no one was floating on the broken bulwarks now.  Poor
Dave must have gone.

Just at that moment, however, the middy's faint hail rang again clearly out above the noise
of the wind and the sea, to assure him he was still above the surface, and restore his drooping
energies.

"Ahoy!  Help!  Ahoy!"

He did not require to hail again, for, the next moment overtopping another billow, his friend
Jonathan shot up alongside of him, and grasped him by the shoulder.

"Oh, Dave," he exclaimed.  "Thank God I've got you safe.  I thought I would never have found you."

David had partly clambered up on the top of the wheelhouse, and lay stretched out with his
legs in the water.

He raised his head and turned his face as Jonathan got hold of him.

His emotion was too great for many words.

"And you jumped overboard to save me?" was all he said.

But his look was enough.

Johnny Liston had been swimming with one arm only thrust through the life-buoy, as he had been
obliged to quit his hold of it each time he dived beneath the crest of a wave.

He now took it off, holding on to the wheelhouse-top, which sank down into the water on one
side under the double weight of the two lads, elevating the other end in the air.

"Here, put this on, Dave," he said.  "I brought it for you, and a precious job I have had to
reach you with it."

"But you, Jonathan--I beg your pardon, old chap, I didn't mean to call you so.  I know you
don't like it."

"Never mind, Dave.  If you think of me as Jonathan you may as well call me so.

"What a chap you are to think of that now," said David admiringly, "with both of us bobbing
about in the middle of the ocean, and the ship out of sight.  But I won't have the life-buoy;
what will you do without it?"

"Bless you, I can swim like a fish, Dave, and it was more a nuisance to me than a help; but,
we can both hold on to it, you know, if it comes to the worst.  How's your leg, Dave?  I thought
it was broken when you got it twisted in the wheel that time."

"Oh, it's all right," said David, kicking it out vigorously as he spoke. "The bone isn't quite
broken, but it's very sore, and I suppose I'd have to lay up for it if I wasn't here;" and
he grinned ruefully.

"Do you think the ship will pick us up?" said the other presently, losing some of his self-possession
now that he had come up with David, and the motive for forgetting self and personal danger
was wanting.

He was naturally timid unless nerved up by necessity.

"Oh, yes," said David, whose spirits rose with the occasion, and who in the presence of his
friend forgot all the peril.  "Captain Markham won't desert us, never fear; but you can't pull
up a ship like a horse, you know, Jonathan, and it will take some time for the Sea Rover to
tack about before she can fetch us.  I wish, however, old chap, we had a little better raft
than this to support us; the wheelhouse-top is hardly big enough for two, even with the buoy,
which, though it can keep us afloat, won't raise us out of the water as we want."

"Why, I passed some wreckage a few yards off before I reached you," said his friend.

"Did you?" said David.  "That must have been the gangway and part of the bulwarks that came
away with me.  I wish we had the lot here."

"Do you?" said Jonathan, as we must now call him, "then I'll soon fetch them," striking out
as he spoke.

"Take care," said David; "and pray take the buoy with you."

But, the sea saved Jonathan the trouble of leaving his friend, for the very pieces of timber
of which he had spoken made their appearance at that moment, floating down towards them from
the summit of a wave, in whose valley they were; and Jonathan swam beyond them and pushed them
before him till they were alongside the wheelhouse-top.

There was plenty of material to form a substantial raft with the addition of what they already
had; and as Jonathan drew up the heavy mass alongside, David gave a shout of joy.

"Why," he exclaimed, "here is the cleat of the signal halliards come away with a piece of the
taffrail, and we'll have enough rope to form all the lashings we want.  Isn't that lucky?"

The young middy was handy enough in sailors' ways through his two years' experience of the
sea; and--Jonathan aiding him under his direction--in a short time the loose timbers were lashed
firmly together as a framework, with the roof of the wheelhouse fastened on the top, forming
altogether a substantial platform, on which the two boys found themselves elevated a clear
foot or more out of the water, and free from the cold wash of the waves, which was beginning
to turn them blue.

"There," exclaimed David, "now we're comfortable, and can wait in patience till the ship overhauls
us; she can't be long now."

Watching with eager eyes they saw the Sea Rover coming towards them, after a long, long while,
as it seemed to them; but ere she had reached them, in spite of their shouts and hand-wavings,
which they fancied must have been seen and heard on board, she went round on the other tack,
and disappeared from their view, to their bitter disappointment and grief.

It was David now who was hopeful still.  Jonathan seemed to have lost all that courage which
had inspired him to leap into the sea to his friend's rescue, and was trembling with fear and
hopeless despair.

The next time the Sea Rover came in sight, she was further off, and appeared to be sailing
away from them, although they could see her tack about in the distance several times, as if
searching for them still.

Then it gradually got darker, and night came on, enveloping them in a curtain of hazy mist
that seemed to rest on the water, through which they could see far off the blue lights that
were burnt on board the ship to show their whereabouts, although they were useless to them,
as they could not reach her.

Even David began to lose hope now, but he still encouraged his companion.

"They'll not desert us, old fellow," he said, with a heartiness which he by no means felt.
"The captain will lie-to, and will pick us up in the morning."

Jonathan was not attending to his words, however.  He was shivering and shaking as if he had
the ague, and David could hear his teeth chatter together with the cold, although the wind
had gone down somewhat, and the sea no longer broke over them.

It was so dark that the two lads could scarcely see each other as they lay on top of the frail
structure that separated them from the deep, clasping each other's hands.

Presently, in the fitful phosphorescent light of the water, some dark object seemed to float
up alongside; and Jonathan gave vent to a scream of horror, that rang through the silence of
the night.

"Oh, what is that?" he exclaimed.

And if David had not clutched him, he would have plunged headlong from the raft into the sea
in his fright and agonised terror.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER FOUR.

ALONE ON THE OCEAN.

For hours the two boys remained in a sort of nameless terror, David feeling almost as frightened
as Jonathan, although he concealed his fright in order to reassure his companion, with the
terrible object that had excited their fear bobbing up and down alongside them, and occasionally
coming with a crash against their frail raft, that threatened to annihilate it and send them
both into the water, when it would be all over with them.

The night was pitch dark, for the mist that hung over the surface of the deep appeared to increase
in intensity, and they could not see even the faint glimmer of a star to cheer them; while
all they could hear was the lapping of the waves as they washed by them, and the ripple and
swish of some billow as it overtopped its crest, and spent its strength in eddies of circling
foam, as David could imagine--for the darkness rendered everything invisible now, even the
platform on which they were supported, and the unknown companion beside them, which might be
anything, and their very hands when held before their faces.

Some time after midnight, when David and Jonathan had gone through a purgatory of dread, not
knowing what might happen to them any moment, the moon rose gradually from the horizon, shining
faintly through a veil of clouds that almost obscured its light, and the morbid terror of the
two boys was at once dispelled on their being able to perceive what it really was that had
occasioned them such alarm.

"Goodness gracious me, Jonathan!" exclaimed David, with a tone of glad surprise in his voice,
which at once aroused his friend, who was lying face downwards on the raft, with his head buried
in his crossed arms. "Why, what do you think it is that has frightened us so?  I'm blest if
it isn't that very identical boat that you saw in the afternoon passing by the Sea Rover! 
Isn't it providential, old chap, that after all these hours we should come across it again?
Thank God for it, Jonathan," he added more earnestly a moment afterwards; "it may save both
our lives in case the ship is unable to find us and pick us up!"

Yes, there it was, a long black boat, the cutter of some vessel, that had been washed away
from the bows, as it was twenty feet long and more, floating keel uppermost, alongside the
raft, although buried somewhat deep in the water.

The night had no longer any terrors for them; and, although they waited anxiously for the sun
to rise to see whether the Sea Rover was still in sight--for the moon was frequently obscured
by clouds, and its light too intermittent and deceptive for them to scan the ocean by--they
did not dream of despairing now, even if their worst suspicions should be realised, and the
ship have left them to their fate, as the boat offered them a tangible means of rescue, which
the raft did not; albeit it had saved their lives for the while, and served as a "pis-aller."

Morning came at last, first tinging the horizon to the eastwards with a pale sea-green hue,
that deepened into a roseate tinge, and then merged into a vivid crimson flush, that spread
and spread until the whole heavens reflected the glory of the orb of day, that rose in all
its might from its bed in the waters, and moved with rapid strides towards the zenith, the
crimson colour of the sky gradually fading away, as the bright yellow sunlight took its place,
and illuminated the utmost verge of the apparently limitless sea; but the Sea Rover was nowhere
in sight, nor was the tiniest speck of a distant sail to be seen on the horizon!

"Never mind, Jonathan," said David, cheering up his companion; "you mustn't be disappointed:
it is only what I expected, although I didn't tell you so before!  Now that we have the boat,
you know, we are not half so badly off as we thought ourselves at first.  We've no reason to
despair!"

And then, sailor-like, he immediately began to overhaul their God-sent gift, to see whether
it was all a-tanto and seaworthy, without losing any more time in vain repinings, and scanning
the ocean fruitlessly for the Sea Rover; Jonathan sitting up, and beginning to be interested,
as he regained his courage and self-reliance, through his companion's words and the warmth
of the sun combined, and lost that feeling of hopeless despair that seemed to overwhelm him
and weigh him down since they lost sight of the ship for the last time on the previous night.

"It must have been adrift a good while," said David, clambering on to the keel of the boat,
and getting astride on it.  "The bottom is quite slimy.  Oh, my poor leg, how it hurts!  I
forgot all about that squeeze I had between the rudder beam and the wheelhouse, for a moment.
Never mind," continued the brave boy, hiding his pain from his companion, who winced in sympathy;
"it was only a little wrench I gave it, and it has passed off now.  But pray hold on tight
to the stern, Jonathan--you can catch hold of it by the rudder-hinge--or else I'll be parting
company, and going off on a cruise by myself."

Working himself along with his hands and knees on the slippery surface of the boat, he felt
the exposed portion all over, and as far under water as his arm could reach down, when he proceeded
to give his opinion like a consulting surveyor.

"The timbers are all sound, old chap," he said, "at least, as well as I can make out; and not
a hole anywhere that I can see. "Three cheers! The sooner the quicker--the next train, let us say.
I'll be at the station to see you off."

He was as good as his word.

The Potato Baron, mounting painfully the steps of the observation car, made hasty appraisal
of the station platform and observed Bill Conway swinging his old legs from his perch on an express
truck. He favored Okada with a very deliberate nod and a sweeping, semi-military salute of farewell.

When
the train pulled out, the old contractor slid off the express truck and waddled over to his
automobile.

"Well, Liz," he addressed that interesting relic, "I'll bet a red
apple I've put the fear of Buddha in that Jap's soul.

He won't try any more tricks in San Marcos County. He certainly did assimilate my advice and drag
it out of town muy pronto.

Well, Liz, as the feller says: 'The wicked flee when no man pursueth and a troubled conscience
addeth speed to the hind legs.'"

As he was driving out of town to the place of his labors at Agua Caliente basin, he passed the
Parker limousine driving in. Between John Parker's wife and John Parker's daughter, Don Miguel
José Farrel sat with white face and closed eyes. In the seat beside his chauffeur John Parker
sat, half turned and gazing at Don Miguel with troubled eyes.

"That girl's sweeter than a royal flush," Bill Conway murmured.

"I wonder if she's good for a fifty thousand dollar touch to pay my cement bill pending the
day I squeeze it out of her father? Got to have cement to build a dam--got to have cash to
get cement--got to have a dam to save the Rancho Palomar--got to
have the Rancho Palomar before we can pull off a wedding--got to pull
off a wedding in order to be happy--got to be happy or we all go to
hell together. . . .

Well . . . I'm going down to Miguel's place to dinner to-night. I'll ask her."

The entire Parker family was present when the doctor in El Toro washed
and disinfected Farrel's wound and, at the suggestion of Kay, made
an X-ray photograph of his head.

The plate, when developed, showed a small fracture, the contemplation of which aroused considerable
interest in all present, with the exception of the patient. Don Mike was still dizzy; because
his vision was impaired he kept his eyes closed; he heard a humming
noise as if a lethargic bumble bee had taken up his residence inside
the Farrel ears.

Kay, observing him closely, realized that he was very weak, that only by the exercise of a
very strong will had he succeeded in sitting up during the journey in from the ranch. His brow
was cold and wet with perspiration, his breathing shallow; his dark,
tanned face was now a greenish gray.

The girl saw a shadow of deep apprehension settle over her father's face as the doctor pointed
to the fracture. "Any danger?" she heard him whisper,

The doctor shook his head. "Nothing to worry about. An operation will not be necessary. But
he's had a narrow squeak. With whom has he been fighting?"

"Thrown from his horse and struck his head on a rock," Parker replied
glibly.

Kay saw the doctor's eyebrows lift slightly. "Did he tell you that was what happened?"

Parker hesitated a moment and nodded an affirmative.

"Wound's too clean for that story to impress me," the doctor whispered. "Not a speck of foreign
matter in it.

Moreover, the wound is almost on top of his head. Now, if he had been thrown from a horse and
had struck on top of his head on a rock with sufficient force to lacerate his scalp and produce
a minor fracture, he would, undoubtedly, have crushed his skull more thoroughly or broken his
neck. Also, his face would have been marred more or less!

And if that isn't good reasoning, I might add that Miguel Farrel
is one of the two or three men in this world who have ridden Cyclone,
the most famous outlaw horse in America."

Parker shrugged and, by displaying no interest in the doctor's deductions,
brought the conversation to a close.

That the return trip to the
ranch, in Don Mike's present condition, was not to be thought of,
was apparent from the patient's condition. He was, therefore, removed
to the single small hospital which El Toro boasted, and after seeing
him in charge of a nurse the Parker family returned to the ranch.
Conversation languished during the trip; a disturbed conscience on
the part of the father, and on the part of Kay and her mother an intuition,
peculiar to their sex and aroused by the doctor's comments, that events
of more than ordinary portent had occurred that day, were responsible
for this.  How will you manage that?"

"With our boots, to be sure," was the prompt answer.

"Oh yes," said Jonathan, "I quite forgot those.  Let us get her over at once; it is cold work
standing thus in the water; and we may as well be comfortable as not!"

After a long and weary struggle, during the course of which the boys were in the water, with
their weight hanging on to the keel, and endeavouring to turn it over--they succeeded at last,
almost when they were half inclined to give up the task as hopeless.

Then when the boat was righted, they pushed it off the raft, and David kept it in proper position,
while Jonathan, taking off one of his boots, baled away until he was tired; David relieving
him, and he taking his place in keeping the boat steady.  It was slow work, but it was done
in time; and when it was half emptied of its contents, they both climbed in, and being now
able to bale together, they soon had it clear, and floating bravely like a cork.

Much to their joy, it did not leak a bit; and after having satisfied themselves on that point,
they went on to examine their craft in detail. It was a smart ship's cutter, which had evidently,
as David had surmised, been washed off the bows or davits of some sea-going vessel through
being carelessly fastened, for it was perfectly uninjured, and, to the delight of the boys,
it had its proper oars and a mast and sails lashed fore and aft under the thwarts.  There was
also a locker in the stern-sheets which was locked, and on David prising it open with his clasp
knife, it was found to contain some fishing-line and hooks.  A small cask, or breaker, was
also locked in the bow of the boat, and this was found to contain water, a trifle impregnated
by the sea, and slightly brackish, but still quite drinkable.  It need hardly be mentioned
what a great boon this was to them, as they had begun to be afflicted with thirst as the sun's
heat grew more powerful towards mid-day.

"Oh, David," exclaimed Jonathan presently, from his seat in the stern of the boat, where he
had been giving way to his thoughts while his friend was bustling about in the bows, stepping
the mast, and seeing that the sail and tackle answered properly, "God has been very watchful
over us!"

"Yes," replied the other, "we have much to be thankful for, old man, and I am for one, as I've
no doubt you are; but still I don't see why we should remain here, as there is no chance of
the Sea Rover coming back for us now, and there is a good southwesterly breeze blowing just
on purpose for us."

"Why, in what direction would you steer?"

"Nor'-east, to be sure, and we'll fetch the Cape of Good Hope in time, besides the chance of
falling in the track of passing vessels."

"Have you any idea of where we are, David?"

"Well, the ship yesterday was in latitude 36 degrees and something, and just nearing the longitude
of Greenwich, which is neither east nor west, as you know, so I suppose we're about a thousand
miles or so off the Cape."

"Good heavens, David! a thousand miles!"

"It isn't such a tremendous long way, Jonathan.  We can run it easily, if the wind lasts from
the same quarter, in about eight days; and if we don't quite fetch the Cape, we'll reach some
part of South Africa at all events--that is, if we don't come across the track of a ship, and
get picked up before then."

"But even eight days, David.  What shall we do for food all that time?" said Jonathan, who
was by no means of so hopeful a disposition as his friend.

"Don't you recollect, old fellow," rejoined David, "what you said just now, of God watching
over us?  As He has done so up to now, don't you think He'll look after us still, and provide
some means by which we shall not starve?"

"Yes," said the other, feeling the rebuke, "you are quite right, David; and I was wrong to
doubt His mercy.  But, oh, I do feel so hungry!"

"So do I," replied David.  "But we'll have to grin and bear it for a while, old chap, as we
are not near old Slush's caboose, on board the Sea Rover, and I don't see any grub anywhere
in sight.  However, Jonathan, we haven't felt the pangs of real hunger yet, and needn't begin
to shout out before we're hurt.  Let us do something--make sail on the boat and abandon our
old raft, which has served us a good turn--and we'll wear off the edge of our appetites."

David's advice was followed.  Taking only the life-buoy with them, they cast loose from the
raft almost with feelings of regret, for it had saved their lives, and it seemed like ingratitude
to leave it there tossing alone on the surface of the deep now that they had no further service
for it; and, hoisting the cutter's "leg-of-mutton" sail, and steering with an oar, as the boat's
rudder was missing, they ran before the wind, David directing their course, as nearly as he
could possibly guess to the north-east, by the sun, which had now passed the meridian.

"I say, Jonathan," said David, after a time, when they had quite lost sight of the raft, and
must have run some miles, "just rummage in the locker again, and see if their is anything else
we passed over in our first search?"

"No," said Jonathan, after going down on his knees and looking into every corner of the receptacle
with his fingers, so that not a crevice was left unsearched, "nothing but the fishing-lines."

"Well, let us have them out and see if we can catch anything."

"But we've got no bait."

"Oh, we can tie a bit of my red flannel shirt or your white one to the hooks.  Fish bite at
anything at sea, if they can only see it.  Hullo!" added David, "I didn't see that before."

"What?" exclaimed Jonathan.

"Why, the name of the vessel to which this boat belonged.  There it is, painted there on the
gunwale as large as life, the Eric Strauss.  I suppose she was a German ship, but I never heard
of her."

The two boys got out the lines presently, attaching small pieces of fluttering cloth to the
hooks, and heaved them overboard, dragging them in the wake of the boat some distance astern;
but they caught nothing that day, nor did they even see the sign of a fin.  A whale travelling
by himself, and not accompanied by a "school" as usual, was the only solitary denizen of the
deep that they perceived.

It was the same the next day, the boat sailing in a north-east direction as well as David could
judge, for the wind remained in the same quarter, from the southward and westward.  But he
had some difficulty in keeping her on her course at night, owing to the absence of the north
star, which is never seen south of the equator, although he could manage to steer her all right
by the sun during the day.

When the third morning broke, the boys were starving with hunger, and could have eaten anything.
They even tried to gnaw at bits of leather cut out of their boots, but they were so tough and
sodden from their long immersion in the sea that they could make nothing of them.

If it had not been for the breaker of water which they found providentially in the boat, they
felt that they must have died.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER FIVE.

STARVATION AND PLENTY.

"Look, David," said Jonathan, when the sun had risen well above the horizon on that third morning.

He was sitting down in the bow of the boat, looking out almost hopelessly for the sight of
some sail, while David was in the stern-sheets steering.

"There's a big flock of birds right in front of us.  Oh, if we only could catch one!  I could
eat it raw."

"Well, I don't think we'd wait for the cooking," said his companion philosophically, although
he put the helm down a bit so that he might likewise see the birds that Jonathan had spied.

"What can they be so far out at sea?" inquired the latter.

"Molly hawks, to be sure," said David promptly.  "We must be getting into the latitude of the
Cape."

"Why, they're as big as geese," said Jonathan, when the boat got nearer them.  "But some are
quite small; are they the young ones?"

"No," replied David; "those are the cape pigeons, which generally sail in company with the
others, and not far off at any rate.  When you see them close, as I've seen them scores of
times, and as you'll be able to if we catch one, as I hope we shall, you'll find they are very
like a large pigeon, only that they have webbed feet; and they always seem plump and fat. 
See, their feathers are white and downy, while their heads are brown and their wings striped
with the same colour, giving them the appearance, if you look down on them from a ship, of
being large white and brown butterflies, with their large wings outspread. Draw in your line
a bit, Jonathan, and let the white stuff on the hook flutter about in the air; perhaps one
of them will grab at it thinking it's something good.  It's our only chance."

No angler, not even the celebrated Izaac Walton, ever angled more industriously than the two
boys did for the next hour, trying to attract one of the birds, which, both molly hawks and
cape pigeons, hovered about the boat all the time, making swoops every now and then down into
the sea.

They were too knowing, however, to accept David's fictitious bait, as a fish would probably
have done.

One look at it was quite sufficient for them; first one and then another wheeling round and
coming nearer the surface of the water to inspect the inducement offered them, and flying off
again in disgust.

At last, just as a group of three of the cape pigeons, which were the most inquisitive of the
lot, stooped down over the strip of red flannel attached to David's hook, he gave it a jerk
and it caught somehow or other in the bird's foot or leg, and he pulled it in, squeaking and
fluttering all the time, its companions circling round it in alarm, and cawing in concert over
its misfortune.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Jonathan, as David hauled in his prize, flapping vigorously, over the gunwale
in triumph; and he stretched out his hand to take hold of it.

"Look out, and stand clear a moment," shouted out his friend.  "Those cape pigeons have a nasty
habit of throwing up everything they have in their stomachs on to you as soon as you catch
them.  There, you see.  I suppose it's a means of protection given them by nature, the same
as the savoury perfume of the American skunk."

"He's lucky to have anything to bring up," said Jonathan drily.  "It is more than we could
do, I'm sure.  There's plenty of him to eat, however, old fellow," he added, when the bird
had disgorged its last feed, "and I vote we pluck off his feathers at once and begin business."

"All right," said David, giving the bird a rap on the head with the steering oar, which effectually
stayed any further proceedings on its part.  "Pipe all hands to dinner."

Both the boys said afterwards, when detailing their experiences during that voyage in an open
boat across the ocean when they were lost at sea, that they never before or since ever enjoyed
such a meal in their lives as that cape pigeon, which they plucked, and divided into two equal
portions, eating the raw flesh, share and share alike, with the greatest gusto, even licking
up afterwards the blood that dropped from it on to the thwarts.

The repast gave them new life and spirits, and from that hour the tide of their affairs seemed
to flow more favourably, as shortly afterwards they caught a molly hawk, which they carefully
put away in the boat's locker along with the water, which David was very particular in allowancing
out, giving Jonathan and himself only a small quantity twice a day out of a measure he had
made by cutting off the toe part of one of his boots.

Towards the afternoon of the same day the heavens grew dark right ahead, a big black cloud
spreading across the horizon like a great curtain, and mounting gradually till it hid the sun
from view.

"We're going to have a squall, Jonathan," said David.  "You must look out sharp to shift the
sheet when I tell you, and unstep the mast, if necessary, the very moment I say, mind!"

"Right you are," answered the other, who had now lost all that nervousness for which David
used to chaff him when on board the Sea Rover.  "You only give the word, old man, and you'll
find me all there."

The squall, however, passed away without touching them, having vented its force in some other
quarter; but the wind veered round to the eastwards, much to David's disgust, as he had to
let the boat's head fall off from the course he wished to steer, and, strange to say, the great
black cloud they had first seen seemed still to face them and keep right ahead, although their
direction had been altered--it looked, really, just as if standing like a sentry to bar their
progress.

"I don't know what it can mean," said David anxiously.  "The wind has shifted, so why can't
it shift too?"

"It doesn't appear so big as it was," observed Jonathan.  "It is gradually narrowing at the
bottom as it spreads out on top.  And look, David, the end of it, close to the sea, comes down
into a point just like a thread."

Presently, as the boat ran nearer towards the cloud, which seemed to rest stationary over the
water, they could see that the sea was churned up around it in a state of violent commotion,
and they could hear a peculiar sucking noise rumbling in the air at the same time.

"I tell you what it is," said David; "although I've never seen one before, it must be a waterspout,
and we'll have to give it a wide berth. Look out, Jonathan, for the sheet; I'm going to put
the helm up and bring the boat about on the other tack."

Almost as soon as the cutter turned off at an angle from the direction of the waterspout, although
not absolutely going away from it, as the boys were interested in the sight, David uttered
another exclamation.

"Gracious goodness, Jonathan!" he ejaculated.  "Look, if there isn't a whale there!  And he
is going slap at it, as if he is going to bowl it over."

It was true enough; but, whether the leviathan of the deep had been caught in the maelstrom
of the waterspout, or had gone towards it from choice, they could not tell.  There he was,
however, at all events, circling round in the eddy of the sea at the foot of the cloud, and
sending up columns of spray every now and then with the flukes of his tail, as they came down
with a bash on the water, like the sound of a Nasmyth steam-hammer.

Almost as soon as the boy spoke, the whale appeared to raise itself up on end, as they could
see nearly the whole length of its body; there was a tremendous concussion; and then, with
a report like thunder, the waterspout burst, falling around the boat in the form of heavy rain.

"I say," said Jonathan, when the unexpected shower had ceased, "it's an ill wind that blows
nobody good.  Look, if there are not a number of dead fish which the waterspout must have sucked
up.  How thankful we ought to be! there is enough to last us ever so long and keep us from
starvation."

"You are light," said David.  "Let us kneel down and thank God for His mercy and care in watching
over us!"

And, after they had prayed fervently to Him who had guarded them through all the perils of
the deep, and now showered on them a supply of food almost from heaven, they set to work and
collected all the fish they could see floating about on the surface of the sea, David saying
that they were bonetas and skipjacks, and capital eating, as he stored them in the locker.

"We'll cut them open and dry them in the sun by and by," he added. "It's too much overcast
to do it now; and it's so rough with the spray dashing over us that they would only get wet
instead of dry."

Soon after the waterspout had burst, the boat's head had been brought round again as near to
the northward as the easterly wind would permit; but, towards evening, as the breeze grew stronger
and stronger, and the sea rose in mountainous billows, just the same almost as on the day on
which they bade good-bye to the Sea Rover, they were obliged to let her off a point or two
and scud before the gale.

It was a day of surprises; for, just as night was closing in, Jonathan-- who took the station
of lookout man in the fore-sheets, while David steered, being more at home with the rudder
oar than his friend-- observed something white, standing out in relief against the dark background
of the horizon, which was piled up with a wrack of blue-black storm-clouds.

"I say, David!" he shouted out, "what is this white thing in front--is it another waterspout,
or a squall, or what?"

"I'll soon tell you," said David, standing up in the stern-sheets to get a better view.  But
he had no sooner looked than he dropped down again in his seat as if he had been shot, and
turned as pale as a ghost, as he exclaimed hysterically, half laughing, half crying, "A sail!
a sail!"

STORY THREE, CHAPTER SIX.

IN EXTREMITY.

"What? a ship really?" said Jonathan, sharing the other's excitement. "Oh, I'm so glad, so glad!"

"Yes," said David, recovering a bit from his hysterical fit, and speaking in a more collected
manner.  "But she's crossing our course, and if she does not see us and take in sail, I'm afraid
we won't be able to catch her up!"

What was a gale to those in the cutter, with a gunwale hardly a foot above the surface of the
water, was only just a fair wind to the full-rigged ship which was sailing on a bowline away
from them almost hull-down on the horizon, with all her canvas spread that could draw, to take
advantage of the breeze.

The boat's head was pointed right towards the vessel, whose course was nearly at right angles
to theirs, and David put the helm up to bring them nearer the wind so that they might intercept
her; but the cutter dipped so much in the waves, and shipped such a lot of water, that he had
to let fall off again and run free, much to his mortification, as the stranger was steadily
ploughing her way ahead; and, proceeding in the direction they did, they would fetch far to
leeward of her.

"Oh, it's cruel," said Jonathan, "to sail away like that and leave us!"

"We mustn't accuse them wrongfully," said David, who, of course, was more versed in nautical
matters.  "Ships when far at sea don't keep much of a look-out, as they would have to do in
the channel or near land. And, besides, old fellow, you must recollect that although we can
see her plainly, we to those on board would appear but the tiniest speck in the distance, if
we were seen at all, and would be taken for a wandering albatross, or one of those Molly hawks
like that we caught this morning. They don't see us, evidently, or they would take in sail."

Jonathan, however, would not give up hope, but continued to wave his shirt--which he had taken
off for the purpose--in the bow of the boat, until she lessened as she drew away, and finally,
disappeared below the horizon as night came on with hasty footsteps--as it always does in southern
latitudes--shutting out everything from their gaze.

The two boys were bitterly disappointed.

Up to the time of their sighting the ship they had been almost contented with their lot, for
the fear of starvation, which had threatened them, had passed away when their hunger had been
appeased by the cape pigeon that David had captured, and they subsequently secured another
bird, besides the half-dozen fish or so that had been brought within their reach by the waterspout;
to add to which the weather had not been hot enough to cause them to make such inroads on their
stock of water--which David had judiciously apportioned from the first--as to arouse any dread
of thirst, which is far worse than want of food to shipwrecked mariners.

It was the fact of the means of escape from their perilous position having been so unexpectedly
brought near them, and as suddenly taken away, that deprived them of their courage and hopefulness
for a time, and made them forget the Eye that was watching over them, and the hand that had
already so miraculously helped them when they seemed to be at death's door! Sickness, for passion's
stress, hath wasted him to nought, And still for your consent to Allah he doth sue. O ye full
moons, whose place of sojourn is my heart, Amongst the human race whom can I choose but you?

At this the young man gave a great cry and rent his clothes, whereupon they let fall the curtain
over him and brought him other clothes. Then he returned to his former case with his boon- companions
and the cup went round as before, till it came to him, when he struck the gong a fourth time
and the door opening, out came a boy, bearing a chair and followed
by a damsel.

He set the chair for her and she sat down upon it and taking the lute, tuned it and sang to it
these verses:

When, when will separation and hatred pass away And what is past of
joyance come back to make me gay?

But yesterday, in gladness, one dwelling held us both; We saw the enviers napping, all heedless
of their prey.

But fortune played the traitor with us and sundered us, And left our dwelling-places even
as the desert grey. Wilt have me, O my censor, be solaced for my loves? Alas, my heart the
censor, I see, will not obey! So make an end of chiding and leave me to my love; For of my loved
one's converse my heart is full alway. Fair lords, though you've been fickle and broken faith
and troth, Deem not my heart for absence forgets you night or day.

When the mock Khalif heard the girl's song, he gave a great cry and tearing his clothes as
before, fell down in a swoon; whereupon they would have let down
the curtain over him, as of wont; but the cords stuck fast and Er
Reshid, chancing to look at him, saw on his body the marks of beating
with palm-rods and said to Jaafer, 'By Allah, he is a handsome youth,
but a foul thief!' 'Whence knowest thou that, O Commander of the Faithful?'
asked Jaafer, and the Khalif answered, 'Sawst thou not the marks of
whips on his sides?' Then they let fall the curtain over him and brought
him a fresh dress, which he put on and sat up as before with his courtiers.

Presently, he saw the Khalif and Jaafer whispering together and said to them, 'What is the matter,
gentlemen?' 'Nothing, my lord,' replied Jaafer, 'save that my friend here, who (as is not unknown
to thee) is of the merchants and hath visited all the great cities and countries of the world
and foregathered with kings and men of worth, saith to me, "Verily, that which our lord the Khalif hath
done this night is beyond measure extravagant, never saw I any do the like of his fashion in
any country; for he hath rent four dresses, each worth a thousand
dinars, and this is surely excessive extravagance."' 'O man,' replied
the youth, 'the money is my money and the stuff my stuff and this
is by way of largesse to my servants and followers; for each suit
that is rent belongeth to one of my boon-companions here present and
I appoint him, in exchange therefor, [if it so like him,] the sum
of five hundred dinars.' 'Well is that thou dost, O our lord!' answered
Jaafer and recited the following verses:

The virtues sure have built
themselves a dwelling in thy palm; Thou hast thy wealth to all mankind
made common property.

An if the virtues' doors were shut on us one luckless day, Thy hand unto their locks, indeed,
were even as a key.

When the young man heard these verses, he ordered Jaafer a thousand
dinars and a dress of honour.

  He then unstepped the mast, and arranged
the sail like an awning over the rest of the boat, serving to shelter themselves--with the
exception of David's leg, of course--from the heat, which was decidedly more comfortable, and
act as a table for their culinary arrangements.

On counting them, which they had not done before, they found they had thirteen bonetas and
skipjacks, beside the molly hawk, which they determined to eat while it was fresh; and then
would have sufficient food, as the fish would keep perfectly when dried, for quite that number
of days--a lucky number as Jonathan said, as it was "a baker's dozen," and certainly not an
even one.

"An unlucky one, you mean," said David.  "They say that when thirteen people sit down at table
together one is sure to die before the year is out."

"That will only apply to the fish," said Jonathan laughing, "and they're dead already, and
will be eaten soon.  And talking of that, Dave, I think it's about dinner-time; what say you?
My clock here," patting his stomach as he spoke, "warns me that it needs winding up."

"All right, I feel peckish myself," answered David, who was skinning and cutting open the fish
leisurely with his clasp knife, which he could do easily without removing from his position
or shifting his leg, while Jonathan cleaned them and washed them in the sea over the side of
the boat preparatory to spreading them out on the top of their awning to dry in the sun.  "Just
wait till I finish this last beggar, and then I'll tackle Miss Molly Hawk, and we'll begin.
Do you know, Jonathan, I don't think birds are half so bad eaten raw?  I did enjoy that cape
pigeon yesterday."

"So did I," said the other.  "It makes me hungrier to think of it.  Look alive, old boy, or
I'll start on one of these fish just to keep my hand in."

"No, you won't, or your teeth either, you cannibal," said David jocularly.  "I'm captain, and
purser too, and I'm not so extravagant as to serve out two courses for dinner.  Chaffing aside,"
he added more seriously, "we'll have to be rigidly economical, Jonathan, for we can't tell
how long it may be before we fall in with a ship or reach land, and we've already experienced
something of what the pangs of starvation are like, though, thank God, we were not put so severely
to the test as some have been!  I wish, old fellow, we were as well off for water as we are
for grub.  I don't think there is a pint more in the breaker, now that we've had that last
drink, and I'm sure we've not been very prodigal of it, and I've measured it out carefully
every day."

"Perhaps it will rain," said Jonathan cheerfully--the sight of the molly hawk, which David
had dexterously plucked and cut in two, the same as he had done the cape pigeon on the previous
day, making him feel ravenously hungry, and limiting all his considerations to the present,
instead of his being impressed with their future needs, as was the case with his more reflective
companion, "Perhaps it will rain, David.  `Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.'  Let
us set to work; I'm starving!"

The appetites of the boys being hearty, they finished every scrap of the bird, which, raw as
it was, tasted like roast goose to them, although it was not nearly so large as it had appeared
with all its feathers on; and then both lay down in the boat and had a hearty sleep, the first
they had had without interruption since they left their bunks for the last time on board the
Sea Rover.

Poor fellows! they had need of rest, for the calm lasted a week, during which time their water
ran out, and for more than two days they had not a single drop, although they reduced their
allowance to such an infinitesimal quantity that their final draught did not amount to more
than a minim.

They now endured all the agonies of thirst, their diet of dried fish making them feel it worse;
and it was as much as David could do to prevent Jonathan from drinking the sea water and losing
his senses, as he would have done--like many others who would not control their inclinations,
but insisted on having it, and afterwards went mad and died.

Then, in the very height of their sufferings, a storm of rain came on which half filled the
boat with water, giving them plenty to drink, but spoiling the remainder of their fish, so
that they had to throw them overboard.

After the rain the wind sprang up again, and the sail was once more hoisted, David trying to
keep the boat as nearly in the direction of the coast of South Africa as he could guess, during
the day steering by the sun; but at night she went as the breeze willed, and so it continued
for days, the boys getting weaker and weaker through starvation, although they had saved plenty
of water in their cask to assuage the pangs of thirst, during which time they never saw a bird
or a fish to which they could get near.

They sighted several ships, but they were too far off to attract their notice; and when, finally,
a sudden squall in the night blew away their mast and sail, and left them tossing helplessly
on the ocean, starving and worn out with fatigue, they gave up all hope, and lay down in the
bottom of the boat to die--Jonathan being the first to succumb.

"Good-bye, Dave!" said he, raising himself with a feeble effort.

"Good-bye, Jonathan!" said the other, grasping his companion's hand, as he thought, for the
last time.

"I think I am going to die," continued Jonathan: "my head is spinning round, and I feel faint.
I will lie down a bit until the end comes. Good-bye, Dave, once more!"

And he sank down again into a restless sleep, the other following his example a moment or two
afterwards; first giving one last haggard glance around the horizon--on which not a single
sail appeared in sight--as if bidding it an eternal farewell.

STORY THREE, CHAPTER SEVEN.

RESCUED.

"Boat ahoy!"

The two boys might have been asleep for hours only, or insensible for days, they never knew
for certain which, and nobody else could inform them; but that shout ringing in their ears
awoke them, with a thrill of agony that it might be merely a dream of their disordered imagination.

One look, however, satisfied them to the contrary, when they painfully raised themselves into
a sitting posture in the bottom of the boat-- which they could hardly do by reason of their
weakness--holding on to the gunwales on either side as they dragged up their attenuated bodies,
and directing their sunken eyes, which rolled with incipient delirium, to the point from whence
the hail came.

They could have screamed for joy, but their voices failed them, and their emotion found relief
in tears and stifling sobs.

A large ship lay to about a hundred yards off; and a boat, which had evidently just been lowered
from its side, was being pulled rapidly towards them.

As soon as the boat came alongside, the men in her, who appeared to be foreigners, looked at
the boys with the deepest pity, and spoke to each other rapidly in some guttural language,
which Jonathan had a hazy idea was German, as if expressing sympathy with their emaciated condition.

One of them whom they took to be an officer, from the gold band on his cap and the tone of
authority in his voice, stepped into their boat, and appeared to have the intention of lifting
them out of it into the other; but all at once he seemed to notice the name of the Eric Strauss,
and stopped short, with an expression of surprised astonishment on his face.

"Wunderbar!" he exclaimed, pointing out the name to his companions, who also looked eagerly
at it; and then, while he remained with the boys in the cutter, the painter of the latter was
attached to the other boat, which towed it alongside the ship; and, after that David and Jonathan
remembered no more, as they both fainted as they were being tenderly hoisted on board.

Jonathan was the first to come to himself.

He was in a hammock in the 'tween decks of a ship, which he could feel was in motion.  At the
slight movement he made in raising his head and peering over the side of the hammock, a man
with a grave face came to him, saying something he could not understand.

"Where's David?" inquired Jonathan, a little bit still puzzled in his head.

The man evidently knew that he was asking after his friend, as he pointed to another hammock,
suspended a short distance from his own, in which David was calmly sleeping; after which he
gave him some soup to drink, and Jonathan dropped off to sleep too.

When he awoke again he felt much better, and motioning to the attendant that he would like
to get out of the hammock, the man assisted him on to his feet.  He was a little shaky at first,
feeling sore all over; but after walking up and down a few steps with the assistance of the
attendant's arm, he regained his strength, and proceeded to the side of David's hammock to
pay him a visit.

At the sound of Jonathan's voice, the other--who appeared to have been wide awake although
he had made no movement--at once jumped up, and without any assistance got out and stood on
the deck by Jonathan's side.

"Well, old fellow!" said he.

"Well, Dave!" ejaculated the other; and they clasped each other's hands with a tight grip,
as they had never expected to do again on earth. They fully appreciated their rescue, and thanked
God for it.

"And how do you feel, Dave?" inquired Jonathan, after they had had a long look at each other.

"First-rate," said he.  "And you?"

"Oh, I'm all right.  But your leg, Dave, is it better?"

"To tell you the truth," answered he with a hearty laugh, "I forgot all about it.  It's quite
well now--look! and that black and blue appearance it had has disappeared.  I don't feel the
slightest pain, so it must be all right."

The attendant, seeing both the lads better and able to move about, here brought them each a
mess of something nice to eat, which they polished off in so hearty a manner as to make him
smile, and exclaim, "Sehr gut!" with much satisfaction to himself; and he then handed the boys
their clothes, which had been carefully dried and smoothed, and assisted them to dress.

"I wish," said David, as he completed his toilet by pulling on a pair of Hessian boots, that
the man brought him in place of the solitary one which he remembered having on in the boat,
"I wish we had been picked up by an English ship, although these chaps have been very kind,
of course, and beggars mustn't be choosers.  They are Germans, I suppose, eh?  Do you know
the lingo, Jonathan?"

"Yes, it's a German ship, Die Ahnfrau," replied his friend, likewise donning another pair of
"loaned" boots, and accepting a cap, which the attendant produced with a bow.  "How polite
this chap is, Dave!  I'm sorry I only know one or two words of the language, or I would thank
him, and get out all the information I could about the vessel, and how they picked us up."

"Oh we'll find that out somehow," said David carelessly, "all in good time, old fellow."  And
the man at that moment tapping him on the arm, and making a motion that he should follow him,
he and Jonathan went after him up the companion-stairs, from the cabin in which they were,
on to the upper deck.

They were in a large barque, as they could see, under full sail, with royals, staysails, stunsails,
and everything that could draw, set; but they had not much time given them for observation.

"Wie heissen Sie?" said a short, stout man in spectacles, speaking in a sharp imperative voice.
He had a very broad gold band on his cap, and the boys took him for the captain of the vessel,
as indeed he was.  He specially seemed to address Jonathan, as the attendant who had escorted
them on deck took them up to him, where he was standing by the binnacle with two or three others.

"John Liston," answered that worthy, speaking almost involuntarily, as the phrase the captain
used, asking his name, was one of the few German ones with which he was acquainted.

"Ah, ah!" exclaimed the captain, in a very meaning tone, addressing an officer that stood by
his side, and whom David fixed as the first mate. "Sie sprechen Deutsch!  Ah, ha!"

"Nein,--no," said Jonathan, "I do not.  I cannot speak German, I assure you."

"Very vell," said the little captain, in pretty good English, although with a strong foreign
accent.  "We will suppose you cannot!  Tell me, how did you come in that boat in which we picked
you up?"

Thereupon Jonathan told him of their being lost from the Sea Rover, David adding, as Jonathan
left out that part of the story, how his friend had bravely plunged overboard to his rescue.
The German captain, however, much to David's disgust, did not believe him.  He wasn't accustomed
to heroism in his sphere evidently!

"Oh, it's all very well," he said sneeringly, "but will you tell me how it was that you two
boys, belonging to the Sea Rover, as you say, came to be in a boat belonging to the Eric Strauss,
which boat was taken away from that vessel by some of the crew--amongst whom, we were informed
at the Cape by the authorities there, were two lads like yourselves--after a mutiny in which
they nearly murdered the master?"

Of course they explained; but the captain only turned a deaf ear to all they said.  He insisted
that they were the survivors of the mutineers of the Eric Strauss, and told them he intended
putting them in irons, and taking them home for trial at Bremerhaven--where Die Ahnfrau was
bound from Batavia, having only stopped at the Cape of Good Hope for fresh provisions and water,
and having there heard of the mutiny on board the Eric Strauss, in which vessel the captain
of the former was deeply interested, being the brother of the master, whom the crew had set
upon, as well as partner of the ship.

All remonstrances on the boys' part were useless; and, after being so miraculously preserved
from the perils of the deep, they wound up the history of their adventures when "lost at sea,"
as David pathetically remarked, by being "carried off prisoners to Germany by a lot of cabbage-soup-eating,
sourkrout Teutons, who were almost bigger fools than they looked!"  It was all Jonathan's little
knowledge of the German language that did it, however.

Naturally, the mistake of Die Ahnfrau's commander was soon discovered on the arrival of the
ship at Bremerhaven, when the boys were able to communicate with their friends and the owners
of the Sea Rover in London, and they were released immediately.  But the insult rankled in
their bosoms for some time after, and did not completely disappear, from David's mind especially,
until the Sea Rover--which, they heard from the owners at the same time that they produced
proof of the boys' identity, had already left Melbourne on her return voyage--had got back
safely to the port of London, and Johnny Liston's father and Captain Markham had greeted their
young heroes as if they had been restored from the dead.

Jonathan received the medal of the Royal Humane Society for his bravery in plunging overboard
to David's assistance; and the two boys are still the closest and dearest friends in the world,
David being third mate, and Jonathan, who took to the sea for the other's sake, fourth officer
of the Sea Rover, at the present moment, "which, when found," as Captain Cuttle says, "why,
make a note on!"

STORY FOUR, CHAPTER ONE.

"BLACK HARRY."

"The cap'en p'r'aps was in fault in the first instance; but then, you know, it's no place for
a man to argue for the right or wrong of a thing aboard ship.  When he signs articles, he's
bound to obey orders; and as everybody must be aware, especially those in the seafaring line,
the captain is king on board his ship when once at sea--king, prime minister, parliament, judge
and jury, and all the rest of it."

"But," said I, "he's under orders and under the law, too, as well as any other man, isn't he?"

"Yes, when he's ashore," said the mate with the shade over his eye. "Then he's got to answer
for anything he might have done wrong on the voyage, if the crew likes to haul him up afore
the magistrates; but at sea his word is law, and he can do as he pleases with no hindrance,
save what providence and the elements may interpose."

"And providence does interpose sometimes?" said I.

"Yes, in the most wonderful and mysterious ways," said the mate with the shade over his eye,
speaking in a solemn and awe-struck manner.  "Look at what happened in our case!  But stop,
as I don't suppose you've heard the rights of it, I'll tell you all about it."

"Do," said I.

He was the mate of a vessel which had been picked up at sea, disabled and almost derelict under
most peculiar circumstances, with only one other survivor besides himself on board, and brought
into Falmouth by the passing steamer which had rescued her.  He was a most extraordinary man
to look at.  Short, with a dreamy face and lanky, whitish-brown hair, and a patch or shade
over one eye, which gave him a very peculiar appearance, as the other eye squinted or turned
askew, looking, as sailors say, all the week for Sunday.

"Do," said I.  "There's nothing that I should like better!"

Clearing his throat with a faint sort of apologetic cough, and staring apparently round the
corner with his sound, or rather unshaded eye, he began without any further hesitation.

"The cap'en p'raps was in the wrong at first, as I said afore, sir.  You see, some men are
born to authority, and some isn't, and Captain Jarvis was one of those that aren't.  I don't
wish to speak ill of a man, when he's dead and gone to his account, and not here to answer
for himself; but I must say, if I speak the truth, that it was all through Cap'en Jarvis' fault
the Gulnare came to grief and all on board murdered each other; and what weren't murdered were
swept off the ship and drowned in the storm that came on afterwards, when everybody was seeking
each other's blood, and so met their doom in that way--all, that is, barrin' little Peter and
me, who only lived through the scrimmage and the gale to tell the story of the others' fate.
The cap'en had a bad temper and didn't know how to keep it under; that was at the bottom of
it all; and yet, a nicer man, when the devil hadn't got the upper hand of him, and a handsomer
chap--he was better looking than me, sir," said the mate in an earnest way, as if his statement
was so incredible that he hardly expected it to be believed--"yes, a nicer and a handsomer
chap you never clapped eyes on in a day's run than Cap'en Jarvis!  He stood a trifle taller
than me, and had a jolly bearded face with merry blue eyes; but with all that and his good-humoured
manner when everything was up to the nines and all plain sailing, he had old Nick's temper
and could show it when he liked!  We left Mobile short-handed; and when you leave port to cross
the Atlantic short-handed at this time of the year, I guess, mister, you've got your work cut
out for you, you have!  There was only the cap'en; myself, first mate; the second officer,
boatswain, and ten hands all told, includin' idlers, to navigate a ship of over eight hundred
tons from Mobile to Liverpool in the very worst time of the year!  A bad lookout when you come
to consider it fairly as I have; and when you have a cap'en as is continually working the men
to death and a-swearin' and a-drivin' at them, and they undermanned too, why it stands to reason
that harm will come: you're bound to have a muss, you bet, before the voyage is through!

"We'd hardly cleared the Gulf of Florida when the weather got bad, with a foul wind and a heavy
sea; and we were driven past Cape Hatteras before we could make a bit of easting in our longitude.
You never saw such a rough time of it as we had.  The watch below had no sooner turned in than
they had to be called up again to reef topsails or make sail, for there were too few hands
to be of much use without both watches worked together, and so the men had to do double tides,
as it were, with neither time to eat nor sleep comfortably.  To add to their hardships, they
were constantly in wet clothes, as it poured with rain the whole time; besides which, the ship
was so heavily laden that we were continually taking in seas over the bows as she laboured,
the water washing aft of course, and drenching them who might have escaped the rain to the
skin, so that not a soul aboard had a dry rag on.  You can imagine, sir, how the men stomached
this, particularly when there was the skipper swearing at 'em all the time, and saying that
they were lazy lubbers and not worth their salt, when they were trying hard to do their best,
as I must give them the credit of!  I spoke to the cap'en, but it was of no use--not a bit;
you might just as well have expected a capstan bar to hear reason!

"`Mr Marling,' says he, in the still way he always spoke when he was real angry.  `Mr Marling,
I'm captain of my own ship, and always intend to be so as long as I can draw my breath: I'll
thank you to mind your own business!'

"What could I say after that?  Nothing; and so I said nothing more, although I could almost
foresee what was coming, step by step!

"This dirty weather had been going on for about a fortnight, or thereabouts; the wind heading
us every now and then and veering back again to the southward and westwards, accompanied by
squalls of hail and rain following each other with lightning rapidly; so that no sooner had
one cleared off than another was on to us, and we had to clear up everything and let the ship
drive before the gale as she pleased, for it was of no use trying to make a fair wind out of
a foul one any longer. As well as we could make out our reckoning, with the aid of some lunar
observations Captain Jarvis booked the night before, for we were unable to see the sun long
enough for our purpose, we were about some three or four hundred miles to the west of Bermuda,
when, just as the clouds were breaking up blue-black against the sky, and the barometer told
us in its plain language that it was coming on to blow harder, and that we would have worse
weather than we had yet had, all the hands, as if with one accord, struck work--with the exception
of the man at the wheel, who stuck to his post!  There was no mistake about it: the watch on
deck refused point-blank to go aloft when the skipper ordered them, for about the fourth time
in the hour, I should think it was, to take in sail; while the watch below, in spite of the
boatswain's hammering away at the fore-hatch and the capen's swearing, declared that they wouldn't
rouse up, not even if the ship was sinking, and if they were shouted at any more they would
sarve him out.  It was a mutiny, there's no denying; a regular crisis, if ever there was one;
and just what I expected, seeing as how things were going ever since we left Mobile, not three
weeks before."

"Captain Jarvis," he resumed after a brief pause, "no sooner heard the men refuse to come on
deck than he went below.  Not to where they were in the fore-hatch--he knew a thing or two
better than that--but to his cabin, and in a minute he comes up again with a revolver in each
of his fists.

"`Now,' says he in a firm, hard, but quiet voice, not loud--he always spoke particularly quiet
when he was angry, as I've told you; and he was angry now, if ever a man was!  `Now, you skulkers,'
he says, addressing first the hands on deck--`Aloft every man-jack of you!  I'll shoot the
last man that's up the shrouds!'  They were up in the rigging pretty smart, you bet, at that,
when he had a revolver levelled dead at their heads.  `See that you stow that main-topsail
in a brace of shakes!  And you lubbers below, wake up there!' he exclaimed over the fore-hatch,
firing a shot down below as he spoke.  `Wake up there and on deck; or, I'll riddle every mother's
son of you before I count ten.  You, Black Harry, I know you've set this pretty little scheme
going! Near the close of the day Mrs. Deane was presented by the company,
with two hundred and thirty-six, seven-knotted skeins of excellent
cotton and linen yarn, the work of the day, excepting about a dozen
skeins, which some of the company brought in ready spun.



"`It's no use your grumbling,' says Cap'en Jarvis, with a queer grin on his face that was more
angry-like than a pain, `It's no use your grumbling with me!  Aloft with you, and make that
fore topsail all snug, and set storm staysails, for we've got something rougher coming.  I'll
settle with you, Master Harry, by-and-by!'"

"You haven't told me yet about this man, though I've read his name in the papers.  Who was
Black Harry?" asked I.

"Haven't I told you about him yet?  No; then, I'll tell you all about him now, for he had more
to do with the row aboard the Gulnare than anybody else!  He was a regular dare-devil of a
pocket-a-win, as they are called at Liverpool--a tall, lean, down-east Yankee from Boston,
with jet-black hair, and a swarthy face, which made you think he had nigger blood in him and
got him his name of `Black Harry.'  A powerful man and a good foremast hand; but an all-fired
lazy devil about work, and as sulky as a bear when he didn't get his grub regular.  He was
no coward though; and no skulker in danger, as some white-livered chaps are who ought to be
ashamed to ship as sailors, for he'd venture aloft sometimes when no one else would dare, and
was the first man at the weather-earing when it was `Reef topsails!'  But he had a temper as
skittish as the cap'en's, and couldn't stand being swore at.  I've heard him many a time mutter
after the captain had been going on at him.  I know I'd not have liked to have said half to
him that Captain Jarvis did, for Black Harry looked like a man who would never forget nor forgive
a grudge.

"Well, by-and-by the hands came down from aloft; and amongst them Black Harry, who lagged behind
the rest, although he had been the first in the foretop going up.

"`Come here, you lubber!' said the cap'en to him, singing out aloud as he touched the deck--`you,
I mean, Black Harry.  I've got a little matter to settle, I think, with you.  Who incited the
hands to mutiny just now?  I don't forget, Master Harry--I don't forget!'

"`Neither do I!' grumbled Harry below his voice.

"`What is that, you mutinous dog?' exclaimed the cap'en, flying into a violent passion again,
although he had somewhat calmed down from his former rage--`Answer me to my teeth, you scoundrel?
Take that!' and he hit a drive full fair in the centre of the forehead, with the butt-end of
his revolver, holding it by the barrel, felling Harry to the deck senseless, like a bullock
under the poleaxe! 

CHAPTER XII

ANCESTRAL WORSHIP

We have just seen that, when a military expedition started out, the event was notified, with
sacrifice, to the ancestors of the person most concerned: it was also the practice to carry
to battle, on a special chariot, the tablet of the last ancestor removed from the ancestral
hall, in order that, under his aegis so to speak, the tactics of
the battle might be successful. Ancestral halls varied according to
rank, the Emperor alone having seven shrines; vassal rulers five;
and first-class ministers three; courtiers or second-class ministers
had only two; that is to say, no one beyond the living subject's grandfather
was in these last cases worshipped at all.

"The sun, which we couldn't see, had set long since, before indeed that little misunderstanding
had occurred about going aloft; and the moon shone feebly now and then through an occasional
opening in the clouds, which had piled up atop of each other so heavy to windward that they
were like a pall in the sky.

"There was only myself and the steersman aft, the rest of the watch, which were only five in
number altogether, being stowed somewhere under the bulwarks amidships, trying to get an odd
wink if the seas that were shipping in as the ship's bows fell would let them.  Not a sound
was to be heard save the whistle and screech of the wind through the cordage, and the creak
of a block occasionally aloft; and I was looking out at the weather, wondering how soon the
next squall would tackle us, when my arms were seized by somebody behind me, who held them
down close to my sides, and a gag of a reef-knot or some piece of rope shoved into my mouth,
so that I couldn't cry out.

"`Mr Marling!' says a voice, which I recognised at once as Black Harry's, whispering in my
ear, `you need not fear nothing, only keep quiet, and no harm will be done to you; but if you
tries to make a noise, why, we'll have to quiet you in a way you won't like!'

"With that, you may be sure, I was as tranquil as a mouse, while they tied me down to a ring-bolt
close by the cabin skylight, so that I couldn't move; but from my position I could see and
hear everything that went on afterwards, although I couldn't get the gag out of my mouth so
as to be able to speak.

"`Now, men,' I heard Black Harry then say aloud; `now, we'll pay out that devil below!  I wonder
how he'll like his mutinous dogs at close quarters?' and he laughed a horrible bitter laugh.

"Then I heard them begin to descend the companion ladder into the captain's cabin.

"They didn't go far enough!  No sooner had Black Harry placed his foot on the first stair,
followed by the other mutineers, than there was a flash and a stunning explosion from below.
The captain, who had the quick hearing of a hound, must have caught the sound of their tussling
with me on the deck, for he was ready for them with his double-barrelled gun.  I saw him distinctly
by the flash through the skylight, standing at the foot of the companion, while Gripper, the
second officer, was hurrying up behind him through the door leading into the steerage where
our berths were.  Yes, I saw the captain.  He had fired one shot, and stood waiting with the
other barrel ready.

"`Come on, you dogs!'  I heard him exclaim as he discharged the gun. `There's one dose of slugs,
and I've got another handy for you!'

"The men from the sound appeared to shrink back for a second, but the next minute they rushed
down in a body; there was a second report of the captain's gun, and I received, unbeknown to
him, poor fellow--for he didn't intend it, I know--a slug right in my eye here; and for some
time I was in such agony that I didn't know what occurred below, although I heard plenty of
shots fired, and the sound of hand-to-hand fighting mingled with oaths, and curses, and cries.

"When I recollected myself again there was Black Harry near me surrounded by only four others,
as well as I could see after wiping the blood off my face with part of my arm, which I was
able to do by wriggling at my lashings; the rest must have gone under in the scrimmage.

"`Now, you villain,' I heard Black Harry say again in a voice full of spite and anger, `I've
got you!  Lash him up there in the lee rigging!' says he to his fellow-murderers; and in a
trice I saw the poor cap'en, quite pale and exhausted, fixed like a spread eagle in the mizzen
shrouds to leeward.  `Now, you villain!' says Black Harry again, cocking one of the captain's
revolvers which he had ready in his hand, `you said you would riddle us just now if we didn't
go aloft after treating us like dogs ever since we came on board your cursed ship! "O jeweller," rejoined
she, "know that I love thee and can hardly credit that I have brought
thee hither."

Then she bent to me and I kissed her, and she kissed me, and drawing
me towards her, pressed me to her bosom.

She knew by my case that I had a mind to enjoy her; so she said to me, "O my lord, dost thou
think to foregather with me unlawfully? By Allah, may he not live who would do the like of this
sin and who takes pleasure in foul talk! I am a clean virgin, whom no man hath approached, nor
am I unknown in the city.  You knocked me down on the deck with the butt-end of your pistol, and ordered my
body to be taken below by the hands, or else you said you'd throw it overboard.  For that outrage
I'll take my last revenge, after riddling you like a sieve, by smashing in your skull, and
pitching your vile carcass to the sharks--Dog!'

"With that the ruffian fired his first shot with the revolver at his powerless victim.  The
captain winced slightly, and I saw the bullet had carried off part of one of his ears.

"`Ha!' said Black Harry, `nervous, are you?  Here's another fillip for you.'

"But at the same moment the storm, which I had seen brewing up to windward, burst over the
ship; and a tremendous wave seemed to flatten me down on the deck, the ring-bolt to which I
was lashed preventing me from slipping away.  When the rush of water had subsided, and I was
able to hold up my head once more, my wounded eye smarting worse than ever, I saw that the
mizzen and main masts with part of the foremast had been washed clean away with the shrouds,
running-gear, and all their hamper, and, of course, the body of the poor captain, Black Harry,
and all his companions in crime had been carried off too in the general wreck.

"How long I remained lashed to the deck of the crippled vessel with the waves dashing over
me, the sport of the sea and the mark of the weather, I know not.  The first thing I recollect
after what appeared to be an eternity of torture, was that I found myself on board the Saracen,
a screw steamer bound from New York to Southampton, which had sighted the Gulnare tossing at
the mercy of the wind and waves, and sent a boat to see whether there was anybody alive on
board.  I was on board, alive though senseless for a time, and brought to after much kindly
solicitude; so, too, was little Peter, the cabin-boy, whom the mutineers had tied up in his
bunk in the forecastle, and who was also alive, though nearly starved to death.  Besides our
two selves, there was no other living thing; but the bodies of Gripper, the second officer,
Painter, the boatswain, and those of the mutineers who had not been washed overboard, were
found floating about in the cabin, all with the marks of bullet and shot wounds and other injuries,
to show that they had come by a violent death after a hard struggle.

"When my senses were to the fore again, naturally I informed my salvors of all that had occurred;
and as the cargo of the Gulnare was a valuable one, her hull not very much damaged, and the
weather calm and favourable, the captain of the Saracen, which had so providentially come across
her--and a right good fellow he has been to me!--made up his mind to salvage my old ship if
he could."

"And so he towed her in here at Falmouth, and you made your depositions along with the cabin-boy,
Peter, the only survivors of the catastrophe, about the facts of the case, for the benefit
of the underwriters and the clearance of your own character?"

"Just so, mister," said the man with the shade over his eye, who it strikes me from certain
circumstances was of American nationality; "and that's the whole story about `Black Harry,'
I guess!"

THE END.

