He referred to the time when the war over the Philippines was going on, at which time he was
Mayor of San Francisco. He said, "Then we hardly knew where the Philippines were." He dwelt
upon the marvelous resources of the Islands and warned us not to be like the old miner, who
before the "Days of '49" said that he saw a sign advertising the village that is now San Francisco,
for sale for five dollars. When asked, "Why he didn't buy it," he said, "He didn't' have the
five dollars, and anyway he didn't want it then."

Governor Wood finished the speeches with a stirring address. "Capital is safe in the Philippines.
Take an interest in them," he said. "They are big, there are wonderful resources and there
is big work to do here. The American Flag is still at the top of the pole. The progress of
the Philippine people in the last twenty-three years cannot be paralleled, it could not have
been accomplished without their cooperation and without our aid." He referred to the so-called
laws of discouragement that are said to impede business. "I want to get hold of them and correct
them, but they cannot be changed in a hurry. The United States stands for the development of
trade and the open-door in the Pacific. One of the best piers in the world will be built; the
harbor rivals Seattle, and Manila will be a great port and a distributor of the products of
the Far East. There is room for expansion, labor is cheap. Germany, the beaten nation, has
learned to live without import or export and understands cheap living. Competition will be
keen. They are out to gobble up South American trade. We must get busy. The war talk is tommy-rot.
Of course there will be wars in the future, but only irresponsible people think of war at present."

Manuel Queson, in a long interview, after the "Wood-Forbes" report was out, said, "I do not
agree with the report as the Islands are ready for independence."

Sergio Osmena, referred to as a great power and known as the "Sphinx of the Philippines," was
reticent at first, but later he talked freely about the marvelous resources of the Islands
and stated that he, too, believed the Islands ready for independence.

Chapter XI

Hongkong

Returning from Manila we stopped once more at "The City of Mist," Hongkong, and were entertained
all over again. While some of the Chamber of Commerce party were motoring to a dance given
in honor of the San Francisco delegates, a coolie was hit and nearly run over. Our host told
the coolie to get out of the way, while assuring us that it would not have caused much trouble
had he been severely injured. He said, "Labor is so cheap here, some coolies try to get hit
to get something out of you, and if I had really run over him, I would have given him fifty
cents, or so. You know there is a law that if a Chinese accepts any amount of money after being
injured, he has no redress." He went on to tell a story about using Chinese women to retrieve
instead of dogs in snipe shooting. If these coolie women happen to stand up and get a stray
shot, a few cents is given them, and it is called "square." One of the husbands of these women
retrievers needed money, so his wife stood up in order to get a lot of shots. She got seven
shots and went away with her husband rejoicing upon receipt of five dollars.

It was like meeting someone from home when Mrs. H. W. Thomas and Mrs. Cudahy joined our party
again.

Many of our party looked for the American flag at our consulate, and H. L. Judell said he could
not buy one in all of British Hongkong.

The feeling against the Germans in Hongkong, many of our party decided, must be very strong,
as we saw cartoons showing a fierce-looking person killing everyone, and the same person in
another pose, dressed as a traveling salesman, together with the warning, "Remember they are
one and the same." We also noted sentiment against the Japanese in China, for instance, a Chinese
gentleman told a group of our party that he and many of his countrymen taught their children
that someday they would fight the Japanese. We were told that if a Chinese child is given a
piece of candy and then told that the candy was made in Japan, the child refuses to eat it.
This just typifies the attitude we found in China towards the Japanese. But as Dr. Kasper Pischel
said at one of our evening meetings, "The spirit of China is not dead but is very much alive
in Canton. Where the guidebooks discussed the narrow streets, to small even for rickshaws,
I found twenty miles of broad streets. Where I anticipated hovels, a twelve-story skyscraper
was seen, and it is my belief that unscrupulous outsiders are trying to keep the old political
power in Peking."

Canton

Leaving Hongkong, we passed the typhoon shelter on the bay with its hundreds of floating homes.
Next we noted the numerous curved graves (evil spirits, we were told, would not attack curved
lines) and that all the graves faced the rice fields and the water for good luck. It seems
that once a year, the relatives come with a big feast, and after waiting two hours for the
spirits to eat, the mourners "fall to" and devour it themselves. The sacred mountain that resembles
an amah and child, where the expectant Chinese mothers come to pray for male babies, was seen
in the distance, as was the inlet of the bay, which, according to legend, was the original
location of the Garden of Eden. Some members of the party considered this region much more
beautiful than the Inland Sea of Japan. 

The idea therefore was not at all incongruous, nor was the way in which it was carried out, though
the latter was so ingenious as to deserve special consideration.

In the old days when Rome was a farming community, the guardianship of the gods over the fields
was one of the most important elements in religious life. The gods were above all the protectors
of the boundary lines, and thus it came to pass that where two roads
crossed and thus the corners of four farms came together the deities
protecting these farms were worshipped together as the Lares Compitales,
the Lares of the compita or cross-roads.

Curiously enough this worship was later extended to the crossing of city streets, and as was natural
it became more highly organised in the city than it had been in the
country.
We heard all about Ho Fook, with his fourteen wives and fifty-six children, and how Wang Chong
Hin had just made a million in Java, raising sugar cane; that fat worms were considered a great
treat, as were portions of rats, cats and dogs, all of these questionable delicacies being
on display in the wayside markets.

The Canton reception was by far the most spectacular the Chamber of Commerce party received
in the Orient. After the gaily attired band (playing American airs) greeted us, we passed through
a brilliantly decorated arch and drove past the business section of Canton to the Yamen of
His Excellency, Chan Chuing Ming, the Governor of Kwangtung. Here a reception committee representing
the Government of the Republic of China, at Canton, the Provincial Government of Kwangtung,
the Canton Municipality, the General Chamber of Commerce at Canton and the American Association
of South China gave us a never-to-be-forgotten welcome.

An elaborate Chinese tiffin (yes, we ate a la chop sticks) was served. Governor Chan Chuing
Ming, in his opening address, spoke of South China's plan for trade expansion and the development
of this vast section. He referred to America's policy of fair play and the "Open Door" in the
Orient and said that South China was rapidly becoming a progressive democracy and that the
delegation showed its interest in South China by its presence there.

Commissioner Francis Krull, in answering this speech, spoke of the "Heavenly Welcome." This
reminded us that besides the bands, military escort, soldiers at salute throughout the streets,
auto street sprinkler to keep down the dust in front of the procession, an aeroplane had soared
over our heads dropping messages of greeting. Someone suggested that a book on Chinese etiquette
should have been studied by all representatives, for, when Mayor Sun, the son of Dr. Sun Yat
Sen, head of South China, gave one of the ladies of our party a choice morsel, fished out of
the central platter with the spoon with which he as eating, she did not know that his is considered
a special mark of favor and accepted it very reluctantly, thinking her host most forgetful.

After eating our fill of bird's nest soup, sharks' fins and bamboo cells, we were taken in
motors to see the five-storied Pagoda, the City of the Dead, and the monument to the Chinese
revolutionary heroes (donated by the Chinese all over the world). When we saw one huge slab
donated by some Chinese in San Francisco, we did feel toward the intelligent, kindly people
just as our cultured host and hostess put it, "Right at home with them."

The General Chamber of Commerce gave a dinner at the Asia Hotel to the businessmen of the party,
while the Chinese ladies gave a twelve-course dinner on the top floor of one of their new skyscrapers. Thus
there began that ever-increasing participation in the affairs of the Latin league, which was her
first step toward acquiring a world dominion. It is probable that Rome had always belonged to this
league, but at first as a very insignificant member.


Another typically Chinese dinner was given for us where James H. Henry, an American living
in Canton, made the best speech we had heard in the Orient. He laid stress upon the fact that
we need China more than she needs the United States. As other nations are studying her people
and her resources we are letting things drift. He said, "United States is pursuing the same
stupid psychology that originally caused England to lose her trade in China to the painstaking,
persistent Germans. There are few Americans that can name readily six Chinese cities. China
favors America because she stands for Liberty, Fraternity, Equality and Fair Play, but that
her favoring the United States is more negative than positive as the United States is doing
nothing to cultivate her trade and her favor is more on account of what Americans stand for
but have not done as yet. Americans had better get busy and do something positive to develop
her trade as do the other nations. The French are importing Chinese to study in France and
in order to get to know the French and like them. The Germans come and live among the Chinese
to learn their ways and to secure their friendship. China is going forward."

Chapter XII

