A Little Garrison

A REALISTIC NOVEL of GERMAN ARMY LIFE of TO-DAY

By FRITZ VON DER KYRBURG (Lieutenant Bilse) · Translated, Edited and with a Special Introduction
by WOLF VON SCHIERBRAND Author of “GERMANY: THE WELDING OF A WORLD POWER,” “THE KAISER’S SPEECHES,”
ETC., ETC.

NEW YORK · FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY · Publishers

Copyright, 1904,

BY FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY.

All rights reserved.

This edition published in January, 1904.

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS CAMBRIDGE, U. S. A.

Contents

                                                         PAGE

INTRODUCTION                                             vii

CHAPTER

   I. An Evening Party at Captain König’s                  1

  II. What Happened at the Casino Dance                   29

 III. The Consequences of a May Bowl                      63

  IV. The Case of Sergeant Schmitz                        80

   V. Officers at a Masquerade                           140

  VI. A Sensational Event stirs the Garrison             161

 VII. An Airy Structure Collapses                        207

VIII. Changes in the Garrison                            264

  IX. Resignations are in Order                          282

   X. Unto This Last                                     301

Introduction

In his book, Le Débâcle, Zola shows in a vivid and intelligible manner the downfall of Napoleon
III. and his army, and paints in his usual matter-of-fact tints the actual condition of the
great host led forth to destruction. He makes us read in the soul of the common French soldier
and in that of his commanding officer. The keen analysis of the characters he portrays enables
us humanly to understand the catastrophe on the plains of Sedan. The whole Second Empire undermined
by corruption; the army, head and front, honeycombed with loose morals, favoritism, and boundless
conceit,--we begin to perceive the main reasons underlying the utter defeat of a gallant nation.
And this all the more when, side by side with the sombre painting of Zola, we read the God-fearing
letters written home from the reeking battlefields by William I. and his Iron Chancellor.

Indeed, when the conquering German legions returned, in the spring of 1871, to their own firesides,
they presented a body of men of whom any nation might have been proud. Elated they were at
their unparalleled successes, but not puffed-up or vainglorious.

A generation has passed since then. Is the German army of to-day still of the same metal? Does
it, as a body, still show the same sterling qualities which led it to victory after victory
on the soil of France?

Alas, no. On that point the best and clearest minds in Germany itself are agreed. Foreign military
leaders who have had opportunity to watch the German soldier of to-day at play and at work,
have sent home reports to their respective governments, saying: “These are not the men that
won in 1870!”

A couple of years ago several American officers of high rank, fresh from the Philippines, witnessed
the great autumn manœuvres of the German army, conducted under the supreme command of William
II. One of them, after viewing in stark amazement the senseless attacks of whole cavalry divisions
up steep declivities or down slippery embankments, exposed all the while to a withering fire
from the rifles of infantry masses, said to the present writer: “If this were actual war, not
a horse or man would be left alive!”

In the Reichstag, the national parliament of Germany, many have been the heated debates and
scorching has been the bitter satire passed during recent years upon the German army of to-day.
And not only the solid phalanx of Socialists did the criticising on such occasions, but also
not a few members of every other party, even including those of the Conservative Faction, composed
of men who are the very representatives of the caste from which the Empire’s corps of officers
have sprung.

The German newspaper press has sounded of late years, again and again, the note of alarm, dwelling
in scathing articles on signs of decadence in the nation’s whilom pride,--the army. It has
pointed out the growing spirit of luxury in its ranks, the wholesale abuse of power by the
officers and sergeants, the looseness of discipline, the havoc wrought by “army usurers,” the
“money marriages,” so much in vogue with debt-ridden officers, the hard drinking and lax morals
prevailing, the gaming for high stakes, which is another festering sore, and leads to the ruin
of so many,--and a whole train of other evils. The professional, that is, the military, press
has joined in this chorus in more subdued tones.

Throughout the length and breadth of the Empire a spirit of disquiet, nay, of apprehension,
has spread. Are the very foundations trembling on which the reunited “fatherland” rests?

If any reliance can be placed on an unbroken chain of evidence it would seem so indeed.

It was in 1786 that Frederick the Great died, leaving an army that he had raised to the pinnacle
of fame. With this army he had faced and vanquished, standing at bay against almost the whole
of continental Europe, his powerful foes. Little Prussia, a straggling strip of territory stretching
from the ice-bound Niemen to the vine-clad Rhine, Frederick’s genius had lifted until it took
rank with the powers that prescribe laws to the world.

A score of years later, just one short score, the hills of Jena looked down upon the crushing,
disgraceful defeat of this same Prussian army. The country was dismembered, and as a political
force ceased to exist. The heel of the Corsican despot was on its neck. Even after the restoration
of Prussia by the Vienna Congress in 1815, it required another half-century to give her back
her lost prestige. Sadowa and Sedan reinstated Prussia, and with her the allied states of Germany
in her former glory.

        *       *       *       *       *

Is another Jena coming?

Are we on the eve of another international upheaval?

        *       *       *       *       *

A little book has recently appeared in Germany. Its title is unpretentious. Aus einer kleinen
Garnison (“A Little Garrison”) does not sound very sensational. The book, besides, was written
by a simple lieutenant, Bilse by name. There was apparently nothing to arouse public attention
in its appearance.

And yet, from the instant of its publication, this little book did arouse such attention; more
than that, it grew into an enormous sensational event, and led to developments of such a serious
character that their consequences will be felt for many years to come. Indeed it seems likely
that this little book will indirectly be the means of the moral reformation of the entire German
army.

Shortly after its appearance the authorship of Lieutenant Bilse, who had written under the
pen name of Fritz von der Kyrburg, was discovered. A court-martial was promptly convened, and
he was summoned to appear before this military tribunal.

Mail reports now to hand of this memorable trial show that it created intense interest in Germany,
that it was regarded, indeed, as a cause célèbre of the first magnitude. The interest in the
case was largely due to the belief that Lieutenant Bilse’s novel--for he had given his terrible
arraignment of the army the outward semblance of a novel--presented a true, if highly unflattering,
picture of conditions as they exist in many German garrison towns. This impression was borne
out by the evidence, which tended to corroborate the account given by Lieutenant Bilse of the
moral tone and the standard of discipline prevailing among the officers. Part of the revelations
have not been made public, as the examination of some witnesses was conducted in camera. It
is understood that their evidence was of a highly sensational character.

In his examination, Lieutenant Bilse stated that since entering the service he had “lost all
his illusions concerning the character and duties of an officer’s calling.” He declared that
the social and regimental tone of the frontier garrison towns was extremely low, and that the
repeated instances of lax discipline, favoritism, and loose living which he had observed had
provoked him to write his book.

In not a single instance were the facts of the various incidents and events which form, grouped
in a loose tissue, the body of his book disproved or even weakened by the testimony produced
at the trial.

Nevertheless the court-martial sentenced the young officer to six months’ imprisonment and
to dismissal from the service “for libelling his superior and commanding officers by the publication
of writings in a peculiarly offensive and damaging form, and also for a breach of service regulations.”

The lieutenant was undoubtedly guilty of a breach of regulations, as an officer in Germany
is prohibited from publishing any printed matter except over his true name, and is required
to give notice of his intention to the military authorities,--a rule which the young man had
violated.

The German press, in its comments on the case, admits that it has an importance far beyond
the person of the accused.

The Berlin Post, one of the chief organs of the aristocracy in Germany, said:

     “In the interest of the army’s good name it is urgently
     requisite that abuses such as have been partly disclosed
     should be speedily and thoroughly eradicated.”

The Berlin Tageblatt, a leading paper, said:

     “Lieutenant Bilse’s book should be seriously pondered in
     high places.”

The Vossische Zeitung, one of the oldest and most respected journals at the German capital,
made this comment:

     “That such things could be possible in German military corps
     would have seemed impossible to the most malevolent critic
     ... the public confidence must be restored.”

The Hamburg Nachrichten, Bismarck’s old organ, says:

     “We regret to admit that the picture is not overdrawn.”

And that is the tenor of all the comment of the entire German press. In the neighboring countries,
in the house of Germany’s friends, Austria and Italy, the comment was even more outspoken;
while in France and Russia, although their political affiliations are not precisely friendly
to Germany, more forbearance was shown.

The Bilse book and the Bilse case have since formed the theme of divers debates in the Reichstag.
On an interpellation from some of the delegates, the Minister of War, General von Einem, made
some interesting admissions. He did not deny that Bilse had stated, in the guise of fiction,
established facts; nor did he repudiate the statement that the conditions described by the
author existed in duplicate form or worse in many garrisons of the empire.

The Kaiser himself was forced, much against his will, to take notice of Bilse’s book. A detailed
report was made to him by the chief of his Private Military Cabinet, General von Hülsen-Häseler,
on all the essential facts underlying the plot of A Little Garrison. He expressed himself as
much grieved at the terrible revelations in it. In their totality they presented a state of
facts of which he himself, thoroughly acquainted as he had deemed himself to be with conditions
in his army, had been ignorant.

The immediate outcome of this conviction on his part was the issuance of a secret decree directed
to the various commanders of the twenty-three army corps composing his army. In this decree
he called the attention of these commanders to the awful conditions laid bare in Bilse’s book,
and bade them watch hereafter with greater zeal over the morals and discipline of their various
corps. The decree he ordered to be read by each commanding colonel to his subordinate officers,
threatening with expulsion from the army any officer who should hereafter be guilty of such
heinous behavior as exemplified by the characters in Bilse’s book.

It might, therefore, be supposed that a thorough reform of the whole moral status of the German
army was now under way, or that it had been at least initiated by this action of the Kaiser.
Certainly, there is no one in all Germany who takes a deeper interest than he in the welfare
of his army, or who has a profounder conviction of its importance in maintaining the empire’s
proud position as a world power. On many occasions the Kaiser has emphasized his belief that
this, “the most precious legacy” left him by his grandfather, must be kept intact to secure
his own throne and the nation’s predominance in the heart of Europe.

        *       *       *       *       *

But it would be short-sighted to assume this. The causes that have been at work for thirty
years past, undermining and honeycombing the whole structure of the German army, are too manifold,
too much ingrained in the very fibre of the German people of to-day, and too complex to yield
at the mere bidding of even so imperious a voice as the Kaiser’s. Bilse, in his book, lays
a pitiless finger on the ulcers that have been festering and growing in the bosom of the army;
but his story, after all, is that of only one small garrison, and refers to but a brief period
in the very recent past.

It may be worth while, in order to give the reader a more comprehensive and more general view
of conditions in the German army of to-day, briefly to survey some patent facts.

The wide spread of the gambling spirit is one of these. Against it the Kaiser has inveighed
in army orders since his accession to the throne, but all in vain. This evil spirit is as strong
to-day as ever. It was but a few years ago that a monster trial took place in Hanover. It showed
a frightful state of rottenness within even the most renowned regiments--those of the Guard
Corps, in which the scions of nobility hold it an honor to serve. The details of this trial
were a shock to the whole country, and it ended by dismissal or expulsion from the army of
a score of officers bearing, some of them, the most ancient and honored names within the empire.
Even one of the Kaiser’s own aides-de-camp issued from it with a reputation so besmirched as
to lead to his hasty retirement. More recently still the Club of Innocents (Club der Harmlosen)
became the cynosure of all eyes, but unenviably so. It was not, strictly speaking, a military
club, but it counted in its membership list a majority of active army officers. I will not
go into details, but merely mention that one of the chief victims of the diabolical machinations
practised by a number of high-titled black-legs--officers of this club--was young Prince Alfred,
a grandson of the late Queen Victoria, whose complete moral and physical ruin was wrought,
soon followed by his death. The Jockey Club in Berlin, made up largely of officers, and similar
organizations in Potsdam, Charlottenburg, Hanover, Cassel, Dresden, Brunswick, Cologne, and,
in fact, nearly every other garrison town of any importance within the empire, have all had
their list of scandals during recent years,--scandals brought about by unprincipled gamesters
belonging to their corps of officers. Probably several thousands of resignations, semi-enforced
retirements, or outright dismissals from the army have been due during the last decade to this
one evil of high play alone.

The hard drinking indulged in throughout the army, to a degree which to the ignorant outsider
seems incredible, is another evil of perhaps as great magnitude. Of that Bilse’s book gives
a faithful impression. For these excessive drinking habits, and in an equal degree for the
luxurious habits of life, more particularly the indulgence in sybarite banquets, the Kaiser
himself must be held largely to blame, since, by force of example at the many “love feasts”
(Liebesmähler) and anniversary celebrations of every kind which he not only attends at the
quarters of the various regiments throughout the German domain, but which he very frequently
arranges for or encourages himself, he has taught his army officers a direful lesson. Incidentally,
she took a satisfactory bite out of a square of toast. "I 'll soon shake the reserve out of
him. He is mine. You will see him play pet dog long before we meet
that terrible gale of yours."

"Isobel, you promised your father--"

"To look after my health during the voyage. Do you think that I intend only to sleep, eat, and
read novels all the way to London? Then, indeed, I should be ill. But there is a French Comte
on the ship. He is mine, too."

"You mean to find safety in numbers?"

"Oh, there are others.

Of course, I am sure of my little Count. He twisted his mustache with such an air when I skidded
past him in the companionway."

Elsie bent forward to give the chatterer another cup of tea.

"And you promised to read Molière at least two hours daily!" she sighed good-humoredly. Even
the most sensible people, and Elsie was very sensible, begin a long voyage with idiotic programs
of work to be done.

"I mean to substitute a live Frenchman for a dead one--that is all. And I am sure Monsieur le
Comte Edouard de Poincilit will do our French far more good than 'Les Fourberies de Scapin.'"

"Am
I to be included in the lessons? And you actually know the man's name already?"

"Read it on his luggage, dear girl. He has such a lot.

See if he doesn't wear three different colored shirts for breakfast, lunch, and tea. And, if
you refuse to help, who is to take care of le p'tit Edouard while I give the captain a trot round.
Don't look cross, there's a darling, though you do remind me, when you open your eyes that way,
of a delightful little American schoolma'am I met in Lima. She had drifted that far on her
holidays, and I believe she was horrified with me."

"Perhaps she thought you were really the dreadful person you made yourself out to be. Now, Isobel,
that does not matter a bit in Valparaiso, where you are known, but in Paris and London--"

"Where
I mean to be equally well known, it is a passport to smart society
to be un peu risqué.

Steward! Give my compliments to Captain Courtenay, and say that Miss Maxwell and Miss Baring
hope he will favor them with his company to tea."

Elsie's bright, eager face flushed slightly. She leaned forward, with a certain squaring of the
shoulders, being a determined young person in some respects.

"For once, I shall let you off," she said in a low voice. "So I give you fair warning, Isobel, I
must not be included in impromptu invitations of that kind. Next time I shall correct your statement
most emphatically."

"Good gracious! I only meant to be polite. Tut,
tut! as dad says when he can't swear before ladies, I shan't make
the running for you any more."

Elsie drummed an impatient foot on
the deck. There was a little pause. Isobel closed her eyes lazily,
but she opened them again when she heard her friend say:

"I am sorry
if I seem crotchety, dear. Indeed, it is no pretense on my part. You
cannot imagine how that man Ventana persecuted me. The mere suggestion
of any one's paying me compliments and trying to be fascinating is
so repellent that I cringe at the thought. And even our sailor-like
captain will think it necessary to play the society clown, I suppose,
seeing that we are young and passably good-looking."

Isobel Baring
raised her head from the cushions.

"Ventana was a determined wooer,
then? What did he do?" she asked.

"He--he pestered me with his attentions.
Oh, I should have liked to flog him with a whip!"

"He was always
that sort of person--too serious," and the head dropped again.

The
steward returned. He was a half-caste; his English was to the point.

"De
captin say he busy, he no come," was his message.

Elsie's display
of irritation vanished in a merry laugh. Isobel bounced up from the
depths of the chair; her dark eyes blazed wrathfully.

"Tell him--"
she began. One sergeant, a man
by the name of Franzki, belonging to the Eighty-fifth Regiment of the Infantry, was shown at
the trial to have been guilty of no less than twelve hundred and fifty individual cases of
cruelty and of one hundred cases of abuse of power. Another man, Lieutenant Schilling, of the
Ninety-eighth Regiment of Infantry, stationed in Metz, had a record against him of over a thousand
such cases. Both men were recently tried and convicted, and the degree of their punishment
seems strangely inadequate. Yet in most instances the Kaiser does not even allow these convicted
offenders to serve out their brief terms of confinement, but issues free pardons to them after
they have undergone but a small portion of their penalty.

However, from several points of view, the most serious evil of all that has grown up within
the German army since the close of the Franco-German War of 1870-1871 is the cleavage in sentiment
between the army and the nation. That also has been demonstrable on many occasions during recent
years. I recall the case of Lieutenant von Brüsewitz, of Carlsruhe. This young officer ran
his sword through the back of a defenceless civilian by whom he fancied himself insulted in
a restaurant, the man dying within a few hours of the deed. His murderer attempted no other
exculpation, or indeed explanation, than by saying that according to the army code of honor
he was forced to avenge on the spot the insult offered him. Brüsewitz was sentenced to merely
a mild type of confinement for a term of two years, but was pardoned by the Kaiser at the expiration
of a twelvemonth. A more recent case was that of a young navy lieutenant who likewise stabbed
to death with his sword a former schoolfellow and townsman who had not saluted him on the street
with sufficient ceremoniousness. That, he said, was his only reason for killing the man, and
he, too, received a very mild sentence. Even worse was the case of two officers quartered in
a small garrison of the province of East Prussia, close to the Russian border. These men, being
somewhat in liquor on New Year’s Eve, mortally wounded one civilian and gravely wounded another
for no other reason than that these men had shouted a song distasteful to them, the whole occurrence
happening in the street after midnight. The officers got off with a ludicrously small punishment.

Such facts as these--and they could be multiplied indefinitely--show, above all, one thing:
the striking difference in the conception of what is termed “honor” obtaining between the officers
in the army and the bulk of the population, the citizen element. The so-called “army code”
embodies views which it is euphemism to call mediæval--remnants of the dark ages. And yet these
views are not excused; no, they are upheld and endorsed by the Kaiser, his government, and
by the army in a body.

The “code” also brings about that other absurdity, the army duel, as a mode of settling all
serious “affairs of honor.” About that enough has been written in Germany itself to fill whole
libraries, and yet the foolish thing continues. The Kaiser, grown up in all the prejudices
of caste as held by his ancestors and by the present generation of the upper classes in Germany,
has done nothing to eradicate this evil. The provisions made by him, and now carried out, for
regulating the practice of duelling in his army, have had only the effect of rendering the
duel as an institution still more respectable.

The main reason which impelled me to secure the authority for presenting his little work in
an English dress was the fact that it tells a truthful tale about an organization of such first-rate
importance as the German army. It paints that organization not only as he himself saw it, but
as in its essential features it really is. In doing this Lieutenant Bilse has not only rendered
an enormous service to his own country,--as indeed many thousands of Germans are recognizing
to-day,--but he has also enabled the rest of the world to gain a clear insight into the inner
mechanism of the most powerful fighting-machine in the world, has shown its hidden flaws, its
grave organic defects, and has thus permitted us truly to gauge its inherent power. But interwoven
with his criticism there is the hope, nay the conviction, that the main part of the machine
is still sound.

A book of this kind, “written from the inside,” has a strong merit of its own not to be measured
by its purely literary qualities; for these, I am free to admit, are not of the highest order.
There is talent in it, when considering that it is the first effort of a literary tyro; but
its great value lies in its intense realism, interpreting that word in its higher sense.

I have been compelled to make some alterations and omissions in my work of translation. The
omissions have been due to the conviction both of myself and of my publisher, that the author
has in certain instances given a mass of unnecessary details to which serious objection might
be urged, in this country at least, on the score of clean literary taste. The alterations were
either dictated by similar considerations or grew indirectly out of them.

With these exceptions mentioned, however, my translation may fairly claim to be true to the
spirit of the original. Even the strictest moralist will not cavil at seeing equivocal situations
painted in Bilse’s book when his purpose in doing so has been the radical exposure of ills
existing in a body around which cluster so many traditions of honor and duty well done as is
the case with the German army. And there is no excuse to be offered by me for furthering that task.

                                       WOLF VON SCHIERBRAND.

     NEW YORK, JANUARY 1, 1904.

A Little Garrison

CHAPTER I

AN EVENING PARTY AT CAPTAIN KÖNIG’S

Standing in the centre of her parlor, a spacious and cosy one, Frau Clara König let her eyes
glide over the arrangements made for the reception of her guests.

For this was her regular soirée musicale, when she saw assembled about her, one evening each
week, those of her more intimate friends who dallied habitually with Euterpe, loveliest of
the Muses. To-night, however, her invitations had not been so restricted, for she had asked
some other families to come, largely for the laudable purpose of admiring the musical achievements
of the “artists.”

Here she placed a chair in its proper place; there she smoothed with tapering fingers one or
the other of the tidies, products of her own skilful needle, which, in every hue and size,
adorned the furniture. She tested the various lamps; opened and shut piano and parlor organ
to convince herself of the absence of dust; and finally minutely inspected sundry vases, deftly
manipulating their lovely contents, so that each flower and each enfolding leaf stood out to
greatest advantage. This was one of her specialties. At none of her parties, even in mid-winter,
was there a lack of tastefully grouped nosegays and bits of green on mantel and corner brackets.

Frau Clara was a woman of about thirty, with a well-proportioned figure and a rather pretty,
rosy face. Her lively blue eyes and a wealth of well-groomed hair combined to give her a look
of pleasant youthfulness.

These last touches done, she seated herself on a low stool, for her thoughts pronounced it
all good.

And now the heavy drapery was thrust aside, and her husband appeared--a tall man with a black
moustache. He, too, came to attend to his share of the preparations. He lit up the chandelier.
Usually he gauged the number of gas jets lit by the number of guests expected, one for each.
But inasmuch as there were only five jets and about a dozen guests to come, he indulged in
the luxury of igniting them all. He did this with various groans at the latest outrageous gas
bill, and next inspected the stoves. Then he also sank down into a seat.

Albrecht König was captain in the cavalry regiment quartered in the town. His squadron was
always in apple-pie order, for he devoted to it his entire energy during waking hours. Brief
intervals of leisure he filled by glancing at the Deutsche Zeitung, studying the money-market
reports, toiling in the large garden behind the house, which he always kept in almost as good
order as his squadron, and superintending his hennery, the useful output of which he sold to
his wife at more than current prices.[1] And if there was nothing else to do, he had scientific
skirmishes with his nine-year-old, attended wine-tests,[2] or practised on the piano, an instrument
which he played almost as well as might have been wished by his friends.

    [1] This has reference to the not uncommon habit in German
    households, especially those of officers and the higher
    classes, of keeping husband’s and wife’s exchequer strictly
    separate.--TR.

    [2] “Wine tests.” In the wine-growing districts of Germany
    men possessed of a delicate “wine tongue” delight in
    attending public or private meetings where new vintages are
    sampled and their prices and marketable qualities
    determined.--TR.

A noise in the hall told of the arrival of the first guest. A heavy, dragging step and a snorting
breath told them who it was. The door opened, and Agricultural Counsellor von Konradi made
his appearance. A rather fleshy sort of man, with glasses on his aristocratic nose, over the
tops of which his eyes sought the lady of the house. His hair was dyed a fine dark shade, and
envy proclaimed that this was done on account of the fair sex; for he was unmarried. His two
ideals in life, however, were a good dinner and several bottles of even a better wine to go
with it. Since he realized both of these ideals in the captain’s house, he was fond of going
there. As to the rest, he was held to be a gentleman.

While he was at the critical point in a story embodying his profound grief at the arrival from
his estate of a pheasant in a scandalously unripe condition, the door opened again and admitted
the spouse of Captain Kahle.

Of a dainty, petite figure, and with a face that seemed to belong to a gamin, she presented
on the whole a graceful enough ensemble. But there were two drawbacks--her rather large mouth
was wreathed in a stereotyped smile, and when she opened it it gave utterance to a voice of
somewhat unpleasant, strident timbre.

Three youngish men followed on her heels. The first of them was Lieutenant Pommer, who was
somewhat of a general favorite because of his unaffected, frank demeanor. Occasionally it became
a trifle rough or rude; but you always knew where you had him. With special ardor he saluted
Frau Kahle, and it looked almost droll to watch the contrast between him, a burly, corpulent
fellow, and this tiny, fragile figure that resembled a Dresden china shepherdess.

The second one was Lieutenant Müller. Those who did not know him could have guessed from his
stiff, self-contained mien that he must be the regimental adjutant. Housewives dreaded him,
for his appetite was Gargantuan. With stoic defiance of all warning glances he was in the habit
of demolishing thrice the quantity of the daintiest eatables apportioned to each guest. After
everybody else had put down his fork, his invariable way was to help himself once more liberally,
saying it was his favorite dish.

The last of the trio was Lieutenant Kolberg, an amazingly pale young man with moustaches à
la Kaiser. He led a life against which moralists might have urged arguments, and there had
been various scandals connected with his past.

While the other guests were waited for, a few groups were being formed. Lieutenant Kolberg
approached Frau Kahle and measured her from top to toe with approval. The adjutant made a clever
attempt to find out from the hostess what particular dishes were in store for him. Having ascertained
this, he at once swore they were his special delectation. Herr von Konradi was chatting with
Captain König about a wine-testing trip into the Moselle district which they were jointly planning
in order to replenish their respective cellars.

Another lady entered, one whose corpulency and unskilfully powdered face and arms made an unpleasing
contrast with a badly fitting robe of black and yellow. She ran up to Frau Clara and squeezed
her hand in her wobbly fingers, expressing joy at the invitation. To the gentlemen who sidled
up to her one after the other she extended that same chubby hand with a fatuous smile, but
holding it so high that they could not do otherwise than touch it with their lips.

This was Frau Captain Stark, the latest spouse in the regiment, though probably past the demi-century
line.

Her lord, likewise of rotund shape, came after her. He wore a black Vandyke beard, and his
special forte was a carefully trained and extremely long nail on the little finger. It was
said that this nail demanded a goodly portion of his leisure hours. His voice told its own
story of bonhommie and unctuous Rhine wine.

Behind this couple hove in sight the figure of the commander. Everybody stepped aside with
a show of deference, and all around he was saluted with deep bows, while he slowly stepped
up to Captain König and his lady. The bowlegs and the robust body were not relieved by a face
of finer mould, and thus it was that Colonel von Kronau scarcely corresponded with the popular
conception of a dashing cavalry officer. Most striking about him was a tear that permanently
glistened in the corner of his eye. This tear he always allowed to grow to a certain size,
when he would, by a dexterous motion born of long practice, propel it from its resting-place
over at his vis-à-vis, either at the latter’s feet or in his face, as the case might be. It
largely depended on the size of the tear and the rank of his vis-à-vis.

The lady who accompanied him and who had the face and manners of a governess was his better
half. She had squeezed herself on this occasion into a dowdy dress of pearl-gray silk, with
a purple collar of velvet.

Almost simultaneously the remainder of the invited personages filed in. There was First Lieutenant
Borgert. His shifting eyes seldom looked squarely at any one whom he deigned to address. He
was fleshy, but his movements were nevertheless elastic and suave. Behind him stood First Lieutenant
Leimann, under-sized and prematurely bent, with a neck several sizes too short for him and
a suspicion of deformity between the shoulders. A pear-shaped head protruded from between them,
fitfully lit up by a pair of pig’s eyes, which either restlessly shot glances or else were
so completely buried under their lids as to become invisible. A monocle hung down his bosom
from a broad ribbon, but he never used it, for fear of becoming ridiculous.

These two gentlemen dwelt together in the same house, each occupying a floor, and were inseparables.
Though perennially short of cash, they saw no reason to deny themselves the luxuries of this
mundane sphere. On the contrary, they lived like heirs to great fortunes.

“Pardon me, my gracious lady,”[3] remarked Leimann to the hostess, “but my wife could not come
immediately, having her old complaint--nervous headache, you know!” In saying this he made
a face as though he didn’t himself believe what he was saying. “But she will doubtless come
a bit later.”

    [3] “My gracious lady”--“Gnädige Frau”--a term of politeness
    used to-day indiscriminately in Germany toward married
    women.--TR.

“Sorry to hear it,” Frau Clara sweetly answered, “but I hope she will soon feel well enough
to appear.”

After little Lieutenant Bleibtreu, a special friend of the house and the only subaltern in
Captain König’s squadron, had in his turn saluted everybody, the servant announced that the
meal was served. The diners, in couples, ranged strictly according to rank, passed in. The
dining-room looked cheerful, and the table had been arranged with Frau Clara’s customary taste.

Everybody having been served, conversation started slowly. “The weather has turned so fine
of late that we can commence playing tennis,” remarked Frau Colonel von Kronau.

“Certainly,” chimed in her husband, masticating vigorously. “I shall call a meeting of the
club next week, and then nothing will stand in the way.”

“Charming!” enthusiastically fluted Frau Stark. “I love it passionately, and you, of course,
will all join in? You, my dear Frau Kahle, were one of the most zealous members last season.
And how is it with you, Frau König?”

“I’ll have to forego the pleasure,” she replied, “for it does not agree with me.”

“And your husband?”

“I don’t know how to play,” the captain said; “but I like to watch graceful ladies at it.”

Frau Stark bit her lips and shot an angry glance at the captain. “What did he mean by ‘graceful
ladies,’ anyway?” she thought. That was meant for her, no doubt. And she remembered unpleasant
comment made because she with her fifty years had started riding a patient old mare belonging
to her husband’s squadron. One of the sergeants was giving her lessons.

“Some civilians, I believe, will join,” broke in the colonel. “I will have a list circulating.”

Everybody knew this was buncombe, the colonel being extremely unpopular in civilian circles,
and they smiled incredulously.

“I will join you,” said Herr von Konradi, “provided the heat is not excessive. Next week, however,
I have no leisure. I must sow my peas, or it will be too late.”

“Yes,” put in König, “or they will not thrive.”

“What? Not thrive? Peas will always turn out well if properly attended to,” said the colonel’s
wife, with a touch of asperity.

“I fear I must contradict you, my gracious lady,” retorted the captain. “Last year’s did not
turn out well anywhere.”

“They must be sowed at moonlight, and not a word be spoken, then they will do finely, every
time,” said the Frau Colonel, eagerly. “But don’t imagine that I am superstitious. I am simply
stating a fact.”

It was a bold thing to do, for whatever the colonel’s wife said must not be gainsaid, yet Lieutenant
Bleibtreu could not help it. He laughingly said: “Sowing, therefore, bacon in between while
the sun is shining, we’ll have one of my favorite dishes ready made.”

The colonel’s lady merely transfixed him with an envenomed stare. After a dramatic interval
she resumed: “But, come to think of it, I myself won’t have leisure next week. My goose-liver
pâtés are not yet finished.”

“You prepare them yourself?” asked the agricultural counsellor with deep interest.

“Of course. I do up six potfuls every year. The colonel dotes on this kind of stuff.”

“And where do you procure your truffles, may I ask? I am myself looking for a trustworthy person.”

“Truffles? Nonsense, it tastes every bit as good without them--that is all imagination.”

“Oh, but you must excuse me, my gracious lady; truffles are the very soul of a goose-liver
pâté. Without them it is insipid--‘Hamlet’ with Hamlet left out.”

“‘Hamlet’?” rejoined the lady with the governess face. “We were talking of truffles.”

Herr von Konradi shrugged his shoulders. Nobody else said a word. Just then Frau First Lieutenant
Leimann entered. She looked as fresh and bright as the morning star.

“A thousand pardons, Frau König,” she smiled, “but I had to finish some important letters.”
And she sat down in the place reserved for her.

“We heard you were suffering from headache,” was the general remark.

“Headache? Yes, I forgot--I did have it. But that is such an old story with me that I scarcely
think of mentioning it any more.”

She was a handsome young woman, and the fact was made more apparent by the really tasteful
gown she wore.

During all this time the adjutant had not said a word. He attended strictly to the business
that had brought him here. His voracity attracted no attention, because everybody was used
to it. Off and on he merely emitted a species of grunt in token of approval or dissent of what
had been said. He was still eating when the hostess finally gave the signal to rise. Then everybody
wished everybody else a “blessed digestion,”[4] and made for the adjoining rooms, where the
ladies were served with coffee and the men with cordials, beer, and cigars.

    [4] “Blessed digestion”--“Gesegnete Mahlzeit”--is the
    universal greeting in Germany after meals.--TR.

Informal chatting was indulged in. The colonel, after briefly despatching a trifling matter
connected with the service, for which purpose he retained Müller, who was fairly oozing with
good cheer, retired to a quiet corner with Frau Stark. Since their conversation was carried
on in whispers, First Lieutenant Borgert, despite strenuous efforts to overhear, could only
catch a phrase or a single word from time to time.

“You must manage it,” he heard her say.

“Let us hope that the annual inspection will turn out well,” replied the colonel. “Last time
our direct superiors were finding fault with your husband. It began in the stables, and I heard
some talk about it.”

“Never mind all that, Colonel, my husband must be promoted to be major. I tell you plainly,
if you drop him I shall--”

“Have no fears, my most gracious lady. I have given him a very brilliant report, though he
doesn’t deserve it, as you know. But I shall do my best.”

“And you owe me your best, Colonel, as you very well know, for without me you would be to-day--”

Captain König came up.

“Will the Herr Colonel not accompany us next week on a wine-testing trip up the Moselle? Agricultural
Counsellor von Konradi will make one of the party. Some exquisite growths are to be sold.”

“Certainly, my dear König. You know that I always join in such expeditions. And with you in
particular I like to go, for your dinner has shown me once more that you own a faultless ‘wine
tongue.’”

“Very flattering, Colonel. But I see you are still cigarless; everything is laid out in my room.”

The colonel stepped into the next room. Frau Kahle was flirting with Lieutenant Pommer in one
corner, while several young men were doing that with the pretty hostess in the other corner.
Just then First Lieutenant Leimann entered from the dining-room, and behind him his spouse,
making a wry face. Her mien became sunny, however, when First Lieutenant Borgert stepped up
to her and inquired with solicitude as to the cause of grief.

“Oh! The usual thing,” she snapped. “My husband has scolded me. You know his ungentlemanly
ways. Always rude and offensive.”

“What was the trouble this time?”

“Merely the fact that I had excused my lateness at table by pleading unfinished letters, while
he had urged a headache. I am tired of his eternal fault-finding.”

“That is valid reason for a divorce, my bewitching lady,” smiled Borgert. “Look for another
husband if you are tired of the present one.”

She peered into his face inquiringly. “You don’t imagine how serious I am.”

“Ah, if that’s the case, my dear lady, there is no time like the present for planning a change.
How, for instance, would I do for a substitute? Now, honor bright?” and he playfully fondled
her plump little hand.

She took this just as smilingly. “Before I answer,” she said, coquettishly lowering her eyelids,
“I must know what you have to offer me.”

“Let us sit down then and discuss this most alluring topic in its various bearings,” laughingly
remarked he; and he led her to a divan, where they sat down side by side.

“Now, then, pay close attention, please,” continued he. “I offer you an elegant home, a neat
turnout, a tolerably groomed nag, a villa on Lake Zurich, and a host of serving genii.”

“And who is to pay for it all?”

“Pay?” His wonderment was great. “Pay for it? Why, what is the use of doing that? It has become
unfashionable, and besides, so much good money is frittered away by paying. I never pay, and
yet I manage to live pretty comfortably.”

“All very well, but there is my husband to think of besides,” joked the pretty woman.

“Of course you still have him; but meanwhile you might try and accustom yourself to me--as
his successor, you know.”

Frau Leimann nodded cheerfully and then buried her empty little head in her hand, dreamily
scanning the carpet. The others had left the two in sole possession of the room. The eyes of
the officer sought hers, and there was a peculiar expression in them when they met.

“Why do you look at me that way?” said she. “You make me almost fear you.”

“Afraid of your most dutiful slave?” whispered he, and his breath fanned her cheek. “Ah, no.
But do not forget our conversation, loveliest of women. Things spoken in jest often come true
in the end.” She looked up and smiled as if enchanted at the idea. Then she rose, and when
he grasped one of her hands she made no effort to wrest it away. He imprinted a long-drawn
kiss on it. She shivered and then rapidly glided into the adjoining room, where the jumble
of sounds produced by tuning a variety of musical instruments was now heard. The strident notes
of violins, the rumbling boom of a cello, and the broken chords of a piano were confusedly
mingling, and the male guests were slowly dropping in or taking up a position, a half-smoked
Havana or cigarette between the lips, just outside the door, so as to combine two sources of
enjoyment. Borgert had remained behind in the next room, and was now studying intently a letter
the contents of which plunged him in a painful reverie. At last he put back the letter in his
breast pocket, audibly cursing its sender, and then joined the group nearest him.

At the parlor organ Captain König was seated, while his wife had taken charge of the piano
accompaniment. Herr von Konradi and First Lieutenant Leimann stood ready with their violins,
while Lieutenant Bleibtreu, the violoncello pressed between the knees, occupied the rear. The
auditors, at least the majority of them, were comfortably ensconced in chairs or sofas, near
the mantelpiece, and around a table on which a small battery of beer mugs, steins, and tankards
was solidly planted.

They began to play: a trio by Reinhardt. It sounded well, for the performers had practised
their respective parts thoroughly. But there were some disturbing factors, as is always the
case with amateurs. The unwieldy agricultural counsellor rose on his creaking boots with every
note he drew, and frequently snorted in his zeal. Leimann, too, was one of those one must not
look at while performing, for his queer-shaped head had sunk between his shoulders and his
bowed back presented a rather unæsthetic picture. The cellist, whose fingers were rather thick,
occasionally grasped the wrong string, but tried to make up for this by bringing out the next
tones with doubled vigor. The trio was followed by violin solos, and lastly by a Liszt rhapsody,
played by the Königs with warm feeling and sufficient technique.

For finale the small audience overwhelmed the players with praise, and some more or less correct
remarks were made about the different compositions.

“Oh, my dear Lieutenant Bleibtreu,” cried Frau Stark, “I must resume my cello practice with
you. It is such a soulful instrument, and I used to play it with tolerable proficiency in my
younger days.”

Bleibtreu made a grimace, and Captain König whispered to him that the elderly lady was unable
to distinguish one note from another.

Borgert had looked on nonchalantly from the door during the concert. Once in a while he glanced
sharply at Frau Leimann, who was cosily reclining in an arm-chair, her eyes half closed, a
prey to thoughts.

The players had now taken seats at the large table, and the conversation turned to trivial
affairs of the day, the Frau Colonel assuming the lion’s share of it, for she was decidedly
talkative. Thus another hour passed; and when the clock on the mantel marked half-past ten,
Colonel von Kronau gave his better half a look of understanding, and the latter slightly nodded
in reply, and rose, saying to the lady of the house, with a smile:

“Dear Frau König, it was charming of you to prepare such an enchanting evening for us. But
it is time for us to be going. Many thanks!”

The hostess made some polite objections; but when she saw that the Starks too, and the agricultural
counsellor began to take formal leave, she desisted from any further attempts to retain her
guests, not dissatisfied, on the whole, that but a small circle remained. For with them it
was not necessary to weigh words as carefully as in the presence of the colonel. It frequently
happened that he, the day after a social gathering, took occasion to reprove his captains and
lieutenants for a careless turn of phrase or for something which he construed as a lack of
respect shown to him or his wife.

Those five gone, the others moved their chairs closer together around the table, and some fresh,
foaming nectar was served. Borgert started the talk.

“Did you notice how this Stark woman again had a whispered confab with the colonel?” he said.
“Such manners I think they ought to leave at home, for there they are not very particular.
Just fancy, the other day I was witness when Stark threw a slipper at his wife, and she on
her part had received me in a horribly soiled and frowzy morning gown.”

“I saw worse than that,” interrupted Leimann. “Last week they had in my presence one of their
frequent matrimonial disagreements, and the fat one, her husband, clinched the matter by shouting
at her: ‘Hold your tongue, woman!’ A nice, lovable couple, those two!”

“Anyway, it seems as if she lorded it over him pretty effectually,” broke in the adjutant.
“Day before yesterday Stark had had his fill at the White Swan, and when he became a trifle
noisy and quarrelsome his wife arrived on the scene and behaved simply disgracefully. Finally
she tucked him under her arm and took him home amidst the shouts and laughter of the other
guests. I don’t think their meeting at home can have been an angelic one.”

“That sort of thing happens every little while,” remarked Pommer; “at least at the Casino[5]
she appears whenever he does not depart punctually at mealtime, and calls him hard names before
the very orderlies.”

    [5] “Casino”; the military club houses are so called.--ED.

“Well, she is keeping a sharp eye on him just now,” said Captain König, good-humoredly, “for
he wants to get his promotion as major, or, rather, it is her ambition to become Frau Major.”

“Why, there can be no idea of that,” interjected Borgert, with a great show of righteous indignation.
“If this totally incapable idiot becomes major I ought to be made at least a general. Though
it is queer that the colonel is evidently moving heaven and earth in his behalf.”

“Good reason why,” retorted Leimann, calmly.

“How so?”

“Don’t you know the story? And yet it is in everybody’s mouth.”

“Then tell us, please, because we know not a word of it, and I scent something fiendishly interesting!”
And Borgert rubbed his hands in anticipation.

“Why, last year the colonel had, with his usual want of tact, insulted a civilian--a gentleman,
you know. The latter sent him a challenge. Our good colonel began to feel queer, for while
he is constantly doing heroic things with his mouth, he is by no means fond of risking his
skin. So after some talk with her, this Stark woman went to see the gentleman in question as
peacemaker. She told him that the colonel was really innocent in the whole matter, and that
she herself had been the cause of the trouble, having spread a false report under an erroneous
impression. She managed to tell her yarn with so much plausibility as entirely to deceive and
bamboozle the other party, who thereupon withdrew his challenge with expressions of his profound
regret. So, you see, she saved the colonel’s life, for the civilian is known as a dead shot.
Since then she has the colonel completely in her power, and no matter what she tells him to
do, he executes her orders like a docile poodle dog,--a fact which we all see illustrated every
day.”

“Well, that explains the whole mystery, of course,” delightedly shouted Borgert. “Don’t you
know any more such stories? For it is really high time to call a halt. He has manners like
a ploughboy’s, and she like a washerwoman’s. I’ll collect a few more tales of the sort. It
is simply shameful that one must submit to the dictation of this woman.”

“There are rumors that she had peculiar relations with a well-known nobleman in her younger
days; but I know nothing positive, mind you.”

“Where in the world did you hear that now?”

“My military servant told me. He happens to hail from the neighborhood she comes from.”

        *       *       *       *       *

During this delectable interchange of gossip the wife of First Lieutenant Leimann had listened
with gleaming eyes and heightened color; it seemed wonderfully interesting to her. Captain
König, on the other hand, sucked his cigar thoughtfully, and his wife toyed with the embroidered
border of the table-cover.

“Why so lost in thought, my gracious lady?” Borgert said.

“I was merely wondering what stories you gentlemen might hatch against us,” she said with some
dignity.

He was about pathetically to disclaim any such fell designs, when it was noticed that Frau
Kahle had risen to bid farewell, and with her Lieutenant Pommer, whose escort home she had
accepted, her husband being off on a short official trip.

They were barely gone, when Borgert remarked:

“I think we ought to subscribe for this poor Kahle woman, just enough to enable her to buy
a new dress. I don’t think she has anything to wear besides this faded, worn-out rag of hers.
I am sick of seeing it.”

“But you ought to see her at home,” interjected Müller, in a minor key of disdain. “There she
looks worse than a slovenly servant girl. And she doesn’t seem to find time to patch up her
dirty gown, while her boy, the only child she has, runs about the streets like a cobbler’s
apprentice from the lower town. One thing, though, that urchin does know--he can lie like Satan.”

“Inherited from his mother, of course,” remarked Borgert, when a cold and reproachful look
out of Frau Clara’s eyes made him stop in the middle of his sentence. There was an embarrassed
silence for a minute, and when the talk was resumed it no longer furnished such “interesting”
material. Captain König’s yawning became more pronounced, and Leimann was leaning back in his
chair, dozing, with mouth half open. His wife, too, showed unmistakable signs of ennui, now
that the scandal she loved no longer poured forth. Her features, a moment ago smooth and animated,
now looked worn and aged, losing all their charm. Müller was still digesting audibly, and hence
it seemed the proper moment for adjourning.

Amid unanimous assurances that “this has been the most enjoyable evening this season,” the
leave-taking was finally effected, and the captain accompanied his last guests down the stairs,
and returned after shooting the strong bolt at the house door.

As he turned off the gas in the drawing-room, he said to Frau Clara: “Quite interesting, this
evening! These are two gentlemen we shall have to be on our guard against.”

CHAPTER II

WHAT HAPPENED AT THE CASINO DANCE

“Corporal Meyer! Have all this cleared out of the stable! Instantly! What beastly filth is
this? What? The stable guard is not present? Then do it yourself; it won’t hurt you. Forward,
march! And then bring me the parole book!”

“At your orders, gracious lady!”

Frau Captain Stark strode with rattling steps up and down in the stable, followed by two ragged-looking
dogs. She wore a badly fitting riding habit of slate-colored cloth, with a black derby that
had seen better days. In her right hand she carried a whip with which now and then she cut
the rank atmosphere in a reckless manner, so that the dogs slunk aside in affright. Her keen
eye pierced everywhere. She scanned the black register boards nailed above the different partitions,
and studied attentively the tablet on which was marked in chalk the ordre du jour. She came
to a full stop behind two horses, the only ones left behind by the squadron which had gone
off for drill to the parade grounds. Wrathfully she glanced at the poor old beasts, the bones
sticking out of their wrinkled, badly groomed skin like those of a skeleton. Then she lifted
the hind feet of the brown gelding and examined the hoofs. She drew a small note-book from
her habit, and entered on the dated page: “Remus No. 37. Left hind iron.” Next she climbed
the steep wooden stairs leading up to the hayloft. There they were, the culprits, two men of
the stable guard, slumbering peacefully, and not even awakened by the entrance of the “squadron’s
mother.” Quick as a flash her whip rained a shower of blows, while she cried:

“Down with you; attend to your work, you lazy scum! I shall have you reported to the colonel!”

And they flew down the stairs, and were at the feed-cutter as if the devil himself were after
them. She met Corporal Meyer at the door, breathless from running, but handing her the parole
book. He clapped his heels together before her so that the spurs jingled.

She pushed the greasy book aside.

“What does the idiot think?” she cried. “Hold it before my eyes while I read it. Here is an
entry that the saddles and bridles are to be inspected to-morrow. Have your men everything
in good shape?”

“I will go and inquire of the sergeant-major.”

“Away! Bring him here, but this very moment.”

The sergeant-major made a black face when Meyer had delivered his message, for the hours when
the squadron was drilling or practising were his choicest during the day. He spent them, as
a rule, in domestic bliss, having his cup of coffee before him and the wife of his bosom in
close proximity. He was peacefully enjoying his morning cigar when Meyer reported to him the
desire of the “gracious one.”

He cursed his luck, but lost no time in girding his loins with his sabre; shoved his cap on
his bald brow, and went rattling down the stairs.

The gracious one received him very ungraciously.

“Sergeant-major, is everything in readiness for to-morrow?”

“I think so, but will once more examine to-night.”

“To-night? You are crazy. At once. Loafing must stop. And, mark you, I demand a more respectful
tone from you, or I shall report your case to the colonel. Now bring me my horse!”

“Horse, my gracious lady? That is out with the rest of them. All horses were ordered out, except
these two lame ones,” and he pointed at the two sorry steeds.

“What? My horse ordered out? What new insolence is this? Let it be brought to me instantly.
One of the corporals can go on foot.”

But this moment she heard steps approaching, and seeing Borgert she called out to him in dulcet
tones:

“Ah, what a pleasure, my dear First Lieutenant! So early out on duty? I was just about to give
some sugar to my husband’s horses, but find them already gone. My dear husband is so excessively
punctual in all that concerns the service.”

“Your interest for the squadron is most praiseworthy, my gracious lady,” said Borgert with
a malicious twinkle in his eye. “I have often remarked you with secret admiration when issuing
orders to the men about the stable.”

“Orders? Scarcely that, my dear Borgert. Once in a while I am the messenger of my dear husband
when he has forgotten something. Of course, I take an interest in all that concerns him and
the squadron.”

“Frau Captain is quite right, and I can only congratulate you on the successful way in which
your interest in the squadron and in the whole regiment takes concrete form.”

“You are always jesting. But I suppose I shall see you at the Casino to-night?”

“Assuredly, we are to meet at five to talk over some service matters.”

“Yes, you remind me. But that will not last long. It concerns only some trifling affairs.”

“Much obliged for the exact information.”

“Oh, of course, I take an interest in everything, as I said. I called the colonel’s attention
to divers things, and I presume he will talk them over with you gentlemen.”

“I am curious to learn what they can be. But, pardon me, I see Captain König coming, with whom
I have to transact some business. Good morning, my most gracious lady!”

“Good morning, mon cher!” And she held her hand up high to him,--a big hand, which was encased
in a soiled, worn-out gauntlet of her husband’s.

Then she turned once more to the sergeant-major, while Borgert hastened to intercept König,
who was on the point of turning into the big courtyard of the third squadron.

“Good morning, Herr Captain! I must beg you to excuse me if I interfere with your liberty for
a moment, but a very pressing matter induces me to ask of you a great favor.”

“You astonish me. What is the matter? Is it anything of importance?” retorted the captain.

“This afternoon the colonel will doubtless mention the unpaid Casino bills, and it would be
extremely painful to me, especially in the presence of the junior officers, to have my name
spoken of in that connection.”

“My dear fellow,” said Captain König, “you’ll have to go elsewhere for the money. It was difficult
enough for me to raise that hundred for you a week ago.”

“And if I repeat my request, nevertheless, Captain, it is because I find myself in a horribly
embarrassing situation. For if I don’t succeed in procuring four hundred marks till this evening,
I shall have to face the most annoying, possibly disastrous consequences.”

“All very well, but I simply haven’t the money,” said the captain, shrugging his shoulders.

For a moment or two there was silence, and each avoided looking at the other. Then Borgert
murmured, hesitatingly:

“May I make a proposition, Herr Captain?”

“Well?”

“But I must ask you not to misunderstand me. Would it not be possible to borrow so small a
sum from the funds of the squadron, since it would be only a question of a few days?”

Captain König looked startled.

“But, my dear fellow, how can you suggest such a thing to me! You can’t expect me to touch
the treasury.”

“I do not think it would matter the least bit, since the Herr Captain alone is responsible
for that fund, and since this would practically mean nothing but the transferring of four hundred
marks from the public fund in your own keeping to private funds of your own, to be made good
by you, without anybody being the wiser within a week or so.”

“No, no, that would never do,” again said the other.

“But, Captain, you cannot leave me in the lurch. It would simply place me in a beastly predicament,”
wailed Borgert, glancing appealingly at his brother officer.

König began to think, twirling his moustache. On the whole, he reflected, it might be a wise
thing to place under an obligation this man with the dangerously bitter tongue. Borgert’s influence
on the younger officers was not to be underestimated, he knew, and a refusal would turn him
into an enemy. The money itself he had, locked up in a drawer of his desk at home; but if he
made Borgert believe that he had to “borrow” it from the squadron funds,--whose custodian he
was,--it might be expected that the lieutenant would not so soon ask for another loan, mindful
of the great difficulties this present one was causing. It was as the result of these cogitations
that König resolved to lend Borgert the sum he required, but to leave him in the belief that
to do so it was necessary to touch the funds in his care.

“All right, then,” he said; “you shall have your money. When will you pay it back without fail?”

“Within ten days, Captain. I give you my word on it.”

“Very well, come to my office at noon, and you shall have it.”

“Accept my most grateful thanks, Herr Captain!”

“Don’t mention it; but I trust it won’t occur again.”

They shook hands, and the captain mounted and trotted off in a lively tempo toward the parade
grounds.

Borgert, elated and free of care, hastened home. His duties to-day did not begin until ten.
He really felt kindly towards König for the moment. It was not the first time the captain had
helped him out of a dilemma. Ten days! Well, within ten days all sorts of things could happen.
Why not his ability to repay the loan? And if not, bah! What is the use of speculating about
the future? For the moment he was safe; that was the main thing.

Leimann meanwhile was awaiting the coming of his friend in the latter’s study, and when Borgert
entered, serene of brow and humming an operatic tune, his face too brightened.

“Has he done it?” he shouted.

“Of course. Go to him at eleven, and he will do the same in your case, all the more as you
need it less.”

And at noon, when the two friends met at the Casino over a bottle of fragrant Moselle, you
could tell from Leimann’s exuberant gayety that his own request had not been refused.

        *       *       *       *       *

Punctually at five all the officers of the regiment were assembled, with caps and sabres, in
the reading-room of the Casino. And when the different squadron commanders had stepped up and
reported “Everybody present,” the colonel at once let them know his mind.

“Gentlemen,” he said, in his most pompous manner, “I have commanded your presence in order
to talk over a few matters. First: I must request that for the future, at balls and similar
affairs, dancing spurs be worn, so as to avoid such unpleasant accidents as we had night before
last. One gentleman, who shall be nameless,”--and as he said it he fixed a basilisk eye on
Lieutenant von Meckelburg--“tore off with his spurs the whole edge on the robe of Frau Captain
Stark. This must not occur again, gentlemen, and from now on I shall officially punish similar
behavior. Furthermore, it is customary among persons of education not to be first in stretching
out a hand to shake that of a lady. And if the lady herself offers her hand, good manners in
our circles requires that the gentleman salute it with his lips. It was made evident to me
by the complaints of one of the ladies of this regiment that some of you gentlemen stand greatly
in need of further education on such points of etiquette.” This particular passage referred
to the fact that Lieutenant Bleibtreu had omitted the customary hand-kiss the other day, when
Frau Captain Stark had thrust her hand under his nose, his reason being that she had worn an
old pair of dogskin gloves, soiled and wet by the rain.

Casting a big tear, which had meanwhile gathered in his left eye, several yards away, where
it glittered in the sunshine, the commander continued:

“Next, gentlemen, I formally forbid you to visit another town without first obtaining leave
of absence. Whoever will visit the neighboring town must ask my formal permission first, no
matter if the distance is inconsiderable. You all remember that two of the gentlemen of this
regiment were forced to retire under peculiarly distressing circumstances, because of large
debts contracted in the adjoining town.”

“Will the Herr Colonel permit me a question?” interrupted Captain König.

“If you please, Herr Captain!”

“Is this order intended to apply to married officers as far as invitations to social entertainments,
the theatre, concerts, et cetera, are concerned?”

“Most assuredly; I must retain exact control of the movements of every one of you gentlemen
as often as he leaves the garrison. Infringements I shall punish severely, in exact accordance
with the military penal code. Such infringements I shall regard not as mere breaches of discipline,
but as direct disobedience to my explicit orders.”

There was a pause, the colonel whisking his big bandanna out of the breast pocket of his uniform
coat, and carefully wiping his left eye. This done, he looked about and saw disgust plainly
printed on every face around him.

Indeed there was disgust. Because two offenders in the past had got themselves into trouble,
the whole corps of officers in town was to suffer vicariously, forced to remain shut up, even
during their leisure hours, in a place offering absolutely no intellectual and worthy relaxation.
The elder officers more especially felt all the insulting tyranny that lay in this new order;
but iron-clad military discipline forbade even a murmur.

“And now, gentlemen,” resumed the colonel, after scanning the clouded faces around him for
another minute, “let us proceed to the election of president of the Casino management, for
the term has just elapsed. You, Captain Kahle, filled that position for a year past, and I
rejoice to say that the manner in which you have done so has found my full approval. Indeed,
gentlemen, all of us are indebted to Captain Kahle, for he has done his best, by devoting the
larger portion of his leisure hours to the task, in improving the management of our Casino.
He has enlarged our funds, and has introduced a number of well-considered and highly welcome
ameliorations. It is for this, I think, we cannot do better than to beg Captain Kahle to remain
in an office which he has administered so much to our joint benefit. If, however, there should
be among you, gentlemen, somebody to propose another man, let him speak up, for in that case
we must ballot in the regular manner.”

A unanimous murmur of approval, such as never before had greeted utterances by the colonel,
ran through the assembly, and Kahle issued as the choice of everybody from the oral election.
His office of dictator of the Casino was one which involved much gratuitous labor and frequent
abuse, but was of the greatest importance to his fellows, since it concerned so closely the
most sensitive portion of a soldier’s anatomy--his stomach.

“It is not necessary to inspect the books,” continued the colonel; “for I feel quite sure that
everything is in the best of order. But one more thing, gentlemen! I cannot permit Casino bills
to grow in this avalanche fashion, such as has been the case for months past. It is true that
the two highest accounts have been settled to-day; but I warn you that henceforth I shall proceed
without leniency, if all the outstanding bills are not settled by the first of next month.
Consider well what I have said! Thank you, gentlemen!”

Thus dismissed, most of the poor lieutenants felt and looked decidedly blue. For some of them
it meant another loan in Berlin or Cologne at usurious interest, with no prospect of ever discharging
the principal, which meant nothing less than ultimate ruin and disgrace. For others, less reckless
or with less credit because of more modest family connections, it meant the paying off in monthly
instalments of their debts, which always led to a black mark against their names in the regimental
list of conduct, minimizing their chances of promotion when the list would reach the eyes of
the commanding general and, finally, those of the Kaiser and of his military cabinet. At best
it meant a tussle with the pater. But golden youth does not long indulge in such gloomy reflections.
That is its privilege. Thus, then, after exchanging melancholy views, the younger swarm broke
and fled into the garden or into the cool veranda.

Meanwhile the ladies of the regiment convened in the reading-room, and with them were two young
civilian gentlemen who had not been able to withstand their combined blandishments, and who
had declared themselves ready to join the tennis club. The main business of the evening was
to be transacted; namely, the election of a board for the tennis club and the fixing of certain
days for play in the courts near the Casino building.

Frau König alone had not come, and her husband had had formally to excuse her. The truth was,
she avoided as much as she could to meet the wives and sisters of her husband’s comrades, for
she was not fond of the malicious, evil gossip that formed their chief pleasure in life. This
natural inclination on her part had become stronger since her recent evening party, when she
had heard how even most of the officers themselves did not scruple to retail disgusting bits
of scandal. Of course, she was made to suffer for this exclusive taste--or distaste rather--and
she knew perfectly well that the scandal-mongers were only awaiting the slightest opportunity
to besmirch her own name and that of Captain König; but even so, she preferred her own way.

The negotiations in the reading-room lasted some time, for each one of the ladies had a wish
or an idea of her own to defend. Moreover, it required the encouraging words of the elected
club officers to induce a number of newly arrived gentlemen to become candidates for admission.
Of course they knew, these sirens, that nearly all of these candidates would never show up
at the tennis courts; but at any rate the initiation and membership fees were thus substantially
increased, and the ladies, of course, paid no dues.

At last, however, the folding-doors of the dining-room were thrown open. A substantial but
not very elaborate supper was to be served there. The acrimonious and strident voice of the
Frau Colonel floated above all this babel of feminine noises. In the corners stood, in little
groups, a number of the younger and older officers, discussing, in subdued accents, the latest
decrees of their superior officer. They were still vibrating with suppressed indignation.

Captains König and Hagemann made sport of Frau Stark, but in such manner that she never suspected
it. Lieutenant Pommer never quitted the immediate vicinity of Captain Kahle’s spouse.

Supper over, nearly all the men present had the lively desire to escape from this promiscuous
gathering, into which they had been inveigled under pretence of an official matter. But such
was not the intention of Frau Stark, who cried out to the colonel in her domineering way:

“How about this, Colonel; cannot we make a good use of this favorable occasion and arrange
a hop? Nobody, I suppose, would have any objection? I myself would think it charming,--simply
delicious.”

The colonel took just one minute to ruminate; then he declared himself equally delighted with
the lady’s idea. For her wish had indeed become his law--dura lex sed lex.

The men were in a rage. What folly to dance, with the thermometer so high! Much more sensible
to sit down quietly on the veranda and drink cool, frothy beer! Lieutenant Specht felt particularly
enraged, for he was to meet his flame at the train about ten. He exploded his anger, saying
to Borgert:

“The old woman is crazy, with her eternal dancing; but let us keep her in perpetual motion
to-night, just to teach her a lesson, until she herself gives in!”

While the ballroom was being cleared of chairs and got ready for the hop, couples were promenading
in the garden. The golden sickle of the moon shed dim rays over the landscape and made the
towers and steeples of the town, standing out at some distance, appear like misty silhouettes.
In the deep green of the bushes a nightingale pealed forth his liquid plaint into the balmy
night air, while from the ballroom inside the tuning of violins mingled inharmoniously. From
the town gusts of warm wind carried snatches of a martial song, ground out on the barrel-organ
of a carrousel. All these noises rose in a confused mass into the still air, mingling with
the laughter of the women and the calls of the servants and musicians.

Meanwhile Borgert gave a gratis performance to a number of his younger comrades. He had gathered
them around him in the tennis courts, where he strikingly imitated Frau Stark in the rôle of
a tennis player. He showed how she attempted to meet the balls with a racquet, and how she
picked them up, until these young men were fairly dying with hilarity. He was too funny, they
said, and played his improvised part really to perfection. At last, however, Borgert tired
of this “manly” sport, and his audience dropped off, one by one, joining the dancers inside.
Borgert, though, enjoying the mild night air, lit a fresh cigar and strolled about the garden,
his habitual cat-like tread barely audible on the soft ground. Puffing the fragrant weed, he
suddenly spied, in the uncertain glimmer of the moon, the sheen of a white summer robe.

“Oho! A little intrigue,” he thought to himself. “Maybe something of interest. Let’s reconnoitre!”

He glided like a shadow among the flowering lilacs, heavy with perfume, and when a few paces
from the figure in white, crouched and hid himself behind one of the bushes. He could not distinguish
the outlines of the two figures clearly, but he heard whispering. First, in low tones, he made
out the voice of Frau Kahle, cooing like a turtle, and next it was the basso profundo of Lieutenant
Pommer, vainly endeavoring to compress its volume into a murmur.

“Amazing! Has this coarse elephant turned into a Romeo, sighing like a furnace?” he said to
himself, and listened with all his might.

The syllables and now and then the broken words that he was able to understand from his point
of vantage seemed to afford him the greatest delight. When the couple at last rose and disappeared
down the path leading to the side entrance of the Casino, he left his hiding-place and slowly
followed in their footsteps. An unholy smile played around his thin lips. “Two more in my power!”
he whispered.

All this time the dancers inside were devoting themselves, without interruption, to Terpsichorean
pleasures,--mostly waltzes, they being the special delight of Frau Stark. When Borgert entered
the ballroom the band struck up the latest waltz,--“Over the Waves,”--and he noticed Frau Stark,
flaming like a peony, perspiration streaming down her rubicund face, being handed, true to
his programme, by Lieutenant Specht to his smiling comrade, von Meckelburg. Frau Stark just
took the time to gulp a glass of lemonade, and then was off again, breathing hard, but still
in the ring. The atmosphere in the room was stifling, but all the ladies, at least, seemed
to enjoy themselves. Officers’ wives are proverbially insatiable dancers.

After two rounds of the room von Meckelburg was seen steering his victim towards a chair near
the open window. Frau Stark sank into it, literally exhausted. She looked indeed dripping.
The young lieutenants had had their revenge. She had “given in.”

Borgert meanwhile had taken his stand in a corner, where he bent over Frau Leimann, who was
seated and fanning herself with her handkerchief. Although fatigued from heat and dancing,
she looked most seductive in her pale blue tulle, whose filmy lace clouds around throat and
bosom heightened the effects of her charms. Borgert, bending over her, sniffed with sensual
delight a faint perfume, while he carried on a whispered conversation in monosyllables with
her--a conversation which seemed to have meaning but for these two.

In the reading-room the orderlies were busy filling tulip glasses with that fragrant mixture,
a May bowl, so grateful in its delicious iced condition, and yet so deceptive. Around a plain
table in the small side room, away from the throng and undisturbed, several of the captains,
the colonel, and two of the younger officers were playing “skat” at a penny the point. One
of the lieutenants, to judge from his heated face and the anxious look on it, must be losing
heavily. Had this “little game” been arranged to encourage the men under him in the economies
Colonel von Kronau had but now so strongly recommended to them?

Lieutenant Specht just then was taking French leave. It was necessary for him to run to the
station and meet the young lady--a lovesick, pretty little milliner from Cologne--who for the
time being dwelt in his unstable heart.

Lieutenant Bleibtreu sat in a brown study, a few feet away from the players, deep in his melancholy
thoughts. The army, his military career, intercourse with his brother officers and their ladies--it
was all a grave disappointment to him. His illusions were gone, though it was but a couple
of years since he had donned the bright, showy, glittering dragoon uniform, so attractive to
the neophyte. He was thinking of home, of his dear, patient, loving mother, whose constant
preoccupation he was; of his lovely, self-denying sisters, whose dowry was fast going while
he was himself enjoying himself in the “king’s service.” Was he? Was he “enjoying” himself?
Was this--this hollow, stupid round of the coarsest pleasures and the equally coarse and stupid
round of duties--really what he had looked forward to?

The young man sighed. The absence of the wife of his captain, Frau König, rendered him still
more melancholy. Bah, it was disgusting. And to think that this was the profession most highly
honored, most envied in the fatherland! To think that it had always been drummed in his ears,
ever since early childhood, that to “wear the king’s coat” would exalt him high above his fellow
mortals!

Comradeship! What a fine word when it bears out its full meaning, thought Lieutenant Bleibtreu.
But what was it here? What had he found the practical construction of the term? To follow,
day by day, step by step, in the same treadmill of dull routine, only relieved by occasional
but all too brief glimpses of the freedom that lay beyond “the service”--that was the meaning
of comradeship. There was none of that unselfish intimacy, that ready sympathy and help between
the members of the caste into which he had risen on the proud day he first read his name among
the Kaiser’s appointments in the Armee-Verordnŭngsblatt. Dead sea fruit! Ashes that taste bitter
on the tongue.

Certainly there were exceptions. He himself had heard of some such cases of comradeship as
he had dreamed of when still a slim little cadet in the military academy: cases where one comrade
lifted the other, the younger and less experienced, up to his higher level; cases where one
comrade sacrificed himself for the other. But these must be very rare, he thought, for he had
never seen such a case himself. What he had seen was the casting into one stiff, unchanging
form of so many individualities not suited to each other. It was the hollow mockery of the
thing that palled so on him. And what would be the end?

Though young in the service, he had seen men meant for better things broken as a reed on the
wheel of military formalism; he had seen them retiring when but in the prime of life, broken
in spirit, unfit for any new career, impaired in health, perfectly useless--victims of the
conventional ideas that rule supreme in the army. Others he had seen forced to resign, overloaded
with a burden of debt, ruined financially, physically, morally bankrupt,--all due to the tinsel
and glitter, to the ceaseless temptations thrown into the path of the German army officer.
A young civilian, even when the son of wealthy parents, is not coaxed and wheedled into a network
of useless expenditure, as is the youngest army officer, waylaid everywhere by the detestable
gang of “army usurers,” who follow him to the bitter end, knowing that to repudiate even the
shadiest debt means disgrace and dismissal from the army to every officer, no matter if his
follies have been committed at an age when other young boys are still subject to closest supervision.

Deep lines had formed on Bleibtreu’s smooth forehead, and he was visibly startled when the
cheery, round voice of his squadron commander, Captain König, recalled him to his surroundings.

“And that’s what they call pleasure,” said he, sitting down on the sofa beside his young lieutenant,
for whom he felt something like paternal affection. “If such entertainments were at least arranged
beforehand, with the consent or at the instance of the juniors themselves,--for I will say
nothing about us older men,--but no! Frau Stark commands, and the whole regiment, from the
colonel down to the youngest cornet, has simply to obey. Disgraceful, I say. Why, we cannot
even choose our own tipple on such occasions. The colonel simply orders that a May bowl be
composed, and we have to brew it, drink it, and--pay for it. This evening will cost us a pretty
penny again. A glass of apollinaris would be far more palatable, and certainly much cheaper
and appropriate at this temperature than this confounded sweetish stuff, which gives one a
headache fit to split the skull next morning.”

“Quite true, Captain,” replied the young man. “This form of quasi-official pressure, even in
one’s private expenditures, is one of the worst curses of our profession. It has indirectly
caused the ruin of many a promising young officer, I’ve been told.”

“Yes, my boy, you are quite right,” answered König. “It is amazing how many officers have been
forced into retirement of recent years, solely because of unpaid and unpayable debts. Things
in this respect cannot go on much longer. For the ruin of thousands of these young officers
means also the ruin of their families, and among them many of the oldest and best in the Empire.
An unhealthy craze for luxurious living has seized upon the army, and God alone knows how it
will end some day. It is a thing which will and must frighten every true patriot, and I wish
our most gracious sovereign would take up this matter more earnestly.”

“Yes, H. M. does not attach enough importance to this chapter.”

“And yet the remedy would be such a simple one,” remarked the captain. “If H. M. would simply
issue a decree to the effect that no debts of army officers up to captain’s rank shall be recoverable
in court, that would be the end of army usury, and with it would be removed the worst cancer
of which the whole army suffers. Once the certainty that ultimately they are sure of their
money would be gone, these leeches would no longer trouble the gay and shiftless young officer
whom they now pursue with the persistence of bloodhounds. But what is the use of saying this?
H. M. himself is not without blame in these things. As long as his personal example all tells
the other way, how can we expect the army to become prudent and economical?”

“However, Captain, that is not the sole trouble. I think as long as we as a class--or caste--are
taught that we are something better than the civilian population, so long as we are guided
by another code of ethics, erecting an insurmountable barrier around us, there can be no real
reform. Such prejudices, or rather such systematic teaching, must inevitably lead to sharp
separation between the professional soldier class and the rest of the people. Good heavens,
this is the twentieth century, and no longer the middle ages, we’re living in. Caste and exclusive
privileges must go, else--”

“Sh! Sh! Lower your voice, my dear boy--the colonel is looking our way, and over there stands
Müller, the adjutant, always ready for tale-bearing. Let us get up and take a stroll in the
moonlight, or, better still, let us go home.”

The lieutenant accompanied his superior officer as far as the door of his dwelling, and on
the way spoke in tones of real concern of the fact that the cleavage between the private soldier
and his superiors was so great.

“After all,” he remarked, “many of these poor devils are every bit as well educated as we,--some
of them even better,--and as long as this is supposed to be a ‘nation in arms,’ and not, as
in the eighteenth century, an army of mercenaries, no such strict difference, socially, ought
to be made. Do you know, I often think the Socialists are not so wrong in some things they urge.”

“For goodness’ sake, my dear Lieutenant, don’t let any such remarks escape you anywhere else,”
said Captain König, in a scared voice. But they had reached the captain’s door, and so they
shook hands and parted.

Bleibtreu lived at the other end of the straggling little town. In walking leisurely home,
he followed his train of thought. The systematic brutality shown the common soldier--even the
noncom. (though not in so pronounced a manner)--by his fellow-officers had from the start been
very much against his taste. “They don’t see the defender of the fatherland in him,” thought
he, “but merely the green man, unused to strict discipline and to the narrowly bound round
of dull duties, the clumsy, ungainly recruit, or the smarter, but even more unsympathetic private
of some experience whose drill is an unpleasant task for them, and who, they know, hates and
abominates them in his heart.” And he remembered scenes of such brutality, the unwilling witness
of which he had been. Such cruelty and abuse of power, he felt, was playing into the hands
of the Socialist Party. “These young men, fresh from the plough or the workshop,” he mused,
“cannot help losing all their love for the army. So long as they serve in it, of course, they
will not risk those punishments for expressing their real thoughts which the military law metes
out with such draconic severity; they will prefer suffering in silence the injustice, cruelty,
and inhuman treatment to which, at one time or another, nearly every one of them is subjected
during their period of active service. But once dismissed to the reserve, how many, many thousands
of them will naturally turn to the only political party with us which dares to oppose with
courage militarism and all its fearful excrescences! And all this,” he continued inwardly,
“is the natural result of a long period of deadening, enervating peace. Oh! If there were but
a war! All this dross would then glide off us, and the true metal underneath would once more
shine forth.”

He went to bed with these ideas still humming in his brain.

Borgert had been enjoying himself meanwhile. His kind always does. He had, for a few moments,
tried to listen to the arguments of Captain König and Lieutenant Bleibtreu, while they were
seated on the sofa; but, pshaw! how absurd to philosophize about these things, he thought.
Far better to take life as it comes. And so he had joined the party at the gaming-table, where
one of the winners was just then standing treat for a battery of Veuve Clicquot, and as he
slowly sipped the delicious beverage, the bubbles rising like rosy pearls from the depths of
his chalice, he smiled with self-satisfaction.

But at last he, too, left the house and directed his steps toward the far end of the garden,
where a small gate led directly into the street at the end of which he dwelt. There! Again
Frau Kahle and uncouth, elephantine Lieutenant Pommer! The May bowl, he thought, has been too
strong for his addled brain. And he stepped silently aside on the velvety sward, under the
clump of lilacs. The nightingale, from the centre of a thicket a score of paces away, still
fluted and trilled a song of passion. And something like it, he made sure, big Pommer was also
pouring into the tiny ear of that conquering flirt, the volatile spouse of Captain Kahle. Having
ascertained this, First Lieutenant Borgert rapidly strode toward the interesting pair, clinking
his spurs and drawling forth an accented “G-o-o-d evening!” as he came up to them before they
had had a chance to rise. Pommer looked indescribably much like an idiot in returning the salute;
but the little woman, with the ready wit of her sex, assumed the air of an immaculate dove.

The players were the last to leave the Casino,--all of them with heavy heads and some of them
with much lighter purse. Among the latter was Leimann.

CHAPTER III

THE CONSEQUENCES OF A MAY BOWL

Next morning the garrison--that is, the officers of it--was slower and later in awakening than
usual. That cursed May bowl! It was precisely as Captain König had said: terrific headaches
paid for indulgence in its seductive potency. Pommer, poor Pommer, although waked by his servant
at the usual time, was still so much under the influence of the fumes that had mounted to his
silly head the night before, that the only answer he was able to make to the shoutings of his
Masovian[6] man was an unintelligible grunt. Then he turned over on the other side and settled
down to a solid sleep.

    [6] Masovians, the population of certain districts in eastern
    Prussia; they are of Polish race.--TR.

At eleven he was still peacefully snoring, when his man stepped up to his bed once more, and
undertook such violent and persistent manipulations with the extremities of his master that
the latter finally opened his eyes far enough to let a little daylight and some sense into
his dazed brain. The bulky lieutenant stretched himself, yawned, and at last remembered his
doings of the night before. With both mighty fists he hammered his thick skull in disgust and
despair.

“Holy smoke--that-- ---- May bowl!” he groaned, and then sat down in the chair beside his couch
to feel of his head, which seemed a gigantic bass drum, hollow and reverberating. Like a flash
his desperate flirtation with the wife of his own squadron chief came back to his muddled consciousness.

Vaclav, his man,--whom he, for short, called Watz,--brought in his morning coffee, and after
dressing with a great running commentary of grunts and groans, he sat down to drink a mouthful
of the reviving decoction. But his brain was still in a whirl, and the scenes of a few hours
ago passed rapidly, but in nebulous form, before his clouded inner vision.

Dimly he felt ashamed of himself. He knew he had not behaved like a gentleman, and he thought
he remembered that somebody had witnessed the spectacle he had made of himself. Specht? Meckelburg?
Or Müller? No--he thought not. But Borgert? Yes, he thought it was Borgert. No, no. But who?
He gave it up with another groan, and took a mouthful of the cold coffee.

Anyway, he had behaved in a beastly fashion. That he did know. But stop! Had she not told him
how badly she was treated by her husband--how neglected--had she not appealed to his gallantry
and friendship? He felt uncertain. All he knew with certainty was that he had been a brute.

He buried his head in his brawny hands.

How had it been possible for him so to forget himself?

He knew:--champagne luncheon with that fellow Borgert,--a fellow whose powers of consumption
had never been ascertained. Then, at dinner, that heavy “Turk’s blood”[7] to which Müller had
to treat because of a lost bet. And then, worst of all, that thrice-condemned May bowl! And
hadn’t they noticed it, the other fellows, and hadn’t they filled him up notwithstanding, or
rather because, they saw that he couldn’t carry any more liquid conveniently? His big fist
slammed the table.

    [7] “Turk’s blood” (“Türkenblut”) is the name of a mixture of
    English porter, brandy, and French champagne very much in
    vogue in the army.--TR.

There was a knock at the door.

The man with the sore conscience and the sorer head bade the unknown enter.

It was First Lieutenant Borgert, helmet in hand. He pretended astonishment at the evident condition
of his comrade, but eyed him sharply, and then said:

“Pardon me if I come inopportunely, but a rather delicate matter induces me to see you this
morning.”

“Officially or privately?” grunted Pommer.

“Both, if you wish it,” answered the other.

“If a private matter I beg you will postpone it,” said Pommer. “Let us talk about it some other
day.”

“I regret to say that I must insist on discussing the matter now,” retorted Borgert, stiffly.
“You are aware, of course, that as the elder man in the service I have the right, even the
duty, to remonstrate with you if I see occasion for it.”

Pommer reflected a moment. In years he was the other man’s senior, and he had also visited
a university for a triennium before joining the army, while the other had simply completed
the easy curriculum of the military academy. But, true, Borgert was a twelvemonth ahead of
him in actual service. So he silently submitted.

“All right, then; to what matter do you refer, sir?”

Borgert assumed the air of a grand inquisitor.

“Accident made me, last night, witness to a scene which I am sorry to say, Herr Comrade, I
cannot otherwise describe than shocking. It was in the most secluded spot of the grounds near
the Casino. The lady in question--”

“You need proceed no further, Herr Comrade. I know perfectly well that I am to blame.”

“May I ask you for an explanation?”

“I was intoxicated. That is the sole explanation I can offer.”

“A strange one. Why, if you cannot drink without losing your senses,--why, then, do you drink
at all?”

“The fact that I was intoxicated was due in large measure to the very gentleman I am now addressing,
who would not--”

“You need not go into such details,” Borgert interrupted him. “You do not seem to understand
the gravity of your offence, and it seems necessary that I should enlighten you as a younger
comrade on that point.”

Pommer felt indignant at this hypocritical lecture, but before he could reply to it Borgert
continued:

“Your offence is the most serious against comradeship which can be conceived. Really, it would
be my duty to call the attention of the lady’s husband to it if I did not trust in your sense
of honor to rectify the matter before any more mischief is done. If you will promise me to
go at once and ask the lady’s pardon, and to do all in your power to avoid any further cause
for scandal, I will on my part forbear to mention what I saw. You must know, of course, that
to tell Captain Kahle would mean a challenge, a duel, your enforced resignation from the army,
and maybe your death,--for he is a good shot.”

Borgert was very dramatic as he said this. The rôle of an austere prophet, calling a sinner
to repentance and amends, had all the spice of novelty for him. Inwardly he smiled at himself,
but outwardly he drew up his tall, sinewy frame to its full height, and cast a hypnotizing
stare at the man before him, now slowly recovering his usual sober frame of mind. And as the
sense of his wrong-doing began to overpower poor Pommer, he bowed his towzled head in misery.
Two big tears crept slowly down his tanned cheeks.

Borgert went on:

“It is, of course, your duty to go at once to the outraged husband as well, and to confess
your guilt. As I know Captain Kahle, he is not the man to withstand a direct appeal to his
clemency if couched in appropriately contrite terms. If you will pledge me your word of honor
to do as requested and to obtain the pardon of husband and wife, you may count on my silence.”

Pommer glanced up. Tumultuous feelings were surging in his breast, and so rapid had been the
revulsion from his first sentiments when Borgert had opened the conversation, that what was
now uppermost in his mind was gratitude for this discreet and wise friend. He rose, and with
a pathetic gesture stretched forth his great paw.

“Here is my hand,” he said, with a hitch in his voice. “I promise.”

Borgert clasped it a moment.

“Thanks, many thanks, for your sympathy and aid in this sorry business,” the junior mumbled,
and surreptitiously wiped a briny drop out of the corner of his eye.

Borgert left, very much satisfied with himself. He had now among the younger officers of the
regiment another one who would henceforth swear by him. He noisily clanked down the shaky wooden
stairs of the humble house wherein Pommer occupied narrow quarters. And Frau Kahle, too, was
now in his power, he gleefully reflected. Besides all that, there was something positively
piquant about the little adventure,--something which would frequently hereafter furnish him
with pleasant innuendoes and hints, understood only by those immediately concerned, and which
would supply him, Borgert, with an endless fund of amusement. He intensely enjoyed this propitious
ending to his machinations.

Humming a tune, and feeling in the best of spirits, he went home, gave his servant sabre, cloak,
and helmet, and mounted the stairs leading up to Frau Leimann’s apartments.

She was not alone. The adjutant was present. Müller, in fact, had shirked his duties to-day,
the colonel being off on a hunting trip in the adjacent extensive forest, having been invited
thereto by the royal head forester commanding that district. Frau Leimann greeted Borgert warmly,
and while the latter and the adjutant stepped to the window, looking at the wife of Captain
König and Lieutenant Bleibtreu, who were riding past the house on horseback, Borgert seized
the opportunity and deftly appropriated the pretty woman’s hands, which he kissed passionately.

Then he told them of his interview with Pommer,--told it in such droll terms and with such
an abundance of mimicry, that his two hearers could not help laughing immoderately. The picture
of ungainly, rough Pommer being in the sentimental stage and a prey to a lacerated conscience
was too exquisitely ludicrous.

Meanwhile Pommer sat at his desk, laboriously inditing a letter to his mother, to whom he opened
his whole heart, as in duty bound. Several of the strongest passages in his letter were panegyrics
on his new-won friend, Borgert, whom he limned in colors so brilliant that the original would
indeed have had great trouble in recognizing himself in the portrait.

The lieutenant had by this time calmed down a good deal, and the blurred images of the past
evening resolved themselves, one after another, into sane recollections. He now distinctly
recalled the part in the ugly intrigue played by the woman; how she had skilfully led him on
to make advances; how she had smiled encouragingly at his terms of endearment; how she had
“fished” for dubious compliments, and how she had, above all, so alluringly made the most intimate
confidences to him as to her marital troubles and as to her status of a femme incomprise. Really,
he thought after quiet reflection, he himself was not so much to blame in this affair, disgraceful
as it doubtless was when all was said and done. For the woman herself, a change of feeling
took place simultaneously. The tender pity he had felt for her in his maudlin condition made
room for something akin to contempt and dislike. She certainly could not be a pure woman, a
faithful wife and mother, he thought, thus to invite, almost provoke, the passionate regard
of a man much younger and less experienced than herself,--a man, too, whom she had known but
slightly and conventionally hitherto. In his inmost consciousness he had almost absolved himself
from guilt in the matter. And as to writing to her husband, or confronting him with the raw
tale of her and his indiscretion, as Borgert had suggested, why, the more he thought of it,
the less advisable a step it seemed to him, from every point of view. However, a promise was
a promise, and he would keep it.

He donned his full regimentals, and issued forth at the right time for a visit of the kind.

He did not find Kahle himself in, he being still away at squadron drill. But his wife flew
to meet him as soon as the parlor door had closed behind the announcing servant, and her reception
was indeed such an affectionate and even enthusiastic one that the words of penitence perforce
died on his lips. She drew him toward her on the low lounge, and exuberantly babbled on about
the comfort, the delight his confidence had brought her. There was not the slightest word said
by her to show that she had disapproved his approaches now that the glamour of the moment,
the enervating effects of close communion in the warm air of a spring night, were gone. Coquettishly
she plied all her wiles to captivate poor Pommer anew. His pulses hammered, his senses were
aflame; but he remained master of himself, and sternly he resolved to sever these equivocal
relations with a woman whom he could no longer respect. The weak, purblind man had been steeled
against further temptation by seeing a few hours ago the abyss yawning at his feet, in which
an illicit love had threatened to engulf him forever. The image of his mother, noble type of
womanhood, rose before his mind, and he remained strong.

Frau Kahle, on her part, at last becoming convinced that all her arts were thrown away on this
iceberg, suddenly changed her tactics, and dismissed her visitor in somewhat abrupt fashion.
She swept from the room, leaving him to find his way out. Only the intoxicating perfume which
she used by preference lingered a moment longer in the close air of the room as the lieutenant
sought his way out; but despite a curious feeling of defeat which he could not help instinctively
feeling, there was subdued exultation in his heart. His brow was serene as, at the next crossing
of the street, he encountered Borgert, who hailed him:

“Well, Pommer,” he shouted satirically, “how is your headache? And how did you find things
at Kahle’s?--everything forgiven?”

“Oh, yes, everything forgiven,” answered Pommer, demurely, without going into any further details.

“Excellent. Was a wise thing for you to do to take counsel with an elder comrade, my dear fellow.
Well, I am glad for your sake everything ended well.”

“Yes, thanks to you,” said Pommer; and the two shook hands and parted.

Pommer went home, well satisfied with himself.

He fancied that all was now over between him and Frau Kahle. His acquaintance with women of
her stamp had never been extensive, and to read the soul of one so utterly false and grossly
sensual as this inveterate coquette, was quite beyond the ability of Lieutenant Pommer, analysis
of his own or anybody else’s character not being his strong point.

He had, however, miscalculated Frau Kahle’s fascinations over his unsophisticated self, and
decidedly underestimated her craving for admiration. He was made aware of this when he next
met her, on the day following. She greeted him with a smile so bewitching and a half-expressed
sense of intimacy so flattering to his amour propre, that he was unable to resist. Soon these
two became the talk of the little town. No matter if Pommer, looking at his inner self within
the quiet retreat of his own bachelor quarters, bitterly bewailed his renewed fall from grace,
her influence over the coarser fibre in his being easily triumphed over his qualms of conscience.

He frequently met Borgert during this period, but the latter, far from training once more on
him the battery of his eloquence, contented himself with some facetious remark or with a Mephistophelian
grin. And for Kahle himself, he was probably the only one in the garrison--as is the fate of
husbands too often in such cases--who was not in the slightest aware of the “goings-on” of
his nominal partner in the joys and sorrows of life. And, besides, his tasks as chairman of
the Casino’s house committee kept him, together with his official duties, practically away
from home all day long, and frequently far into the night.

Pommer was, as we have seen, not precisely of delicate stuff, either bodily or in his psychic
makeup. But the chains he was wearing nevertheless galled him, and he not seldom manœuvred
with his charmer to obtain release; but all in vain. More than once he thought seriously of
writing to Captain Kahle himself, confessing his guilt, glossing over her own share of it,
and offering all the reparation in his power. That would mean, of course, exposing his own
precious life to the unerring bullet of the captain; but even that outlook appeared to him
preferable to his present life of deceit. He now regretted that he had not followed, the morning
after the Casino hop, his first impulse of making a clean breast of it to Captain Kahle. Thus
weeks dragged on, and there was no prospect of a change in a situation which gradually became
intolerable to him.

But suddenly, without his having done anything to bring it about, the day came that granted
him escape from his degrading entanglement. The imperial order arrived, promoting him to the
grade of First Lieutenant and transferring him to another garrison, far in the interior of
the country.

She was the first person he informed of it.

“Farewell! We shall not see each other again!” He spoke quite coolly, almost callously, and
he left her cowering on the sofa and weeping hysterically. He felt a free man again. The abominable
shackles had fallen from him.

If he had seen Frau Kahle five minutes after he had left her he would not even have retained
for her a vestige of that first tenderness that had swept over him that night in the Casino
garden. For when he had retired, and she had heard his step on the flagging of the hall below,
she had quickly risen and peered, from behind the lace curtains, into the street after his
vanishing figure. Then she had sat down at the piano and intoned a merry Strauss waltz.

But then she reflected that they might call her heartless. So she had indited a long, passionate
farewell letter to him. He showed it, the night before his going, to Borgert at the Casino.
They were all his guests that night. Borgert had screamed with laughter.

“What a devilish smart little woman she is, after all,” he had exclaimed. And then, poising
in mid-air his champagne glass, he said, nodding to Pommer:

“Here’s to her and her simpleton!”

He spoke from experience.

CHAPTER IV

THE CASE OF SERGEANT SCHMITZ

Late in the forenoon of a raw day in autumn Vice-Sergeant-Major Roth was seated in his comfortably
heated room, and near him Sergeant Schmitz. Each was enjoying a cup of coffee.

The quarters occupied by Roth were situated on the second story of the regimental barracks,
and made at first sight the impression of elegance and almost wealth, precisely as though the
occupant were a member of the upper ten thousand.[8] It required a closer examination to become
convinced that a good deal of these apparently costly trappings, as well as the furniture and
wall decorations, was not what it seemed, and that, to produce by all means the effect sought
for, taste and appropriateness had been sacrificed. The wall paper of arabesques in green and
blue, which the government had furnished, did not harmonize with the hangings or carpets. The
paintings on the wall were cased in heavy gilt or oak frames, so unskilfully placed as to conceal
in spots the very wall itself. Above the scarlet plush sofa hung a reproduction of Lenbach’s
“Prince Bismarck,” and to right and left of it abominable oil chromos representing horses.
Against the opposite wall stood a piano in stained oak, showing glittering silver-plated candelabra.
Neither Roth himself nor his worthy better half, formerly saleswoman in a shop, possessed the
slightest knowledge of the art of manipulating such an instrument. But there was a story connected
with this showy piece of furniture--a story that even now, years after the events themselves
occurred, brought tears of rage to the eyes of the “Vice.” To the young corporal of his own
squadron who on Sunday afternoons strummed on the piano, he used to say in pathetic accents,
that those “one year’s volunteers”[9] had treated him most outrageously; and from his own point
of view he was probably right.

    [8] A vice-sergeant-major in the German cavalry receives in
    legitimate pay and emoluments and rations, if married, about
    one dollar per day. But it is notorious that peculations,
    hush money, and bribes from privates often swell his income
    to ten times that amount.--TR.

    [9] “One year’s volunteers” are those young soldiers in the
    German army who, by reason of superior education and because
    they pay for their own uniforms and accoutrements, serve but
    one year in the active army. They belong, of course, mostly
    to the well-to-do classes, and generally are promoted to the
    rank of officers in the reserves.--TR.

During the first year of their married life the “Frau Vice-Sergeant-Major,” full of a sense
of her new dignity, had painfully felt the lack of an “upright” or, better still, a “grand,”
inasmuch as she regarded such an instrument as an irrefutable evidence of belonging to the
higher walks of life. She asserted, besides, that in her girlhood she had received instruction
on the piano,--an assertion which nobody was able to dispute because that period lay about
a generation back. She admitted that she had forgotten whatever of piano playing she might
ever have known; but she felt quite sure that a piano in her parlor would restore the lost
nimbus, and then--perhaps the most potent reason of all--the wife of her husband’s “colleague”
in the second squadron owned a piano, and had taken great care to let her know the fact soon
after she had become Frau Roth.

Roth himself, probably under the influence of his partner’s urgings, had frequently and with
due emphasis spoken to that year’s crop of “one year’s men” about the great musical talents
of his wife, now, alas! lying fallow for want of a piano of her own, and he had coupled these
remarks with plaints that the smallness of his resources prevented the purchase of such an
instrument. These remarks, coming from one who had it virtually in his power to obtain for
each one of the “one year’s men” promotion after the fall manœuvres, had at last borne fruit.
One day the aforesaid stained oak piano had been unloaded at Roth’s door, accompanied by a
round-robin from the volunteers themselves, in which they waxed duly enthusiastic over his
wife’s imaginary musical proficiency. Of course, the supposed gift had been accepted, and of
course every one of the supposed donors was advanced in rank the following autumn, due to Roth’s
brilliant testimonials of their prowess and exceptional fitness for a higher grade.

Roth never saw these “one year’s men” again, but about a week after their departure from the
regiment a cart stopped before his door, and the driver said he had come to take the piano
back to the factory, the term of pre-paid hire having expired. Decidedly a dirty trick on the
part of these young fellows, all the more so as Frau Roth had by this time bragged so much
about her piano to every one of her female friends and neighbors, to whom she had represented
it as a belated wedding gift from a far-away uncle! The couple agreed it would never do to
return the instrument to the makers, and thus it was that the Roths were still paying for this
piano in monthly instalments, one “gold fox”[10] each time, a number of years afterwards, with
quite a long time yet to run. No reasonable person will blame Vice-Sergeant-Major Roth for
the aforementioned tears of rage.

    [10] “Gold fox,” a slang term for the German twenty-mark gold
    pieces.--TR.

Hanging above the piano, one could admire a huge steel engraving of Vernet’s “Funeral Banquet,”
also in an expensive frame (the gift of a parting young soldier, son of a wealthy farmer);
while antlers, Japanese fans, a peacock’s tail, etc., helped to produce a somewhat incongruous
ensemble. There was a pretty mahogany stand, on the various shelves of which stood a large
china punch-bowl, six green Rhine-wine glasses (both gifts from other “grateful” recruits).
There was also a solid oak writing-table, on one corner of which Frau Roth had stood the cages
for her canary birds, just then in the interesting stage of breeding, and therefore voiceless.
A huge portrait of the Kaiser, with two crossed sabres and a pair of pistols under it, and
a cuckoo clock were exhibited on the wall close by. A tube is mounted with a handle like a pistol.
A plug is provided to screw in and out of its side. The plug carries two wires connected on its
inner side by a fine platinum wire, or else disconnected but with
their ends brought near together to act as terminals for the production
of a spark.

To use it the tube is filled with a mixture of air and gas, the latter either hydrogen, hydro-carbon
or other combustible gas. The tube when full is corked. The wire is heated to incandescence
by a current, or a spark is passed from a Leyden jar or other source of electrostatic excitation.
The mixture, if properly proportioned, explodes and expels the cork
violently.

Fig. 264. ELECTRIC PISTOL.

Pith.

A light and soft cellular tissue forming the central core of exogenous trees and plants. In
the older parts of the tree the woody tissue often encroaches in and partly obliterates it.

For electrical pith-balls, the pith of the elder, of corn, or, best
of all, of sun-flower stems is used.

Pith-balls. Ball made of pith. They are used in the construction of electroscopes and for other
experiments in static electricity.

They are cut out with a sharp knife and their shape may be improved by gentle rolling in the hand or
between the fingers.

Pivot Suspension. Suspension poising or supporting of an object on a sharp pivot. This is used for
the needle in the ordinary compass. A cavity or inverted cup, which may be made of agate,
is attached to the middle of the needle which has a hole for its reception. The centre of gravity
of the needle comes below the bottom of the cup.

Pivot suspension is not perfect, as it has considerable friction. There is no restitution force,
as with torsion filaments.

417 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Plant. The apparatus for commercial manufacturing or technical works. An electric lighting
plant includes the boilers, engines and dynamos for producing the current, and the electric mains
and subsidiary apparatus.

Plant Electricity. Electricity manifested by plant life. By means of a galvanometer potential
differences are found to exist in different parts of trees or fruits. The roots and interior portions
are negative, and the flowers, smaller branches and fruit are positive.

In

some cases a contraction of the tissue of plants can be produced by an electric current. The
sensitive plant and others exhibit this phenomenon, exactly analogous to the action of muscular
tissue.

Plate, Arrester. In a lightning arrester the plate connected to the circuit. Sometimes both
plates are designated arrester plates.

Plate Condenser. A static condenser having a flat plate of glass for dielectric. (See Epinus' Condenser.)

Plate
Electrical Machine. A frictional electric machine, in which a circular plate of glass is excited
by friction with the cushions. It is the most recent type of frictional machine and has superseded
the old cylinder machines. In its turn it is superseded by influence machines, really plate
machines, but not so termed in practice.

Plate, Ground. In a lightning arrester, the plate connected to the earth.

Plate, Negative. In a voltaic battery, either primary or secondary,
the plate which is unattacked by the oxygen or negative radical or
element of the fluid.

It corresponds to the carbon plate in the ordinary voltaic battery, and is the one charged with
positive electricity.

Plate, Positive.

In a voltaic battery, either primary or secondary, the plate which is dissolved or attacked
by the oxygen or negative radical or element of the fluid.

It is the plate corresponding to the zinc plate in the ordinary voltaic battery, and is the
one charged with negative electricity.

Plating Balance. A balance or scales to which articles in an electroplater's bath are suspended.
A weight exceeding by a known amount that of the article as immersed overbalances the article.
When the plating is being deposited as soon as it exceeds the excess of weight of the counterpoise
the balance tips, the article descends a little, the electric circuit is broken and the plating ceases.
Thus the plating is automatically stopped when a predetermined amount
of metal is deposited.

    
    
    418 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Plating Bath. A vessel of solution for the deposition of metal by electrolysis as used in electro-plating.

Plating,
Electro-. The deposition of metal by electrolysis so as to coat the conducting surface of objects
therewith.

The full details of the many processes are very lengthy and cannot
be given here.

The general principle includes a battery or source of electric current. The object to be plated
is connected to the negative terminal and is immersed in the solution. Thus with a battery the
object is in electrical connection with the zinc plate. To the other terminal a metallic plate
is connected.

The object and the plate termed the anode being introduced into a
suitable bath, the metal whose solution is in the bath is deposited
upon the surface of the object.

The bath is a solution of the metal in some form that will lend itself
to the electrolytic action.

The anode is often a plate of the metal of the bath, so that it dissolves as fast as metal is
deposited on the object, thus keeping up the strength of the solution.

The

objects to be plated must be scrupulously clean, and great care must
be taken to keep the bath uncontaminated.

When the object has a non-conducting surface, it is made conducting by being brushed over with
plumbago q.v. In addition iron dust is sometimes dusted over it.

This acts by precipitating the metal of the bath directly and thus giving a conducting basis
for the metal to deposit on.

To avoid getting iron in a bath the object may be dipped in copper
sulphate solution.

    This precipitates copper in place of the iron and leaves
    the article in good shape for silver or other plating.

Electro-plating, if made thick enough, gives a reverse of the article when separated therefrom.
A direct copy can be got by a second plating, on the first plating
after separation, or a wax impression can be employed.

Under the different metals, formulae for the baths will be found.

(See also Quicking-- Steeling--Plating Balance.)

Platinoid. An alloy of copper, nickel, zinc in the proportions of German silver with 1 or 2 per
cent of tungsten. It is used for resistances. It has a specific resistance (or resistance per
centimeter cube) of about 34 microhms. Its percentage variation in resistance per degree C.
(1.8° F.) is only about .021 per cent., or less than half that of German silver. This is its
most valuable feature.

419 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Platinum. A metal; one of the elements; symbol, Pt; atomic weight, 197.4; equivalent, 49.35;
valency, 4; specific gravity, 21.5.

    It is a conductor of electricity. (c) 1 meter long, weighing
    1 gram, 1.938 "

(d) 1 meter long, 1 millimeter thick, .1153 " Resistance of a 1 inch cube, 3.565 Electro-chemical
equivalent (Hydrogen = .0105), 0.5181.

The coefficient of expansion by heat is almost the same as that of glass. It can be passed through
holes in glass and the latter can be melted about it so as to hermetically
seal its place of passage through the glass.

It is used in incandescent lamps for leading-in wires and other similar uses.

Platinum Black. Finely divided platinum. It is made by boiling a solution of platinic chloride
with excess of sodium carbonate and a quantity of sugar, until the precipitate is perfectly
black and the supernatant liquid is colorless.

It seems to possess a great power of occluding oxygen gas. When heated
to redness it becomes spongy platinum.

The negative plates of a Smee battery are coated with platinum black.

Platinum-silver Alloy.

An alloy of 1 part platinum and 2 parts silver, used for resistance coils.

Relative Resistance (silver annealed = 1 ), 16.21 microhms.

(b) 1 foot long, 1/1000 inch diameter, 146.70 "

(c) 1 meter long weighing 1 gram, 2.924 " (d) 1 meter long, 1 millimeter diameter, 0.3106 "
Resistance of a 1 inch cube, 9.603 microhms. Percentage Variation per degree C. (1.8° F.) at
about 20° C. (68° F.), 0.031 per cent.

Synonym--Platinum Alloy.

Platinum Sponge.

Finely divided platinum obtained by igniting platinum black, q.v.,
and also by igniting salts of platinum.

It has considerable power of condensing or occluding oxygen. It will, if in good condition, set
fire to a jet of hydrogen impinging upon it.

Plow.

Contact arms projecting downwards from the motors, trucks, or bodies
of electric street cars, which enter the underground conduit through
the slot and carry contact pieces or brushes, to take the current
for driving the motors from the leads within the conduit.

420 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Plücker Tubes. A special form of Geissler tube designed for the production of stratification and for observing
the effects produced in the space surrounding the negative electrode.

Plug. (a) A piece of metal with a handle and a somewhat tapered end, used to make connections
by insertions between two plates or blocks of metal slightly separated and with grooves to
receive it.

(b) A plug or wedge with two metallic faces, insulated from each other with a separate wire
connected to each one.

It is used in spring-jacks q. v., to introduce a loop in a circuit.

Synonym--Wedge.

Plug. v. To connect by inserting a plug, as in a resistance box.

Fig. 265. PLUGS FOR RESISTANCE COIL BOX.

Fig. 266. PLUG SWITCH.

Plug, Double. A spring-jack plug or wedge with two pairs of insulated faces, one behind the other,
so as to simultaneously introduce two loops into a circuit.

Plug, Grid. A piece or mass of lead oxide, inserted into the holes in the lead plates of storage
batteries. The holes are often dovetailed or of uneven section to better retain the plugs.

Plug
Infinity. In a box-bridge or resistance box, a plug whose removal from between two disconnected
discs opens the circuit. All the other discs are connected by resistance coils of various resistance.

Plug
Switch. A switch composed of two contact blocks, not touching each other and brought into electrical
connection by the insertion of a metallic plug. The latter is usually provided with an insulating
handle, and a seat is reamed out for it in the two faces of the contact blocks.

421 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Plumbago. Soft lustrous graphite, a native form of carbon; sometimes chemically purified. It
is used in electro-plating to give a conducting surface to non-conducting objects, such as
wax moulds. The surface, after coating with plumbago, is sometimes dusted over with iron dust, which
precipitates the metal of the bath and starts the plating. It is sometimes plated with copper,
silver or gold, and is then termed coppered, silvered, or gilt plumbago. It is gilded by moistening
with etherial solution of gold chloride and exposing to the air, and drying and igniting.

Plunger. A movable core which is used in connection with a so-called solenoid coil, to be drawn
in when the coil is excited. (See Coil and Plunger.)

Fig. 267 COIL AND PLUNGER WITH SCALES TO SHOW ATTRACTION.

P. O. Abbreviation for Post Office, q.v.

Poggendorf's Solution.

An acid depolarizing and exciting fluid for zinc-carbon batteries. The following is its formula:
Water, 100 parts; potassium bichromate, 12 parts; concentrated sulphuric acid, 25 parts. All
parts by weight. Use cold.

Point, Neutral. (a) On a commutator of a dynamo the points at the ends of the diameter of commutation,
or where the brushes rest upon the surface of the commutator, are termed neutral points. At
these points there is no generation of potential, they marking the union of currents of opposite
direction flowing from the two sides of the armature into the brushes.

(b)

In electro-therapeutics, a place in the intra-polar region of a nerve so situated with reference
to the kathode and electrode as applied in treatment, that its condition is unaffected.

Synonym--Indifferent Point.

(c) In a magnet the point of no attraction, situated between the two poles, at about an equal
distance from each, so as to mark the centre of a magnet of even distribution of polarity.

(d)
In thermo-electricity the point of temperature where the thermo-electric
powers of two metals are zero; in a diagram the point where the lines
representing their thermo-electric relations cross each other; if
the metals are arranged in a thermo-electric couple, one end at a
temperature a given amount above, the other at a temperature the same
amount below the neutral point, no current or potential difference
will be produced.

422 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Point, Null. A nodal point in electrical resonators; a point where in a system of waves or oscillations,
there is rest, the zero of motion being the resultant of oppositely directed and equal forces.
In electrical resonators it is to be sought for in a point symmetrically situated, with reference
to the spark gap, or in a pair of points, which pair is symmetrically
placed.

The null point in resonators is found by connecting a lead from one
of the secondary terminals of an induction coil to different parts
of the resonator.

The null point is one where the connection does not give rise to any sparks between the micrometer
knobs or spark gap, or where the sparks are of diminished size.

The whole is exactly comparable to loops and nodes in a vibrating
string or in a Chladni plate as described in treatises on sound and
acoustics.

(See Resonance, Electrical--Resonator, Electrical.)

Synonym--Nodal
Point.

Point Poles. Magnet poles that are virtually points, or of no magnitude.

A long thin magnet with little leakage except close to the ends may
be supposed to have point poles within itself a short distance back
from the ends.

Points, Consequent. In a magnet with consequent poles, the points where such poles are situated.

Points,
Corresponding. In bound electrostatic charges the points of equal charges of opposite potentials;
the points at opposite extremities of electrostatic lines of force.

This definition implies that the bound charges shall be on equal facing areas of conductors,
as otherwise the spread or concentration of the lines of force would necessitate the use of
areas of size proportionate to the spreading or concentrating of
the lines of force.

At the same time it may figuratively be applied to these cases, the penetration of the surface
by a single line of force including the area fixed by its relation
to the surrounding lines.

     

     
     Points, Isoelectric. In electro-therapeutics, points of
     equal potential in a circuit.
     
     423 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.
     
     Points of Derivation. The point where a single conductor branches
     into two or more conductors, operating or acting in
     parallel with each other.

                               

     
     Polar Angle.

The angle subtended by one of the faces of the pole pieces of the field- magnet of a dynamo
or motor. The centre of the circle of the angle lies in the axis of the armature.

Synonym--Angle of Polar Span.

Polar Extension. An addition made of iron to the poles of magnets. Various forms have been experimented
with. The pole pieces of dynamo field magnets are polar extensions.

Synonyms--Pole Piece--Polar Tips.

Polarity, Diamagnetic. The induced polarity of diamagnetic substances; it is the reverse of paramagnetic
polarity, or of the polarity of iron. A bar of diamagnetic material held parallel with the lines
of force in a magnetic field has a like pole induced in the end nearest
a given pole of the field magnet, and vice versa.

This theory accounts for the repulsion by a magnet of a diamagnetic substance. The existence of
this polarity is rather an assumption. It originated with Faraday.

Polarity, Paramagnetic. The induced polarity of paramagnetic substances, such as iron, nickel, or
cobalt.

When such a substance is brought into a magnetic field the part nearest a specific pole of a magnet
acquires polarity opposite to that of such pole and is thereby attracted.

Another way of expressing it, in which the existence of a pole in or near to the field is not implied,
is founded on the conventional direction of lines of force. Where these enter the substance
a south pole is formed and where they emerge a north pole is formed.

Such polarity tends always to be established in the direction of greatest length, if the body
is free to rotate.

424 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Polarization.

(a) The depriving of a voltaic cell of its proper electro-motive force. Polarization may be due
to various causes. The solution may become exhausted, as in a Smee
battery, when the acid is saturated with zinc and thus a species of
polarization follows.

But the best definition of polarization restricts it to the development of counter-electro-motive
force in the battery by the accumulation of hydrogen on the negative (carbon or copper) plate.
To overcome this difficulty many methods are employed. Oxidizing solutions or solids are used,
such as solution of chromic acid or powdered manganese dioxide, as
in the Bunsen and Leclanché batteries respectively; a roughened surface
of platinum black is used, as in the Smee battery; air is blown through
the solution to carry off the hydrogen, or the plates themselves are
moved about in the solution.

(b) Imparting magnetization to a bar of iron or steel, thus making a permanent magnet, is the
polarization of the steel of which it is made. Polarization may be permanent, as in steel, or
only temporary, as in soft iron.

(c) The strain upon a dielectric when it separates two oppositely charged surfaces. The secondary
discharge of a Leyden jar, and its alteration in volume testify to the strain put upon it by
charging.

(d) The alteration of arrangement of the molecules of an electrolyte
by a decomposing current. All the molecules are supposed to be arranged
with like ends pointing in the same direction, positive ends facing
the positively-charged plate and negative ends the negatively-charged
one.

(e) The production of counter-electro-motive force in a secondary
battery, or in any combination capable of acting as the seat of such
counter-electro-motive force. (See Battery, Secondary--Battery, Gas.)
The same can be found often in organized cellular tissue such as that
of muscles, nerves, or of plants. If a current is passed through this
in one direction, it often establishes a polarization or potential
difference that is susceptible of giving a return current in the opposite
direction when the charging battery is replaced by a conductor.

Polarization
Capacity. A voltaic cell in use becomes polarized by its negative
plate accumulating hydrogen, or other cause. This gradually gives
the plate a positive value, or goes to set up a counter-electro-motive
force. The quantity of electricity required to produce the polarization
of a battery is termed its Polarization Capacity or Capacity of Polarization.

Polarization
of the Medium. The dielectric polarization, q. v., of a dielectric,
implying the arrangement of its molecules in chains or filaments;
a term due to Faraday. He illustrated it by placing filaments of silk
in spirits of turpentine, and introduced into the liquid two conductors.
On electrifying one and grounding (or connecting to earth) the other
one, the silk filaments arranged themselves in a chain or string connecting
the points of the conductors.

Polar Region. That part of the surface
of a magnet whence the internal magnetic lines emerge into the air.
(S. P. Thompson.) As such lines may emerge from virtually all parts
of its surface, the polar regions are indefinite areas, and are properly
restricted to the parts whence the lines emerge in greatest quantity.

Polar
Span. A proportion of the circle which represents the transverse section
of the armature space between the pole pieces of the field magnet
in a dynamo or motor; it is the proportion which is filled by the
faces of the pole pieces.

425 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Pole,
Analogous. The end of a crystal of a pyroelectric substance, such
as tourmaline, which end when heated become positively electrified.
On reduction of temperature the reverse effect obtains.

Pole, Antilogous.
The end of a crystal of a pyroelectric substance, such as tourmaline,
which end, while increasing in temperature, becomes negatively electrified.
During reduction of its temperature the reverse effect obtains.

Pole
Changer. (a) An automatic oscillating or vibrating switch or contact-breaker
which in each movement reverses the direction of a current from a
battery or other source of current of fixed direction, as such current
goes through a conductor.

(b) A switch moved by hand which for each
movement effects the above result.

Pole, Negative. (a) In a magnet
the south pole; the pole into which the lines of force are assumed
to enter from the air or outer circuit.

(b) In a current generator
the pole or terminal into which the current is assumed to flow from
the external circuit. It is the negatively charged terminal and in
the ordinary voltaic battery is the terminal connected to the zinc
or positive plate.

Pole Pieces. The terminations of the cores of
field or other electro-magnets, or of permanent magnets. These terminations
are variously shaped, sometimes being quite large compared to the
core proper of the magnet.

They are calculated so as to produce a
proper distribution of and direction of the lines of force from pole
to pole. As a general rule the active field should be of uniform strength
and the pole pieces may be of contour calculated to attain this end.

Pole,
Positive. (a) In a magnet the north pole; the pole from which lines
of force are assumed to emerge into the air.

(b) In a current generator
the pole or terminal whence the current is assumed to issue into the
outer circuit. It is the positively charged terminal, and in the ordinary
voltaic battery is the terminal connected to the copper or carbon
plate, termed the negative plate.

Poles. (a) The terminals of an
open electric circuit, at which there necessarily exists a potential
difference, produced by the generator or source of electro-motive
force in the circuit.

(b) The terminals of an open magnetic circuit;
the ends of a magnetized mass of steel, iron or other paramagnetic
substance.

(c) The ends in general of any body or mass which show
electric or magnetic properties more developed than those of the central
sections of the body.

426 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Pole,
Salient. In dynamo and motor field magnets, salient poles are those
projecting from the base or main body of the field magnet, as distinguished
from consequent poles formed by coils wound on the main body itself.

Fig.
268. SALIENT POLES OF FIELD MAGNET.

Poles, Compensating. A device
for avoiding the cross-magnetizing effect on the commutator core due
to the lead of the brushes. It consists in maintaining a small bar
electro-magnet perpendicularly between the pole pieces. This compensates
the cross-magnetizing effect.

Poles of Intensity. The locus of highest
magnetic force on the earth's surface. One such pole is in Siberia,
another is about lat. 52° N., long. 92° W.

Poles of Verticity. The
magnetic poles of the earth. (See Magnetic Poles.)

Pole Tips. The
extreme ends of the expanded poles of a field magnet. In some machines
some of the pole tips are made of cast iron, to alter the distribution
of the lines of force and resulting magnetic pull upon the armatures.
This is done to take off the weight of the armature from its bearings.

Pole,
Traveling. A term applied to the poles produced in the action of a
rotatory field, whose poles constantly rotate around the circle of
the field. (See Field, Rotatory.)

417 STANDARD ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY.

Porous
Cup. A cup of pipe clay, unglazed earthenware or other equivalent
material used in voltaic cells to keep two liquids separate and yet
to permit electrolysis and electrolytic conduction.

They are necessarily
only an expedient, as their porous nature permits considerable diffusion,
and were they not porous electrolytic action would be impossible.

Synonym--Porous
Cell.

Porret's Phenomenon. In electro-physiology, an increase in
the diameter of a nerve produced by the positive pole of a voltaic
circuit, when placed in contact with the tissue and near to the nerve
in question, the other pole being connected to a more or less remote
part of the body.

Portelectric Railroad. A railroad worked by solenoidal
attraction, the car forming the core of the solenoids. It includes
a series of solenoids or hollow coils of copper wire distributed all
along the road and inclosing within themselves the track. On this
a cylindrical car with pointed ends moves on wheels. Current is supplied
to the solenoid in advance of the car, and attracts it. Schmitz expected, therefore, that the term at which he was to be tried would also
be the day of regaining his liberty; for the last few weeks, what with suffering from hardships,
from the insufficient and coarse jail diet, and from worry, had been terrible ones indeed for him.

Even the formal indictment drawn up against him, of which a copy had been sent him, could not
repress his hopes. He knew that in such a document everything concerning him and his offence
was naturally represented in the darkest colors, so as to leave the judge-advocate sufficient
grounds on which to bring the proceedings against him to the point of actual trial.

The document read:

     “Proceedings have been opened against Sergeant Ferdinand
     Julius Schmitz, on motion to that effect, because of an
     offence against Paragraph 94 of the Military Criminal Code.

     “Although the defendant maintains that he has been on
     particularly friendly terms with Vice-Sergeant-Major Roth,
     that would in no way justify him in disobeying an order
     issued while in the performance of duty. On the contrary,
     his refusal to obey two peremptory and emphatic orders,
     given in the presence of the stable guard, and therefore
     before men assembled, was a most glaring instance of
     insubordination.

     “The excuse of defendant, that he was in an excited
     condition by reason of indulgence in alcoholic liquors, in
     nowise exculpates him. The circumstance that his offence has
     been committed while intoxicated during the performance of
     his duty, is rather an additional reason for increasing the
     measure of his punishment.

     “Defendant will be tried by court-martial.”

That sounded indeed very dangerous, just as if he were a criminal of the deepest dye,--he,
who for nine years had conducted himself blamelessly. He was almost tempted to laugh at this
accusation, which seemed to him so strongly tinctured with prejudice.

On October 20th, at noon precisely, the trial began.

The judges had come to town from the seat of the command of the army corps. With faces severe
and forbidding, they sat at a long table,--a major, a captain, a first lieutenant, a judge-advocate
to conduct the proceedings according to the statutes, and a second one to conduct the prosecution.

After Schmitz had given an intelligent account of the facts, Roth was called as witness. He
represented the affair in the most glaring colors, denied all friendship with the defendant,
and likewise denied in the strongest language that he also had been intoxicated, as Schmitz
had stated. By hook or crook he had gained over as witnesses for his sober condition on that
evening the invalid afflicted with lung trouble, and likewise the Pole. The latter, because
of the semi-idiotic state of his mind, and because of his insufficient knowledge of German,
he had instructed to simply nod his head to all the questions asked him. As luck would have
it, it so happened that the questions put to this witness were of a kind to which his mute
nods were the answers most unfavorable to the defendant. The wonder was, however, that the
court made no objection to such testimony. Finally the “Vice” swore, with a voice shaken by
no tremor, to the truth of his deposition.

This, of course, was an unexpected turn in the affair. Schmitz had not expected, and he had
not forearmed himself against such a tissue of lies. His hopes sank considerably when he noticed
that the major, as chairman of the commission, was shaking his head in grave disapproval on
hearing the unfavorable testimony.

Next followed the address of the prosecuting judge-advocate, which conformed in almost every
detail to the substance of the act of accusation.

Then Schmitz’s counsel arose. In eloquent words he described the event as it had actually occurred,
weighed the peculiar circumstances, and pointed with great emphasis to the former intimacy
of accuser and defendant,--an intimacy the existence of which had been corroborated by several
witnesses who had deposed during the preliminary stage of the case. Lastly, he made as much
as he could out of the fact that the whole occurrence had been an outgrowth of a friendly birthday
celebration. In consideration of all these things, and also because of the irreproachable conduct
of the defendant for so many years of active service, he moved for his acquittal.

The court-martial then retired for deliberation, and a long time elapsed before its members,
wearing a severe aspect, reappeared in the session chamber.

Schmitz was in a dazed condition when he heard the sentence: two months of jail!

He saw his life destroyed. In vain had been the long years which he had given, at the sacrifice
of his best strength, to his country. His dream of a future free from care, and of an appointment,
after another three years of service, to a municipal office of an humble kind in his native
town, had been shattered at one blow. What would his parents say, his sisters and brothers,
and what would become of the girl to whom he had been engaged for several years past?

A fierce rage seized him, and he could have throttled on the spot the man who by perjury, out
of vindictiveness and for selfish reasons, had marred his existence forever. The blood rushed
to his head as he saw this same man striding past him now, a sneer on his lips, in haughty
indifference. Nay, worse, he heard the commander of the regiment say to this dishonorable scoundrel:

“That is right, Roth. Unpitying in the service is what I want my non-commissioned officers to be.”

Schmitz was taken to a fortress on October 21st, where many hours of mental torture and many
days of hard, grinding labor of the lowest kind awaited him.

Thus gradually approached Christmas time. The wide yard of the barracks was covered with snow.
All lay desolate, lifeless, and grim in the severe cold which had supervened during the last days.

A large part of the regiment had been granted holiday leave, and every one of the men did his
utmost while on duty, in order not to forfeit at the last moment the joys of home and friendship
which awaited him.

Almost every evening the members of the corps of officers rode to the neighboring city, there
to make Christmas purchases; for only one of them intended to go home for the holidays, and
the others were preparing a little celebration at the Casino for which mutual gifts were being
chosen.

Borgert and Leimann both returned from their divers trips, heavily laden with packages. They
bought everything that pleased them. It might be that at some future time they would somehow
have the money to pay for it all. Meanwhile every tradesman continued to give them unlimited
credit.

After making their purchases, the officers usually met in a certain restaurant, where they
broke the necks of a few bottles of good wine. And often it would happen that they boarded
the midnight train, being in a decidedly animated mood, returning to their garrison.

One night Lieutenant Müller, the regimental adjutant, found an official telegram on his reaching
home, and was obliged, despite the late hour, to go to the chief clerk of the regiment, in
order to talk over its contents.

There had been a heavy fall of snow, and the keen east wind drove the snowflakes in a wild
dance through the cold air. It was all one could do to recognize the path.

Müller, who did not like being disturbed at such a late hour, continued grumbling to himself
all the way to the barracks. Whenever he had taken more than was good for him he was in a quarrelsome
mood, and in such a case he usually made trouble. His comrades claimed that he was suffering
from megalomania.

Through the thick snow Müller saw the illuminated windows of the guard house, and inside the
small detachment of men were peacefully slumbering.

The officer du jour had already visited them, and the men had now made themselves comfortable,
discarding their sabres and helmets, contrary to the regulations, and, dozing in their chairs,
had covered themselves with warm blankets.

Private Röse had mounted guard outside. He stood, shivering in the cold air, holding his sabre
in his fist, barely able to maintain his martial attitude without freezing on the spot.

His thoughts dwelt in his far-away home, with his parents and brothers, whom he expected to
meet again at Christmas, after a long term of separation. His people were well-to-do farmers,
and his affection for the horses, cows, and plump pigs under his father’s roof was as sincere
as that for the bipeds. He pictured to himself all these pets, and was speculating as to what
he was to do in the shape of amusement during the holidays, when he was suddenly scared by
the shout:

“Guard!”

Röse pulled himself together and quickly glanced all around him in the gloom; but he was unable
to discover the owner of the voice. Another similar shout reached him, and then at last he
saw dimly in the driving snowflakes a figure approaching him.

“Why don’t you present arms, you swine?” bawled the regimental adjutant.

“I humbly beg the Herr Lieutenant’s pardon; but I did not see him coming in the snowstorm.”

“Shut your mouth, you lying beast; you’ve been sleeping. I have been waiting an eternity for
your salute; but I will show you, you hog, what punishment awaits a fellow of your stripe!”

With that he passed the sentinel, and the latter was almost paralyzed with fear. Arrived at
the regimental headquarters, Müller made the following report:

     “The sentinel keeping guard between twelve and two o’clock
     this night I found asleep during an inspection which I made.
     He answered my call only after a considerable time. I must
     declare in advance that the man, in case he should urge his
     inability to recognize me in the dark, is stating what is
     not true, since I noticed particularly that he was asleep.”

This report he placed on the desk of the commander of the regiment. Then he aroused the regimental
chief clerk from a sound sleep in the adjoining room, kept that poor fellow shivering in his
night garments in the corridor for about ten minutes, and then went home. Having discharged
what he considered a grave duty, he was able to sleep the sleep of the just.

        *       *       *       *       *

On the afternoon of December 22d, Sergeant Schmitz returned from jail.

The poor fellow had greatly changed. The black moustache, formerly twisted and waxed so as
to describe an angle in exact imitation of the Kaiser’s, was drooping, and his face was pale
and worn. He looked shyly at all the privates whom he met in the streets, and when one of them
saluted him, he deemed it a special act of courtesy. He thought he read in everybody’s eyes:

“This man is a criminal,--a man punished for grave insubordination!”

When he reported himself to the chief of the squadron, the latter said, with some show of feeling:

“Sorry, my dear Schmitz, that I have to lose you. You were always a man of whom I felt proud,
and who did his duty as few others did. But the colonel has commanded me to cancel the capitulation
agreement[14] and to dismiss you forthwith. Console yourself with the thought that you have
become the victim of a dirty intrigue. I wish you well, and if I can be of any service to you,
you know where to find me. And so, farewell!”

    [14] “Capitulation” means an arrangement by which a
    non-commissioned officer agrees to serve the government for a
    certain term of years.--TR.

Schmitz felt the tears spurting from his eyes, as his chief went towards the stable. His captain
was really sorry to lose him. Schmitz had always been one of the pillars of discipline in the
squadron, and now this train of misfortune had removed him and plunged him into misery. It
was a most unfortunate thing.

Schmitz went to the sergeant-major, who gave him his papers and the fifty marks due him. The
sergeant-major, too, felt sorry for him. He gave him a fervent shake of the hand.

“Have you any further claims on the regiment, Schmitz?” he asked.

“Since the manœuvres last year I’ve been suffering with rheumatism.”

“But you didn’t tell me about that, Schmitz, at the time, and considerably over a year has
elapsed since then.”

“Well, I didn’t report it then because I did not want to disturb the run of things by my absence.
I knew the captain was bothered a good deal at the time.”

“Yes, yes, that is all very well. I will report your statement at once to the regiment, but
I’m afraid it will be too late. Meanwhile you had better deliver up all the regimental property.”

So then Schmitz went up to his room, packed all his things, and put his private belongings
in a small trunk. But before doffing his uniform he went to the neighboring city and purchased
for himself a civilian’s suit, a collar, and a hat. These took about all the money which had
been paid him.

Then he carried everything of the government’s outfit to the quartermaster, to whom he likewise
sold some of the private regimentals he had bought with his own money. The sabre he kept as
a memento.

And then came the hardest of all,--the farewell from his comrades and his horses. Every one
had a friendly word for him, for he had been a good comrade and had never been puffed up with
his own importance. Many a mute pressure of the hand told him that they all felt sorry for
him, and that they, as much as he himself, thought the treatment to which he had been subjected
an act of injustice. The privates, too, pressed up to him to say a word of good-bye. Often
he had berated them soundly, but they all knew him as a decent fellow, and as one who had never
badgered them unnecessarily.

As the noon service drew towards its close, Schmitz went into the stable. What a pang for him!
Never in his life had a thing seemed so hard to him. All the beasts he loved so well turned
and craned their necks towards him, leaving the savory hay and their oats for a moment as soon
as they heard his voice, and gazing at him with such intelligence as if they appreciated his
woe to the full. The sense of desolation almost overpowered him.

He had filled his pockets with sugar, and he began with “Clairette,” feeding the sweet morsels
to all his quadruped friends. “Clairette” lifted her forefoot, begging for one more piece.
He laid his head against the velvety neck of the animal, stroking caressingly the silky nostrils
and around the fine eyes, then kissing her on the white spot just below. The mare seemed to
understand him. She whinnied softly, and gave him a sad glance of parting. Next came old “Marie.”
How much longer would she be able to stand the service? And thus he visited them, one by one,
in token of farewell. The last one was “Napoleon”; but even he showed to-day no trace of his
accustomed ill temper. He gave the strange man in civilian clothes a long look of doubt and
forbearance.

A last, lingering glance to his hundred darlings, and then he painfully suppressed a tearful
sob, and climbed up to his late quarters to get his trunk.

There he met the sergeant-major of his squadron.

“Your invalid claims, Schmitz, have been disallowed. The colonel says you would have had to
make a report at the time. Now it is too late. Just as I thought. Here is something for you,--the
bill of your attorney, who has asked the regiment to collect the amount due him. It’s a matter
of sixty marks; and if you are unable to pay it he threatens to seize your property.”

Schmitz had almost forgotten about that.

“Within an hour I shall have the money,” said he, after reflecting a moment.

Then he went down to the city and entered the store of a watchmaker. He laid on the counter
his watch and chain and asked in a firm voice:

“What will you give me on this? I need money!”

The watchmaker examined both, and then said, with something of a sneer:

“Twenty marks. That is all I can give you.”

Schmitz calculated silently. He still had thirty-five, and twenty more made fifty-five. So
he needed another five marks. He removed a ring from his finger, a little gift from his mother.

“What is this worth to you?”

“Ten marks!”

“Good, give it to me!”

Schmitz pocketed silently the two gold pieces, then went to the barracks, paid the sergeant-major
the sixty marks, and took his trunk away. He was just in time to catch the evening train.

Those who saw this pale, downcast man, with his small trunk, seated in the car, scarcely supposed
that he was until recently a royal Prussian sergeant, dismissed in disgrace from long service
because of a small offence, without a penny, but with rheumatism in all his bones, and with
his patriotism destroyed, thrust into the street to seek a new and precarious means of living,
after spending his best strength, his health, and his youth in the service of his country.

On the summit of the hill, whence he could discern the barracks, the snow glistening on its
roof, he cast a last look at the spot where he had spent so many years. He raised his arms
with a threatening gesture, and a curse escaped his lips.

In the train which carried him off there were numerous soldiers of his regiment, singing and
joking, on their way home for the holidays.

Christmas Eve had come. All the world--thousands, millions--were happy. They felt the charm
of this most beautiful Christian festival,--a day which moves to softness the hardest hearts.
But Schmitz, an outcast, felt nothing but bitterness and shame. His glance dwelt on the lighted
windows where all these happy people were celebrating, and he vowed vengeance.

        *       *       *       *       *

Friedrich Röse meanwhile occupied a badly warmed cell, undergoing a fortnight’s confinement
because of his alleged inattention while on duty as sentinel.

Through the narrow window of his cell he could espy the quarters occupied by the third squadron,
a couple of stories higher, in the same building; the row of windows was shining with the brilliant
lights of a gigantic Christmas tree, standing in the centre of the large hall. The sounds of
a pathetic Christmas hymn were floating down to him, as it was intoned by the throats of the
men. Shivering with cold, he sat on the edge of his hard pallet, and a tear rolled down his
cheek. Again his thoughts dwelt with his friends at home, far away, and wrath filled his soul.

What disillusionment the year had brought him since he had begun his term as volunteer! His
father, once sergeant-major in a regiment of Guard Cuirassiers, had often described to him
a soldier’s life in vivid colors, and had expressed his hope to see, some day, his boy himself
advanced to the grade of sergeant.

But that prospect was now gone. His punishment brought with it as a consequence the impossibility
of ever rising from the ranks.

His one-time zeal for his calling had changed suddenly to a violent distaste for everything
connected with the service. At one blow the enthusiastic, ambitious recruit had turned into
one of the many soldiers who serve in the army simply because they are compelled to do so,
and who are longing for the day when they will be able to doff the uniform forever.

And why all this?

Not because he had knowingly neglected his duty, but because one of the officers, one of the
men whom he had until recently looked up to as demigods, had in his drunken spleen selected
him for a victim. And that which this officer had maintained in his report had to stand as
an absolute fact, no matter how untrue; and if he or anybody else should express doubts of
its accuracy it would mean a new and punishable offence.

In answer to the questions asked by the chief of his squadron, Röse had stated the occurrence
quite truthfully, and had assured him solemnly of his innocence. But the adjutant had replied
to this that the man wanted to exculpate himself by untrue statements. The report was, therefore,
accepted as it read.

Was it to be expected that Müller would admit his own wrong, admit that he had in his semi-drunkenness
misinterpreted the facts, and that he had been in an unpleasant frame of mind at the time?
Of course not. That would have meant charging himself with an offence. How could he, the infallible
regimental adjutant, own up to an error? No, he was never mistaken; and what difference did
it make, anyway, if this raw recruit did get a fortnight’s term in the “cooler”?

What difference?

This difference,--that there was now one more of those who proclaim that the private soldier
in the German army is a man forced into a yoke, the prey of every whim of his superiors, a
man exposed to the bad humor of those above him, one who has to suffer, without a sign of resistance,
undeserved harshness and injustice. Such a man was now this young recruit.

And what further harm was there in it?

This,--that everybody in the future, when Röse should be asked for his testimonials, would
shrug his shoulders, thinking: “This man cannot be trustworthy, for he has undergone severe
punishment for neglect of duty as a sentinel, and that is a bad sign!”

Towards nine o’clock in the evening Röse was aroused from his sombre reflections by a rattling
of keys at his door. The key turned in the lock, and in stepped the officer on duty, making
his round, behind him the guard.

Röse jumped up, assumed a rigid military posture, and reported himself.

“Private Röse, sentenced to a fortnight’s confinement for neglect of duty while on guard!”

The officer cast a searching glance into the dark cell, trying to make out whether he could
discover a forbidden object in it beside the blanket and the water-pitcher, and then he turned
to go. But Röse hesitatingly and in humble tones said:

“Will the Herr Lieutenant permit me to make a respectful request?”

“Ask the guard if you want anything,” answered the officer shortly, and then descended the
stone steps, his sword clanking.

The corporal on guard then turned and went back to Röse’s cell.

“What is it you want?” he asked, with a show of good-nature.

“I should like to know, Herr Corporal, whether a letter from home has arrived for me, and whether
I could not have it!” answered Röse, shyly.

“Well, my boy,” laughed the corporal, “strictly speaking, that is something not permitted--first
serve your sentence, then you can find out.”

But as he scanned closely the features of Röse, who was of his own squadron, and whom he rather
liked,--noticing the melancholy face,--he felt pity for the poor fellow. It was really a hard
thing to spend Christmas in jail for what probably was a mere oversight, or for what, according
to Röse himself, he had not even committed. Therefore he said pleasantly:

“Well, I will inquire.”

He locked the door, and sent a man to Röse’s quarters with a request to the corporal there
to call on him. When the man came over he asked him:

“Is there a letter for Röse?”

“A letter? No, but a package has come for him.”

“Let me tell you!” whispered the corporal. “Open the box and bring something of the contents
over here. I feel sorry for the poor devil.”

The other nodded and disappeared, soon to return with a letter that he had found inside the
package together with some dainty eatables. The corporal took it all and brought it up to Röse,
and then he told a man to carry up a pail of coal to the cell.

In a few minutes the sheet-iron stove was aglow, and sent waves of warmth into the cold cell.
Röse stood in front of it, and by the flickering light of the flames he slowly perused the
letter of his parents. While he read tears were streaming down his face. Then he hid away under
his pillow the other treasures,--a sausage and a cake,--wrapped himself into his blanket and
lay down to sleep. In his dreams Röse was standing beneath the Christmas tree, and around him
were his dear ones at home.

The twenty-eighth of December was a day of mourning for the fourth squadron.

All the men, including those who had just returned from leave, gave the last escort to a dead
comrade. It was Dietrich, the good-service man, who was carried out to the cemetery.

He had always been of a weakly constitution; but he had been seized by a violent fever the
day when he had returned, overheated, and wet to the bones from rain, after hard drill on the
parade ground, and had had to spend the evening and the night in a cold room, because Roth
had refused to furnish coal. Two days later the surgeon of the regiment established the fact
that inflammatory rheumatism had supervened, and this had taken so bad a turn within a short
time that the heart had become affected. On Christmas Day the poor fellow had died.

His parents had been summoned by telegraph to attend the funeral of their only son; but sickness
in the family and other circumstances had prevented their coming, and thus the funeral took
place without a single friend or relative being present.

The day afterward the fat reserve man, the one who had been injured by “Napoleon,” left the
hospital. His injuries seemed healed; but the whole face was horribly disfigured by livid marks
left from the sutures of the surgeon’s needle, and the left eye had been removed by an operation,
since it had been feared that the other eye might also be lost unless prompt and radical measures
were taken.

Maimed and crippled for life, the man returned to his home, discharged from the army for physical
inability. A monthly pension of nine marks had been “generously” allowed him by the government.

        *       *       *       *       *

Schmitz, the ex-sergeant, on New Year’s Eve sat in a scantily furnished room.

To earn a living, even if but a very poor one, he had been forced to take work as a common
laborer in a large factory of the neighboring city. He had engaged board in a tenement house,
with the family of a fellow-workman.

There he sat now, his head buried in his hands. On a plate before him were the remnants of
a frugal supper, and a small lamp with broken chimney threw a reddish sheen on his immobile
figure. Against the wall, above his bed, were hung his sabre and its scabbard, crosswise. On
a small wooden stool stood a bowl, in which he had performed his ablutions, and a soiled towel
hung from it. The fire in the small stove had long ago died down, and but a few coals were
still glimmering feebly.

To see the man one would have imagined him asleep; but Schmitz was very much awake, and in
his head wild thoughts were whirling. He was thinking of times past and gone; and the more
his present circumstances contrasted with former ones, the more grimly rose his hatred against
the man who had brought him to his present plight. He was planning his revenge, ruminating
deeply how best he should punish the rascal, and how to brand him with a life-long reminder
of his infamous deed.

A while longer he thus sat, brooding darkly; then he rose with clouded face and stepped to
the window. He breathed against the pane covered with rime, until a small space had been formed
through which he could peer out into the open. He saw the dial opposite on the church steeple,
from which the bells melodiously rang out in full-toned peals the closing moments of the old
year, and proclaiming the advent of a new one.

Midnight. Schmitz seized his hat, clapped it on, took his heavy cane into the right hand, blew
out the lamp, and cautiously descended the dark staircase. On the ice-crusted step in front
of the housedoor he lingered a moment, listening to the vibrations of the solemn bells. No
other sound was audible; no human step could be heard--only the distant rush of air which,
like the breath of a gigantic being, told of the thronged streets of a busy city.

Schmitz shiveringly turned up his coat collar, sank both his hands into his pockets, and went
briskly, the cane under his arm, to the railway station. There he bought a ticket for his former
garrison, but a few minutes away by rail, and stepped on board the train which had just rolled in.

Arrived there, he found the small town buried under a thick blanket of snow. From the barracks
row upon row of lighted windows glimmered like stars from the distance. Every little while
snatches of song or single chords, wafted towards him by the wind, gave sound in the night.
Far away the ringing of church bells could be heard, coming not only from the steeples of the
town itself, but from the villages and hamlets surrounding it,--a joyful greeting to the new
year. From out of the dramshops and restaurants floated the sounds of loud talking, laughter,
and singing of merry people, celebrating in hot punch the gladsome hour.

Schmitz went fleet-footed towards the end of the town where the barracks were situated. But
when he came to a restaurant in the vicinity of the spacious building he made a halt. Cautiously
he peered into the gloom around him, to make sure that nobody was near, and then he climbed
to the top of a wall and looked intently into the lighted window below.

Sure enough, there sat Roth, a conspicuous figure in a company of fellow-drinkers; for in this
place he habitually spent his evening hours, frequently far into the night, drinking and playing
at cards.

Then carefully and noiselessly he climbed down and strolled on in the direction of the barracks.
He turned into a rural pathway, lined on both sides by snow-capped hedges, and then stopped
at a certain spot. He knew that Roth would pass him on his way home.

Schmitz had to wait a long while in the nipping air, but his blood bounded tumultuously through
his veins; for his revenge, longed for with all his heart, was close at hand.

The keen-edged wind drove particles of snow before it and pricked his heated face like needle-points.
The dead leaves of a tall beech-tree rustled over him, and he felt like a victor. Patiently,
triumphantly, he waited.

Down below, where the pathway opened into the street, he now and then saw a dark shape reel
past and disappear in the night like a shadow, the soft snow deadening the footfall. These
were jolly roysterers, returning from their carousal.

From the steeple, some distance away, came the metallic voice of a bell striking the first
hour of the new year, and Schmitz reckoned on the probability that his foe would soon wend
his way homeward.

But in this he deceived himself, for it was close unto two o’clock when the “Vice” at last
turned into the lane. Schmitz could not be mistaken. His sharp eyes, by this time habituated
to the dark, clearly made out the burly figure. He grasped his cane firmly in his hand, and
his heart hammered in his bosom. Nearer and nearer Roth approached, now but a few steps away,
his face almost completely hidden in the upturned collar of his cloak; but Schmitz saw the
cruel, hard eyes, now dull and fishy from excessive indulgence in New Year’s punch. Roth was
in a good humor, however, whistling to himself and dragging his sabre at his feet, walking
with unsteady gait.

At this moment Schmitz stepped out from beside the hedge, and, his cane on his shoulder, he
planted himself before the other.

Roth was startled, and looked keenly at the man who stopped his progress. He did not recognize him.

“What is it you want?” He mumbled thickly.

“To settle accounts with you,” was the brief answer. At the sound of the voice Roth visibly
paled. For a moment the two stared at each other.

“Oh, I see, it is you, old fellow. And what do you want of me?”

“This is what I want!” shouted Schmitz, and with terrific force his cane came down on Roth’s
head. A second blow followed, almost as hard, which hit him on the cheek, so that the blood
rushed out of the wound. The “Vice,” taken unawares, made no motion to defend himself while
Schmitz rained a shower of strokes on his body. Then at last Roth, wide awake now, felt for
his sabre, partly drawing it from its scabbard; but Schmitz gave him no chance to use it. Like
a famished wolf he seized his enemy by the throat, throttling him, and, dropping his cane,
with his clenched fist he dealt him several fearful blows on forehead and mouth, winding up
with a tattoo that sounded like the beating of a drum on the man’s skull. A violent push made
Roth stumble and fall to his knees.

“So, now, you miserable cur, I have paid my debt to you!” and saying which, he kicked his fallen
foe. Then he turned on his heels and said, as a parting shot:

“Now go and report me again, you swine; but if you do I shall have another reckoning with you,
and tell about some of your thieving!”

The former “foddermaster” felt that he had meted out justice, and he was fully prepared to
take the consequences, no matter what they might be. Revenge is a sweet morsel.

Roth had to spend several weeks in the hospital, until he had recovered from his injuries.
It was the hardest drubbing he had ever received in his life. Vanity forbade him to give a
true version of the assault. He reported that he had been attacked by several drunken laborers,
and claimed to have used his sabre with effect on one of them; but nobody believed his tale,
for no wounded laborer was heard of in the little town, and physicians there and in the vicinity
were equally ignorant of such a case. It was, therefore, generally assumed that Roth had met
with his deserts at the hands of the ex-sergeant, and nobody pitied him.

CHAPTER V

OFFICERS AT A MASQUERADE

During the last days of January the Casino was in an uproar. A number of mechanics, painters,
and florists were busy transforming the rooms and corridors, even the veranda, with its adjoining
conservatory, into a suite of daintily decorated festal halls. Numerous booths and tents were
being erected, and all other preparations were made worthily to receive Prince Carnival, whose
coming was timed for the first week in February.

Hundreds of potted plants and orange and laurel trees from the conservatory gave a gay and
summer-like appearance to the ballroom. Placards painted and inscribed in suitable manner hung
from the walls. In the booths and tents the usual array of eatables and “wet goods” of every
description could be seen, to be sold by pretty womenfolk. One stage had been fitted up for
variety performances, while on another a circus was to be seen, in which a number of private
soldiers, disguised as wild beasts, were to play leading parts under the eyes and whip of the
trainer--none other than Captain Kahle. These men had been drilled for the purpose throughout
the whole month.

There was also a stretch of natural greensward, laid down by the Casino gardener. This was
to produce the illusion of a small park. Benches placed on it invited the guests to rest and
to enjoy the music of a band upon a suitable stand, while Pilsen beer was to be handed to the
audience by waiters. In an adjoining room mock marriages were to be performed, the fee to the
officiating justice of the peace to consist in the purchase of a bottle of champagne. And,
to complete the scene, arrangements had also been made to obtain a quick decree of divorce
(by the same official) for all those couples who deemed themselves mismated after a short experience
of an hour or so.

The large dining-room represented picnic grounds. On a platform wreathed in green there was
room for an orchestra, and the trumpeters of the regiment had been ransacking the whole town
for weeks in order to find ragged costumes and discarded garments of every kind, clad in which
they were to represent village musicians.

Even photographers were there, to ply their trade in several tents, the outside of which showed
a collection of ludicrous portraits and prints of various kinds. The purpose of this stratagem
was, of course, to attract customers.

Naturally all these festivities, planned for weeks, formed the main topic of conversation with
the members of the club, and the whole garrison was for the time being turned topsy-turvy.
Every one intended to appear in as original and amusing a guise as possible, and there was
much mutual consulting and guessing as to which particular rôle was to be assumed by each person.

Thus the opening night of the fête drew near. During the afternoon a crowd of hairdressers
moved into the Casino, to assist members of the club in getting themselves up properly. The
regimental tailor, with his aides, went from one officer’s house to another, making alterations
or needed repairs on the uniforms and costumes to be donned.

At seven in the evening the orderlies, in the black garments of waiters, were expecting the
guests and members, and half an hour later these began to arrive in crowds.

It was a multi-colored, vivid picture, as all these persons, many of them good-looking and
picturesquely attired, in all sorts of disguises, began to move in the brilliantly lighted
halls, while the several bands, placed at coigns of vantage, struck up lively and inspiring
airs. Dancing began at once, and champagne flowed in streams. At a garden table under an orange
tree one could see a powerfully limbed peasant, his hawthorn stick between his knees, devouring
a plateful of caviare, while his neighbor, a circus clown, was dissecting a lobster.

The most ludicrous figure, however, was Colonel von Kronau in his Polish farmer’s costume,
wearing a fur cap on his head, and a tippet around his neck. If he had appeared in this disguise
at the hog market in a Pomeranian town, every purchaser would have supposed him to be the “genuine
article,” namely, a breeder of porkers. And it was quite evident that he did not have to take
much pains correctly to imitate the manners and gestures of the person he represented.

The champagne was paid for out of a common fund specially raised by all the members of the
Casino. It was, therefore, not astonishing that the Herr Colonel was, after the lapse of one
brief hour, deep in his cups.

His adjutant had not done well to disguise himself as a Polish Jew, for in that way he looked
indeed too much his part.

Frau König was charming as a chambermaid, and her blue eyes radiated the pleasure she felt.
As a young gamekeeper, Lieutenant Bleibtreu paid assiduous court to the aforementioned chambermaid.
He had already proposed to her to visit the “marriage booth” in the adjoining room, and the
justice of the peace was getting ready his paraphernalia. Only late at night, when the captain,
her every-day husband, carried her home, did the pretty maid relinquish her newer claims upon
the gamekeeper.

Frau Leimann presented herself as a peasant girl from the “Vierlande,”--a district near Hamburg,--and
her costume looked indeed very picturesque, and became her well. Borgert noticed this fact
with great pleasure, and the dainty figure and small nimble feet made a strong impression on
his susceptible heart.

Frau Kahle, as a flower girl, was flirting desperately with the younger men. She also played
her part very well, for the champagne in which she had liberally indulged began to exert its
effects. Lieutenant Kolberg, as a modish dandy, had already purchased nearly her entire supply
of flowers, and when, soon after, the remnant had gone, he claimed and obtained her as his
partner for the dance.

Frau Captain Stark alone did not seem to belong in this milieu. The choice of a costume, to
begin with, had occasioned her deep and anxious thought. She felt that to follow her inclinations
and appear at the masquerade in either the guise of a ballet dancer or of a flower girl would
too markedly invite criticism. Her fifty years and her towering shape would really have made
her too conspicuous in such parts. On the other hand, to show herself as a peddler woman or
fishwife would have, so she feared, made her look “too natural.” Having, therefore, discarded
these notions, her fancy roved in the realms of the beautiful and fantastic, until it settled
down upon a costume which, bespangled and with its garland of rushes, she declared to be that
of a “mermaid of middle age.” Nobody was in a condition to contradict her, inasmuch as nobody
recollected ever having seen a “middle-aged” mermaid before. She floated, as a matter of fact,
in a cloud of pink and sea-green laces. The capacious bosom this cloud concealed from view
rolled and heaved quite realistically, thus producing the effect of ocean waves, and her enormous
arms were awe-inspiring enough to keep away all evening those in the crowd who had not got
their sea-legs,--and that meant practically all the younger officers. At all other times her
most dutiful slaves, these young men seemed to have conspired to leave the dreaded chief of
the regiment’s nominal chief severely alone. Of course she felt this as an unpardonable offence,
and this all the more as the colonel at an early hour was in an irresponsible condition, and
hence listened to her violent plaint with stolid equanimity.

There was a male trio, too, that claimed some attention. They represented to the life merry,
devil-may-care vagabonds, and so well did they act their parts that one would have supposed
they had just been picked up on the miry highway outside. They deemed it, of course, strictly
within their privileges to get drunk with all due speed,--an endeavor in which they admirably
succeeded. From that hour on they became an unmitigated nuisance, not even atoned for by some
humor or merry pranks. After midnight they were always seen in a bunch, steadying each other
as they lurched along.

Lieutenant von Meckelburg, during the earlier part of the evening, stuck resolutely and almost
silently to his assigned duty, it being that of an organ-grinder. He had picked up somewhere
a villainous specimen of this instrument of torture, and with it had retired into a corner,
wearing the ragged and faded clothes of an impecunious veteran of the wars, with his visorless,
crumpled cap pulled over his eyes, and with a face which for unadulterated melancholy could
not be duplicated. Hardly any one took notice of him, and his physiognomy grew sadder and sadder.
At last, however, he left his organ in its corner, and visited the various bars where champagne
could be had. With each generous libation his features cleared, and finally he got himself
into a decidedly hilarious condition, and not only moved with his organ into the centre of
the greensward, where he placed it on one of the benches, but accompanied its shrill and squeaking
notes with a mellow basso of his own.

The bands meanwhile played their best and merriest, and as several casks of beer and some dozen
bottles of cheap spirits had been provided for them, the members, both trumpeters of the regiment
and civilian musicians hired for the night, devoted no inconsiderable portion of the intervals
between their playing to frequent and prolonged visits to that small side-room where these
drinkables had been placed ready for use. After a while they dispensed even with such formalities.
They rolled the remaining casks up the steps of their podium, and shortly the faucet could
be espied from among the greenery, and the musicians hovering about it. As a matter of course,
their playing soon showed the effects of all this tippling. One man particularly, one of the
flageolets, became quite unmanageable,--or rather the instrument on which he was performing,--so
that it usually was the space of a second or two ahead of the others. This weird music only
ended with the removal of flageolet and man from the scene.

At eleven began the festal performance on the small stage constructed for the purpose.

One of the lieutenants led off with two topical songs rather too outspoken in the lessons they
tried to convey. He was disguised as a prima ballerina for the purpose, and as a windup he
danced, with great skill and abandon, a can-can. The ladies tittered and the men guffawed.
After more of the same kind there was enacted a parody on Shakespeare’s “Hamlet.” The gentleman
responsible for this version had employed radical means to clear the stage of all the dramatis
personæ, at the end. Murder, suicide, poison, dagger, lightning even decimated their ranks,
and when the curtain dropped there was not a soul of them left alive. The crowning effect of
this parody was the appearance of the prompter himself before the footlights. In a few tear-choked
words he informed the audience that after seeing the actors all die, and nothing but corpses
around him, he could and would not survive, and so he made an end of himself, too, using a
rope for the purpose.

The humor of the whole audience after that grew rapidly boisterous, and by midnight the tone
of this carnival fête given by officers and their ladies could scarcely be distinguished from
that rampant at a village kermess. If anything, it was a trifle more unconventional.

Lieutenant Kolberg had in the meantime found a cosy arbor into which to retire with Frau Captain
Kahle, and more effectually to exclude intruders had placed a tall screen before the entrance.

A little “flirtation,” more or less serious, was something he could not do without, and since
the garrison with its staid citizens and their staider wives and daughters did not furnish
the material required for him, he had made up his mind to lay violent siege to the heart of
the lady. He knew that it was a susceptible one, and from Pommer he had heard, in hours of
bibulous intercourse, that siege in her case meant speedy surrender. He had already progressed
with her beyond mere preliminary skirmishes, and in their conversations with nobody near they
had begun to use the intimate “thou,” and to call each other by their given names.

For his purpose, then, no better time could have been found than this very festivity, with
all the allurements which champagne, music, the dance, and the hurly-burly of a huge crowd
afforded. Shielded against indiscreet spies by the interlacing vines creeping all over this
arbor, his love-making had proceeded at such a rapid pace that within an hour the little woman
did not thrust her gallant wooer aside when he dared imprint a kiss on her swelling lips.

In another arbor, more in proximity to the champagne bar, First Lieutenant Leimann sat in lonely
misery and shed rivulets of tears. His intoxication, in its more advanced stage, always took
that form known technically as “howling desolation.” On this occasion it had seized him promptly
after the ninth glassful.

His condition was in ludicrous contrast with the magnificence and dash of his attire, for he
was dressed, regardless of expense, as a Hungarian magnate of the first water, and he rejected
with sombre scorn all attempts made by friends to commiserate him. His nearer acquaintances
knew for a certainty that he would thus remain seated on top of an empty wine cask until the
very close of the ball. For whenever the black devils of drink cast their spell over him in
this fashion it required from four to six hours to emerge into a saner and somewhat soberer
frame of mind. Just now his sobs shook his whole bony body. The divers orderlies who passed
him held their sides with laughter, but he heeded them not.

His wife found the situation very annoying, and she therefore resolved to get one of her sudden
attacks of headache. She retired, with signs of disgust on her pretty face, to another corner,
and when Borgert joined her soon afterward, she requested him in mellifluous tones to escort
her home.

As they reached the door of the house in which she with her husband occupied the upper part,
while Borgert had his smaller lodgings on the ground floor, she sighed with some satisfaction
and said in a low voice:

“The air has done me good; I feel much better now.”

“Then may I take you back to the Casino?” was Borgert’s answer, and the tone of his voice was
full of disappointment.

“No, no, we will go up and have a cup of coffee; that will do us good, and I really do not
feel like returning to that crowd of drunken people; it is simply disgusting!”

“Just as it pleases you, my most gracious lady!”

With that he inserted the key into the lock, opened the door, and both of them silently scaled
the rather steep stairs, dark as Erebus.

When they had reached her cosy parlor, Borgert brought the lamp and lit it. He knew exactly
the spot where he would find it in the dark, for his acquaintance with every nook of the apartments
had come in the course of time with their mutual intimacy. Then he took up a newspaper and
sat down in the sofa corner.

Frau Leimann had disappeared in the adjoining room; but it took her only a very few minutes
to return, bearing in her hands the Vienna coffee machine, and presenting, now that she had
resumed a comfortable and coquettish kimono in lieu of her masquerade costume, a most seductive
picture.

“So,” said she, letting the heavy window curtains down, “now at last we are again where we
can have a comfortable, undisturbed chat together.”

        *       *       *       *       *

The first rosy dawn showed on the horizon as a heavy, lurching step was heard on the stone
stairs outside. The pity of God for the only distress which belongs to all paradises has no bounds:
he forthwith created other animals besides.

The first mistake of God: man did not find the animals entertaining--he ruled over them, but
did not even want to be an "animal"--God consequently created woman.

And, in fact, there was now an end of tedium--but of other things also! Woman was the second
mistake of God.--"Woman is in her essence a serpent, Hera"--every priest knows that: "from
woman comes all the mischief in the world"--every priest knows that
likewise.

Science is the first sin, the germ of all sin, original sin. This alone is morality.--"Thou
shalt not know:"--the rest follows therefrom.--By his mortal terror God was not prevented
from being shrewd. How does one defend one's self against science?

That was for a long time his main problem.

Answer: away with man, out of paradise!

Happiness and leisure lead to thoughts,--all thoughts are bad thoughts.... Man shall not think--and
the "priest in himself" contrives distress, death, the danger of
life in pregnancy, every kind of misery, old age, weariness, and above
all sickness,--nothing but expedients in the struggle against science!

...

* * *

--I have been understood.

The beginning of the Bible contains the entire psychology of the
priest.--The priest knows only one great danger: that is science,--the
sound concept of cause and effect.

But science flourishes on the whole only under favorable circumstances,--one
must have superfluous time, one must have superfluous intellect in
order to "perceive"

 I suppose he
went to bed long ago.”

“Why didn’t you offer him a cup of coffee?”

“But, Franz, what would the servants think if they heard me coming home with a gentleman so
late at night? That would never do. Our maid, Marie, anyway, is listening and spying continually,
and one has to take care not to let her hear things. I presume she has been telling tales out
of school as it is.”

“Send her away then, if you have no confidence in her.”

“I would have done it long ago, but I can’t let her go until we have paid her wages. We’re
several months behind with her.”

“Then pay her to-morrow.”

“What with? Have you any money?”

“I? What an idea. You know perfectly well that the few marks of my pay could never keep this
household running. Hasn’t your mother sent the allowance this month?”

“No, she hasn’t anything to spare this time.”

“Oh, of course,--the old story.”

“Is that meant for reproach? You knew yourself that we were not rich. Do me the favor, therefore,
to spare me your hints and complaints. I find them tactless and inappropriate at this late time.”

“Yes, you never want to hear about that. You ought to have known before you married me that
to keep house without money is a beastly nuisance. Now we have this ceaseless dunning every
day: one day it’s the butcher, the next the baker, and the day after the laundress,--and they
all want money. I can’t cut it out of my hide.”

“But wasn’t it yourself who kept on urging and urging me until I promised to marry you? Didn’t
you gainsay all my objections and insist on our marriage?”

“True enough; but you and your mother ought to have known better. You never ought to have consented,
even if I was fool enough to insist on it. Your mother knew how much it costs to keep house,
and I didn’t. And now it is too late.”

“That I know myself, and you needn’t drive me crazy by constantly nagging at me. And it isn’t
my fault, either; for if everything had turned out the way my mother desired, you would not
have had to complain to-day that you are married to a woman without money. You were not the
only one from whom I had proposals.”

“That you ought to have told me then,” replied her husband, with an ugly sneer. “I’m awfully
sorry if I have interfered with your fine prospects.”

“You are more vulgar, Franz, than I thought you.”

“Oh, yes, women can never bear the truth. If one doesn’t flatter you the whole time and play
on the tuneful lyre of love, you at once begin to find fault.”

“Well, I haven’t been surfeited with terms of affection by you.”

“That is merely because I don’t know how you have deserved them of me. Is it perhaps because
I don’t know how to pay my shoemaker, or how to meet a whole bunch of bills that have come
in the last fortnight? Oh, what a fool I have been! Instead of leading this dog’s life with
you, I might to-day attend the Academy of War and lead a decent existence.”

“Hold your tongue, you vulgar brute; you have no right to insult me! Leave my room, or I shall
leave the house!”

“Instantly, and with the greatest pleasure, my gracious lady! Pleasant dreams to you!”

So saying, Leimann violently slammed the door behind him so that the windows shook, and then
went to his own bedroom.

But his wife buried her face in the sofa cushions and sobbingly sought relief in tears. That
gave a vent to her feelings of hatred and rage against her heartless husband. Her whole soul
rebelled against this brutal man whom she had married because he had sworn on his knees to
her that he could not live without her. And now he roughly stamped into the ground the affection
which she once had borne him. He desecrated all those recollections which are so dear to a
woman’s heart, and which at critical points in her life are meant to be a stay and a comfort,
and to make the burden of misfortune lighter to her.

And if, a short time before, when she had hastily parted from Borgert, she had felt something
like remorse,--something of shame in having abused the confidence placed in her by her husband,--she
now regarded herself as a victim, and her fault only in the light of a just revenge for his
heartless conduct.

For at no time is the heart of woman more susceptible to temptation than at the moment when
she feels herself betrayed and outraged in her best feelings.

CHAPTER VI

A SENSATIONAL EVENT STIRS THE GARRISON

It was plain daylight when the last guests left the Casino. Without exception, liberal indulgence
in champagne and brandy had done its work, and the motley crowd that left the building thus
“early” was in a decidedly boisterous mood, and the limits of decency and good manners had
been passed by them hours before.

The nearby church bell struck the hour of seven as Captain Stark and his wife, as well as the
colonel and his better half, climbed into the capacious vehicle that had been waiting for them
at the door of the club-house for several hours. The horses had become stiff in the joints,
and, with a cold and raw blustering wind to chill them, they were now forced to pull their
heavy load on the miry highway leading toward town. The coachman had to use his whip freely
to make the poor beasts break into a sorry trot; but at last the human load had been deposited
before their doors.

Lieutenant von Meckelburg and First Lieutenant Specht could scarcely keep on their legs; but,
nevertheless, they walked straight from the Casino to the barracks, where they were to give,
each of them, an hour’s instruction to the recruits. They quickly doffed their fantastic gear--the
organ had been left behind by the lieutenant; but when they appeared before their pupils the
latter could scarcely suppress a shout of laughter. For Specht had in his hurry forgotten to
remove his artificial moustache, and this gave him such an unusual appearance that it was only
when his voice, somewhat shaken by alcoholic excesses, met the soldiers’ ears that they felt
sure whom they had before them. The “instruction” he thus imparted was certainly very far from
enlightening their minds on the duties falling to the share of a defender of the fatherland.

Most of the other officers preferred, however, a good long sleep, and simply ignored the work
of the day. It was only towards noon when the first captain showed his face at the barracks.

Captain König and his faithful Lieutenant Bleibtreu were, in fact, the only officers of the
whole regiment who attended to their duties in the forenoon, they having gone home at reasonable
hours. Their principle was: first the work, and then the amusement.

Captain Hagemann showed himself in the streets, mounted on his favorite horse, as the noon
hour struck. He had not yet recovered his equilibrium, and the horse seemed to appreciate that
fact instinctively. He carried his master with such tender commiseration for the condition
of the latter that he picked his way as carefully as if walking on ice.

Stark himself preferred to remain altogether at home. His “Kater”[15] was inexorable, and demanded
a long, unbroken rest to find its way out of the muddled brain of its owner. His place in the
regiment was, as usual, filled by his tireless lady. Holding her husband’s official note-book
in her hand, she went her rounds, noticing the presence of all the men and non-commissioned
officers, and making a black mark against the name of Lieutenant Kolberg, as he was absent
without leave.

    [15] “Kater,” a slang term for the demoralized condition
    consequent upon alcoholic overindulgence.--TR.

At 1.30 she received a visit from Hagemann, who came to make most elaborate and humble excuses
because he had been audacious enough to indulge in gibes at the expense of the doughty lady
during the ball. In fact, while in the enterprising stage which forms so interesting a part
of the effects produced on human bipeds by champagne, he had been bold enough to pay her some
strongly ironical compliments in her capacity of “mermaid.” He had told her incidentally that
she was eminently fitted for her part, as it was a well-known physiological fact that fat kept
afloat on water. Frau Stark, who was proof at all times both against flattery and against the
insinuating allurements of the foamy liquid, and who was as much matter-of-fact to-day as she
had been the night before, merely deigned to accept these excuses with a small nod and a dry
“That will do!”

Leimann, on his part, likewise started out on a tour of visits, the sole purpose of which was
to offer much-needed explanations and apologies to nearly every member of the club whom he
had offended more or less seriously during the period of his “howling desolation.”

Night had come, in fact, when the larger number of the officers met at a solemn “Dämmerschoppen”
at the Casino,--a process of applying hair of the dog that bit you to cure the injury. They
discussed in voices still considerably husky and thick the doings and misdoings at the entertainment
of the previous night. Criticism was applied freely to everybody who happened to be absent;
but about Leimann judgment was unanimous: he was a beast.

It was Borgert’s part to report to the assembled “Corona,”[16] in his inimitable manner, about
that part of the adventures of Kolberg and Frau Kahle which had come under his personal observation.

    [16] “Corona,” meaning all the drinkers present; a student’s
    expression.--TR.

Nothing had escaped his lynx eye, and he related with great gusto what he had not failed to
discover of the interesting proceedings in the arbor. Even the protection of the screen had
not been sufficient to blind him.

While all these things were said about them, Kolberg and Frau Kahle were sitting near a good
fire in his room, enjoying the renewal of their intimacy.

On pretext of necessary purchases, she had escaped the vigilance of her husband, and under
the protection of the dark had hastened to that end of the town and to the garden behind the
walls of which stood the small house inhabited by Kolberg. Tall chestnut trees, throwing their
shadows over its roof, gave it additional seclusion.

What was there really for her to make life enjoyable? Aside from walks in the woods nearby
there was nothing to do for her the live-long day, so that she felt it a positive blessing
to have, as often as circumstances would permit, a cosy tête-à-tête with Kolberg. Her husband,
too, was not the kind of man a woman could be happy with. Hard drinking and interminable hours
spent at the Casino were all he cared for. The estrangement between him and his wife had been
almost complete even before Pommer, and now, since his going, Kolberg had crossed her path.

In this way passed several months.

The secret of the intimate relations existing between Kolberg and Frau Kahle had slowly filtered
down into all the strata of society represented in the little town, and they formed even one
of the regular themes of conversation in the low-class dramshops on the outskirts of the town
where the laboring population lived.

Even Kolberg’s comrades knew about it, but none of them felt rash enough to undertake mediation
or interference in such a delicate matter where the tangible proofs seemed not within reach.
It was to be expected, that if confronted with the facts of the case as far as these were palpable,
both parties concerned would simply deny the damaging allegation, and in such a case the rôle
of the advising friend might easily have become one of great difficulty. The accuser might
then have been charged with assailing the honor of a lady of the regiment and that of a fellow-officer.
Such a charge, in the absence of absolute proof, could have had but one issue. For who could
tell whether the sole witness to some of the escapades of the two--that is, Kolberg’s man--would
stick to his statements as soon as he should see that circumstances became serious? Perhaps--and
that seemed probable--he would entirely recant from fear of punishment for having secretly
played the spy on his master. And suppose he then represented the facts in a more harmless
light, who could gainsay him?

On the other hand, it was justly feared that the dénouement of this matter would raise much
dust, and lead to the resigning of one comrade, to a serious duel, and to the disruption of
another comrade’s household. And as Captain Kahle was rather popular with his comrades, because
of his open-handedness and his easy good nature, nobody felt like opening his eyes to the miserable
intrigue.

Therefore everything remained as it was, and only malignant gossip increased in volume, so
that Captain König at last resolved to give the commander of the regiment a hint of affairs
in a spirit of strict privacy.

But the colonel asked, as soon as the ticklish subject was broached:

“Do you report this to me officially? No? Well, then, I don’t want to know anything about it.
I won’t burn my fingers in meddling with a matter of that kind.”

König himself did not feel like becoming the instigator of a most disastrous scandal. After
all, it was not primarily an affair where he ought to take the initiative, and this aside from
the further consideration that he would probably become involved in a duel by taking the lead
in exposing the guilty parties. He therefore also made up his mind to keep quiet.

Thus it was that nothing was done by anybody to put a stop to all this mischievous talk, and
to put out of the world a matter which was of the greatest injury to the regiment and to the
whole corps of officers,--a matter, too, in which the civilian population was perfectly justified
in pointing the finger of scorn at them. And whereas in other circles, in civilian ones, the
guilty parties would under similar circumstances have been called to account, in this instance
a state of things was permitted to exist for a number of months which scandalized every decent
person who, while forced by social conventions to meet the offenders on terms of equality,
would have entirely shunned them once proper steps were taken to conciliate outraged public
opinion. And this was all the more reprehensible because it affected a caste which deems itself
superior to any other within the monarchy, and which believes itself to be the guardian of
good manners and morals, and of a high conception of honor.

The largest measure of blame necessarily fell to the share of Colonel von Kronau. This gentleman,
at all other times ready to proceed with stringent severity wherever he discovered slight breaches
of discipline or of the mechanical details of drill, and who knew no clemency where nothing
was to be feared for himself by playing the rigid taskmaster, in this instance tolerated this
shameful thing; for he knew that interference in this particular would mean for him, in any
case, serious inconvenience. Two things were possible. Either he would be charged with falsely
accusing others, or else his position as commander would receive such a blow as to make it
perhaps untenable, once his superiors should obtain knowledge of the actual state of affairs
within the regiment. Neither of these contingencies was to his taste.

It was, therefore, with great relief that he one day received the official notification of
Captain Kahle’s promotion to a majority, together with an order of the latter’s transference
to a garrison in South Germany. That, then, meant the longed-for end of this horrible business,
and he doubly rejoiced that he had not acted on the spur of impulse; for he doubted not that,
if he had, the outcome would not have been as favorable.

Kahle felt naturally greatly elated at his unexpectedly rapid promotion. At last he had reached
the goal of his ambition. For many years, ever since he had entered the army as a beardless
stripling, it had been his aim to attain to a commanding position. And once up the ladder as
far as major,--the critical point in the career of every German army officer,--he could with
confidence await further promotions in the course of time; for he was not devoid of talent
in his profession, and had devoted much serious study and research to its higher spheres, although
the benumbing effects of the dissolute and monotonous life in the little garrison had also
had upon him decidedly deleterious effects. He had acquired drinking habits, and his domestic
peace had, as he was aware, for some time suffered therefrom; but he felt sure that amid new
and more inspiring surroundings he could pull himself together and become once more his old
self of former days. Hence the new Major Kahle felt happy, and no cloud disturbed his serenity.
He was going to a large and lively city, and both he and his wife would reap the advantages
of that. There was quartered there a considerable body of troops of various branches of the
service, and his intercourse would, in consequence, greatly widen, and so would that of his
wife. His income would be much larger, and the social attractions offered in the new place,--such
as diverse entertainments, concerts, a good theatre, and the opera,--would do much to restore
that sense of contentment to his volatile spouse which she had seemed to lack for long.

The day after his promotion had become public,--a “Liebesmahl”[17] assembled the entire corps
of officers at the Casino. Specially to honor the departing major, the colonel had ordered
full-dress uniform, and Kahle himself, a man of tall and commanding figure, made a fine show
in all the glory of his orders, silver tassels, and broad stripes.

    [17] “Liebesmahl,” a fraternal banquet arranged, on special
    occasions, by the officers of a garrison or of a regiment for
    the purpose of celebrating joyous events.--TR.

After the second course the colonel arose and made an impressive speech in behalf of the departing
comrade. In it he paid high tribute to the new major’s popularity and to his eminent military
virtues. At its close he handed to Kahle the usual silver tankard, bearing the initials and
insignia of the regiment.

Kahle was greatly moved by these tokens of esteem, and he thanked the colonel in a short, manly
way. In his farewell speech the joy of his promotion was the predominant note; but there was
an undertone of sadness at parting, after so many years, from comrades and a garrison he had
known so long. Often, it is true, he had sighed for a change, and there had been a good deal
of worry and annoyance in this world-forgotten little town close to the French frontier; but
now, when the hour of parting came, it cut him, nevertheless, to the quick to have to leave
it all behind. Such is the weakness and inconsistency of frail human nature.

Next day he left by the noon train, and the officers were assembled at the station in full
force to bid him good-bye. Brief military leave-taking,--just a shake of the hand and a word
or two. The colonel formally and affectionately kissed him on the cheek, and then Kahle bade
leave to his wife and their little son. His heart was heavy, and it cost him something to conceal
the tear which had stolen into a corner of his eye. He had fully resolved to make his married
life hereafter a happier one, and to have once more a real home. It was this thought in his
mind which made parting with his wife particularly cordial. He trusted that she would rid herself
of those bad habits she had acquired here, and that different environs would soon sweep from
her memory recollections of life in this little town, where he and she had been forced to spend
the best years of their lives, at the frontier, quasi outcasts of the empire.

Until arrangements could be made by him for new and comfortable quarters in the garrison he
was going to, Frau Kahle was to stay on here, and First Lieutenant Weil and wife had asked
her, to make things pleasanter for her, to remain as a guest at their dwelling for the short
intervening time.

Joyfully Frau Kahle had accepted the friendly invitation. Thus she would have occasion thoroughly
to enjoy herself with Kolberg until the hour of separation from him should strike. She felt
with great relief that with her husband away she had no longer to give an account of her actions
to anybody.

One day the Weil family were seated with their guest at table, when a military servant brought
in a letter for Frau Kahle which the carrier had just left. She opened it, rapidly looked over
its contents, and then put it away in the pocket of her robe, her cheeks reddening.

“Frau Pastor Klein is writing me to come and take a cup of coffee with her this afternoon,
since she wants to see me once more before my going,--amiable of her, isn’t it? I think I will
start at once, so as not to be too late.”

She arose, and sidled out of the room with a “Till this evening, then!”

A few minutes later Weil saw her hastening down the street in the direction of the town.

“Strange!” he then said to his wife. “I don’t think she ever associated with her before, and
scarcely knows her. I hope this is not one of madame’s little tricks.”

“Let her go where she will, Max,” retorted Frau Weil, indifferently. “It’s none of our affair.
She will leave in a day or two, anyway, and, after all, she is responsible for her own actions.”

But Weil shook his head doubtfully and went to his study.

The clock on the mantel indicated eight, and Frau Kahle had not yet returned. They began to
fear anxiety on the score of their guest. What could have happened to her?

The maid was just setting the table for the evening meal in the adjoining room when the couple
were giving expression to their surmises, explaining in one way or another this prolonged absence.

“Minna,”--Frau Weil turned to the girl,--“I think you had better go to the house of Frau Pastor
Klein and ask whether Frau Major Kahle is still there. I shall have no rest until I know what
has become of her.”

“I don’t think I shall find her at the Frau Pastor’s, gracious lady,” replied the girl, “for
I saw the Frau Major up on the avenue, about half-past four, as I was fetching the milk, and
the Frau Pastor lives right behind the church.”

“In that case there is no use in sending there,” and Frau Weil shrugged her shoulders.

“I think my idea will prove the right one,” said the first lieutenant,--“it was a mere pretext
on her part. She did not want to tell us where she was really going. I have my own thoughts
about the matter.”

“And what do you think, Max,” his wife asked, with some show of curiosity. “Where else could
she be?”

“With Kolberg, of course.”

“But how can you say so, Max? I don’t suppose she....”

“Certainly she will! That is just what she is doing.”

Both became silent when the servant girl stepped in. She placed the teapot on the table, and
then took a folded piece of paper from her pocket, and handed it to Weil with a peculiar smile.

“Has this perhaps been dropped by either the Herr First Lieutenant or the gracious lady?”

And as Minna had again retired, the officer first gazed at the paper with eyes wide open, then
he gave a scornful laugh and held it open to his wife.

“Here, my dear, will you not convince yourself? There it is in black and white.”

Frau Weil hesitatingly took the slip of paper from his hands and read:

     “Am expecting you to-day at 4.30, since I shall be engaged
     to-morrow in the service.”

Signature and address were wanting, but the writing was unmistakably Kolberg’s.

“Here it is,” said Weil. “That is her way of thanking us for offering her our hospitality,--just
lying to us, and trying to befool us for no other purpose than to permit her to continue her
disgraceful conduct. Didn’t I at once say it would be better not to have her come? But you,
of course, insisted on inviting her. If you had listened to me, we should now be spared the
disagreeable necessity of throwing that woman out.”

“But for heaven’s sake, Max, that you can’t do. Throw the note into the fire!”

“I’ll do nothing of the kind,” her husband flared up. “I shall certainly throw her out of the
house! Or do you suppose I’m going to make our home a convenient shelter for depraved women?
Let her see where she will find another refuge. As for me, I respectfully decline the honor
of harboring her any longer as our guest; and this note will not go into the fire, but, instead,
where it belongs,--before a Council of Honor!”

The young officer was in a great state of excitement. With rapid strides he measured the room,
burying his hands in his pockets. His dark look betrayed indignation and resolve.

“If you will take my advice,” his soft-hearted spouse said, with some trepidation, “you will
put that bit of paper into the stove and keep quiet about the whole matter. She is to join
her husband in another two days, anyway, and then there would be an end to her intrigues in
any case. Do me the favor, my dear Max, and leave your fingers out of that pie, for there will
be nothing but disagreeable consequences awaiting you if you don’t. And then, another thing,
think of the poor major!” And the little woman had actually tears in her eyes.

But that stubborn husband of hers proved inexorable.

“I shall do what I said I was going to do, and that’s all there is about it. These are matters
you don’t understand. I won’t quietly look on while this person continues her miserable intrigue
with that scoundrel, Kolberg,--at least not while she is in my house. She ought to have had
enough decency remaining to have left off meeting him while being the guest of honest people.
That is beastly; it’s worse than beastly,--hoggish, I may say!”

Frau Weil did not insist any longer. She knew her husband, knew his strictness in such matters,
and also knew that the more she would plead with him the more fixed his purpose would become;
but her forehead became rumpled with unpleasant thoughts, and she sat down before the glowing
coal in the grate, in a brown study.

Her husband meanwhile continued to pace the carpet, reflecting on what steps he had best decide.

At last the maid came into the room once more, and said, with a mien of ill-concealed curiosity:

“Madam is served!”

“Tell us, Minna, where did you find that letter?” said the officer to her.

“I found it lying in the hall under the hat-rack; I presume it must have dropped out of somebody’s
pocket.”

“Very well; you may go.”

Silently the couple sat down to table. Weil’s face was clouded, and his wife scarcely looked
up from her plate. She lifted her glance to him, however, with considerable anxiety when the
hall door was heard to open, and Frau Kahle’s voice became audible.

“She is coming, Max! Now, for pity’s sake, don’t make a scene! Think of the servants who will
be sure to listen and to spread everything that’s said.”

But Weil did not answer, neither did he look at the door when it now opened and gave admission
to the Frau Major. Her face was rosy with excitement, and her eyes were gleaming in humid tenderness.

“Good evening, both of you!” she cried gayly, her voice trembling with suppressed agitation.
“I hope you will pardon the delay; but Frau Pastor Klein pressed me so much to drive with her
over to the city that I could not resist, and that is how it became so late. But it was delightful,--my
afternoon with her. We were at a café, and made a number of purchases.”

Weil arose stiffly and faced his guest.

“Madam,” said he, with quiet dignity, “it is useless for you to try to deceive us as to the
purpose of your absence this afternoon. The letter which reached you while at table with us,
and which has come into our hands by accident, proves in the most unmistakable manner that
you have abused our hospitality most grossly. May I request you to leave this house as soon
as ever you can, but certainly no later than to-morrow morning? I must beg that you will leave
us undisturbed for the remainder of the evening.”

He ceremoniously bowed, and then took his seat once more at table.

Frau Kahle remained for a moment as if petrified in the semi-obscurity of the room. Then she
hastily seized her châtelaine bag. Her hand tremblingly fingered its contents, and then she
turned to the door and went out, slamming it behind her. The footfall of her retreating steps
could be heard in the direction of her own room.

After supper the first lieutenant stepped up to his writing-desk, lit the green shaded lamp,
and sat down on a stool before it. Next he selected a large sheet of official note-paper, dipped
his pen, and leaned back and reflected.

For some time he thus concentrated his thoughts, and at last began to write.

His spouse, meanwhile, with anxious aspect, sat on the sofa near a small table, busy with some
embroidery, her fingers mechanically travelling to and fro; but every little while she cast
a troubled glance towards her husband, whose pen went scratch, scratch, over the paper.

At last he had finished the letter. Weil reclined pensively in his chair, and slowly read over
and over what he had written. He made no alterations, but folded Frau Kahle’s note up with
his own, and then enclosed both in a large yellow envelope, sealing it in the proper way.

Then he locked up the document in a drawer of his desk, blew out the lamp, and took a seat
on the sofa next to his wife, perusing attentively a newspaper.

Frau Kahle departed the following morning by an early train. Nobody, not even the orderly,
knew her destination. He had taken her trunk to the station, but she had not told him a word
as to her future intentions. And neither by letter nor by word of mouth had she left a word
of thanks or apology for her late hosts.

At noon of the same day Lieutenant Kolberg, whose mind not even the faintest suspicion of these
latest developments of his intrigue had crossed, was ordered to appear forthwith before the
commander. The latter, dryly and without comment, informed him that proceedings had been begun
against him before the Council of Honor, and that until further notice he would be excused
from service.

There was much excitement within the body of officers. In their secret hearts every one of
them was glad that in the deadening monotony of their garrison life this affair, painful as
it was, was now assuming tangible proportions. For not a single one of them had any kindly
feeling for Kolberg, whose secretive disposition and whose absence from nearly all joint festivities
at the Casino had rendered him unpopular, and Frau Kahle herself was scarcely better liked,
desperate flirt as she was.

It was because of this that none of the officers, least of all Borgert, refrained from criticising
in a most uncompromising spirit both Kolberg and his paramour. And Weil’s proceedings were
unanimously adjudged perfectly correct. The remarks made in regard to this whole matter were
by no means couched in such terms as might have been expected from his Majesty’s officers of
the army when applied to comrades. In fact, hard names were used, and everybody proclaimed
aloud his intention severely to cut “the vulgar beast” and “that coarse woman.”

Colonel von Kronau had had a great fright when Captain Stark, as president of the Council of
Honor, had handed him in the morning that document which had given Weil so much anxious thought.
He ruminated and lugubriously pondered what had best be done in this unfortunate affair in
order to end it with the least amount of scandal; but his cogitations were in vain. The matter
had been brought formally to the attention of the Council of Honor, and, according to the strict
wording of the instructions provided, there was no squelching or modification of the proceedings
possible. He had to be satisfied, therefore, to curse most heartily the author of the fatal
document,--First Lieutenant Weil,--and to give him in his thoughts a big black mark in the
next conduct list.

A most unwelcome business, indeed. Already he saw himself superintending the unloading of hay-carts
on that estate of his, far off in the eastern, semi-civilized districts of the realm.

But it was poor Major Kahle who would suffer most of all. After attaining at last the goal
of his desires, all his aspirations were to be nipped in the bud by the misdemeanor of his
wife. He had no idea where she was now; she had preferred not to venture near him in leaving
the garrison, since she did not feel sure of a cordial reception on his part. Hence she had
sent her little son to her parents, while she herself had taken up quarters in Berlin. Her
chief amusement just now consisted in the inditing of innumerable letters to Kolberg, full
of reproaches for “having succeeded by his diabolical arts in alienating her affections from
her husband,” while the leisure she could spare from these epistolary efforts was devoted to
roaming that broad international thoroughfare, Unter den Linden, which presented to her, after
her long “exile” close to the frontier, a striking and highly appreciated contrast.

Kahle was firmly resolved to show the door to his faithless wife if she should dare present
herself before him; meanwhile he took preliminary steps to obtain a legal separation from her.

But there was another thought heavy on his mind. It was the unavoidable duel. Because his wife
had deceived him, the army code forced him to next expose himself to the bullet of her seducer,
instead of simply expelling the latter from the army and giving him a much-needed period of
reflection in jail.

He was expected to “save the honor of his wife” by mortal combat.

What an absurdity! he thought to himself. Is there any honor left in a wife who deceives her
husband? A coquette she was, heartless and honorless, nothing more, and yet he must risk his
life in defence of a thing which did not exist any longer, and which, he now strongly suspected,
had from the first been nothing but a delusion on his part--her honor! What a ludicrous farce!

And he began to reflect whether there was not some way in which he could escape this impending
duel. Not because he was a coward or afraid of death; no, he was brave enough, but he could
not see why he should expose to blind chance not only the fruits of his own arduous life, but
also the future of his son, merely because another man had acted in a despicable manner. It
was quite possible that his adversary might kill him in this duel. In that case he, the innocent
party, would suffer the supreme penalty which man can suffer,--death,--and the criminal himself
would go off scot-free.

But reflection showed him clearly that there was no way to avoid mortal combat, for, if he
refused or neglected to send a challenge to the other, the Council of Honor was bound under
the code to dismiss him from the army, because, forsooth, he did not know how to “protect the
honor of the profession.” On the other hand, if he did this prescribed duty of “honor,” and
fought this duel and escaped being wounded or killed, a term of confinement in a fortress awaited
him. The latter seemed to him the lesser of two evils, but he now made up his mind to show
no consideration to the man who had destroyed the peace of his home, and who was likely to
destroy his existence. He would demand the most severe conditions for this duel, and he would
not scruple to send a bullet crashing into his antagonist’s brain if his arm were steady enough,
or else let the scoundrel deprive him of his life as well,--a life which would hereafter be
a burden to him.

The proceedings and investigations of the Council of Honor required several months. Things
were unearthed which to the younger officers of the garrison seemed very interesting, but which
threw a dubious light upon Lieutenant Kolberg and his conceptions of honor and comradeship.

The behavior, too, of the corps of officers underwent a change during this time.

At first all the officers had shunned Kolberg, and he was only occasionally seen in the environs
of the garrison when exercising his horses.

But one day Borgert was in severe financial straits, and then, all his other sources failing,
he had repaired to Kolberg for the money as a last resort. And Kolberg on his part had been
shrewd enough to use the opportunity to place Borgert under obligations, for he knew the latter’s
influence on his younger comrades. Therefore, Kolberg managed to raise the thousand marks needed,
and put himself at Borgert’s disposal for future occasions of the kind.

The result of this manœuvre could have been foreseen. Within a few days Borgert had changed
his tune in regard to Kolberg’s character and failings. At the Casino table he now sang his
praises, lauded the fine qualities of comradeship possessed by Kolberg, and condemned the view
taken by the superior officers of the lieutenant’s guilt, doing all this in his effective manner,
half banter, half bonhomie; so that the disgraced one, although not doing actual duty, became
suddenly a well-received guest at the social functions in the Casino; and not alone that, he
also assumed successfully the part of host himself, in the much-talked-of little garden-house
under the chestnut trees.

Kolberg could even go so far as to brag at his own table, while champagne from his cellars
was flowing and his guests smoked his fragrant Havanas, of the prowess to be shown by him at
the prospective duel. He applied names like “Dämelsack”[18] to Kahle, of whom he vowed to “make
short work.” In that way he not only silenced all his former detractors, but actually became
the lion of the garrison--a dashing fellow, who had made the conquest of a lady’s heart, while
others had to be satisfied with lesser game.

    [18] “Dämelsack”--a low term of opprobrium.--TR.

He began to sing small, however, when he one day received Kahle’s challenge:

“Fifteen paces distance, visored duelling pistols, and an exchange of bullets to the point
of incapacitating one or both parties.”

That he had not expected. Why, this was murder, he said, and the issue of the forthcoming duel
now became suddenly rather doubtful to him; all the more as the major was known to be a good
shot, and his reputation as an excellent Nimrod was known beyond the confines of the garrison.

So, then, Kolberg earnestly began to train for the meeting. Day after day he could be seen
issuing forth for a walk into the woods nearby, for pistol practice. Scores of trees soon bore
the traces of his bullets. When the day of battle would come he meant to be prepared to face
his adversary well equipped.

Sometimes, when he sent leaden pellets, one after the other, into his targets, the thought
would occur to him that really he ought not to hit the major, since he had sinned against him
and betrayed his trust. It was something like the last flickerings of a feeling of duty which
had dwindled for years in the slow process of moral decadence: the last flutterings of a guilt-laden
conscience and of a sense of justice. These dim emotions, however, were drowned by a more powerful
sentiment: his newly awakened love of life, the primal feeling of self-preservation, which
seized him all the harder the more he began to muse about the possibility of having to lose
a life which offered so much that was worth living for. An inner voice called to him: “Thou
shalt not die! Life is sweet!”

And there was only one way of carrying out his purpose,--to kill his man.

In this way, with delays and supplementary investigation, four months elapsed. Then at last
the Council of Honor pronounced its sentence. Kolberg was dismissed from the service; but,
along with the formal request to his Majesty to confirm the sentence, went a unanimously signed
petition for his reinstatement.

The proposed duel was likewise sanctioned, but not under the conditions proposed by Kahle.
Perhaps it was feared that a fatal ending to the duel, such as the very stringent conditions
seemed to make almost unavoidable, would raise too much dust. For quite recently there had
been several cases of a similar nature, and the death of one of the duellists had had the most
disagreeable consequences for those high-commanding officers who had neither attempted to modify
the conditions of combat nor endeavored to bring about reconciliation.

Thus it was that the new terms of the challenge were: thirty-five paces distance and one exchange
of bullets; ordinary pistols.

Kahle, then, was to be given no opportunity to punish as he deserved the disturber of his domestic
peace, because superior officers did not wish to bring unpleasant consequences upon themselves;
for the duel, as now arranged for under these altered terms, he regarded as a mere farce, and
a possible fatal issue could be nothing but the work of blind accident.

Borgert had been requested by Kolberg to serve as his second, and the former readily agreed
to this; for on the one hand he liked to play the rôle of an onlooker in such an affair, and
on the other he deemed it prudent to put Kolberg under a new obligation; all the more as the
repaying of his loans seemed as far off as ever.

On the eve of his leaving for that city in South Germany where the meeting was to take place,
Kolberg once more assembled his faithful admirers in his quiet little garden-house. His invitations
had been for a banquet, washed down with some of his choicest wines. The drinking on that occasion
was so hard that Kolberg himself became completely intoxicated, and when his guests left he
was snoring in a drunken stupor on his lounge. The train left early, and Kolberg’s man had
a hard task in rousing his master sufficiently at the proper time to hastily prepare him for
his long journey.

Borgert had been in a similar plight. As he stood on the station platform a few minutes before
the train rolled in, he felt as if he had only just now risen from his chair at the festive board.

As he confided this impression to his principal, Kolberg, he did not forget to mention incidentally
that, “of course,” he had forgotten to take his purse along. With a show of assumed indifference
he stuffed the two “blue rags” into his watchpocket, Kolberg having fished the bills with trembling
fingers out of his own wallet, and a silent pressure of the hand was the only thing Kolberg
was ever to receive in lieu thereof.

They arrived at Kahle’s garrison in due time, still in a somewhat dazed condition. Kahle’s
second had attended to all the preliminaries of the duel. It was a cold morning when two cabs
rolled out of the town on their way to the garrison shooting stands, where the bloody meeting
was to take place.

The sun was just peeping over the backs of the mountains to the east, and sent his first oblique
rays down upon the hoar-frosted stubble fields.

Peacefully Nature spread her autumnal robe, and in the forest deep silence reigned. The only
sound, now and then, was the fluttering of a dead leaf seeking its bed of repose on the bare earth.

In the first cab sat Kolberg, Borgert, and two surgeons, while the second was occupied by Kahle,
his second, and the two members of the Council of Honor, who were to witness the duel as impartial
judges. Beneath the rear seat lay the case of pistols. From the highroad the vehicles turned
into a side path, so narrow that the branches of the trees standing to right and left frequently
beat against the cab panes.

They reached their destination,--an opening in the woods. It was here, secluded from all curious
and observant eyes, that the officers of the nearby garrison went to settle their “affairs
of honor.” The occupants of both vehicles descended and ordered the drivers to ride back to
the edge of the woods, and there await their return.

The case containing the pistols was placed on a slight eminence, and the seconds took out the
weapons; then these were loaded, and both pistols underwent an examination by the seconds.

The surgeons took off their coats, spread out their instruments, and made ready strips of bandage.
Meanwhile the judges had measured the proper distance and had firmly planted their swords at
either end, to mark the terminal points. This was accomplished with some difficulty, as the
ground was frozen hard.

The customary formal attempt to effect a reconciliation was ineffectual, of course, and so
the two principals took their stands at the indicated points.

Kahle looked pale; he trembled with the cold, and his nervously-twitching features betrayed
intense agitation.

Kolberg, on the contrary, was almost smiling, and threw away with a careless gesture the stub
of the cigarette he had been smoking until the last.

One of the judges explained briefly the order of combat, saying that the shots must be fired
between the words “one” and “three.” A moment later he commanded:

“Ready!”

Both men held their pistols pointed towards the ground, in order to raise them immediately
on the word “one.”

Simultaneously with “two” Kahle fired, and the ball struck with a slight noise the bark of
a beech tree, a step or two to the left of and above his adversary, while a small twig fell
rattling from overhead. Kahle’s unsteady hand had given his pistol a slight upward turn, so
that he had missed his prey.

Kolberg, however, stood throughout firm and motionless, and took steady aim, so that with “three”
the trigger of his pistol fell.

Kahle looked unflinchingly at the small black mouth of the pistol pointing at him, but at the
shot he opened his eyes wide, lurched heavily, and fell headlong.

A cold tremor ran down Kolberg’s spine as he saw the tall, powerful man pitch forward, and
for a moment he remained, his smoking pistol lifted, rooted to the spot. Then the weapon slipped
from his hand.

The others, however, immediately ran towards the major, and the surgeons tore open his coat.

There was a small hole in his chest, and the blood began to ooze from it.

Kahle had lost consciousness for a second only. Now he lay there, pale, and gazing steadily
at the men busily engaged about him.

Kolberg also approached, holding out his hand in token of amity; but he quickly withdrew his
hand and retreated out of sight, for a cold, repellent look from Kahle’s eyes had met his.
From some short distance in the rear, out of the reach of those severe eyes, he attentively
viewed his prostrate foe; then he turned on his heels and made off through the woods, towards
the cabs.

The major’s wound, however, was found to be not fatal, although the bullet had grazed the lungs,
and a long time would have to elapse before he would be up and about once more.

One of the cabs was driven up and the major carefully lifted into it. The two surgeons accompanied
him inside, while his second occupied the place next the driver. Thereupon they drove back
at a slow gait to the city, where the injured man was to be at once taken to the hospital.

After he had taken farewell from the two judges as the vehicle reached the outskirts of the
town, Borgert, who remained with Kolberg, slapped the latter encouragingly on the shoulder
and said:

“Don’t make such a wry face, man alive! Be satisfied that you got off with a whole skin. Of
course, it was rough on the poor devil that you happened to hit him in the chest; but that’s
something you are not responsible for; after all, the challenge came from him. And now let’s
have a good breakfast, for my stomach rebels against this raw air. I am not accustomed to knock
about the woods so early in the morning.”

“I feel sincerely sorry that I hit the major so unluckily,” replied Kolberg; “but I didn’t
mean to, and the devil take the women! It’s always their doing. I don’t know anyway what made
me take up with that silly Kahle woman!”

“Don’t bother your head about that, my dear fellow,” said Borgert. “The major alone is to blame,
for he ought to have looked out better for that handsome wife of his. And as for her, she is
not worth a thought, as we all know. One must treat a woman as she deserves.”

Borgert’s specious eloquence succeeded in a short while in dispelling the clouds from Kolberg’s
face, for to his callous perceptions all that the other had said was true. That there were
heartless and vulgar sentiments contained in Borgert’s words he neither understood nor cared about.

So these worthy twain proceeded to their hotel, donned citizens’ clothes, and then repaired
to a fashionable restaurant. The waiters received them with sleepy eyes, being just engaged
in putting the place to rights; for it was still very early in the day, and they looked at
their guests with something of amazement.

The two officers started in on their round of dissipation with several glassfuls of neat brandy,
and wound up, late at night, in a resort of doubtful repute. Whoever might have observed them
throughout the day, joking and jesting, could not have helped the conclusion that these two
had clearly forgotten the events of the morning, and that they had recovered, together with
their peace of mind, that superficial good humor which so often distinguishes the conscienceless
rascal from the man of finer mould.

Next day, at noon, our two heroes arrived at their garrison. They were received with open arms
by a number of their comrades, for the rumor of what had occurred had preceded them.

A group of officers, in fact, stood on the platform of the little station as they left their
train, and after much handshaking and congratulations, all of them accompanied Kolberg to his
dwelling, there to celebrate his triumph in a “drop” of choice wine.

But there were some of the officers, especially the elder ones, who censured Kolberg for his
heartless behavior. Several of them even went so far as to say that it would have been more
fitting for him to have remained alone just at this time, and to make amends for his past follies
by a term of undisturbed self-inspection; this new orgy they thought, above all, indecent and
coarse.

Two days afterward the confirmation of the sentence pronounced in his case by the Council of
Honor arrived from Berlin. With it came likewise the permission for Kolberg to enter the army
anew as a junior lieutenant. That, however, meant his transference to another garrison, for
in this one there was no room for him. Before he could start his career afresh in a beautiful
city by the Rhine, Kolberg had to comply with one other little formality, and that took him
to a fortress where he had to undergo confinement of an easy description, and lasting only
for a couple of months, because he had been guilty of “participation in a duel with deadly
weapons,” as his Majesty’s decree read.

The major recovered very slowly. The difficult operation undertaken by two regimental surgeons
of removing the bullet imbedded near the spinal column had not entirely succeeded. The bullet
had indeed been removed, but inflammation of the affected parts had set in, and this had been
accompanied with great pain and a high fever.

It was only towards the close of winter that the major was dismissed from the hospital as a
convalescent. His health and his energy were both gone, and he was compelled to resign his
commission in the army, his strength being insufficient to discharge the duties of his post.

He also had been sentenced to a three months’ term in a fortress in consonance with the invariable
custom followed in such cases by the Kaiser, which makes no distinction between offender and
offended, between victim and aggressor. But in this instance a confinement of a few days was
considered ample, and at the expiration of this brief term the imperial pardon reached the
broken-down man, and he was permitted to depart to wherever his inclination might take him.

Kahle thus saw his life’s labor destroyed. As a man who had scarcely reached forty, yet with
his physical strength nearly spent, he had to face the question how and where he was to carve
out a new field of activity for himself. His small pension was wholly insufficient to enable
him to even eke out an existence on it, and he had, besides, by the decree of the court, been
intrusted with the sole custody of his child. This, while it gave him at least an object in
life, was for a man in his circumstances an additional grave burden; for his little son was
still of that tender age to require a woman’s constant ministrations.

The small fortune which his divorced wife had brought into their marriage had, of course, been
handed back to her by the law.

And why had all this misfortune overtaken him?

Because the army code and social conventions had bidden him to save as much of the “honor”
of his wife as he could. To this mistaken idea he had been sacrificed.

And Kolberg was domiciled by the vine-clad borders of the Rhine, and in his new garrison led
a life as dissipated and as free of care as he had in his former one.

CHAPTER VII

AN AIRY STRUCTURE COLLAPSES

Seated at his desk in his elegantly furnished apartments, we see First Lieutenant Borgert.

Before him lay a large sheet of paper covered with rows of figures, and all around him whole
mountains of documents, bills, and vari-colored envelopes.

One after another he took up these bits of paper, and from them noted down amounts on the big
sheet. He had already reached the third column when he suddenly ceased his labors and threw
the pencil disgustedly away. Then he grasped the whole pile and threw it into the fire, where
in a few moments it was consumed in the leaping flame and reduced to a tiny mass of ashes.

His laudable purpose had been to go through all the claims against him, so far as they had
been presented. Usually his simple method was to throw bills, as they reached him, into the
stove; but for once he had been curious to find out how much he really owed in the world, or
at least to gain an approximate idea of his indebtedness.

But we have seen that he gave it up as an impossible task. To tread the mazes of these bundles
of dunning letters, plaints, simple bills, and formal orders issued to him by the colonel to
discharge certain debts submitted to his authority, was more than Borgert felt himself equal
to, especially as the conviction had very soon dawned on him that his was labor lost. This
much had become quite clear: to pay his debts was impossible, for their total rose far and
away above his surmises. When he had left off in sheer disgust, the neat little sum of eleven
thousand marks had been reached, and to that had to be added the other mountain of bills which
he had just consigned to the flames.

Most of all, the seven hundred marks which he owed to Captain König lay on his conscience;
but there were some other items that pressed him hard, for they were “debts of honor,” contracted
with his equals in the social scale; and the first of these, amounting to two thousand three
hundred marks, was due in about six weeks. How and where should he raise these large amounts?

He began to reflect. The furniture had already been saddled with a chattel mortgage, one of
his horses even been mortgaged twice, and for the other, his former charger, he probably would
not get more than three hundred marks, and that was nothing but a drop on a hot stone. Of his
comrades there was none remaining with whom an attempt to borrow would have had the slightest
prospect of success,--possibly König alone excepted. But should he go to him again with such
a request? It could not be easily done,--at least not before the old item of seven hundred
marks had been paid back. The only safety anchor he could think of was a formal request for
a large loan from a Berlin usurer with a large clientèle in the army. In fact, he had tried
it; but the fellow had not yet been heard from, although three weeks had gone since this same
individual had been furnished with a surety given by First Lieutenant Leimann, and with a life
insurance policy in the amount of twenty thousand marks.

For the moment nothing could be done. He would try to pacify in some way the most pressing
of his creditors, and to pay in small instalments only those who either should begin legal
proceedings against him, or lodge their complaints with the regiment. Perhaps--who could tell?--an
undiscovered source might open somewhere; perhaps luck at the cards, so long unfaithful to
him, would return, or one of his many tickets in various state lotteries would draw a big prize.
And who could tell but what the biggest prize of all, a wealthy bride with a good fat dowry,
might not fall to his share? He had formal applications of the kind on file with several of
the most prominent and successful marriage agencies at the capital and elsewhere, and only
recently one of these centres for the radiation of connubial bliss, so much in vogue with his
kind throughout the empire, had been heard from to some apparent purpose.

“Quite a bundle of bright hopes,” he said to himself, and with that his plastic mind resumed
its equilibrium. His good humor returned, he lit himself a cigarette, and whistled a gay tune,
while pacing the thick Smyrna rugs in the centre of his study.

His alert ear heard a whispering in the corridor. He discerned the soft tread of nimble feet
on the hall carpet, and then there was a knock at his door.

That must be Frau Leimann, he thought to himself, for she frequently paid him hasty visits
at the afternoon tea hour, because at that time her husband used to go to the “Dämmerschoppen.”

To his “Come,” however, a poorly clad woman with a basket on her arm stepped over the threshold.
Her youthful face showed already the unmistakable stamp which care and sorrow had imprinted
on it, and she gazed shyly at the officer who had remained standing in the centre of the room,
whence he eyed his visitor with undisguised displeasure.

“And what is it you want again, Frau Meyer?” he blurted. “I’ve told you once before that I
will give you no more washing to do.”

“I beg the Herr First Lieutenant will excuse me, but I wanted to ask whether I cannot have
to-day those forty marks, or at least a part of them. I badly need money, for my husband has
been lying sick for three weeks past and is unable to work.”

“Oh, bother!” replied Borgert, roughly. “Come back to-morrow night; I have no small change
about me, and I haven’t any time to spare.”

“But I hope you will keep faith with me this time, Herr First Lieutenant; you have promised
so often to pay me.”

With that she diffidently opened the door and left, but Borgert undid one of the windows and
let the pure autumn air stream in. The odor of these poverty-stricken wretches was insupportable
to him. Disgusting! He took from a carved cabinet on the wall a large perfume bottle, and sprinkled
a good portion of its contents upon the costly rugs and the upholstery of his furniture. Then
he rang the bell for his servant.

The man stepped in briskly. It was Private Röse, whom the captain no longer wanted in the front,
since he had proven unreliable, and with his deficient conceptions of military discipline would
only be an injury to the squadron.

“What did I order you to do, you swine?” the officer shouted.

“I was to let nobody in without being announced,” answered Röse with diffidence; “but the woman
passed me by, and I could not hinder her from going in.”

“Then throw the carrion out, thou sloppy beast! The first time somebody is let in again without
my consent, I’ll cowhide you within an inch of your life!”

In saying which, he struck Röse with both fists in the face, then thrust open the door and
kicked him out.

“If the hag should come back to-morrow night, you tell her I’ve just gone out!” he called after
him.

Borgert had just seated himself, with a newspaper, by the window when the floor bell once more
sounded. It was a short, energetic tinkle. The servant came in and announced, with a face still
wet with tears:

“A gentleman would like to see the Herr First Lieutenant!”

“What is his name? They wanted to have a talk.

The General told me to tell the Indians that the Mormons were their
friends, and that the Americans were their enemies, and the enemies
of the Mormons, too; that he wanted the Indians to remain the fast
friends of the Mormons, for the Mormons were all friends to the Indians;
that the Americans had a large army just east of the mountains, and
intended to come over the mountains into Utah and kill all the Mormons
and Indians in Utah Territory; that the Indians must get ready and
remain ready for war against the Americans, keep friendly with the
Mormons and do what the Mormons told them to do - that this was the
will of the Great Spirit; that if the Indians were true to the Mormons
and helped them against their enemies, the Mormons would keep them
from want and sickness and give them guns and ammunition to hunt and
kill game with, and also help the Indians against their enemies when
they went into war.

This talk pleased the Indians, and they agreed to all that I asked
them to do.

I saw that Gen. Smith was nervous and fearful of the Indians, notwithstanding their promises of friendship.
To relieve him of his anxiety I hitched up and started on our way
as soon as I could do so without rousing the suspicions of the Indians.

We had ridden along about a mile or so when Gen. Smith said:

"Those are savage fellows. I think they would make it lively for an emigrant train if one should
come this way."

Would they be permitted to go their way, or would the brethren pitch into them and give them
a good drubbing?"

I am particularly sure they will be wiped out if they have been making threats against our
people. Unless emigrants have a pass from Brigham, they will never get safely through this country."

My
reply pleased him, and he laughed heartily, and then said:

"Do you
believe the brethren would make it lively for such a train?"

"Yes, sir," I replied, "I know they will, unless protected by a pass,
and I wish to tell you, and you must inform Brigham, that if he wants
emigrants to pass without being molested he must send orders to that
effect to Bishop Dame or Brother Haight, so that they can give passes
to the emigrants; their passes will insure safety, but nothing else
will, except the positive orders of Brigham, as the people are bitter
against the Gentiles, full of religious zeal, and anxious to avenge
the blood of the Prophets."

The only reply he made was to the effect that on his way down from
Salt Lake he had had a long talk with Haight on the same subject,
and that Haight had assured him, and given him to understand, that
emigrants who came along without a pass from Brigham could not escape
from the Territory.

We then rode along in silence for some distance, when he again turned to me and said:

"Brother Lee, I am satisfied that the brethren are under the holy
influence, and I believe they will do just as you say they will with
the wicked emigrants that come through the country, making threats
and abusing our people."

Thereupon I repeated my views to him, but at much greater length. I went into a statement of
the wrongs of our people, and told him that the people were under
the blaze of the reformation, full of wildfire, and that to shed the
blood of those who would dare speak against the Mormon Church or its
leaders would be doing the will of God, and the people would do it
as cheerfully as they would any other duty.

That the Apostle Paul was not more sincere than was every Mormon
who lived in southern Utah.

My words served to cheer up the General; he was delighted, and said:

"I
am glad to hear so good an account of our people.

God will bless them for all they do to build up His Kingdom in the
last days."

On my way from Cedar City to my home in Harmony I came up with a band of Indians under Moquetas
and Big Bill, two Cedar City chiefs; they were in their paint, and
fully equipped for battle.

They halted when I came up and said they had had a big talk with Haight, Higbee, and Klingensmith,
and got orders from them to follow up the emigrants and kill them all, and take their property
as a spoil.

These Indians wanted me to go with them and command their forces. I told them I could not go with
them that evening; that I had orders from Haight, the Big Captain, to send other Indians on
the warpath to help them kill the emigrants, and must attend to that
first; that I wanted them to go where the emigrants were and camp
until the other Indians joined them; that I would meet them the next
day and lead them.

This satisfied them, but they wanted me to send my little Indian boy, Clem, with them. After some
time I consented to let Clem go with them, while I returned home.

When I got home I told Carl Shirts what the orders were that Haight had sent to him. Carl being
naturally cowardly was not willing to go, but I told him the orders must be obeyed. He started
that night, or early next morning, to stir up the Indians of the
south, and lead them against the emigrants.

The emigrants were then camped at Mountain Meadows.

The Indians did not obey my instructions.

They met, several hundred strong, at the Meadows, and attacked the
emigrants Tuesday morning, just before daylight, and at the first
fire killed seven and wounded sixteen of the emigrants.

The latter fought bravely, and repulsed the Indians, killing many
of them and breaking the knees of two chiefs, who afterwards died.

The news of the battle was carried over the country by Indian runners,
and the excitement was great in all the small settlements.

I was notified of what had taken place early Tuesday morning, by
an Indian who came to my house and gave me a full account of what
had been done.

The Indian said it was the wish of the Indians that I lead them, and
I must go back with him to the camp.

I started at once, and taking the Indian trail over the mountain
I reached the camp by going twelve miles.

To go round by the wagon road would have been between forty and fifty miles.

When I reached the camp I found the Indians in a frenzy of excitement.

They said they had been told that they could kill the emigrants without danger to themselves,
but they had lost numbers of their bucks, and others were wounded, and unless they could kill
all the "Mericats," as they called them, they would declare war against
the Mormons and kill everyone in the settlements.

I did as well as I could under the circumstances.

My talk served to increase their excitement.

I told them I would go south and meet their friends, and hurry them
up to help them.

At first the Indians would not consent, but they finally said I might go and meet their friends.
I then got on my horse and left the Meadows and went south.

I had traveled about sixteen miles when I met Carl Shirts with one hundred Indians and a number
of Mormons from the southern settlements.

They were going to the scene of conflict.

How they learned of the emigrants being at the Meadows I never knew, but they did know it, and
were coming armed, and determined to obey orders.

Among those that I remember to have met there were Brothers Samuel
Knight, Oscar Hamblin, William Young, Carl Shirts, Harrison Pearce,
James Pearce, John W. Clark, William Slade, Sr., James Matthews, Dudley
Leavitt, William Hawley, William Slade, Jr., George W. Adair, and
John Hawley.

The Mormons camped that night with me, but most of the Indians rushed
on to their friends at the camp on the Meadows.

I reported to the brethren what had taken place at the Meadows, but none were surprised in the
least. I spent much of the night in prayer. I wrestled with God for wisdom to guide me.

In the morning we agreed to go on to Mountain Meadows and camp there,
and then send a messenger to Haight.

We knew that the original plan had been for the Indians to do the
work, and the Mormons to do nothing beyond plan for and encourage
them.

        Now we saw the Indians could not do the work, and we were in a fix.

I did not then know that a messenger had been sent to Brigham for
instructions.

Haight had not mentioned it to me; James Haslem, a Danite, was sent
to Brigham.

We went to the Meadows and camped at the springs, about half a mile
from the emigrant camp.

There were a larger number of Indian there - fully three hundred, and I think as many as four
hundred of them. The two chiefs who had been shot were in a bad way.

The Indians had killed a number of the emigrants' horses, and about
sixty or seventy head of cattle were lying dead on the Meadows, which
the Indians had killed for spite and revenge.

Our company butchered a small beef for dinner, and after eating a
hearty meal we held a council and decided to send a messenger to Brother
Haight.

The messenger started for Cedar City, from our camp on the Meadows, about 2 o'clock, p. m.
We stayed on the field, and I tried to quiet and pacify the Indians,
by telling them that I had sent to Haight, the Big Captain, for orders,
and when he sent his order I would know what to do.

This appeared to satisfy the Indians, for said they:

"The Big Captain will send you word to kill the Mericats."

Along toward evening the Indians again attacked the emigrants.

This was Wednesday. I heard the report of their guns, and the screams of the women and children
in the corral.

I ran with Brothers William Young and John Mangum, to where the Indians were. While on the
way to them they fired a volley, and three balls from their guns
cut my clothing.

One ball went through my hat and plowed through my hair.

Another ball went through my shirt and leaded my shoulder, another cut my clothes across my
bowels.

I thought this was rather warm work, but I kept on until I reached
the place where the Indians were in force.

CHAPTER XX - THE MUSTER OF THE DANITES

On Thursday, about noon, several Danites joined us from Cedar City. I cannot remember the order in
which the brethren came to the Meadows, but I do recollect that at
this time and in this company were Brothers Joel White, William C.
Stewart, Benjamin Arthur, Alexander Wilden, Charles Hopkins, and James
Tate.

These men said little, but everyone seemed to know what he was there for. As our messenger
had gone for further orders, we moved camp about four hundred yards further up the valley on to
a hill, where we made a camp as long as we stayed there.

The emigrants' wagons were corralled after the Indians made the first
attack.

On the day following our arrival the emigrants drew their wagons
closer together and chained the wheels one to the other.

While they were doing this there was no shooting going on.

Their camp was about one hundred yards above and north of the spring.

They generally got water from the spring at night.

Thursday morning I saw two men start from the corral with buckets, and run to the spring and fill
them with water, and go back again. The bullets flew around them thick and fast, but they got
into their corral in safety.

The Indians made a determined attack on the train on Thursday morning about daylight. At this
attack the Clara Indians had one buck killed and three wounded. This so enraged them that they
left for home, driving a number of cattle with them. During the day I said to Brother John Mangum:

"I
will cross the valley and go up on the other side, on the hills to
the west of the corral, and take a look at the situation."

As I was crossing the valley I was observed by the emigrants, and as soon as they saw that I was
a white man they ran up a white flag in the middle of their corral or camp. They then sent two
little boys from the camp to talk to me, but I could not talk to
them at that time, for I did not know what orders Brother Haight would
send to me, and until I had his orders I would not know how to act.

I hid, to keep away from the children. They came to the place where they had last seen me and
hunted all around for me, but being unable to find me they turned and went back to the camp
in safety. It is false what has been told about little girls being dressed in white and sent out to
me. There was nothing of the kind done. I stayed on the west side of the valley for about two
hours, looking down into the emigrant camp.

While I was standing on the hill looking into the corral I saw two men leave the corral and
go outside to cut wood; the Indians and Mormons kept up a busy fire
all the time, but the two paid no attention to danger, and stuck to
their work until they had it done; then they went back to camp.

The men acted so bravely that it was impossible to keep from respecting them. After staying
there and looking down into the camp awhile I returned to my company.

On Thursday evening Higbee, Chief of the Iron Danites, and Klingensmith, Bishop of Cedar City,
came to our camp with two or three wagons and a number of Danites all well armed. I can remember
the following as a portion of those who came to take part in the work of death which was so
soon to follow, viz.: Brothers John M. Higbee, Chief of the Iron
Danites, and also first Counselor to Brother Haight; Philip Klingensmith,
Bishop of Cedar City; Ira Allen, of the High Council; Robert Wiley,
of the High Council; Richard Harrison, of Pinto, also a member of
the High Council; Samuel McMurdy, one of the Counselors of Klingensmith;
Charles Hopkins, of the Counselors of Cedar City; Samuel Pollock;
Daniel McFarland, a son-in-law of Haight; John Ure, of the City Council;
George Hunter, of the City Council; Samuel Jukes; Nephi Johnson, with
a number of Indians under his command; Irvin Jacobs; John Jacobs;
E. Curtis, a Captain of Ten; Thomas Cartwright, of the City and High
councils; William Bateman, who afterwards carried the flag of truce
into the emigrant camp; Anthony Stratton; A. Loveridge; Joseph Clews;
Jabez Durfey; Columbus Freeman.

There were others whose name have slipped me. I know that our total force was fifty-four Danites
and three hundred Indians.

As soon as these gathered around the camp I demanded of Brother Higbee
what orders he had brought.

I then told all that had happened at the Meadows, so that every person
might understand the situation.

Brother Higbee reported as follows:

"It is the orders that the emigrants be put out of the way. President Haight has counseled with Bishop
Dame, and has orders from him to put the emigrants to death; none
who is old enough to talk is to be spared."

     Brother Higbee then said substantially that the emigrants
     had come through the country as our enemies, and as the enemies
     of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That they
     had no pass from anyone in authority permitting them to
     leave the Territory. That none but friends were permitted
     to leave the Territory, and as these were our sworn enemies
     they must be killed. That they were nothing but a portion
     of Johnston's army. That if they were allowed to go on to California
     they would raise the war cloud in the West and bring destruction
upon all the settlements in Utah.

     That the only safety for the people was in the utter destruction
     of the whole rascally lot.
     
     The Danites then in Council now knelt down in a prayer circle
     and prayed, invoking the Spirit of God to direct them how
     to act in the matter. After prayer Brother Higbee said:
     
     "Here are the orders," and handed me a paper from Haight.

The
     paper read in substance that we were to decoy the emigrants
     from their position and kill all that could talk. This order
     was in writing. Brother Higbee handed it to me and I read it.
     The orders were that the emigrants should be decoyed from
     their stronghold, and exterminated, and no one left to tell
     the tale. Then the authorities could say it was done by Indians.
     Haight told me the next day that he got his orders
     from Bishop Dame.
     
     After the Council I retired and bowed in prayer before God.

     Brother Hopkins, a man in whom I had great confidence,
     came to me from the Council, saying that he believed it was
     right, for the brethren and the Priesthood were united in the thing.

     At the solicitation of Brother Hopkins I returned with him
     to the Council. When I got back the Council again prayed for aid.

         The Council
             formed a prayer circle,
                and kneeling down, so that elbow touched elbow, the Danites prayed
for Divine instructions.

After prayer Brother Higbee said:

"I have the evidence of God's approval of our mission.

It is God's will that we carry out our instructions to the letter." I was much shaken by this
promise.

The meeting was then addressed by me. I spoke in about this language:

"Brethren, we have been sent to perform a duty.

It is a duty that we owe God and our Church and people. The orders are that the emigrants must
die.

Our leaders speak with inspired tongues, and their words come from
the God of Heaven.

We have no right to question what they have commanded us to do; it is our duty to obey. On Wednesday
night two of the emigrants got out of camp and started back to Cedar
City for assistance to withstand the Indian attacks; they had reached
Richards' Springs when they met Brothers William C. Stewart, Joel
White, and Benjamin Arthur, three of our Danite brethren from Cedar
City.

The men stated their business to the brethren, and as their horses were drinking at the spring
Brothers Stewart, feeling for the glory of God and the upbuilding of the Kingdom of God on earth,
shot and killed one of the emigrants, a young man by the name of Aden. When Aden fell from
his horse Brother Joel White shot and wounded the other Gentile;
but he got away, and returned to his camp and reported that the Mormons
were helping the Indians in all they were doing.

Now the emigrants will report these facts in California if we let them go. We must kill them all, and
our orders are to get them out by stratagem if no other thing can
be done to put them in our power."

The plan of action had been agreed upon, and it was this: The emigrants
were to be decoyed from their stronghold under a promise of protection.

Brother Bateman was to carry a flag of truce and demand a parley,
and then I was to go and arrange the terms of surrender.

I was to demand that all the children who were so young they could not talk should be put into
a wagon, and the wounded were likewise to be put into another.

Then the arms and ammunition of the emigrants must be put into a third; I agreeing that the Mormons
would protect the emigrants from the Indians and conduct them to Cedar City in safety, where
they would be safe until an opportunity came for sending them to California.

It was understood that when I had made the treaty the wagons would start for Hamblin's Ranch
with the arms, the wounded, and the children.

The women were to march out on foot and follow the wagons in single file; the men were to follow
the women, they also to march in single file.

Brother Higbee was to stand with his Danites about two hundred yards from the camp, double file,
open order, with about twenty feet space between the files so that
the wagons could pass between them.

    The drivers were to whip along, and not stop. The women were
    not to stop, but to follow the wagons.

The Danites were to halt the men for a few minutes, until the women
were some distance ahead and among the cedars, where the Indians were
in ambush.

Then the march was to be resumed, the troops to form in single file,
each Danite to walk by an emigrant, and on the right-hand side of
his man, the Danite to carry his gun on his left arm, ready for instant
use.

The march was to continue until the wagons had passed beyond the ambush of the Indians, and
the women were in their midst.

Brother Higbee was then to give the order:

"Do Your Duty to God!"

At this the Danites were to shoot down the men; the Indians were to kill the women and larger
children, and the drivers of the wagons and I were to kill the wounded and sick men that were
in the wagons.

Two men were to be placed on horses near by, to overtake and kill any of the emigrants that might
escape the first assault.

The Indians were to kill the women and large children, as we desired to make certain that no
Mormon would be guilty of shedding innocent blood - if it should happen that innocent blood
was in the company that were to die.

Our leading men all said, however, there was no innocent blood in the whole company.

The Council broke up a little after daylight on Friday morning. All the horses, except two for the
men detailed to overtake those who might escape, and one for Brother
McFarland to ride, so that he could carry orders from one part of
the field to another, were turned out on the range.

Then breakfast was eaten, and the brethren prepared for the work in hand.

The Mormons were then at war with the United States, and we believed all Gentiles should be
killed as a war measure, to the end that the Mormons, as God's chosen
people, hold and inhabit the earth and rule and govern the globe.

Soon after breakfast Brother Higbee ordered the two Indian interpreters, Carl Shirts, and Nephi
Johnson to inform the Indians of the plan of operations, and place
them in ambush, so that they could not be seen by the emigrants until
the work of judgment should commence.

This was done in order to make the emigrants believe that we had sent the Indians away. The
orders were obeyed, and in five minutes not an Indian could be seen
on the Meadows.

They secreted themselves and lay still as logs of wood, until the order was given them to rush
out and kill the women.

Brother Higbee called the people to order and directed me to explain the plan to them. I did
so, explaining how every person was expected to act during the whole performance. Brother Higbee
then gave the order for his men to advance.

They marched to the spot agreed upon, and halted there. Brother William Bateman was then selected
to carry a flag of truce to the emigrants and demand their surrender;
I was to go and make the treaty after someone had replied to our flag
of truce.

The emigrants had kept a white flag flying in their camp ever since
they saw me cross the valley.

Brother Bateman took a white flag and started for the emigrant camp.

When he got about halfway to the corral he was met by one of the emigrants. The two talked
some time, but I never knew what was said between them.

Brother Bateman returned to the command and said that the emigrants would accept our terms, and surrender
as we required them to do. I then started for the corral to negotiate the treaty and superintend
the business. I was to make certain and get the arms and ammunition
into the wagons.

Also to put the children and the sick and wounded in the wagons, as agreed upon in Council. Brother
Higbee said to me:

     
     "Brother Lee, we expect you to faithfully carry out the
     instructions that have been given you by our Council."
     
     Two Danites, Samuel McMurdy and Samuel Knight, were then
     ordered to take their teams and follow me into the corral to
     haul off the children and arms. The troops formed in two
     lines, as had been planned, and were standing in that way,
     with arms at rest, when I left them. I walked ahead of the
     wagons to the corral. When I reached it I met Mr. Hamilton,
     one of the emigrant leaders on the outside of their camp.
     
     CHAPTER XXI - THE BLOOD FEAST OF THE DANITES
     

It was then noon, or a little after. I found the emigrants strongly fortified; their wagons were
chained to each other in a circle.

In the center was a rifle-pit, large enough to hold the entire company.

This had served to shield them from the constant fire which had been
poured into them from both sides of the valley and a rocky range that
served as a breastwork for their assailants.

The valley at this point is not more than five hundred yards wide, and the emigrants had their
camp near the center of the valley. On the east and west there is a low range of rugged, rocky
mountains; it afforded a splendid place for the protection of the
Indians and Danites, leaving them in comparative safety while they
fired upon the emigrants.

The valley at this place runs nearly due north and south.

When I entered the corral I found the emigrants engaged in burying two men of note among them,
who had died but a short time before from the effect of wounds received
from the Indians at the time of the first attack on Tuesday morning.

They wrapped the bodies in buffalo robes, and buried them in a grave inside the corral. I was told
by some of the men that seven men had been killed and seventeen wounded in the first attack
made by the Indians, and that three of the wounded men had since died, making ten of their
number killed during the siege.

As I entered the fortifications men, women, and children gathered around me in wild consternation.
Some felt that the time of their happy deliverance had come, while
others, though in deep distress, and all in tears, looked upon me
with doubt, distrust, and terror.



Borgert dressed and went to Röse’s room. He found it unoccupied. The bed was untouched, and
on top of it lay the uniform and the cap of the man.

With astonishment the officer looked about him; the sticky, unventilated atmosphere of the
little chamber, and a strong odor of soiled linen and worn-out clothes, was all that he noticed.
Where could Röse have gone so early in the day, and that, too, without leave, even without
a word to him? Had he been summoned to some unexpected duty? But no, that was impossible, for
here lay his regimentals.

Borgert had already crossed over to the threshold to leave the room again when his eye lighted
on a much-stained slip of paper on the table. He picked it up and his face paled while he read,
for in the man’s scrawling handwriting there were the words:

“Farewell! And go to the devil!”

As if petrified, Borgert stared at the paper. The fellow, then, had deserted!

About his reasons for the step Borgert was not in doubt a minute, and a sudden feeling of shame
and disquiet seized him at the thought that the man might be apprehended. In that case everything
would come to light: the bad usage to which he had been subjected, the maltreatment which he
had met at his hands, and, worst of all, all those big or little secrets of which he had become
aware during his service with his master.

Too unpleasant! Borgert stepped again over to his room and sat down on the edge of the bed.
His face was not pleasant to look at, and a nervous twitching of his features showed how much
he dreaded an unlucky turn of affairs in case the fugitive should be caught and then blab out
all he knew.

It seemed to him as if of late there was a perfect conspiracy against him. Anxiety, ill luck,
and disappointment on every side, with not a single silver lining to the cloud, which, black
and ominous, had suddenly begun to crowd his horizon.

For the first time the awful certainty flashed through his mind that he stood at the brink
of a catastrophe against which there was no remedy unless a miracle intervened. But where under
the sun should such a miracle come from? All faith, all hope, dissolved before his view in
these few moments when the whole crushing weight of his guilt, the whole labyrinth of his failure
in life, came clearly to his consciousness. An unreasoning terror, a fear of himself and a
feeling of helplessness conquered the man, who at other times had never surrendered to untoward
conditions, who had never hesitated to stamp down all obstacles in his path. Borgert was not
capable of deep feeling or of noble sentiment; he had so far trodden the path of life with
cold egotism, coupled with a superficial view of his surroundings and a lack of clearer insight
into the motives impelling him and others.

For some time he sat there, pallid, motionless, gazing into the vast blank space of the unknown
future; only the convulsive workings of his face betrayed the intense agitation of his mind.
It was the psychological crisis in the life of a man who too late becomes aware of having destroyed
his better self, of having annihilated all those hopes which on entering life had floated before
his vision in roseate hue. And there was nothing to which he could cling, not even a straw
for this man battling with the waves that threatened to engulf him, no human soul that could
or would help him. Despair clutched his throat, and his breath came thick and short like that
of one drowning.

Borgert had struck a balance with himself. He had taken stock, and now felt clearly that his
life was one not only marred but destroyed by his own fault. He made up his mind to bear the
consequences since escape there was none.

Mechanically he completed his toilet and then went to the barracks to report himself to the
captain for having missed the morning service. He kept silence about Röse’s flight, saying
to himself that if the deserter had the start of pursuit by a sufficiency of time, say forty-eight
hours, he would be a bigger fool indeed than Borgert took him to be if he had not reached a
safe retreat across the frontier. And that, of course, would spare Borgert himself the unpleasant
predicament of facing a court-martial because of systematic maltreatment of a subordinate.

When he returned home at noon, Borgert found a letter. It was the reply of the financial man
in Berlin to whom, in his quandary, he had turned. The letter told the recipient in curt terms
that his application had been rejected. No loan could be made to him, it said, since inquiries
about Borgert and his co-called bondsmen, and the endorsement of Leimann, had “demonstrated
a financial status highly unfavorable.”

Borgert received this news almost with indifference, for since this morning he had abandoned
all hope of a favorable turn, and hence felt no disappointment.

He knew he could obtain no money anywhere after this. In fact, now that he clearly envisaged
things, it seemed astonishing that the bubble had not burst long ere this. It had been solely
due, as he now felt, to Leimann’s extraordinary skill in hiding his own pecuniary embarrassments
that Borgert himself had been able to run up large accounts without any tangible security whatever.
For Leimann, he remembered, had backed him up throughout.

Dazed and spent, Borgert lay down on his divan.

He did not wish to go to the Casino, for he felt no appetite, and he was not in the mood to
play his accustomed pranks and capers for the delectation of his comrades. He did not want
to see or hear of anybody. He wanted to be all by himself and indulge in his morose reflections.
His eye wandered around the elegant appointments of his dwelling. These fine paintings on his
walls; this handsome and costly furniture, most of it carved in solid oak; the soft Oriental
rugs underfoot which deadened every sound and made his bachelor home so comfortable and cosy;
those heavy, discreet hangings of finest velvet which shut out the intrusive light and kept
his apartments in that epicurean chiaroscuro which his sybarite taste demanded--what a pity,
what an infernal shame, to have to surrender into the hands of these vermin of usurers all
these trappings of his bachelor freedom! Of course, they would struggle and fight for it all,
and each one of them would scramble to be the first to assert and enforce his rights. Rather
amusing it would be, he thought, but alas! he himself would not be able to view the scene.

There was no help for it. Within a few days the crash must come; he could see no escape.

But what was to become of himself? He had never seriously thought of that before. Should he
allow himself to be simply thrown into the street? Perhaps, after all, they would even put
him in quod? Time pressed, and a decision must be reached quickly--at once.

Really, on sober reflection, he could not very well see why he should remain any longer in
this vale of tears after all his glory and his pleasures would be gone. To learn anew, after
losing all caste, after dismissal from the army in disgrace and dishonor, to learn a bread-winning
calling and to have to work like everybody in that despised throng of perspiring, vulgar toilers--surely,
that was not at all to his taste. From infancy up he had been reared in disdain of labor--had
acquired, one by one, tastes and habits of thought that seemed irreconcilable with a life of
sober, plain living and thinking, with a life where his part would be that of a subordinate.
It seemed an impossible thing to him. Dimly he felt that to do so would require energy, self-denial,
and diligence, and of all these he possessed not a trace. Should he then make an end of it,
put a bullet in his brain?

But no, that was absurd, and, besides, that required courage. And courage, in its best sense,
he had never had. He had only shown courage, or the semblance of it--a certain dash--the kind
which in the army is known as “Schneid.”

But here, when facing the final realities of life, his courage entirely deserted him. And was
it not possible, after all, that luck would come to his aid in this dire extremity? He had
only the one life, and once thrown away the loss was irremediable. Suicide therefore would
be rash and stupid--folly never to be redeemed. Life might smile on him again, and should he
then with his own hand cut it off? No, on no account.

But no rescuing thought would occur to him, cudgel his brain as he might. And torturing, self-abasing
reflections crowded again into his brain.

The thought of his servant, of poor Röse, curiously enough, was uppermost. Had not Röse, dolt
that he was, cunningly managed to disappear from a scene which was, in a certain sense, as
unbearable as his master’s at this juncture? And Röse by now was perhaps seated comfortably
in a quiet corner where nobody was looking for him, and where it was possible to live without
interference.

Could he himself, then, not do the same thing?

And this shadowy thought began to take solid form the more Borgert dwelt on it. It seemed to
him the only egress from the situation.

In new surroundings, in another country, amongst people who did not know him, he might begin
life afresh, and soon grass would grow over the short-lived sensation which his disappearance
would create in this world-forgotten little hole of a town! Within a twelvemonth his very name
perhaps would be no longer on anybody’s lips in this place. And even if in times to come this
or that one of his comrades should mention his name, it would be with the thought that such
a man had existed at some time or other, and that nobody to-day cared about him any more.

He was so lost in his dreary thoughts that he did not observe the door opening and giving admittance
to Frau Leimann.

She looked pale and serious. Her face, so pleasant in its youthful, placid beauty at other
times, now appeared aged, and her eyes wore an anxious expression.

Borgert did not rise, but contented himself with nodding to her, saying never a word. His glance
enveloped this woman, an intrigue with whom had seemed to him but a short while ago an ambition
worthy of his talents.

But to-day she appeared to him no longer so desirable; her motions seemed to him without grace
or distinction, and her charms mediocre.

Her hair was arranged in negligent fashion, and the soft folds of her morning gown to-day seemed
to enwrap another woman and not the one whose beauty had intoxicated him.

Two impressions stood out clearly in his mind: the woman as she now faced him, and as she had
appeared to him on a memorable evening.

But Frau Leimann was so preoccupied herself that the unflattering and searching look of Borgert
escaped her. She sat down on the divan beside him and took his hand in hers. Her eyes gazed
with diffidence at the face of the man.

“You are ill, George?” asked she with anxiety.

He contented himself for all answer with a shake of his head.

“But tell me, speak to me. What ails you?”

“Why, it is nothing and it is everything,” Borgert answered with indifference.

“What do you mean by that, George? Talk sensibly, please.”

“What am I to say? I am done with the whole business. That is all.”

“Done! Done with what? How am I to understand you?”

“Done with everything,--with life and with myself.”

“You talk like a sphinx, George. Why not tell me frankly what has happened to you?”

“My money is gone. I’ll have to run away, or else there will be the deuce to pay.”

Borgert felt a tremor run through her body. She did not reply, but turned her face slowly away
from him and stared at the window.

In his heart Borgert was thankful to her for receiving his communication with such composure,
and not with the screams and hysterical sobbings which women habitually employ on occasions
of the kind.

And as he regarded attentively her pale profile, clear-cut against the light, and saw a tear
glistening in her eye, a passionate emotion, largely pity for this suffering creature by his
side, so pathetic in her dumb resignation, took hold of him, and he drew her into his arms.

Then she murmured:

“Take me along, George!”

In amazement Borgert stared at her.

“For heaven’s sake, how did you get such thoughts? How can I do that?”

“Oh, George, you do not know. I cannot bear my life here any longer. Let me go with you, I
beseech you.”

“But that is not to be dreamt of. Will there not be scandal enough when I disappear? And then
take you along? Impossible.”

“In that case I shall go alone. I must leave here--I must.”

“But why all this so suddenly? What has come to you?”

Frau Leimann gave vent to her suppressed feelings by a violent fit of sobbing. “My husband
has beaten me with his clenched fist--see, here are the marks!--because the bailiff had called
on me. His treatment of me has become worse and worse of late, and now my hatred, my dislike
of him has reached a point where I can no longer see him around me, breathe the same air he
breathes; and then,--another thing,” and here she broke into weeping again, “I have no money--there
is nothing with which I can pay my debts; something--some great misfortune will come--I’m sure
of it, George, if I do not leave him peaceably.”

Borgert had great pains to quiet the excited woman.

He reflected. After all, her idea was not such a bad one. If she really had made up her mind
fully to leave her husband, she might as well go with him; for in that case he would at least
have somebody by his side to whom he could speak, to whom he could open his heart,--somebody
who would be in the same situation as himself. And when Frau Leimann once more implored him
with a tearful voice, he whispered:

“Then come with me. We shall leave to-morrow night.”

They began to make plans, and he said:

“Let us talk this matter over sensibly. First, how will you get away from here without being
observed by your husband?”

“He is leaving for Berlin to-morrow morning. He has official matters to attend to there. Has
he not yet told you about it?”

“No; but this is excellent. And now, have you some money?”

“Yes; I received this morning three hundred marks from my mother, and I have not touched the
money because I had resolved on this step.”

“Then you are better off than I am, at least for the moment; but I shall raise some money.
And third, how will you get your luggage to the station? for, of course, I cannot expect you
to run away without some clothes.”

“Very simply, George; just ask my husband to lend you his big trunk, and tell him you are obliged
to go home on a short leave. I will pack all my things into that, and the orderly will bring
it down to you here. The trunk is big enough to hold enough for us both.”

“There it is again,” laughingly said Borgert. “Women are best for all underhanded work.”

“And by which train shall we leave?”

“You will go by the afternoon train, for we will not leave together; that would attract too
much attention. I shall follow you on the evening train. I think it will be best to meet in
Frankfort. We will meet in the waiting-room of the main station, and there we can talk over
everything in quiet. I shall take a three days’ leave, so that they will not follow me at once.”

“Then we are agreed so far. I will come down here to-morrow forenoon, as soon as my husband
has left, and then we can talk this matter over a little more in detail. Just now I’ll have
to leave you.”

Frau Leimann turned towards the door. When she sent a parting nod from the threshold, she seemed
once more enticing in his eyes. The heated face was animated, and the glowing eyes radiated
life. Truly, she was charming. Borgert lost himself in pleasant speculations about the honeyed
existence which they two were to lead hereafter, once that inconvenient husband was out of
the way, and all scruples which still clung to them, as the last vestiges of respectability,
had been thrown overboard.

Borgert had regained all his good humor; he felt almost buoyant, and as if he could dare undertake
anything. There was another consideration with him. His flight, his desertion, his leaving
his creditors unsatisfied, and a record of somewhat crooked financial transactions behind him,--all
that would now be regarded by people in a wholly different light. The romantic element would
predominate in the minds of all the gossips. They would say that these two had fled, because
of an overmastering passion,--to become united, when unfortunate circumstances did not permit
them to belong to each other in their present plight. There would, of course, be enough scandal
even now, but the whole story was going to be lifted by this elopement into a higher sphere;
it would take on, so to speak, an appearance vastly more interesting, less vulgar, nay, even
aristocratic and excusable,--an entirely different matter from the bald statement that he,
Borgert, had deserted for no other reason except a lot of bad debts and unclean financial machinations.

For a moment, it is true, his better conscience spoke, reproaching him with the intention of
adding a new crime to his list of old ones; but this warning resounded so weakly within him
that it had not the slightest effect. The principal thing, after all, was that he must not
let such an advantage escape him simply to save the feelings of others. Such minor considerations
could not be allowed to interfere with his plans.

Borgert therefore briskly walked to town, and at the post-office, where the telegraph bureau
was located, he wired to a large second-hand dealer in the neighboring city, telling him to
pay him a visit the following morning.

Then he returned home and stepped up to Leimann’s.

He found his friend busy packing.

“Well, I hear you are to start to-morrow. I only learned it this noon,” said Borgert, shaking
hands with him.

“Yes; I am not at all charmed with the prospect of this trip, for I had made no arrangements
for it; but you know how it is. It is always only at the last moment we receive orders of that
kind, often barely leaving us time enough to reach the train.”

“Nevertheless, I envy you your trip. As for me, there is a less agreeable one awaiting me.”

“What, you are also planning a journey?”

“It is not a matter of choice with me; I simply have to.”

“And where are you going?”

“Home, starting to-morrow afternoon.”

“Ah, I see. Well, I wish you luck.”

“Thanks. By the way, could you lend me a trunk? I should like to take a number of things with
me home, and my own trunk is too small.”

“Why, certainly; my servant will bring you down the large trunk. I suppose that will answer
your purpose?”

“Oh, of course; it will do very nicely. Thanks again.”

Borgert could not help perceiving that his visit did not come quite opportunely. Leimann was
in an ugly humor and did not let himself be interrupted in his occupation. He was so much engrossed
with his own thoughts that the import of Borgert’s questions scarcely reached him, and the
latter deemed it therefore wise to remain no longer. He made the promise, however, to join
the Leimanns at their evening meal.

Reaching his own room again, Borgert felt himself free of a great burden. In his heart he rejoiced
at the sudden turn his affairs had taken. The bother and vexation of uncertainty no longer
weighed on his mind. “The die is cast!” he mumbled to himself. He would have liked to dance
and scream for joy. Another day only, and he would be rid of the whole sorry outfit, and there
would be no further occasion to worry. And with that, such a pretty travelling companion! He
really wondered at himself now that this idea had not come to him sooner.

Suddenly it crossed his mind that he had not yet begun to pack. At least he should at once
proceed to preliminaries,--arranging and putting aside things, and making ready for packing
the more important objects which he meant to take along.

But what was worth while taking? That was the question. He began to pick out things. From over
the sofa he took the large silver goblet--the farewell gift from his former regiment--and placed
it in an adjoining room on the table.

Rapidly, then, he made his selections: an album of family portraits; sundry packages of letters;
a couple of riding-whips and crops possessing an intrinsic value,--that is, a metallic one;
two of the smaller and more valuable oil paintings; and a large bundle of letters,--these,
besides some indispensable clothes, were all he intended to take with him.

When he entered the door at Leimann’s at seven, he found them already at table.

Leimann’s face wore a black look, and he hardly lifted his eyes to his guest as Borgert entered.

His wife sat opposite to him, her eyes red and swollen with recent weeping. She did not touch
the food before her, but every little while cast a searching and anxious look at her husband.

Throughout the evening harmony was not restored; not even a bottle of Eckel succeeded in bringing
gaiety back into this small circle. Leimann remained in an ugly mood, and whenever that seized
him nothing could be done with him. Therefore the parting took place at an early hour, and
it was cooler than it had been on similar occasions.

        *       *       *       *       *

Next morning Borgert had just risen when the second-hand dealer arrived.

The officer saluted him pleasantly and bade him enter. Then he completed his toilet and began
negotiations with the Hebrew merchant.

“Will you, please, take the trouble to examine the furniture and all the other equipments in
these apartments?” said he. “I mean to sell all of it, just as it stands, since I have been
transferred to another garrison. But as to this point--I mean my transference--I must beg to
preserve silence for the moment, as it is not yet generally known. How much could you offer me?”

The Jew pensively let his keen eyes wander all about the dwelling, mentally going through a
rapid process of addition, subtraction, and silence. Then he proceeded to a more minute examination.
He handled every single piece, using his knuckles to ascertain its exact condition; he subjected
hangings, rugs, and carpets, as well as the expensive carving of the book-cases and stands,
to a similar process. Then he drew forth a small note-book, greasy and worn, and squinted at
each single object as he noted down its price. Finally he turned to Borgert and said, with
an obsequious smile:

“Fifteen hundred marks, Herr First Lieutenant, counting it out in gold on this table.”

“What! fifteen hundred marks?” and Borgert gave a snort of disapproval. “Why, man, you must
be dreaming. I have paid almost ten thousand marks for the things.”

“Sorry, Herr First Lieutenant,” the Jew said, shrugging his shoulders in deprecation of such
high figures. “Old things are not new things, and you won’t get any more from anybody.”

“That is not enough; that would be giving the things away.”

“Well, I will pay you two thousand marks, then, but not a penny more.”

Borgert sat down at his desk. He began to see that there was no time to lose, and that the
man had him at a great disadvantage. Meanwhile the dealer had his eyes fastened on the officer’s
face, and wore the same expectant and obsequious smile.

“All right, give me the money; you can have the whole stuff,” said Borgert, briefly.

With a smile that now broke over his face until it illuminated every nook and corner of the
parchment-like wrinkles, the Jew drew a formal document, a bill of sale, from his breast pocket,
stepped up to the desk, and wrote a few words on it. Then he requested Borgert to sign it.

After the dealer had left and Borgert had securely stowed away the purchase price, he felt
that the last hindrance to his flight had now been removed, for a certain amount of cash was
an indispensable requisite. Then he stepped into his bed-chamber, where he took from the clothes-press
an elegant travelling suit. The remainder of his civilian clothes he packed carefully and compactly
in the large trunk which Leimann meanwhile had sent down. He placed them next to Frau Leimann’s
finery in the huge trunk, and on top of them the few other trifles above enumerated. Then he
had the trunk taken to the station.

Leimann meanwhile was on his way to Berlin. His wife, however, was still very busy,--burning
up packages of letters which she did not wish either her husband or her companion to read,
and then put into a handbag a few objects of the kind which only women cherish, and the sole
value of which lies in the recollections clinging to them. It is astonishing what resplendent
images a woman can conjure before her inner vision when in the possession of such faded flowers,
bits of ribbon, and the like.

Lastly came the leave-taking from Bubi, her little two-year-old son, and this she had fancied
the day before a much harder achievement than it now turned out. She felt some qualms of conscience
as she now, with a light heart, without a tear, left behind her her only child,--left it motherless,
exposed to a future probably troubled and cheerless.

It was strange, she thought. From the first moment on she had experienced something like aversion
for this child with the broad nose, the large mouth, and the small, shifting eyes. When but
a couple of weeks old, the baby had shown a striking resemblance to his father, and the more
the estrangement grew between his parents, the more dwindled the small remnant of her mother
love. She regarded this tiny human being, ugly and eternally crying, as solely his child. It
was in this way that the poor little fellow had spent nearly the whole of his short existence,--either
in the kitchen or with the servants, fondled, scolded, and educated by hirelings. The mother
herself frequently had not seen her child even for a minute a day.

She had the conviction that her husband had deserved no better treatment at her hands, and
because of that she scarcely gave him a thought during these last hours spent at her home.
When she boarded, at three o’clock in the afternoon, a first-class compartment of the express
train for Frankfort, she did so with a spirit light and almost gay.

And the same was true of Borgert. He likewise cast to the winds any slight sentiments of regret
at leaving the garrison, and as the train, some hours after Frau Leimann’s departure, went
shrieking and thundering out of the little station, he felt that he was being carried on to
a brighter future. That was enough for him.

When he and Frau Leimann met, late the same evening, in the dining-room of an elegant hotel,
all their life seemed to lie before them draped in rosy hue, and no shadows of coming evils
troubled them. After they had ladled their soup in comfort, and with the appearance of a fine
game pie, for which this hotel is famous among gourmets, the ex-officer motioned to the black-frocked
waiter with the immaculate shirt front, and said, curtly:

“A bottle of Mumm, sec!”

Thus these two celebrated the event of their flight.

CHAPTER VIII

CHANGES IN THE GARRISON

The flight of First Lieutenant Borgert could not long remain a secret.

When he did not return at the expiration of his short leave, and a telegraphic query brought
the answer from his father that he had not seen him, the assumption began to take shape that
he had tried to escape the consequences of his misdoings by deserting.

It is true that no one aside from Leimann had known precisely his bad financial status. But
when the Jewish dealer came to claim the furniture sold him, and at the same time the bailiff
arrived with the intention of seizing the very same objects on the strength of a new process
of attachment begun in court, the catastrophe could no longer be hidden from the world. Everybody
then began to see, detail after detail, the whole system of fraud erected by Borgert, with
the passive connivance of his friend Leimann.

The court ordered that the entire property of the deserter be placed in legal custody. A term
was fixed when the horde of creditors whom he had so shamefully deceived were to be adjudged
pro-rata shares of the whole. Advertisements were inserted in the papers, calling upon all
those having claims against the estate of the defaulter to come forward. Hundreds of bills
came by mail from all the cities and towns, and even from the villages surrounding the little
garrison, and the amounts in their totality figured up to a considerable sum.

Borgert’s father, too,--a worthy old gentleman, broken-hearted at the downfall of his only
son,--had to appear in court and depose as to his son’s past and present misdoings, as far
as he was aware of them. Even that portion of the estate which, according to the father’s intentions,
was to fall to his son’s share at his father’s death, was sequestrated by a mandate of the
court and added to the assets left behind by Borgert. In addition, the state’s attorney issued
a “Steckbrief”[20] against the ex-officer, in which he was charged with a whole list of offences.

    [20] “Steckbrief,” a term in German law meaning a circular
    demand on all domestic or foreign authorities to arrest and
    hold in custody for extradition an escaped criminal.--TR.

The dwelling itself had the court seals attached to it, and even the poor horses in the stable
had fastened to their manes small, leaden seals tied on with string, to denote that the state
had taken possession of them.

It stands to reason that all these interesting events travelled through the little town on
the wings of gossip, and no village or city within a radius of ten miles failed to regard the
matter as a delicious bit of local scandal. The small penny sheets printed in a number of these
places were in clover. Nothing like such a genuine sensation had come to their hands for some time.

Colonel von Kronau, the pompous and infallible, was very much cast down. There were some smart
gentlemen in the regiment who now claimed to have suspected the facts for a long time, and
to have seen such a catastrophe approaching. But there are always such people, and as a matter-of-fact
neither these wiseacres nor their less astute comrades had ever expected Borgert to turn out
badly. For his case, although somewhat worse, was substantially the epitome of their own cases,
and it is a truism that we never see ourselves as others see us.

The colonel remarked to Captain König, shaking his head with a melancholy smile, that this
new turn of affairs was the “last nail in his coffin,” and henceforth he was seen going about
with a face gloomy and expectant of the worst. For gradually he came to the conclusion that
to keep in good order a garrison and its corps of officers, some other methods must be employed
than those to which he had clung, at the advice of Frau Stark, for years. It dawned on him
that his type of discipline had wrought a train of evils which had grown avalanche-like, and
which now at last was likely to bury his official head under a load of opprobrium.

The fact that Frau Leimann had followed the First Lieutenant became known a few days later.
This was when her husband returned from Berlin and found a letter from her, in which she implored
his forgiveness, and assured him she had acted under an impulse too strong to resist. Of their
unhappy married life she said nothing.

Thus Leimann was punished doubly. He had been made ridiculous before the world, and was laughed
at behind his back by all those who belonged to his extensive circle of acquaintances. And
Borgert’s flight had precipitated Leimann’s own financial downfall. His creditors and those
of Borgert obtained orders in court which forced him to sell the larger part of his small private
fortune, consisting of sound investments, to satisfy their claims. A goodly proportion of his
enforced payments was for those sums guaranteed by him in Borgert’s behalf. When all his affairs
had been unravelled, he had but a very small sum remaining to him.

Meanwhile no trace of Frau Leimann and of her companion was found, although detectives of various
countries were several times on their tracks. Nobody knew where they had found a refuge.

        *       *       *       *       *

A fortnight after his desertion poor Röse was discovered and arrested. He had been seized at
the Belgian frontier. A court-martial was quickly summoned, and during the trial it became
apparent that the motive which alone had driven him to desertion had been the brutal maltreatment
to which his master, Borgert, had subjected him. The court regarded that, however, as a mitigating
circumstance of such slight value that it reduced the measure of the punishment meted out to
him in only a small degree. The poor fellow was universally commiserated by high and low, and
even among the officers a voice was raised now and then in exculpation. Many of their subordinates
expressed privately the opinion that a poor soldier, even if only the son of an humble peasant,
like Röse, ought to have some rights, and that he ought to be treated humanely by his superiors.
But these were but private opinions, stated in a barely audible voice, and in the seclusion
of the men’s own quarters. As such, naturally, they had not the slightest value in changing
the fortunes of poor Röse, who was sentenced to undergo a term of many years of hard labor
in a military penitentiary.

        *       *       *       *       *

At the divorce trial, which took place at Leimann’s instance, a great many unpalatable facts
were brought to light.

The two servant-maids in his house, as well as the orderly, gave testimony of such a character
that the few remaining hairs on Leimann’s pear-shaped skull rose in affright. He could not
understand how he had been so blind as not to have perceived the treachery of his friend and
the faithlessness of his wife. A decree of divorce was pronounced by the court, and Leimann
shortly after handed in his resignation. He was forced to that step by several considerations.
On the one hand he was compelled to turn to a more profitable calling than that of serving
his country in the army, since he had now but very slender means at his command; on the other
hand, all the events in which he had been a conspicuous figure had damaged his reputation so
greatly as to make his further stay in the corps of officers almost impossible.

He accepted a position for which he was eminently qualified by natural taste and long experience,--that
of drummer for a wholesale wine firm. His little boy he intrusted to the care of some humble
relatives, and his pension as First Lieutenant was just sufficient to pay for the little fellow’s
board.

Almost simultaneously, with the acceptance of Leimann’s resignation, formal sentence was pronounced
against Borgert. He was condemned to a jail term of five years, to deprivation of all civic
honors for ten years, and to expulsion from the army, brought about by a series of frauds,
by desertion and by maltreatment of subordinates in ten cases.

The newspapers published this sentence, and with it came to a close the career of this miscreant,
as far as the army was concerned.

        *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile there sat in the bureau of a large factory ex-Sergeant Schmitz, busy at his desk
with a row of figures.

The other employees had already risen from their places and were taking their overcoats from
a rack in the corner, for the large factory bell announcing the close of the day’s labor had
rung out ten minutes since.

But Schmitz did not allow himself to be disturbed by the loud conversation going on about him.
He continued writing as if he were in the midst of silence. The large office-room had almost
emptied itself of its inmates when Master Worker Maurer entered.

Maurer was a squat-built man, and his pale, oval face was strangely illuminated by piercing
eyes of a forbidding expression. His moustache hung straggling about the corners of his mouth,
and there was something indicative of cruelty and meanness about his whole face.

“I suppose you can’t tear yourself away from your work again? Aren’t you coming soon?” he called
over to Schmitz. But the latter did not even look up from his work, and briefly answered:

“In a moment; sit down!”

The two men were good friends.

Only a few weeks before Schmitz had stood amidst the mechanics at the lathe, pushing mechanically
one cube of wood after the other into the sharp teeth of the rotating steel. This sort of activity
had permitted him to indulge in his own thoughts, for it did not require him to expend his
intellect as well as his brawn.

But in a short while qualities had been detected in the quiet, diligent workingman which brought
him advancement. His military training and the self-sufficing determination which he had acquired
in dealing with raw recruits had given him a knack of controlling his fellow-workers. Thus
it came about that Schmitz was promoted to the position of overseer in the machine hall, the
same in which he had so far toiled with the rest. His fellow-workers, of course, looked with
envy upon this parvenu, who had only recently appeared among them and who now played the part
of commander. There was no dearth of scornful remarks at his expense, but the old soldier understood
very well how to baffle such behavior.

In the morning, after he had seen his men busily at work at their various tasks, he frequently
paid a visit to Maurer, who was employed as an engineer.

And during these matutinal chats Maurer discovered in Schmitz a man whom it would be easy to
gain for his cause,--the cause of Socialism. Maurer himself was one of the most notorious local
leaders of the Socialist hosts, and he felt sure that this new man would become a valuable
addition to the ranks of the forces acting under his supervision.

In this assumption, indeed, Maurer was not mistaken. Schmitz was still harboring the hatred
against militarism and the government, which had been engendered in him by his own experience
in the army. A deep-seated, grim feeling fermented in his soul because of the bitter injustice
done him. He could not forget that the best years of his life had been frittered away in a
service which in the end proved of no avail to him. Thus, he had become a recruit for the Socialist
cause, and it had scarcely needed the persuasions of his new comrade, Maurer, to induce him
to forswear all allegiance to the ancient cause of king and fatherland, and to vow service
with body and soul to the red flag. The loyal soldier had become a strong pillar of the Socialist
Party. On the morrow Schmitz was to make a speech before a large circle of men holding similar
views, and it was for that Maurer was now waiting for him. He meant to inculcate another lesson
or two in his friend’s mind, and to talk over with him a few important points in the programme
of the evening.

When Schmitz had laid aside his work and locked up his sheets in the desk,--sheets on which
the list of names of the men under him and the respective amounts of work done by each were
marked down,--he joined Maurer. Both then walked on in silence through the narrow lanes towards
Maurer’s dwelling.

At a nearby dramshop they jointly purchased a jugful of beer; then took it home, lit the lamp,
and began their conversation.

It turned particularly on a new tax bill, which would add another serious burden to those under
which the working classes were groaning. The aim was to gain as many opponents to it as possible,
so that at the last reading in the Reichstag an overwhelming majority could be secured against
the measure, sufficient to bring about its defeat.

The two friends were engaged in eager discussion until after midnight. When they parted they
had reached perfect agreement.

On the day following Schmitz was in a state of feverish agitation. It seemed strange to him,
after all. But a short while ago he was wearing the “king’s coat.” A short twelvemonth previously
he had been a soldier of the Kaiser’s,--a man sworn to defend the fatherland and to aid and
further its interests,--and to-day?--to-day he was one of those who are accused of shaking
the foundations of the state edifice, those who are aiming to erect a new commonwealth more
in consonance with their own ideas and interests.

But when he on the same evening ascended the speaker’s stand, carrying himself erect as a freeman,
and when a crowd of many hundreds welcomed the new comrade with enthusiastic shouts, he felt
differently. Even before he had said a word to his new friends they saluted him joyously as
one of themselves,--as one to bring about the new millennium,--and his confidence in himself
grew apace, and a mighty longing to achieve fame in this new army clutched his soul. It was
his full intention to please this heterogeneous mass of men; he meant to force them into the
circle of his own conceptions and beliefs, so that all of them should follow him, without a
will of their own, as sheep follow a shepherd.

And he began his address. He first described the provisions of this new bill, and then laid
bare the consequences to the laboring multitude that the adoption of such a measure would have.

A new tax, he explained, meant a further step in the pauperization of the masses. He showed
that this new tax was a superfluity, provided the attempt was abandoned by the government to
increase still further the strength of the army.

“Gigantic sums of money are annually wasted by the government for the military,” said he, in
a ringing voice. “Scarcely have millions upon millions been voted for the introduction of new
rifles and new guns; scarcely have new regiments been formed and the conformation of existing
ones altered, when all these measures are found to be worse than useless. Errors of calculation
are discovered when it is too late to retrieve them, and new sums of enormous size are demanded
in order to overcome innovations conceived in haste and executed without judgment.

“Germany’s reputation and her power in the world have been won by the army, and it is her army
which neighbors begrudge us. But have we not arrived on the summit of military power? Must
we extend militarism to the point where it smothers and throttles all other organs of the state
machine?

“If we but devoted to other institutions of the empire a modest portion of the untold money
that is swallowed up every year by the army, there would be no necessity for laying tax upon
tax upon the citizens until what remains to them of the fruits of their labor hardly suffices
for bare needs. If we did that, we should be a wealthy country; the citizen would acquire material
wellbeing. Industry would revive and yield to the people all its blessings. But if it is not
intended to cease favoring the army to such an unreasonable extent, let them take the money
needed from the pockets of those who are spending their days in sloth and wilful luxury. As
it is, the wealthy are not burdened any more than the poor laborer, while the latter really
has to surrender a portion of the scant bread he has earned for himself and his family to maintain
a state of things in which capital enjoys all those advantages which are denied to him.

“Then I ask of what blessing is the army to the citizen, to the people as a whole? It takes
away his children; it uses up the best years in their lives,--those years in which the youth
ripens into a man, and in which his character matures. It is during those years that our sons
are often treated with injustice and brutality, and, as a natural consequence, they return
from the army into work-a-day life, as the bitter enemies of a government which dismisses many
of them as helpless cripples or as physical wrecks without ever thinking of making suitable
award. Then, still more frequently, our sons, after spending the best strength they have in
the service of the state, in hard toil, and in exposing themselves to all rigors of a changeable
climate, are sent back into the world, dismissed from the army, just because of some trivial
offence,--kicked out into the cold as one might a dog, compelling him to hunt for food and
to seek a new master. Therefore, I say, let us compel the government to spend hereafter the
money so uselessly wasted for the enlargement of an army that has already overgrown its proper
size, rather for more useful purposes, so that the people, the masses, will know what they
have sacrificed themselves for.”

The words of the speaker, drawn so largely from his own bitter experiences, were frequently
interrupted by a loud acclaim; but as Schmitz now stepped down from his eminence to mingle
with his auditors, the large crowd that filled the hall to suffocation began to rend the air
with frantic cheers. They threw up their caps and shouted approval; scores of them cried: “Bravo,
Schmitz!”; while others crowded up to him to shake him by the hand. It was an ovation as enthusiastic
as Schmitz had never aspired to in his boldest moments, and his natural vanity felt intensely
gratified. As to these people, he had indeed gained them over to his way of thinking.

His words had sounded so convincing, they had struck the popular chord so accurately, that
many a one in this dense throng who had merely come that night as a spectator, drawn by idle
curiosity, had been convinced of the justice of the Socialist cause, and resolved to join the
party which espoused the claims of the poor.

And so Schmitz had that night become not only an adherent but a leader of the “red” party,--a
party which in this large manufacturing town was becoming more and more formidable.

CHAPTER IX

RESIGNATIONS ARE IN ORDER

Sergeant-Major Krohn, the regimental chief clerk, was leaning against the iron railing which
shut off from the vulgar civilian world the edifice holding the offices and administrative bureaux.

He was smoking his morning cigar with considerable zest and reading the Deutsche Zeitung, which
the letter-carrier had just left for the colonel. He was at leisure just then, for the colonel
had gone on horseback to view the regimental drill on the parade grounds, quite a distance
from town; and on such days it was the habit of the adjutant to recompense himself by a sound
matutinal slumber for the nightly sleep he had missed in attending this banquet or that carousal.

Krohn was deep in the study of the advertisements he had found in the paper when his “colleague,”
Sergeant-Major Schönemann, stepped up to him, dragging his clanking sabre at his heels, and
with a cigarette between his lips.

“Morning, morning, Herr Commander!” he addressed Krohn in a jocular spirit. “What is the news?”

The minor dignitary thus addressed smiled pleasantly, and sent a small cloud of fragrant smoke
into the air before answering.

“Great things are going on, noble brother-in-arms. I had almost forgotten about that.”

“You don’t say! Has H. M. at last sent me a decoration?”

“Not precisely, but something almost as unlikely,--König has been placed under arrest.”

“What? König? Thunder and lightning! What the dickens has he been doing?”

“Why, they say he has been putting his fingers into the squadron fund, and that some of the
gold has stuck to them. Really, it’s a disgrace; a fellow like him, too, quite wealthy, and
all that.”

“The devil! I should never have supposed that of him; no, not of him! And how did they find
it out?”

“Haven’t the faintest idea. I presume the colonel must have heard something about it. Yesterday
afternoon he had him up in his room and charged him with the thing to his face. I peeped through
the key-hole, and saw the poor fellow becoming pale under the accusation. He wanted to fetch
his books at once; but the colonel wouldn’t listen to him, and ordered him forthwith under arrest.”

“But these two used to get along so well together!”

“Of course! And I presume there must be some truth to the story, else the colonel would probably
have managed the thing otherwise, especially as he himself is in disfavor with the powers that
be. This new affair will break his neck.”

“Well, as for me,” said Schönemann, “I don’t believe in the story until I see it in print.
König is not at all that sort of fellow. And the colonel always flies off the handle and seems
to be glad when he has a chance of showing his authority. He thinks that is smart!”

“Oh, I don’t know, and what’s more, I don’t care.”

        *       *       *       *       *

The explanation of all this conversation is a very simple one. We remember that First Lieutenant
Borgert, before seeking fresh fields for his energy, had made up his mind to get even with
Captain König for that curt letter in which the captain had refused to accede to Leimann’s
request for another large loan.

Misled by the captain’s own words on a previous occasion of similar kind, he had taken it for
granted that König had really been guilty of diverting some of the moneys under his care to
oblige a needy comrade,--Borgert himself. In his vindictiveness he had spared no pains in the
course of his conversations with fellow-officers at the Casino to spread rumors as to this
alleged fact, magnifying the matter or distorting its details, as it suited his purpose; and
even after Borgert’s flight these rumors had been scattered broadcast by the idle tongue of
gossip. Finally, they had filtered down and become the theme of general conversation. The colonel,
too, had heard of the matter, and, in his present condition of extreme nervousness regarding
the reputation of the regiment, that worthy had deemed it his duty to go to the root of it.

König himself had had no occasion to clear himself of all this gathering suspicion, for in
his presence the wagging tongues became mute. Borgert had maliciously misrepresented König
so much in his talks with the junior officers as to create quite a strong feeling against him.
He had stated that König, although abundantly able to help some momentarily embarrassed comrades
out of their troubles, had not only refused point-blank, but had added insult to injury. Such
supposed behavior, since Borgert’s tales had found credence, had cost König the sympathy of
the majority of the officers, and now that trouble had overtaken him, many of them rejoiced
at the fact. Lieutenant Bleibtreu would have informed his squadron chief of the unpleasant
rumors circulating, but ill luck would have it that that faithful junior happened to be off
on leave of absence. He did not correspond with any of his fellow-officers during his leave,
and knew nothing of the matter until after König’s arrest.

It was only by furnishing an extravagantly high amount of bail that König temporarily regained
his liberty, having spent some ten days in jail meanwhile. By the colonel’s order he was then
suspended from active duty and compelled to await the outcome of the accusation in his own
home. At first König was stunned by the blow. After fifteen years of active service, during
which he had never been charged with anything contrary to good morals or manners, he was now
accused of a vulgar crime! And what was worse, the accusation against him was entirely based
on the irresponsible remarks of a man who was a moral wreck at the time he made them, and who
had since been legally condemned as a convicted criminal. It was nothing less than an outrage,
it seemed to him.

Where was the confidence, the good comradeship, with which he had formerly met on all sides?
Was it not the duty of his superior, the colonel, first closely to investigate the circumstances
surrounding an alleged fact which on its face seemed highly improbable, before formulating
such an accusation likely to ruin his reputation in the whole regiment and in the entire army?

And, indeed, the good captain had sufficient reason for complaining of the treatment he now
met with. The ground had been well prepared by the mischievous gossip that had preceded his
arrest, and now he was shunned as would have been a convicted criminal, an outcast, and the
very children in the street pointed the finger of scorn at him and his family. Bleibtreu was
the only exception. Firmly convinced of the innocence of his friend, he did valiant service
in trying to restore the former universal confidence in König’s integrity.

He proved his unshaken belief in the captain by paying him daily visits, and by spending every
evening with him and his family. He became the companion of König’s solitary walks; and he
even persisted in this after he had been warned of the consequences by the colonel, and when
his comrades punished him for his unselfish friendship by likewise ostracising and assuming
a hostile attitude towards him.

But all these machinations did not hinder the young man from doing what he regarded as his
duty. He would have deemed himself a poltroon if he had abandoned his friend now that misfortune
had overtaken him.

The entire body of non-commissioned officers of the regiment and the whole rank and file of
it felt deeply indignant at the manner in which this popular officer was made a scapegoat by
the colonel, and this universal sentiment found its expression by numerous unofficial calls
which many of the captain’s subordinates made on him during his time of tribulation.

The same was true of the civilian circles, both in the garrison and in the neighboring city:
they all were filled with disgust and aversion at the conditions created by the stupidity and
stubbornness of Colonel von Kronau. They testified their sympathy for König on various occasions.
It was owing to all these mitigating facts that König gradually came to view the future with
brighter spectacles, and he consoled himself with the thought that justice must triumph in
the end; but his patience was sorely tried in the meanwhile, for the investigation of his case
dragged on a long while. If it had been a case creating sensational interest,--a case of manslaughter
or of cruel abuse of subordinates, perhaps,--there would have been more promptness, in order
to quiet public opinion; but his was a case which seemed to call for no such speedy action.
What difference did it make if he had to wait for months,--a prey to misgivings and doubts,
and exposed hourly to malignant talk of busybodies?

Six weeks had elapsed before his first preliminary hearing took place. König, of course, took
occasion to explain the whole matter, and to prove, by means of his ledgers and by oral testimony,
how entirely unjust was the accusation against him.

He was soon undeceived, however, in the hope that the end of the proceedings against him had
now come; for the court was by no means satisfied with his ex-parte showing. They demanded
an expert examination of his ledgers for the last three years, and this task required fully
three months.

At the trial his innocence of the charge was, of course, fully established, and an acquittal
was the result.

It had been proven that there had been no diversion of funds, but that the captain’s equivocal
statement to that effect made to Borgert and admitted by the captain himself had been a mere
pretext. The motive for this had also been shown to be that, as may be remembered, of preventing
further requests for loans from so bad a debtor as Borgert. A bald statement of these facts
was contained in the finding of the court-martial.

König had expected no other finding; but in the officers’ circle the acquittal called forth
nothing but disappointment.

Some four months later H. M.’s confirmation of the court’s finding reached the little garrison.
And that was the signal for another procedure, for now it became the duty of the Council of
Honor to undertake a new investigation of the same facts, but from a different point of view,--namely,
whether König had failed in any one point against the professional honor of an officer, and
hence merited reprimand or punishment at the hands of his second judges.

The captain accepted this new ordeal with the long-suffering patience which had become habitual
to him by this time. The final issue was still involved in slight doubt, but he felt himself
safe in the firm conviction of his own innocence.

During this whole period of anxiety his domestic hearth had been almost his sole source of
comfort. His family life had always been one of unalloyed happiness, and his wife, though young
and pretty, had never been fond of that ceaseless round of noisy dissipation which had been
such a feature of the little garrison for years past. So she did not miss the social pleasures
which she now perforce had to deny herself; for, along with her husband, the ladies of the
garrison now made it their business to cut her whenever she met any of them in the streets.
Nevertheless, Frau Clara had felt this whole time of trial quite severely. A loving wife is
jealous of her husband’s reputation and of the honor due him, and, as for herself, she had
been degraded from being the most popular woman in the regiment to the level of a social outcast;
but her proud soul refused to submit to this ostracism, and it was no small gratification to
her that the wives of the leading civilians made it a point to visit her at frequent intervals,
and with some ostentation. Meanwhile Lieutenant Bleibtreu, the ever-faithful, was no less zealous
in his attendance.

One evening he again called, but his face was clouded. It was known to the Königs that the
unpleasant position into which their steadfast young friend had fallen by championing his captain’s
cause weighed considerably on him, and that he had made efforts for some time to be transferred
somewhere else.

As to the cause of his depressed mood, the lieutenant answered that his petition for transference
had been rejected.

“And what do you mean to do now?” said his late chief, after a while.

“I have handed in my resignation.”

For a moment his hosts looked at him in some consternation, but then König reached out his
hand and said to him:

“You have done well. I must confess I pity you from my heart that you have to leave so fine
a profession, and to inure yourself to prosaic civilian life, with its eternal questions of
losses and gains; but I understand the motives which have induced you to take this step. You,
as a young officer, have seen events in this place which even I, so much older and more experienced
than you, cannot but deplore with all my heart, and I can well understand it if you have lost
that joyousness in the fulfilment of your duties which alone often makes these duties bearable.

“I could have wished to have you become a valued member of another garrison, and to see other
conditions, better than those prevailing here. That would have proven to you that there are
still many of the officers in our army who differ radically from some of those with whom we
are acquainted here; but since they deny you that boon, it is perhaps best for you to turn
your back on the army entirely.

“I myself would have counselled you in this sense if I had not felt a delicacy in urging you
to a decision which you might perhaps later regret; and to show you that I speak with deep
conviction, I will tell you that I myself am seriously considering my resignation.”

This time it was Bleibtreu who opened his eyes in astonishment.

“But why so?” he stammered. “I understand your request for transference has been granted.”

“True; but it is with me as with you: my respect is gone for the profession to which I have
belonged with honor for fifteen years. The conditions I have found in the corps of officers
here have shown me that I do not belong here by rights. And who can tell me that I shall not
find similar conditions in my next garrison?”

“You are seeing things too black, Herr Captain,” said Bleibtreu.

“I think not,” continued König. “For nine years I have been vegetating in this miserable hole.
During that time I have lost the natural gaiety of my disposition. I have lost, or almost lost,
the manners of good society. If I ever get into better society again, I shall hardly know how
to behave myself. I have become a boor, and the comrades in Berlin or Hanover would treat me
with perfect disdain if I should venture to approach them on a footing of equality. The tone
prevalent in our Casino is enough to demoralize almost anybody in the long run.”

“You are quite right, Herr Captain,” interjected Bleibtreu. “That is the worst of these little
garrisons, especially those located near the frontier. After living in one of them for a number
of years, one becomes impossible in decent society. This continual gossip, these ceaseless
bickerings, are enough to destroy the temper and, to some extent, the reputation of an angel.
Add to this the fact that all sorts of men ‘with a past’ are stuck into these little garrisons,
and the mischief is done. Every little while we hear the phrase: ‘Punished by transference
to Moerchingen, Lyck,’ and a whole number of similar holes.”

“Quite true,” König replied. “For the most part, officers who are sent to these frontier garrisons
are relegated there to get rid of them. But H. M. does not consider the fact that to place
such doubtful elements in large numbers into that sort of garrison renders them even more harmful
than if they were sent to larger garrisons, where they would be subjected to the influence
of respectable and well-bred comrades. That is how so many scandalous affairs happen amongst
the officers near the frontier. If only the officers had at least an opportunity of cultivating
respectable society and of following a refined taste, permitting them regular attendance at
good theatres, concerts, and the like! But unfortunately that is not the case; their whole
social intercourse and their sole diversion consist in frequenting the Casino. And what can
you expect, then?”

“There is much truth in what you say,” put in Bleibtreu. “By rights the transference to a frontier
regiment ought to be a distinction, because there they are closest to the enemy, and would
have the first chance to exercise their profession and to show the stuff that’s in them at
the outbreak of a real war. But to-day that is a mere illusion. Every day the prospect of a
war becomes less, and therefore the chances of marching against the enemy exist only on paper.”

When these two shook hands on parting that night, it was in a sad state of mind. A couple of
weeks later Bleibtreu’s resignation had been accepted, and he doffed his uniform and stepped
out into the life of a plain citizen.

The Council of Honor decided, after many delays, that Captain König deserved censure because
of “endangering his professional honor.” The explanation was added that no officer must put
himself in such a position as to expose himself to the unfavorable opinion of the world; and
since in the present case this had been done, it was necessary to point out to Captain König
that his proceeding at the time in question had been incorrect and injurious to his honor as
an officer.

König read this official communication calmly, while a scornful smile played around his lips;
and on that same night his resignation had been filed at the regimental headquarters.

The colonel himself was not able to see in his official capacity this outcome of his foolish
measures. A few weeks previous to the occurrence just described, he himself had received a
letter; but that came from “above,” and it was enclosed in the fatal “blue envelope.”

He had been told in it, in the well-known diplomatic language employed for such occasions,
that H. M. fully valued his faithful services, but was unable to avail himself of them any longer.

One fine day a huge furniture van stopped in front of the fine house at the end of the town,
where the colonel had made his stately home for so many years, and into its capacious maw brawny
men packed, shoved, and kicked everything of his household goods that was worth while transporting
to the far-away district near the borders of Russia, to which the deposed military autocrat
was returning, with the intention of spending the remainder of his days amid the peaceful calm
of his carrot fields and haylofts.

When the colonel and his wife took final leave of the little garrison, there was nobody at
the station to bid him a tearful farewell. His orderly alone stood on the platform, loaded
down with a dozen handbags and bandboxes the contents of which the Frau Colonel required on
her long journey eastward. When the colonel, his wife, and his extensive family of younger
children had bestowed themselves in the interior of a vast compartment, he leaned out of the
window and handed the orderly a small coin of the realm. The man looked at it and then spat
in disgust.

Of all those who in the opening chapter of this veracious tale had assembled around the hospitable
board of the Königs, barely a handful remained in “the little garrison.” The weeding-out machine
had been set in motion by H. M.’s private military cabinet, and lo! this was the result.

CHAPTER X

UNTO THIS LAST

It is past eight o’clock of an evening in December. A hurrying crowd is streaming on its way
homeward through the arteries of a large and busy city. All the shop doors everywhere are being
closed with a thundering noise, and the ear is assailed by the rattling of the iron shutters
by which thievish hands are to be kept out during the night hours. The brilliant gas jets and
the incandescent lights in the show-windows are turned off in increasing numbers.

On the asphalt pavement dense throngs of people weary from their day’s labor, or else eager
for the pleasures and excitement which the evening has still in store for them, are pressing
forward at an even trot--an endless procession of men and women occupying every grade in the
social scale,--elegantly attired women and girls, men dressed in stylish fashion, others clad
poorly and with the dust of their hard toil still clinging to their garments, and, mingled
with them all, half-grown children,--boys and girls, who had been busy at counter or workshop
throughout the day.

It was like a miniature reflection of life itself,--life in a large city, with all its toil
and its wealth, its misery and its luxury.

On the pavement cabs and busses rattled past in endless succession; and elegant carriages,
drawn swiftly by spirited horses and carrying the princes of trade and of birth, and veiled
ladies, who might be actresses or countesses, for all one could tell, rolled smoothly along.

Scurrying to and fro in zigzag line, and emitting those peculiar doleful notes invented for
them, automobiles were mixed up in apparently inextricable confusion with all this hurly-burly
of vehicles, while the trams clanged their bells, and passengers stood waiting on the edge
of the sidewalks, desirous of boarding them, yet afraid to risk their lives in the turmoil
and bustle of the intervening space. All this excitement of metropolitan life, this feverish
haste, and this pitiless crush, bore the stamp of intense work performed in a human ant-hill,
where every one of the countless inmates has to fulfil his duty unremittingly, so that combined
toil will produce a harmonious whole.

An elegantly attired pair turned the corner into a poorly lighted side street, and then took
their way along the middle of the road, picking their steps among all the scraps of paper and
the refuse of every kind that covered it. They came to a halt before a house the exterior of
which showed it to be inhabited by persons in straitened circumstances, and then they ascended
the well-worn front steps leading to its main entrance. The doorkeeper peered out of his little
lodge and merely nodded slightly to the two. They had come here only a few days before, after
leaving the stylish and expensive Grand Hotel, and that fact had furnished the man with food
for reflection. They were former First Lieutenant Borgert and Frau Leimann. They had turned
their steps to the French capital, in the hope to be there secured against any possible police
persecution, expecting to be able to earn a living in this city of millions, which furnishes
daily bread to so many.

Their funds had rapidly been exhausted; for he who has not learned to husband his resources
in the days of plenty will not be able to do so in the days of dire need.

And so Borgert had been obliged to look about him for some remunerative occupation. Hunger
is a hard taskmaster, and hard as it seemed to this man who had been reared and had lived till
then virtually in idleness, he had now to turn his hands to useful work; but the employment
he had been able to secure had not lasted long. Without a word of warning, he had been dismissed
as incapable of the work demanded, and he was just now returning from a last vain effort to
obtain another place. They mounted the steep stairs and entered their little room, furnished
without regard to even moderate ideas of comfort, and filled with an air which in the days
gone by Borgert had never been able to endure.

He threw himself on the narrow sofa with a cry of despair and covered his face with his hands,
while Frau Leimann cowered before the grate on a small stool.

With eyes hollow from much weeping and many sleepless nights, she gazed into the dying fire.
This was all the warmth which they could expect that night, for their means were entirely exhausted.

Both of them kept silence for a while, and then Borgert spoke. The woman trembled at the sound
of his voice, as if she were awaking from a fearful dream.

“And what is to become of us now?” said he, very low.

She did not answer him, but continued to gaze into the faintly glowing coals, and a tear slowly
coursed down her pale, emaciated face.

“To-morrow we shall have to leave this house, for we are unable to pay, and then no other refuge
is left us but the streets.”

“You must work, George,” replied the woman in a tear-choked voice, although she tried to infuse
some energy into her tones.

“Have I not tried?” replied he, with a shrug. “But haven’t they dismissed me every time without
warning? And besides, there is no use for my trying again. How can I work? I’ve never learned it.”

“But something must be done; we must find a way out of this,” Frau Leimann cried out, and her
voice sounded shrill. “If you intend to leave me to misery, you ought not to have enticed me
away from home.”

“Enticed?” Borgert mimicked her. “Who has enticed you? Was it not you who implored me to let
you come with me because you were unable to endure any longer the life you were leading with
your noble husband?”

“If I did so, you, as a man, ought to have had enough common-sense to talk me out of my intention.”

“I should like to know what man is able to talk an idea out of the head of a woman.”

“Do not speak this way, George; it is worse than frivolous. Summon all your courage and energy
and let us see what can be done. There must be a remedy.”

“There is!” retorted Borgert, throwing a loaded revolver on the crazy table.

A tremor shot through the woman, and for a moment she leaned against the wall as if ready to
swoon, while her wide-opened eyes stared with fear at the little instrument, the glittering
steel of which reflected the glowing embers in the grate.

“By all that is sacred,” her voice came hysterically, “are you out of your senses!”

“On the contrary,” replied Borgert, coolly; “it is the only way out of all our difficulties,
and it is not the first time I have had the thought. Is it not better to put an end to this
dog’s life than to die by inches in penury and distress?”

Frau Leimann stepped musingly towards the grate, as if its warmth were needed to drive the
thought of approaching death out of her head and to pour new life into her trembling limbs.
Her gaze hung fixedly on a faded engraving which was over the mantel, and which represented
a banquet held by one of the ancient English kings. With glassy eyes she stared at this picture
representing the joys of living. She did not notice that Borgert had followed her with his
feline step.

The report of his pistol was heard, quick and sharp, and with a dying moan the woman sank to
her knees. Her left hand felt for the warming flame, as if searching for its aid, and the tiny
bluish tongues of fire wavered in their reflection on the surface of this white, plump hand
from which a rill of life-blood was slowly running, drop by drop, into the ashes of the grate.
For a moment only her slayer gazed terror-stricken at the lifeless body; then he pointed the
weapon at himself, and a second shot put an end to his existence. Death squared with his mighty
hand all the guilt and all the debts he had contracted during his riotous life.

When the two corpses, four days later, were carted to the cemetery of Bagneux, the Potter’s
Field of Paris, and there consigned to the common grave of the destitute, nobody knew and nobody
cared who these two unknown strangers had been. Nobody suspected the drama of their lives or
the sin which had hurried them to death.

THE END.

