This part of his voyage concerns us but little, and a few particulars only are interesting,
as, for instance, his mention of a monkey in the Gorgus Island, who was so lazy, that he was
nicknamed the Sluggard, and of the inhabitants of Tecamez, who repulsed the new-comers with
poisoned arrows, and guns. He also speaks of the Galapagos Island, situated two degrees of
northern latitude. According to Rogers, this cluster of islands was numerous, but out of them
all one only provided fresh water. Turtle-doves existed there in great quantities, and tortoises,
and sea-turtles, of an extraordinary size abounded, thence the name given by the Spaniards
to this group.

Sea-dogs also were common, one of them had the temerity to attack Rogers. "I was walking along
the shore," he says, "when it left the water, his jaws gaping, as quickly and ferociously as
a dog escaping from his chain. Three times he attacked me, I plunged my pike into his breast,
and each time I inflicted such a wound that he fled howling horribly. Finally, turning towards
me, he stopped to growl and show his fangs. Scarcely twenty-four hours earlier, one of my crew
had narrowly escaped being devoured by a monster of the same family."

In December, Rogers repaired to Puerto Seguro, upon the Californian coast, with a Manilla galleon,
which he had seized. Many of his men penetrated to the interior; he found large forest trees,
but not the slightest appearance of culture, although smoke indicated the existence of inhabitants.

The inhabitants, according to Albey Presort's "History of Voyages," were straight built and
powerful, blacker than any Indian tribe hitherto met with in the Pacific Ocean Seas. They had
long black hair plaited, which reached below the waist. All the men went about naked, but the
women wore a garment, either composed of leaves or of stuff made from them, and sometimes the
skins of beasts and birds. Occasionally they wore necklaces and bracelets made of bits of wood
or shells. Others adorned their necks with small red berries and pearls. Evidently they did
not know how to pierce holes in them, for they notched them and joined them by a thread. They
valued these ornaments so highly, that they refused to change them for English necklaces of
glass. Their chief anxiety was to obtain knives and useful implements.

The Duke and Duchess left Porto Segura on the 12th January, 1710, and reached the island of
Guaham, of the Mariannes, in the course of two months. Here they revictualled, and passing
by the Straits of Boutan and Saleyer, reached Batavia. After a necessary delay at the latter
place, and at the Cape of Good Hope, Rogers cast anchor in the Downs upon the 1st of October.

In spite of Rogers' reticence with regard to the immense riches he brought with him, a good
idea of their extent may be gathered from the account of ingots, vessels of silver and gold,
and pearls, with which he delighted the shipowners.

We now come to our account of Admiral Anson's voyage, which almost belongs to the category
of naval warfare, but with it we may close the list of piratical expeditions, which dishonoured
the victors without ruining the vanquished. And if he brought no new acquisition to geography,
his account teams with judicious observations, and interesting remarks about a country then
little known.

The merit of them, however, if we are to believe Nichols' Literary anecdotes, rests rather
with Benjamin Robins, than, as the title would appear to indicate, with the chaplain of the
expedition, Richard Walter.

George Anson was born in Staffordshire in 1697. A sailor from his childhood, he early brought
himself into notice.

He was already well known as a clever and fortunate captain, when in 1739 he was offered the
command of a squadron. It consisted of the Centurion, 60 guns, the Gloucester and Severe, each
50 guns, the Pearl, 40 guns, the Wager, 28 guns. To it were attached also the sloop Trial,
and two transports carrying food and ammunition. In addition to the crew of 1460, a reinforcement
of 470 marines was added to the fleet.

Leaving England on the 18th September, 1740, the expedition proceeded by way of Madeira, past
the island of St. Catharine, along the Brazilian coast, by St. Julian Harbour, and finally
crossed the Strait of Lemaire.

"Terrible," said the narrative, "as the aspect of Tierra del Fuego may be, that of Staten Island
is more horrible still. It consists of a series of inaccessible rocks, crowned with sharp points.
Prodigiously high, they are covered with eternal snow, and edged with precipices. In short,
it is impossible to conceive anything more deserted, or more wild than this region."

Scarcely had the last vessels of the squadron filed through the strait, than a series of heavy
gales, squalls, and storms, caused the oldest sailors to vow that all they had hitherto known
of tempests were nothing in comparison.

This fearful experience lasted seven weeks without intermission. It is needless to state that
the vessels sustained great damage, that many men were swept away by the waves, numbers destroyed
by illnesses occasioned by the exposure to constant damp, and want of sufficient nourishment.

Two of the vessels, the Severe and the Pearl, were engulfed, and four others were lost sight
of. Anson was unable to reach Valdivia, the rendezvous he had selected in case of separation;
carried far to the north, he could only arrest his course at Juan Fernandez, which he reached
upon the 9th of June.

The Centurion had the greatest need of rest. She had lost eighty of her crew, her supply of
water had failed, and the sailors were so weakened by scurvy, that ten only of the remaining
number were available for the watch. The other vessels, in an equally bad plight, were not
long in regaining her.

The first care was to restore the exhausted crews, and to repair the worst injuries sustained
by the vessels. Anson sent the sick on shore and installed them in a sheltered hospital in
the open air, then putting himself at the head of the most enterprising sailors, he scoured
the entire island, and thoroughly examined its roads and shores. The best anchorage, according
to his report, was in Cumberland Bay. The south-eastern portion of Juan Fernandez, a little
island scarcely five leagues by two in extent, is dry, rocky, treeless; the ground lies low,
and is level in comparison with the northern portion. It produces water-cresses, purslain,
sorrels, turnips, and Sicilian radishes in abundance, as well as oats and clover. Anson sowed
carrots and lettuces, and planted plums, apricots, and peaches. He soon discovered that the
number of goats, left by the buccaneers, and which had multiplied marvellously, had since decreased.

The Spaniards, eager to deprive their enemies of this valuable resource, had let loose a quantity
of famished dogs upon the island, who chased the goats, and devoured so many of them, that,
at the time of Anson's visit, scarcely two hundred remained. The Commodore, for so Anson is
always called in the narrative of this voyage, reconnoitered the Island of Mas a Fuero, which
is only twenty-five leagues west of Juan Fernandez. Smaller than the latter, it is more wooded,
better watered, and possessed more goats.

At the beginning of December, the crews were sufficiently recovered for Anson to put into execution
his projected attack upon the Spaniards. He commenced by seizing several ships laden with precious
merchandise and ingots, and then set fire to the city of Paita. Upon this occasion the Spaniards
estimated their loss at one and a half million piastres.

Anson then proceeded to Quibo Bay, near Panama, to lie in wait for the galleon which, every
year, transported the treasures of the Philippine Islands to Acapulco. There, although the
English met with no inhabitants in the miserable huts, they found heaps of shells and beautiful
mother of pearl left there during the summer months by the fishermen of Panama. In mentioning
the resources of this place, we must not omit the immense turtles, which usually weighed two
hundred pounds, and which were caught in a singular manner. When a shoal of them were seen
floating asleep upon the surface of the ocean, a good swimmer would plunge in a few fathoms
deep, and rising, seize the turtle towards the tail, and endeavour to force it down. Upon awakening,
the creature's struggles to free itself suffice to support both the man and his prey, until
the arrival of a boat to receive them both.

After a fruitless cruise, Anson determined to burn three of the Spanish vessels which he had
seized and equipped. Distributing the crews and cargo upon the Centurion and the Gloucester,
the only two vessels remaining to him, he decided upon the 6th of May, 1742, to make for China,
where he hoped to find reinforcements and supplies.

But this voyage, which he expected to accomplish in sixty days, took him fully four months.
After a violent gale, the Gloucester, having all but foundered, and her crew being too reduced
to work her, was burnt. Her cargo of silver, and her supplies were trans-shipped to the Centurion,
which alone remained of all that magnificent fleet which two years earlier had set sail from
England!

Thrown out of his course, far to the north, Anson discovered on the 26th of August, the Isles
of Atanacan and Serigan, and the following day those of Saypan, Tinian, and Agnigan, which
form a part of the Marianne Archipelago.

A Spaniard, a sergeant, whom he captured in a small bark in these seas, told him that the island
of Tinian was inhabited, and abounded with cattle, fowls, and excellent fruits, such as oranges,
lemons, limes, bread fruit, &c. Nowhere could the Centurion have found a more welcome port
for her exhausted crew, now numbering only seventy-one men, worn out by privation and illness,
the only survivors of the 2000 sailors who had manned the fleet at its departure.

"The soil of this island," says the narrative, "is dry and somewhat sandy, which makes the
verdure of the meadows and woods more delicate and more uniform than is usually the case in
tropical climates.

"The ground rises gently from the English encampment to the centre of the isle, but before
its greatest height is reached, one meets with sloping glade, covered with fine clover, and
many brilliant flowers, and bordered by beautiful fruit-trees.

"The animals, who, for the greater part of the year, are the only lords of this beautiful retreat,
add to its romantic charm, and contribute not a little to its marvellous appearance. Thousands
of cattle may be seen grazing together in a vast meadow, and the sight is the more singular
as the animals are all of a milk white colour, with the exception of their ears, which are
generally black. Although it is a desert-island, the sight and sound of such a number of domestic
animals, rushing in crowds through the woods, suggest the idea of farmhouses and villages."

Truly an enchanting description! But has not the author rather drawn upon his imagination for
the charming details of his description?

After so long a voyage, after so many storms, it is little to be wondered at, if the verdant
woods, the exuberant vegetation, and the abundance of animal life, profoundly impressed the
minds of Anson's companions. Well! we shall soon learn whether his successors at Tinian found
it as wonderful as he did.

