"Truly she was, my lord, with the purpose of being transferred to the patronage of the Duchess--I
mean of the Lady Marjory of Douglas. Now, this beetle headed provost, who is after all but
a piece of blundering valiancy, has, like most such, a retainer of some slyness and cunning,
whom he uses in all his dealings, and whose suggestions he generally considers as his own ideas.
Whenever I would possess myself of a landward baron, I address myself to such a confidant,
who, in the present case, is called Kitt Henshaw, an old skipper upon the Tay, and who, having
in his time sailed as far as Campvere, holds with Sir Patrick Charteris the respect due to
one who has seen foreign countries. This his agent I have made my own, and by his means have
insinuated various apologies in order to postpone the departure of Catharine for Falkland."

"But to what good purpose?"

"I know not if it is wise to tell your Highness, lest you should disapprove of my views. I
meant the officers of the Commission for inquiry into heretical opinions should have found
the Fair Maid at Kinfauns, for our beauty is a peevish, self willed swerver from the church;
and certes, I designed that the knight should have come in for his share of the fines and confiscations
that were about to be inflicted. The monks were eager enough to be at him, seeing he hath had
frequent disputes with them about the salmon tithe."

"But wherefore wouldst thou have ruined the knight's fortunes, and brought the beautiful young
woman to the stake, perchance?"

"Pshaw, my Lord Duke! monks never burn pretty maidens. An old woman might have been in some
danger; and as for my Lord Provost, as they call him, if they had clipped off some of his fat
acres, it would have been some atonement for the needless brave he put on me in St. John's church."

"Methinks, John, it was but a base revenge," said Rothsay.

"Rest ye contented, my lord. He that cannot right himself by the hand must use his head. Well,
that chance was over by the tender hearted Douglas's declaring in favour of tender conscience;
and then, my lord, old Henshaw found no further objections to carrying the Fair Maid of Perth
to Falkland, not to share the dulness of the Lady Marjory's society, as Sir Patrick Charteris
and she herself doth opine, but to keep your Highness from tiring when we return from hunting
in the park."

There was again a long pause, in which the Prince seemed to muse deeply. At length he spoke.
"Ramorny, I have a scruple in this matter; but if I name it to thee, the devil of sophistry,
with which thou art possessed, will argue it out of me, as it has done many others. This girl
is the most beautiful, one excepted, whom I ever saw or knew; and I like her the more that
she bears some features of--Elizabeth of Dunbar. But she, I mean Catharine Glover, is contracted,
and presently to be wedded, to Henry the armourer, a craftsman unequalled for skill, and a
man at arms yet unmatched in the barrace. To follow out this intrigue would do a good fellow
too much wrong."

"Your Highness will not expect me to be very solicitous of Henry Smith's interest," said Ramorny,
looking at his wounded arm.

"By St. Andrew with his shored cross, this disaster of thine is too much harped upon, John
Ramorny! Others are content with putting a finger into every man's pie, but thou must thrust
in thy whole gory hand. It is done, and cannot be undone; let it be forgotten."

"Nay, my lord, you allude to it more frequently than I," answered the knight--"in derision,
it is true; while I--but I can be silent on the subject if I cannot forget it."

"Well, then, I tell thee that I have scruple about this intrigue. Dost thou remember, when
we went in a frolic to hear Father Clement preach, or rather to see this fair heretic, that
he spoke as touchingly as a minstrel about the rich man taking away the poor man's only ewe lamb?"

"A great matter, indeed," answered Sir John, "that this churl's wife's eldest son should be
fathered by the Prince of Scotland! How many earls would covet the like fate for their fair
countesses? and how many that have had such good luck sleep not a grain the worse for it?"

"And if I might presume to speak," said the mediciner, "the ancient laws of Scotland assigned
such a privilege to every feudal lord over his female vassals, though lack of spirit and love
of money hath made many exchange it for gold."

"I require no argument to urge me to be kind to a pretty woman; but this Catharine has been
ever cold to me," said the Prince.

"Nay, my lord," said Ramorny, "if, young, handsome, and a prince, you know not how to make
yourself acceptable to a fine woman, it is not for me to say more."

"And if it were not far too great audacity in me to speak again, I would say," quoth the leech,
"that all Perth knows that the Gow Chrom never was the maiden's choice, but fairly forced upon
her by her father. I know for certain that she refused him repeatedly."

"Nay, if thou canst assure us of that, the case is much altered," said Rothsay. "Vulcan was
a smith as well as Harry Wynd; he would needs wed Venus, and our chronicles tell us what came
of it."

"Then long may Lady Venus live and be worshipped," said Sir John Ramorny, "and success to the
gallant knight Mars who goes a-wooing to her goddess-ship!"

The discourse took a gay and idle turn for a few minutes; but the Duke of Rothsay soon dropped
it. "I have left," he said, "yonder air of the prison house behind me, and yet my spirits scarce
revive. I feel that drowsy, not unpleasing, yet melancholy mood that comes over us when exhausted
by exercise or satiated with pleasure. Some music now, stealing on the ear, yet not loud enough
to make us lift the eye, were a treat for the gods."

"Your Grace has but to speak your wishes, and the nymphs of the Tay are as favourable as the
fair ones upon the shore. Hark! it is a lute."

"A lute!" said the Duke of Rothsay, listening; "it is, and rarely touched. I should remember
that dying fall. Steer towards the boat from whence the music comes."

"It is old Henshaw," said Ramorny, "working up the stream. How, skipper!"

The boatman answered the hail, and drew up alongside of the Prince's barge.

"Oh, ho! my old friend!" said the Prince, recognising the figure as well as the appointments
of the French glee woman, Louise. "I think I owe thee something for being the means of thy
having a fright, at least, upon St. Valentine's Day. Into this boat with thee, lute, puppy
dog, scrip and all; I will prefer thee to a lady's service who shall feed thy very cur on capons
and canary."

"I trust your Highness will consider--" said Ramorny.

"I will consider nothing but my pleasure, John. Pray, do thou be so complying as to consider
it also."

"Is it indeed to a lady's service you would promote me?" said the glee maiden. "And where does
she dwell?"

"At Falkland," answered the Prince.

"Oh, I have heard of that great lady!" said Louise; "and will you indeed prefer me to your
right royal consort's service?"

"I will, by my honour--whenever I receive her as such. Mark that reservation, John," said he
aside to Ramorny.

The persons who were in the boat caught up the tidings, and, concluding a reconciliation was
about to take place betwixt the royal couple, exhorted Louise to profit by her good fortune,
and add herself to the Duchess of Rothsay's train. Several offered her some acknowledgment
for the exercise of her talents.

During this moment of delay, Ramorny whispered to Dwining: "Make in, knave, with some objection.
This addition is one too many. Rouse thy wits, while I speak a word with Henshaw."

"If I might presume to speak," said Dwining, "as one who have made my studies both in Spain
and Arabia, I would say, my lord, that the sickness has appeared in Edinburgh, and that there
may be risk in admitting this young wanderer into your Highness's vicinity."

"Ah! and what is it to thee," said Rothsay, "whether I choose to be poisoned by the pestilence
or the 'pothecary? Must thou, too, needs thwart my humour?"

While the Prince thus silenced the remonstrances of Dwining, Sir John Ramorny had snatched
a moment to learn from Henshaw that the removal of the Duchess of Rothsay from Falkland was
still kept profoundly secret, and that Catharine Glover would arrive there that evening or
the next morning, in expectation of being taken under the noble lady's protection.

The Duke of Rothsay, deeply plunged in thought, received this intimation so coldly, that Ramorny
took the liberty of remonstrating. "This, my lord," he said, "is playing the spoiled child
of fortune. You wish for liberty; it comes. You wish for beauty; it awaits you, with just so
much delay as to render the boon more precious. Even your slightest desires seem a law to the
Fates; for you desire music when it seems most distant, and the lute and song are at your hand.
These things, so sent, should be enjoyed, else we are but like petted children, who break and
throw from them the toys they have wept themselves sick for."

"To enjoy pleasure, Ramorny," said the Prince, "a man should have suffered pain, as it requires
fasting to gain a good appetite. We, who can have all for a wish, little enjoy that all when
we have possessed it. Seest thou yonder thick cloud, which is about to burst to rain? It seems
to stifle me--the waters look dark and lurid--the shores have lost their beautiful form--"

"My lord, forgive your servant," said Ramorny. "You indulge a powerful imagination, as an unskilful
horseman permits a fiery steed to rear until he falls back on his master and crushes him. I
pray you shake off this lethargy. Shall the glee maiden make some music?"

"Let her; but it must be melancholy: all mirth would at this moment jar on my ear."

The maiden sung a melancholy dirge in Norman French; the words, of which the following is an
imitation, were united to a tune as doleful as they are themselves:

     Yes, thou mayst sigh,
     And look once more at all around,
     At stream and bank, and sky and ground.
     Thy life its final course has found,
     And thou must die.

     Yes, lay thee down,
     And while thy struggling pulses flutter,
     Bid the grey monk his soul mass mutter,
     And the deep bell its death tone utter--
     Thy life is gone.

     Be not afraid.
     'Tis but a pang, and then a thrill,
     A fever fit, and then a chill,
     And then an end of human ill,
     For thou art dead.

The Prince made no observation on the music; and the maiden, at Ramorny's beck, went on from
time to time with her minstrel craft, until the evening sunk down into rain, first soft and
gentle, at length in great quantities, and accompanied by a cold wind. There was neither cloak
nor covering for the Prince, and he sullenly rejected that which Ramorny offered.

"It is not for Rothsay to wear your cast garments, Sir John; this melted snow, which I feel
pierce me to the very marrow, I am now encountering by your fault. Why did you presume to put
off the boat without my servants and apparel?"

Ramorny did not attempt an exculpation; for he knew the Prince was in one of those humours,
when to enlarge upon a grievance was more pleasing to him than to have his mouth stopped by
any reasonable apology. In sullen silence, or amid unsuppressed chiding, the boat arrived at
the fishing village of Newburgh. The party landed, and found horses in readiness, which, indeed,
Ramorny had long since provided for the occasion. Their quality underwent the Prince's bitter
sarcasm, expressed to Ramorny sometimes by direct words, oftener by bitter gibes. At length
they were mounted and rode on through the closing night and the falling rain, the Prince leading
the way with reckless haste. The glee maiden, mounted by his express order, attended them and
well for her that, accustomed to severe weather, and exercise both on foot and horseback, she
supported as firmly as the men the fatigues of the nocturnal ride. Ramorny was compelled to
keep at the Prince's rein, being under no small anxiety lest, in his wayward fit, he might
ride off from him entirely, and, taking refuge in the house of some loyal baron, escape the
snare which was spread for him. He therefore suffered inexpressibly during the ride, both in
mind and in body.

At length the forest of Falkland received them, and a glimpse of the moon showed the dark and
huge tower, an appendage of royalty itself, though granted for a season to the Duke of Albany.
On a signal given the drawbridge fell. Torches glared in the courtyard, menials attended, and
the Prince, assisted from horseback, was ushered into an apartment, where Ramorny waited on
him, together with Dwining, and entreated him to take the leech's advice. The Duke of Rothsay
repulsed the proposal, haughtily ordered his bed to be prepared, and having stood for some
time shivering in his dank garments beside a large blazing fire, he retired to his apartment
without taking leave of anyone.

"You see the peevish humour of this childish boy, now," said Ramorny to Dwining; "can you wonder
that a servant who has done so much for him as I have should be tired of such a master?" 

My father sketches several plans; he disapproves of a technical treatise, in which he thinks
that Fitzjames would be at a disadvantage from the inevitable comparison with his uncle, the
serjeant; but he advises some kind of legal history, resembling Hallam's history inverted.
In the proposed book the legal aspect should be in the foreground
and the political in the background.

He expounds at length a scheme which has not been executed, and which would, I think, be exceedingly
valuable. It was suggested by his own lectures on French history, though it must be 'six times
longer and sixty times more exact and complete.' It is to be a history
of the English administrative system from feudal times downwards,
giving an account of the development of the machinery for justice,
revenue, ecclesiastical affairs, war, trade, colonies, police, and
so forth.

Each chapter should expound the actual state of things, and trace
the historical development of one department, and would involve a
variety of parenthetical inquiries, which should be carefully subordinated
to the main purpose.

Various hints are given as to the course of investigation that will be necessary. Fitzjames
began to work upon this scheme; and his opening chapters fill two
or three large manuscript books.

The plan was abandoned for one more suitable to his powers.

     Meanwhile, the literary activity which had
     alarmed his father was not abated, and,
     indeed, before very long, was increased.
     
     IV. EDUCATION COMMISSION AND RECORDERSHIP

     

Another employment for a time gave him work, outside both of his professional and his literary
career, though it remained something of a parenthesis. On June 30, 1858, a royal commission was
appointed to investigate the state of popular education. The Duke of Newcastle was chairman
and the other members were Sir J. T. Coleridge, W. C. Lake (afterwards Dean of Durham), Professor
Goldwin Smith, Nassau Senior, Edward Miall, and the Rev. William Rogers, now rector of St.
Botolph, Bishopsgate.[72] The Duke of Newcastle was, as I have said,
the patron of the editor of the 'Saturday Review,' and perhaps had
some interest in that adventure as in the 'Morning Chronicle.' He
probably knew of my brother through this connection, and he now proposed
him, says Mr. Rogers,[73] as secretary to the commission.

 We have both left our apparel behind. There is as much female trumpery in the wardrobe
adjoining to my sleeping room as would equip a whole carnival. Look you, I will play Dame Marjory,
disposed on this day bed here with a mourning veil and a wreath of willow, to show my forsaken
plight; thou, John, wilt look starch and stiff enough for her Galwegian maid of honour, the
Countess Hermigild; and Dwining shall present the old Hecate, her nurse--only she hath more
beard on her upper lip than Dwining on his whole face, and skull to boot. He should have the
commodity of a beard to set her forth conformably. Get thy kitchen drudges, and what passable
pages thou hast with thee, to make my women of the bedroom. Hearest thou? about it instantly."

Ramorny hasted into the anteroom, and told Dwining the Prince's device.

"Do thou look to humour the fool," he said; "I care not how little I see him, knowing what
is to be done."

"Trust all to me," said the physician, shrugging his shoulders. "What sort of a butcher is
he that can cut the lamb's throat, yet is afraid to hear it bleat?"

"Tush, fear not my constancy: I cannot forget that he would have cast me into the cloister
with as little regard as if he threw away the truncheon of a broken lance. Begone--yet stay;
ere you go to arrange this silly pageant, something must be settled to impose on the thick
witted Charteris. He is like enough, should he be left in the belief that the Duchess of Rothsay
is still here, and Catharine Glover in attendance on her, to come down with offers of service,
and the like, when, as I need scarce tell thee, his presence would be inconvenient. Indeed,
this is the more likely, that some folks have given a warmer name to the iron headed knight's
great and tender patronage of this damsel."

"With that hint, let me alone to deal with him. I will send him such a letter, that for this
month he shall hold himself as ready for a journey to hell as to Falkland. Can you tell me
the name of the Duchess's confessor?"

"Waltheof, a grey friar."

"Enough--then here I start."

In a few minutes, for he was a clerk of rare celerity, Dwining finished a letter, which he
placed in Ramorny's hand.

"This is admirable, and would have made thy fortune with Rothsay. I think I should have been
too jealous to trust thee in his household, save that his day is closed."

"Read it aloud," said Dwining, "that we may judge if it goes trippingly off."

And Ramorny read as follows: "By command of our high and mighty Princess Marjory, Duchess of
Rothsay, and so forth, we Waltheof, unworthy brother of the order of St. Francis, do thee,
Sir Patrick Charteris, knight of Kinfauns, to know, that her Highness marvels much at the temerity
with which you have sent to her presence a woman of whose fame she can judge but lightly, seeing
she hath made her abode, without any necessity, for more than a week in thine own castle, without
company of any other female, saving menials; of which foul cohabitation the savour is gone
up through Fife, Angus, and Perthshire. Nevertheless, her Highness, considering the ease as
one of human frailty, hath not caused this wanton one to be scourged with nettles, or otherwise
to dree penance; but, as two good brethren of the convent of Lindores, the Fathers Thickskull
and Dundermore, have been summoned up to the Highlands upon an especial call, her Highness
hath committed to their care this maiden Catharine, with charge to convey her to her father,
whom she states to be residing beside Loch Tay, under whose protection she will find a situation
more fitting her qualities and habits than the Castle of Falkland, while her Highness the Duchess
of Rothsay abides there. She hath charged the said reverend brothers so to deal with the young
woman as may give her a sense of the sin of incontinence, and she commendeth thee to confession
and penitence.--Signed, Waltheof, by command of an high and mighty Princess"; and so forth.

When he had finished, "Excellent--excellent!" Ramorny exclaimed. "This unexpected rebuff will
drive Charteris mad! He hath been long making a sort of homage to this lady, and to find himself
suspected of incontinence, when he was expecting the full credit of a charitable action, will
altogether confound him; and, as thou say'st, it will be long enough ere he come hither to
look after the damsel or do honour to the dame. But away to thy pageant, while I prepare that
which shall close the pageant for ever."

It was an hour before noon, when Catharine, escorted by old Henshaw and a groom of the Knight
of Kinfauns, arrived before the lordly tower of Falkland. The broad banner which was displayed
from it bore the arms of Rothsay, the servants who appeared wore the colours of the Prince's
household, all confirming the general belief that the Duchess still resided there. Catharine's
heart throbbed, for she had heard that the Duchess had the pride as well as the high courage
of the house of Douglas, and felt uncertain touching the reception she was to experience. On
entering the castle, she observed that the train was smaller than she had expected, but, as
the Duchess lived in close retirement, she was little surprised at this. In a species of anteroom
she was met by a little old woman, who seemed bent double with age, and supported herself upon
an ebony staff.

"Truly thou art welcome, fair daughter," said she, saluting Catharine, "and, as I may say,
to an afflicted house; and I trust (once more saluting her) thou wilt be a consolation to my
precious and right royal daughter the Duchess. Sit thee down, my child, till I see whether
my lady be at leisure to receive thee. Ah, my child, thou art very lovely indeed, if Our Lady
hath given to thee a soul to match with so fair a body."

With that the counterfeit old woman crept into the next apartment, where she found Rothsay
in the masquerading habit he had prepared, and Ramorny, who had evaded taking part in the pageant,
in his ordinary attire.

"Thou art a precious rascal, sir doctor," said the Prince; "by my honour, I think thou couldst
find in thy heart to play out the whole play thyself, lover's part and all."

"If it were to save your Highness trouble," said the leech, with his usual subdued laugh.

"No--no," said Rothsay, "I never need thy help, man; and tell me now, how look I, thus disposed
on the couch--languishing and ladylike, ha?"

"Something too fine complexioned and soft featured for the Lady Marjory of Douglas, if I may
presume to say so," said the leech.

"Away, villain, and marshal in this fair frost piece--fear not she will complain of my effeminacy;
and thou, Ramorny, away also."

As the knight left the apartment by one door, the fictitious old woman ushered in Catharine
Glover by another. The room had been carefully darkened to twilight, so that Catharine saw
the apparently female figure stretched on the couch without the least suspicion.

"Is that the maiden?" asked Rothsay, in a voice naturally sweet, and now carefully modulated
to a whispering tone. "Let her approach, Griselda, and kiss our hand."

The supposed nurse led the trembling maiden forward to the side of the couch, and signed to
her to kneel. Catharine did so, and kissed with much devotion and simplicity the gloved hand
which the counterfeit duchess extended to her.

"Be not afraid," said the same musical voice; "in me you only see a melancholy example of the
vanity of human greatness; happy those, my child, whose rank places them beneath the storms
of state."

While he spoke, he put his arms around her neck and drew her towards him, as if to salute her
in token of welcome. But the kiss was bestowed with an earnestness which so much overacted
the part of the fair patroness, that Catharine, concluding the Duchess had lost her senses,
screamed aloud.

"Peace, fool! it is I--David of Rothsay."

Catharine looked around her; the nurse was gone, and the Duke tearing off his veil, she saw
herself in the power of a daring young libertine.

"Now be present with me, Heaven!" she said; "and Thou wilt, if I forsake not myself."

As this resolution darted through her mind, she repressed her disposition to scream, and, as
far as she might, strove to conceal her fear.

"The jest hath been played," she said, with as much firmness as she could assume; "may I entreat
that your Highness will now unhand me?" for he still kept hold of her arm.

"Nay, my pretty captive, struggle not--why should you fear?"

"I do not struggle, my lord. As you are pleased to detain me, I will not, by striving, provoke
you to use me ill, and give pain to yourself, when you have time to think."

"Why, thou traitress, thou hast held me captive for months," said the Prince, "and wilt thou
not let me hold thee for a moment?"

"This were gallantry, my lord, were it in the streets of Perth, where I might listen or escape
as I listed; it is tyranny here."

"And if I did let thee go, whither wouldst thou fly?" said Rothsay. "The bridges are up, the
portcullis down, and the men who follow me are strangely deaf to a peevish maiden's squalls.
Be kind, therefore, and you shall know what it is to oblige a prince."

"Unloose me, then, my lord, and hear me appeal from thyself to thyself, from Rothsay to the
Prince of Scotland. I am the daughter of an humble but honest citizen. I am, I may well nigh
say, the spouse of a brave and honest man. If I have given your Highness any encouragement
for what you have done, it has been unintentional. Thus forewarned, I entreat you to forego
your power over me, and suffer me to depart. Your Highness can obtain nothing from me, save
by means equally unworthy of knighthood or manhood."

"You are bold, Catharine," said the Prince, "but neither as a knight nor a man can I avoid
accepting a defiance. I must teach you the risk of such challenges."

While he spoke, he attempted to throw his arms again around her; but she eluded his grasp,
and proceeded in the same tone of firm decision.

"My strength, my lord, is as great to defend myself in an honourable strife as yours can be
to assail me with a most dishonourable purpose. Do not shame yourself and me by putting it
to the combat. You may stun me with blows, or you may call aid to overpower me; but otherwise
you will fail of your purpose."

"What a brute you would make me!" said the Prince. "The force I would use is no more than excuses
women in yielding to their own weakness."

He sat down in some emotion.

"Then keep it," said Catharine, "for those women who desire such an excuse. My resistance is
that of the most determined mind which love of honour and fear of shame ever inspired. Alas!
my lord, could you succeed, you would but break every bond between me and life, between yourself
and honour. I have been trained fraudulently here, by what decoys I know not; but were I to
go dishonoured hence, it would be to denounce the destroyer of my happiness to every quarter
of Europe. I would take the palmer's staff in my hand, and wherever chivalry is honoured, or
the word Scotland has been heard, I would proclaim the heir of a hundred kings, the son of
the godly Robert Stuart, the heir of the heroic Bruce, a truthless, faithless man, unworthy
of the crown he expects and of the spurs he wears. Every lady in wide Europe would hold your
name too foul for her lips; every worthy knight would hold you a baffled, forsworn caitiff,
false to the first vow of arms, the protection of woman and the defence of the feeble."

Rothsay resumed his seat, and looked at her with a countenance in which resentment was mingled
with admiration. "You forget to whom you speak, maiden. Know, the distinction I have offered
you is one for which hundreds whose trains you are born to bear would feel gratitude."

"Once more, my lord," resumed Catharine, "keep these favours for those by whom they are prized;
or rather reserve your time and your health for other and nobler pursuits--for the defence
of your country and the happiness of your subjects. Alas, my lord, how willingly would an exulting
people receive you for their chief! How gladly would they close around you, did you show desire
to head them against the oppression of the mighty, the violence of the lawless, the seduction
of the vicious, and the tyranny of the hypocrite!"

The Duke of Rothsay, whose virtuous feelings were as easily excited as they were evanescent,
was affected by the enthusiasm with which she spoke. "Forgive me if I have alarmed you, maiden,"
he said "thou art too noble minded to be the toy of passing pleasure, for which my mistake
destined thee; and I, even were thy birth worthy of thy noble spirit and transcendent beauty,
have no heart to give thee; for by the homage of the heart only should such as thou be wooed.
But my hopes have been blighted, Catharine: the only woman I ever loved has been torn from
me in the very wantonness of policy, and a wife imposed on me whom I must ever detest, even
had she the loveliness and softness which alone can render a woman amiable in my eyes. My health
is fading even in early youth; and all that is left for me is to snatch such flowers as the
short passage from life to the grave will now present. Look at my hectic cheek; feel, if you
will, my intermitting pulse; and pity me and excuse me if I, whose rights as a prince and as
a man have been trampled upon and usurped, feel occasional indifference towards the rights
of others, and indulge a selfish desire to gratify the wish of the passing moment."

"Oh, my lord!" exclaimed Catharine, with the enthusiasm which belonged to her character--"I
will call you my dear lord, for dear must the heir of Bruce be to every child of Scotland--let
me not, I pray, hear you speak thus! Your glorious ancestor endured exile, persecution, the
night of famine, and the day of unequal combat, to free his country; do you practise the like
self denial to free yourself. Tear yourself from those who find their own way to greatness
smoothed by feeding your follies. Distrust yon dark Ramorny! You know it not, I am sure--you
could not know; but the wretch who could urge the daughter to courses of shame by threatening
the life of the aged father is capable of all that is vile, all that is treacherous!"

"Did Ramorny do this?" said the Prince.

"He did indeed, my lord, and he dares not deny it."

"It shall be looked to," answered the Duke of Rothsay. "I have ceased to love him; but he has
suffered much for my sake, and I must see his services honourably requited."

"His services! Oh, my lord, if chronicles speak true, such services brought Troy to ruins and
gave the infidels possession of Spain."

"Hush, maiden--speak within compass, I pray you," said the Prince, rising up; "our conference
ends here."

"Yet one word, my Lord Duke of Rothsay," said Catharine, with animation, while her beautiful
countenance resembled that of an admonitory angel. "I cannot tell what impels me to speak thus
boldly; but the fire burns within me, and will break out. Leave this castle without an hour's
delay; the air is unwholesome for you. Dismiss this Ramorny before the day is ten minutes older;
his company is most dangerous."

"What reason have you for saying this?"

"None in especial," answered Catharine, abashed at her own eagerness--"none, perhaps, excepting
my fears for your safety."

"To vague fears the heir of Bruce must not listen. What, ho! who waits without?"

Ramorny entered, and bowed low to the Duke and to the maiden, whom, perhaps, he considered
as likely to be preferred to the post of favourite sultana, and therefore entitled to a courteous
obeisance.

"Ramorny," said the Prince, "is there in the household any female of reputation who is fit
to wait on this young woman till we can send her where she may desire to go?"

"I fear," replied Ramorny, "if it displease not your Highness to hear the truth, your household
is indifferently provided in that way; and that, to speak the very verity, the glee maiden
is the most decorous amongst us."

"Let her wait upon this young person, then, since better may not be. And take patience, maiden,
for a few hours."

Catharine retired.

"So, my lord, part you so soon from the Fair Maid of Perth? This is, indeed, the very wantonness
of victory."

"There is neither victory nor defeat in the case," returned the Prince, drily. "The girl loves
me not; nor do I love her well enough to torment myself concerning her scruples."

"The chaste Malcolm the Maiden revived in one of his descendants!" said Ramorny.

"Favour me, sir, by a truce to your wit, or by choosing a different subject for its career.
It is noon, I believe, and you will oblige me by commanding them to serve up dinner."

Ramorny left the room; but Rothsay thought he discovered a smile upon his countenance, and
to be the subject of this man's satire gave him no ordinary degree of pain. He summoned, however,
the knight to his table, and even admitted Dwining to the same honour. The conversation was
of a lively and dissolute cast, a tone encouraged by the Prince, as if designing to counterbalance
the gravity of his morals in the morning, which Ramorny, who was read in old chronicles, had
the boldness to liken to the continence of Scipio.

The banquet, nothwithstanding the Duke's indifferent health, was protracted in idle wantonness
far beyond the rules of temperance; and, whether owing simply to the strength of the wine which
he drank, or the weakness of his constitution, or, as it is probable, because the last wine
which he quaffed had been adulterated by Dwining, it so happened that the Prince, towards the
end of the repast, fell into a lethargic sleep, from which it seemed impossible to rouse him.
Sir John Ramorny and Dwining carried him to his chamber, accepting no other assistance than
that of another person, whom we will afterwards give name to.

Next morning, it was announced that the Prince was taken ill of an infectious disorder; and,
to prevent its spreading through the household, no one was admitted to wait on him save his
late master of horse, the physician Dwining, and the domestic already mentioned; one of whom
seemed always to remain in the apartment, while the others observed a degree of precaution
respecting their intercourse with the rest of the family, so strict as to maintain the belief
that he was dangerously ill of an infectious disorder.

CHAPTER XXXII.

     King Richard II Act V. Scene I.

Far different had been the fate of the misguided heir of Scotland from that which was publicly
given out in the town of Falkland. His ambitious uncle had determined on his death, as the
means of removing the first and most formidable barrier betwixt his own family and the throne.
James, the younger son of the King, was a mere boy, who might at more leisure be easily set
aside. Ramorny's views of aggrandisement, and the resentment which he had latterly entertained
against his masters made him a willing agent in young Rothsay's destruction. Dwining's love
of gold, and his native malignity of disposition, rendered him equally forward. It had been
resolved, with the most calculating cruelty, that all means which might leave behind marks
of violence were to be carefully avoided, and the extinction of life suffered to take place
of itself by privation of every kind acting upon a frail and impaired constitution. The Prince
of Scotland was not to be murdered, as Ramorny had expressed himself on another occasion, he
was only to cease to exist. Rothsay's bedchamber in the Tower of Falkland was well adapted
for the execution of such a horrible project. A small, narrow staircase, scarce known to exist,
opened from thence by a trapdoor to the subterranean dungeons of the castle, through a passage
by which the feudal lord was wont to visit, in private and in disguise, the inhabitants of
those miserable regions. By this staircase the villains conveyed the insensible Prince to the
lowest dungeon of the castle, so deep in the bowels of the earth, that no cries or groans,
it was supposed, could possibly be heard, while the strength of its door and fastenings must
for a long time have defied force, even if the entrance could have been discovered. Bonthron,
who had been saved from the gallows for the purpose, was the willing agent of Ramorny's unparalleled
cruelty to his misled and betrayed patron.

This wretch revisited the dungeon at the time when the Prince's lethargy began to wear off,
and when, awaking to sensation, he felt himself deadly cold, unable to move, and oppressed
with fetters, which scarce permitted him to stir from the dank straw on which he was laid.
His first idea was that he was in a fearful dream, his next brought a confused augury of the
truth. He called, shouted, yelled at length in frenzy but no assistance came, and he was only
answered by the vaulted roof of the dungeon. The agent of hell heard these agonizing screams,
and deliberately reckoned them against the taunts and reproaches with which Rothsay had expressed
his instinctive aversion to him. When, exhausted and hopeless, the unhappy youth remained silent,
the savage resolved to present himself before the eyes of his prisoner. The locks were drawn,
the chain fell; the Prince raised himself as high as his fetters permitted; a red glare, against
which he was fain to shut his eyes, streamed through the vault; and when he opened them again,
it was on the ghastly form of one whom he had reason to think dead. He sunk back in horror.

"I am judged and condemned," he exclaimed, "and the most abhorred fiend in the infernal regions
is sent to torment me!"

"I live, my lord," said Bonthron; "and that you may live and enjoy life, be pleased to sit
up and eat your victuals."

"Free me from these irons," said the Prince, "release me from this dungeon, and, dog as thou
art, thou shalt be the richest man in Scotland."

"If you would give me the weight of your shackles in gold," said Bonthron, "I would rather
see the iron on you than have the treasure myself! But look up; you were wont to love delicate
fare--behold how I have catered for you."

The wretch, with fiendish glee, unfolded a piece of rawhide covering the bundle which he bore
under' his arm, and, passing the light to and fro before it, showed the unhappy Prince a bull's
head recently hewn from the trunk, and known in Scotland as the certain signal of death. He
placed it at the foot of the bed, or rather lair, on which the Prince lay.

"Be moderate in your food," he said; "it is like to be long ere thou getst another meal."

"Tell me but one thing, wretch," said the Prince. "Does Ramorny know of this practice?"

"How else hadst thou been decoyed hither? Poor woodcock, thou art snared!" answered the murderer.

With these words, the door shut, the bolts resounded, and the unhappy Prince was left to darkness,
solitude, and misery. "Oh, my father!--my prophetic father! The staff I leaned on has indeed
proved a spear!"

We will not dwell on the subsequent hours, nay, days, of bodily agony and mental despair.

But it was not the pleasure of Heaven that so great a crime should be perpetrated with impunity.

Catharine Glover and the glee woman, neglected by the other inmates, who seemed to be engaged
with the tidings of the Prince's illness, were, however, refused permission to leave the castle
until it should be seen how this alarming disease was to terminate, and whether it was actually
an infectious sickness. Forced on each other's society, the two desolate women became companions,
if not friends; and the union drew somewhat closer when Catharine discovered that this was
the same female minstrel on whose account Henry Wynd had fallen under her displeasure. She
now heard his complete vindication, and listened with ardour to the praises which Louise heaped
on her gallant protector. On the other hand, the minstrel, who felt the superiority of Catharine's
station and character, willingly dwelt upon a theme which seemed to please her, and recorded
her gratitude to the stout smith in the little song of "Bold and True," which was long a favourite
in Scotland.

     Oh, bold and true,
     In bonnet blue,
     That fear or falsehood never knew,
     Whose heart was loyal to his word,
     Whose hand was faithful to his sword--
     Seek Europe wide from sea to sea,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!

     I've seen Almain's proud champions prance,
     Have seen the gallant knights of France,
     Unrivall'd with the sword and lance,
     Have seen the sons of England true,
     Wield the brown bill and bend the yew.
     Search France the fair, and England free,
     But bonny blue cap still for me!

In short, though Louise's disreputable occupation would have been in other circumstances an
objection to Catharine's voluntarily frequenting her company, yet, forced together as they
now were, she found her a humble and accommodating companion.

They lived in this manner for four or five days, and, in order to avoid as much as possible
the gaze, and perhaps the incivility, of the menials in the offices, they prepared their food
in their own apartment. In the absolutely necessary intercourse with domestics, Louise, more
accustomed to expedients, bolder by habit, and desirous to please Catharine, willingly took
on herself the trouble of getting from the pantler the materials of their slender meal, and
of arranging it with the dexterity of her country.

The glee woman had been abroad for this purpose upon the sixth day, a little before noon; and
the desire of fresh air, or the hope to find some sallad or pot herbs, or at least an early
flower or two, with which to deck their board, had carried her into the small garden appertaining
to the castle. She re-entered her apartment in the tower with a countenance pale as ashes,
and a frame which trembled like an aspen leaf. Her terror instantly extended itself to Catharine,
who could hardly find words to ask what new misfortune had occurred.

"Is the Duke of Rothsay dead?"

"Worse! they are starving him alive."

"Madness, woman!"

"No--no--no--no!" said Louise, speaking under her breath, and huddling her words so thick upon
each other that Catharine could hardly catch the sense. "I was seeking for flowers to dress
your pottage, because you said you loved them yesterday; my poor little dog, thrusting himself
into a thicket of yew and holly bushes that grow out of some old ruins close to the castle
wall, came back whining and howling. I crept forward to see what might be the cause--and, oh!
I heard a groaning as of one in extreme pain, but so faint, that it seemed to arise out of
the very depth of the earth. At length, I found it proceeded from a small rent in the wall,
covered with ivy; and when I laid my ear close to the opening, I could hear the Prince's voice
distinctly say, 'It cannot now last long'--and then it sunk away in something like a prayer."

"Gracious Heaven! did you speak to him?"

"I said, 'Is it you, my lord?' and the answer was, 'Who mocks me with that title?' I asked
him if I could help him, and he answered with a voice I shall never forget, 'Food--food! I
die of famine!' So I came hither to tell you. What is to be done? Shall we alarm the house?"

"Alas! that were more likely to destroy than to aid," said Catharine.

"And what then shall we do?" said Louise.

"I know not yet," said Catharine, prompt and bold on occasions of moment, though yielding to
her companion in ingenuity of resource on ordinary occasions: "I know not yet, but something
we will do: the blood of Bruce shall not die unaided."

So saying, she seized the small cruise which contained their soup, and the meat of which it
was made, wrapped some thin cakes which she had baked into the fold of her plaid, and, beckoning
her companion to follow with a vessel of milk, also part of their provisions, she hastened
towards the garden.

"So, our fair vestal is stirring abroad?" said the only man she met, who was one of the menials;
but Catharine passed on without notice or reply, and gained the little garden without farther
interruption.

Louise indicated to her a heap of ruins, which, covered with underwood, was close to the castle
wall. It had probably been originally a projection from the building; and the small fissure,
which communicated with the dungeon, contrived for air, had terminated within it. But the aperture
had been a little enlarged by decay, and admitted a dim ray of light to its recesses, although
it could not be observed by those who visited the place with torchlight aids.

"Here is dead silence," said Catharine, after she had listened attentively for a moment. "Heaven
and earth, he is gone!"

"We must risk something," said her companion, and ran her fingers over the strings of her guitar.

A sigh was the only answer from the depth of the dungeon. Catharine then ventured to speak.
"I am here, my lord--I am here, with food and drink."

"Ha! Ramorny! The jest comes too late; I am dying," was the answer.

"His brain is turned, and no wonder," thought Catharine; "but whilst there is life, there may
be hope."

"It is I, my lord, Catharine Glover. I have food, if I could pass it safely to you."

"Heaven bless thee, maiden! I thought the pain was over, but it glows again within me at the
name of food."

"The food is here, but how--ah, how can I pass it to you? the chink is so narrow, the wall
is so thick! Yet there is a remedy--I have it. Quick, Louise; cut me a willow bough, the tallest
you can find."

The glee maiden obeyed, and, by means of a cleft in the top of the wand, Catharine transmitted
several morsels of the soft cakes, soaked in broth, which served at once for food and for drink.

The unfortunate young man ate little, and with difficulty, but prayed for a thousand blessings
on the head of his comforter. "I had destined thee to be the slave of my vices," he said, "and
yet thou triest to become the preserver of my life! But away, and save thyself."

"I will return with food as I shall see opportunity," said Catharine, just as the glee maiden
plucked her sleeve and desired her to be silent and stand close.

Both crouched among the ruins, and they heard the voices of Ramorny and the mediciner in close
conversation.

"He is stronger than I thought," said the former, in a low, croaking tone. "How long held out
Dalwolsy, when the knight of Liddesdale prisoned him in his castle of Hermitage?"

"For a fortnight," answered Dwining; "but he was a strong man, and had some assistance by grain
which fell from a granary above his prison house."

"Were it not better end the matter more speedily? The Black Douglas comes this way. He is not
in Albany's secret. He will demand to see the Prince, and all must be over ere he comes."

They passed on in their dark and fatal conversation.

"Now gain we the tower," said Catharine to her companion, when she saw they had left the garden.
"I had a plan of escape for myself; I will turn it into one of rescue for the Prince. 'No variety
of intemperance is more evidently doomed to work out its own ill-reward than that which is practised
by a bookseller's drudge of the higher order.' He appeals to various precedents, such as Southey,
whose brain gave way under the pressure. Editors and publishers soon find out the man who is
dependent upon them for support, and 'since the abolition of West India slavery the world has
known no more severe servitude than his.' 'Can a man of your age,'
he asks, 'have the accumulated capital of knowledge necessary to stand
such a periodical expenditure?' 'What I have read of your writing
seems to me to be singularly unequal.

At times it is excellent in style and in conception, and evidently
flowing from springs pure, copious, and active, and giving promise
of great future eminence.

At other times the marks of haste, of exhaustion, and being run out of breath, are perceptible
to an eye so sensitive as mine is on this subject. I see no reason why you should not become a great
writer and one of the teachers of your country-folk, if you will
resolve never to write except from a full mind--which is just as essential
to literary success as it is to success in singing never to sing but
out of well inflated lungs.' He ends by the practical application
of an entreaty to make use of the family purse.

The reference to a law-book is explained by a correspondence which is going on at the same period
in regard to various literary proposals.



They sobbed in each other's arms, and the intervening hours till evening were spent in endeavouring
to devise some better mode of supplying the captive with nourishment, and in the construction
of a tube, composed of hollow reeds, slipping into each other, by which liquids might be conveyed
to him. The bell of the village church of Falkland tolled to vespers. The dey, or farm woman,
entered with her pitchers to deliver the milk for the family, and to hear and tell the news
stirring. She had scarcely entered the kitchen when the female minstrel, again throwing herself
in Catharine's arms, and assuring her of her unalterable fidelity, crept in silence downstairs,
the little dog under her arm. A moment after, she was seen by the breathless Catharine, wrapt
in the dey woman's cloak, and walking composedly across the drawbridge.

"So," said the warder, "you return early tonight, May Bridget? Small mirth towards in the hall--ha,
wench! Sick times are sad times!"

"I have forgotten my tallies," said the ready witted French woman, "and will return in the
skimming of a bowie."

She went onward, avoiding the village of Falkland, and took a footpath which led through the
park. Catharine breathed freely, and blessed God when she saw her lost in the distance. It
was another anxious hour for Catharine which occurred before the escape of the fugitive was
discovered. This happened so soon as the dey girl, having taken an hour to perform a task which
ten minutes might have accomplished, was about to return, and discovered that some one had
taken away her grey frieze cloak. A strict search was set on foot; at length the women of the
house remembered the glee maiden, and ventured to suggest her as one not unlikely to exchange
an old cloak for a new one. The warder, strictly questioned, averred he saw the dey woman depart
immediately after vespers; and on this being contradicted by the party herself, he could suggest,
as the only alternative, that it must needs have been the devil.

As, however, the glee woman could not be found, the real circumstances of the case were easily
guessed at; and the steward went to inform Sir John Ramorny and Dwining, who were now scarcely
ever separate, of the escape of one of their female captives. Everything awakens the suspicions
of the guilty. They looked on each other with faces of dismay, and then went together to the
humble apartment of Catharine, that they might take her as much as possible by surprise while
they inquired into the facts attending Louise's disappearance.

"Where is your companion, young woman?" said Ramorny, in a tone of austere gravity.

"I have no companion here," answered Catharine.

"Trifle not," replied the knight; "I mean the glee maiden, who lately dwelt in this chamber
with you."

"She is gone, they tell me," said Catharine--"gone about an hour since."

"And whither?" said Dwining.

"How," answered Catharine, "should I know which way a professed wanderer may choose to travel?
She was tired no doubt of a solitary life, so different from the scenes of feasting and dancing
which her trade leads her to frequent. She is gone, and the only wonder is that she should
have stayed so long."

"This, then," said Ramorny, "is all you have to tell us?"

"All that I have to tell you, Sir John," answered Catharine, firmly; "and if the Prince himself
inquire, I can tell him no more."

"There is little danger of his again doing you the honour to speak to you in person," said
Ramorny, "even if Scotland should escape being rendered miserable by the sad event of his decease."

"Is the Duke of Rothsay so very ill?" asked Catharine.

"No help, save in Heaven," answered Ramorny, looking upward.

"Then may there yet be help there," said Catharine, "if human aid prove unavailing!"

"Amen!" said Ramorny, with the most determined gravity; while Dwining adopted a face fit to
echo the feeling, though it seemed to cost him a painful struggle to suppress his sneering
yet soft laugh of triumph, which was peculiarly excited by anything having a religious tendency.

"And it is men--earthly men, and not incarnate devils, who thus appeal to Heaven, while they
are devouring by inches the life blood of their hapless master!" muttered Catharine, as her
two baffled inquisitors left the apartment. "Why sleeps the thunder? But it will roll ere long,
and oh! may it be to preserve as well as to punish!"

The hour of dinner alone afforded a space when, all in the castle being occupied with that
meal, Catharine thought she had the best opportunity of venturing to the breach in the wall,
with the least chance of being observed. In waiting for the hour, she observed some stir in
the castle, which had been silent as the grave ever since the seclusion of the Duke of Rothsay.
The portcullis was lowered and raised, and the creaking of the machinery was intermingled with
the tramp of horse, as men at arms went out and returned with steeds hard ridden and covered
with foam. She observed, too, that such domestics as she casually saw from her window were
in arms. All this made her heart throb high, for it augured the approach of rescue; and besides,
the bustle left the little garden more lonely than ever. At length the hour of noon arrived;
she had taken care to provide, under pretence of her own wishes, which the pantler seemed disposed
to indulge, such articles of food as could be the most easily conveyed to the unhappy captive.
She whispered to intimate her presence; there was no answer; she spoke louder, still there
was silence.

"He sleeps," she muttered these words half aloud, and with a shuddering which was succeeded
by a start and a scream, when a voice replied behind her:

"Yes, he sleeps; but it is for ever."

She looked round. Sir John Ramorny stood behind her in complete armour, but the visor of his
helmet was up, and displayed a countenance more resembling one about to die than to fight.
He spoke with a grave tone, something between that of a calm observer of an interesting event
and of one who is an agent and partaker in it.

"Catharine," he said, "all is true which I tell you. He is dead. You have done your best for
him; you can do no more."

"I will not--I cannot believe it," said Catharine. "Heaven be merciful to me! it would make
one doubt of Providence, to think so great a crime has been accomplished."

"Doubt not of Providence, Catharine, though it has suffered the profligate to fall by his own
devices. Follow me; I have that to say which concerns you. I say follow (for she hesitated),
unless you prefer being left to the mercies of the brute Bonthron and the mediciner Henbane
Dwining."

"I will follow you," said Catharine. "You cannot do more to me than you are permitted."

He led the way into the tower, and mounted staircase after staircase and ladder after ladder.

Catharine's resolution failed her. "I will follow no farther," she said. "Whither would you
lead me? If to my death, I can die here."

"Only to the battlements of the castle, fool," said Ramorny, throwing wide a barred door which
opened upon the vaulted roof of the castle, where men were bending mangonels, as they called
them (military engines, that is, for throwing arrows or stones), getting ready crossbows, and
piling stones together. But the defenders did not exceed twenty in number, and Catharine thought
she could observe doubt and irresolution amongst them.

"Catharine," said Ramorny, "I must not quit this station, which is necessary for my defence;
but I can speak with you here as well as elsewhere."

"Say on," answered Catharine, "I am prepared to hear you."

"You have thrust yourself, Catharine, into a bloody secret. Have you the firmness to keep it?"

"I do not understand you, Sir John," answered the maiden.

"Look you. I have slain--murdered, if you will--my late master, the Duke of Rothsay. The spark
of life which your kindness would have fed was easily smothered. His last words called on his
father. You are faint--bear up--you have more to hear. You know the crime, but you know not
the provocation. See! this gauntlet is empty; I lost my right hand in his cause, and when I
was no longer fit to serve him, I was cast off like a worn out hound, my loss ridiculed, and
a cloister recommended, instead of the halls and palaces in which I had my natural sphere!
Think on this--pity and assist me."

"In what manner can you require my assistance?" said the trembling maiden; "I can neither repair
your loss nor cancel your crime."

"Thou canst be silent, Catharine, on what thou hast seen and heard in yonder thicket. It is
but a brief oblivion I ask of you, whose word will, I know, be listened to, whether you say
such things were or were not. That of your mountebank companion, the foreigner, none will hold
to be of a pin point's value. If you grant me this, I will take your promise for my security,
and throw the gate open to those who now approach it. If you will not promise silence, I defend
this castle till every one perishes, and I fling you headlong from these battlements. Ay, look
at them--it is not a leap to be rashly braved. Seven courses of stairs brought you up hither
with fatigue and shortened breath; but you shall go from the top to the bottom in briefer time
than you can breathe a sigh! Speak the word, fair maid; for you speak to one unwilling to harm
you, but determined in his purpose."

Catharine stood terrified, and without power of answering a man who seemed so desperate; but
she was saved the necessity of reply by the approach of Dwining. He spoke with the same humble
conges which at all times distinguished his manner, and with his usual suppressed ironical
sneer, which gave that manner the lie.

"I do you wrong, noble sir, to intrude on your valiancie when engaged with a fair damsel. But
I come to ask a trifling question."

"Speak, tormentor!" said Ramorny; "ill news are sport to thee even when they affect thyself,
so that they concern others also."

"Hem!--he, he!--I only desired to know if your knighthood proposed the chivalrous task of defending
the castle with your single hand--I crave pardon, I meant your single arm? The question is
worth asking, for I am good for little to aid the defence, unless you could prevail on the
besiegers to take physic--he, he, he!--and Bonthron is as drunk as ale and strong waters can
make him; and you, he, and I make up the whole garrison who are disposed for resistance."

"How! Will the other dogs not fight?" said Ramorny.

"Never saw men who showed less stomach to the work," answered Dwining--"never. But here come
a brace of them. Venit extrema dies. He, he, he!"

Eviot and his companion Buncle now approached, with sullen resolution in their faces, like
men who had made their minds up to resist that authority which they had so long obeyed.

"How now!" said Ramorny, stepping forward to meet them. "Wherefore from your posts? Why have
you left the barbican, Eviot? And you other fellow, did I not charge you to look to the mangonels?"

"We have something to tell you, Sir John Ramorny," answered Eviot. "We will not fight in this
quarrel."

"How--my own squires control me?" exclaimed Ramorny.

"We were your squires and pages, my lord, while you were master of the Duke of Rothsay's household.
It is bruited about the Duke no longer lives; we desire to know the truth."

"What traitor dares spread such falsehoods?" said Ramorny.

"All who have gone out to skirt the forest, my lord, and I myself among others, bring back
the same news. The minstrel woman who left the castle yesterday has spread the report everywhere
that the Duke of Rothsay is murdered, or at death's door. The Douglas comes on us with a strong
force--"

"And you, cowards, take advantage of an idle report to forsake your master?" said Ramorny,
indignantly.

"My lord," said Eviot, "let Buncle and myself see the Duke of Rothsay, and receive his personal
orders for defence of this castle, and if we do not fight to the death in that quarrel, I will
consent to be hanged on its highest turret. But if he be gone by natural disease, we will yield
up the castle to the Earl of Douglas, who is, they say, the King's lieutenant. Or if--which
Heaven forefend!--the noble Prince has had foul play, we will not involve ourselves in the
guilt of using arms in defence of the murderers, be they who they will."

"Eviot," said Ramorny, raising his mutilated arm, "had not that glove been empty, thou hadst
not lived to utter two words of this insolence."

"It is as it is," answered Evict, "and we do but our duty. I have followed you long, my lord,
but here I draw bridle."

"Farewell, then, and a curse light on all of you!" exclaimed the incensed baron. "Let my horse
be brought forth!"

"Our valiancie is about to run away," said the mediciner, who had crept close to Catharine's
side before she was aware. "Catharine, thou art a superstitious fool, like most women; nevertheless
thou hast some mind, and I speak to thee as one of more understanding than the buffaloes which
are herding about us. These haughty barons who overstride the world, what are they in the day
of adversity? Chaff before the wind. Let their sledge hammer hands or their column resembling
legs have injury, and bah! the men at arms are gone. Heart and courage is nothing to them,
lith and limb everything: give them animal strength, what are they better than furious bulls;
take that away, and your hero of chivalry lies grovelling like the brute when he is hamstrung.
Not so the sage; while a grain of sense remains in a crushed or mutilated frame, his mind shall
be strong as ever. Catharine, this morning I was practising your death; but methinks I now
rejoice that you may survive to tell how the poor mediciner, the pill gilder, the mortar pounder,
the poison vender, met his fate, in company with the gallant Knight of Ramorny, Baron in possession
and Earl of Lindores in expectation--God save his lordship!"

"Old man," said Catharine, "if thou be indeed so near the day of thy deserved doom, other thoughts
were far wholesomer than the vainglorious ravings of a vain philosophy. Ask to see a holy man--"

"Yes," said Dwining, scornfully, "refer myself to a greasy monk, who does not--he! he! he!--understand
the barbarous Latin he repeats by rote. Such would be a fitting counsellor to one who has studied
both in Spain and Arabia! No, Catharine, I will choose a confessor that is pleasant to look
upon, and you shall be honoured with the office. Now, look yonder at his valiancie, his eyebrow
drops with moisture, his lip trembles with agony; for his valiancie--he! he! he!--is pleading
for his life with his late domestics, and has not eloquence enough to persuade them to let
him slip. See how the fibres of his face work as he implores the ungrateful brutes, whom he
has heaped with obligations, to permit him to get such a start for his life as the hare has
from the greyhounds when men course her fairly. Look also at the sullen, downcast, dogged faces
with which, fluctuating between fear and shame, the domestic traitors deny their lord this
poor chance for his life. These things thought themselves the superior of a man like me! and
you, foolish wench, think so meanly of your Deity as to suppose wretches like them are the
work of Omnipotence!"

"No! man of evil--no!" said Catharine, warmly; "the God I worship created these men with the
attributes to know and adore Him, to guard and defend their fellow creatures, to practise holiness
and virtue. Their own vices, and the temptations of the Evil One, have made them such as they
now are. Oh, take the lesson home to thine own heart of adamant! Heaven made thee wiser than
thy fellows, gave thee eyes to look into the secrets of nature, a sagacious heart, and a skilful
hand; but thy pride has poisoned all these fair gifts, and made an ungodly atheist of one who
might have been a Christian sage!"

"Atheist, say'st thou?" answered Dwining. "Perhaps I have doubts on that matter--but they will
be soon solved. Yonder comes one who will send me, as he has done thousands, to the place where
all mysteries shall be cleared."

Catharine followed the mediciner's eye up one of the forest glades, and beheld it occupied
by a body of horsemen advancing at full gallop. In the midst was a pennon displayed, which,
though its bearings were not visible to Catharine, was, by a murmur around, acknowledged as
that of the Black Douglas. They halted within arrow shot of the castle, and a herald with two
trumpets advanced up to the main portal, where, after a loud flourish, he demanded admittance
for the high and dreaded Archibald Earl of Douglas, Lord Lieutenant of the King, and acting
for the time with the plenary authority of his Majesty; commanding, at the same time, that
the inmates of the castle should lay down their arms, all under penalty of high treason.

"You hear?" said Eviot to Ramorny, who stood sullen and undecided. "Will you give orders to
render the castle, or must I?"

"No, villain!" interrupted the knight, "to the last I will command you. Open the gates, drop
the bridge, and render the castle to the Douglas."

"Now, that's what may be called a gallant exertion of free will," said Dwining. "Just as if
the pieces of brass that were screaming a minute since should pretend to call those notes their
own which are breathed through them by a frowsy trumpeter."

"Wretched man!" said Catharine, "either be silent or turn thy thoughts to the eternity on the
brink of which thou art standing."

"And what is that to thee?" answered Dwining. "Thou canst not, wench, help hearing what I say
to thee, and thou wilt tell it again, for thy sex cannot help that either. Perth and all Scotland
shall know what a man they have lost in Henbane Dwining!"

The clash of armour now announced that the newcomers had dismounted and entered the castle,
and were in the act of disarming the small garrison. Earl Douglas himself appeared on the battlements,
with a few of his followers, and signed to them to take Ramorny and Dwining into custody. Others
dragged from some nook the stupefied Bonthron.

"It was to these three that the custody of the Prince was solely committed daring his alleged
illness?" said the Douglas, prosecuting an inquiry which he had commenced in the hall of the
castle.

"No other saw him, my lord," said Eviot, "though I offered my services."

"Conduct us to the Duke's apartment, and bring the prisoners with us. Also should there be
a female in the castle, if she hath not been murdered or spirited away--the companion of the
glee maiden who brought the first alarm."

"She is here, my lord," said Eviot, bringing Catharine forward.

Her beauty and her agitation made some impression even upon the impassible Earl.

"Fear nothing, maiden," he said; "thou hast deserved both praise and reward. Tell to me, as
thou wouldst confess to Heaven, the things thou hast witnessed in this castle."

Few words served Catharine to unfold the dreadful story.

"It agrees," said the Douglas, "with the tale of the glee maiden, from point to point. Now
show us the Prince's apartment."

They passed to the room which the unhappy Duke of Rothsay had been supposed to inhabit; but
the key was not to be found, and the Earl could only obtain entrance by forcing the door. On
entering, the wasted and squalid remains of the unhappy Prince were discovered, flung on the
bed as if in haste. The intention of the murderers had apparently been to arrange the dead
body so as to resemble a timely parted corpse, but they had been disconcerted by the alarm
occasioned by the escape of Louise. Douglas looked on the body of the misguided youth, whose
wild passions and caprices had brought him to this fatal and premature catastrophe.

"I had wrongs to be redressed," he said; "but to see such a sight as this banishes all remembrance
of injury!"

"He! he! It should have been arranged," said Dwining, "more to your omnipotence's pleasure;
but you came suddenly on us, and hasty masters make slovenly service."

Douglas seemed not to hear what his prisoner said, so closely did he examine the wan and wasted
features, and stiffened limbs, of the dead body before him. Catharine, overcome by sickness
and fainting, at length obtained permission to retire from the dreadful scene, and, through
confusion of every description, found her way to her former apartment, where she was locked
in the arms of Louise, who had returned in the interval.

The investigations of Douglas proceeded. The dying hand of the Prince was found to be clenched
upon a lock of hair, resembling, in colour and texture, the coal black bristles of Bonthron.
Thus, though famine had begun the work, it would seem that Rothsay's death had been finally
accomplished by violence. The private stair to the dungeon, the keys of which were found at
the subaltern assassin's belt, the situation of the vault, its communication with the external
air by the fissure in the walls, and the wretched lair of straw, with the fetters which remained
there, fully confirmed the story of Catharine and of the glee woman.

"We will not hesitate an instant," said the Douglas to his near kinsman, the Lord Balveny,
as soon as they returned from the dungeon. "Away with the murderers! hang them over the battlements."

"But, my lord, some trial may be fitting," answered Balveny.

"To what purpose?" answered, Douglas. "I have taken them red hand; my authority will stretch
to instant execution. Yet stay--have we not some Jedwood men in our troop?"

"Plenty of Turnbulls, Rutherfords, Ainslies, and so forth," said Balveny.

"Call me an inquest of these together; they are all good men and true, saving a little shifting
for their living. Do you see to the execution of these felons, while I hold a court in the
great hall, and we'll try whether the jury or the provost marshal do their work first; we will
have Jedwood justice--hang in haste and try at leisure."

"Yet stay, my lord," said Ramorny, "you may rue your haste--will you grant me a word out of
earshot?"

"Not for worlds!" said Douglas; "speak out what thou hast to say before all that are here present."

"Know all; then," said Ramorny, aloud, "that this noble Earl had letters from the Duke of Albany
and myself, sent him by the hand of yon cowardly deserter, Buncle--let him deny it if he dare--counselling
the removal of the Duke for a space from court, and his seclusion in this Castle of Falkland."

"But not a word," replied Douglas, sternly smiling, "of his being flung into a dungeon--famished--strangled.
Away with the wretches, Balveny, they pollute God's air too long!"

The prisoners were dragged off to the battlements. But while the means of execution were in
the act of being prepared, the apothecary expressed so ardent a desire to see Catharine once
more, and, as he said, for the good of his soul, that the maiden, in hopes his obduracy might
have undergone some change even at the last hour, consented again to go to the battlements,
and face a scene which her heart recoiled from. A single glance showed her Bonthron, sunk in
total and drunken insensibility; Ramorny, stripped of his armour, endeavouring in vain to conceal
fear, while he spoke with a priest, whose good offices he had solicited; and Dwining, the same
humble, obsequious looking, crouching individual she had always known him. He held in his hand
a little silver pen, with which he had been writing on a scrap of parchment.

"Catharine," he said--"he, he, he!--I wish to speak to thee on the nature of my religious faith."

"If such be thy intention, why lose time with me? Speak with this good father."

"The good father," said Dwining, "is--he, he!--already a worshipper of the deity whom I have
served. I therefore prefer to give the altar of mine idol a new worshipper in thee, Catharine.
This scrap of parchment will tell thee how to make your way into my chapel, where I have worshipped
so often in safety. I leave the images which it contains to thee as a legacy, simply because
I hate and contemn thee something less than any of the absurd wretches whom I have hitherto
been obliged to call fellow creatures. And now away--or remain and see if the end of the quacksalver
belies his life."

"Our Lady forbid!" said Catharine.

"Nay," said the mediciner, "I have but a single word to say, and yonder nobleman's valiancie
may hear it if he will."

Lord Balveny approached, with some curiosity; for the undaunted resolution of a man who never
wielded sword or bore armour and was in person a poor dwindled dwarf, had to him an air of
something resembling sorcery."

"You see this trifling implement," said the criminal, showing the silver pen. "By means of
this I can escape the power even of the Black Douglas."

"Give him no ink nor paper," said Balveny, hastily, "he will draw a spell."

"Not so, please your wisdom and valiancie--he, he, he!" said Dwining with his usual chuckle,
as he unscrewed the top of the pen, within which was a piece of sponge or some such substance,
no bigger than a pea.

"Now, mark this--" said the prisoner, and drew it between his lips. The effect was instantaneous.
He lay a dead corpse before them, the contemptuous sneer still on his countenance.

Catharine shrieked and fled, seeking, by a hasty descent, an escape from a sight so appalling.
Lord Balveny was for a moment stupified, and then exclaimed, "This may be glamour! hang him
over the battlements, quick or dead. If his foul spirit hath only withdrawn for a space, it
shall return to a body with a dislocated neck."

His commands were obeyed. Ramorny and Bonthron were then ordered for execution. The last was
hanged before he seemed quite to comprehend what was designed to be done with him. Ramorny,
pale as death, yet with the same spirit of pride which had occasioned his ruin, pleaded his
knighthood, and demanded the privilege of dying by decapitation by the sword, and not by the noose.

"The Douglas never alters his doom," said Balveny. "But thou shalt have all thy rights. Send
the cook hither with a cleaver."

The menial whom he called appeared at his summons.

"What shakest thou for, fellow?" said Balveny; "here, strike me this man's gilt spurs from
his heels with thy cleaver. And now, John Ramorny, thou art no longer a knight, but a knave.
To the halter with him, provost marshal! hang him betwixt his companions, and higher than them
if it may be."

In a quarter of an hour afterwards, Balveny descended to tell the Douglas that the criminals
were executed.

"Then there is no further use in the trial," said the Earl. "How say you, good men of inquest,
were these men guilty of high treason--ay or no?"

"Guilty," exclaimed the obsequious inquest, with edifying unanimity, "we need no farther evidence."

"Sound trumpets, and to horse then, with our own train only; and let each man keep silence
on what has chanced here, until the proceedings shall be laid before the King, which cannot
conveniently be till the battle of Palm Sunday shall be fought and ended. Select our attendants,
and tell each man who either goes with us or remains behind that he who prates dies."

In a few minutes the Douglas was on horseback, with the followers selected to attend his person.
Expresses were sent to his daughter, the widowed Duchess of Rothsay, directing her to take
her course to Perth, by the shores of Lochleven, without approaching Falkland, and committing
to her charge Catharine Glover and the glee woman, as persons whose safety he tendered.

As they rode through the forest, they looked back, and beheld the three bodies hanging, like
specks darkening the walls of the old castle.

"The hand is punished," said Douglas, "but who shall arraign the head by whose direction the
act was done?"

"You mean the Duke of Albany?" said Balveny.

"I do, kinsman; and were I to listen to the dictates of my heart, I would charge him with the
deed, which I am certain he has authorised. But there is no proof of it beyond strong suspicion,
and Albany has attached to himself the numerous friends of the house of Stuart, to whom, indeed,
the imbecility of the King and the ill regulated habits of Rothsay left no other choice of
a leader. Were I, therefore, to break the bond which I have so lately formed with Albany, the
consequence must be civil war, an event ruinous to poor Scotland while threatened by invasion
from the activity of the Percy, backed by the treachery of March. The first article in the 'Edinburgh
Review' was upon Cavallier, the leader of the Protestant revolt in the Cevennes. The subject,
suggested, I fancy, by a trip to the country taken in 1852, was selected
less with a view to his own knowledge or aptitudes than by the natural
impulse of a young writer to follow the models accepted in his organ.

He had selected a picturesque bit of history, capable of treatment
after the manner of Macaulay.

     'I have read it,' says my father, in words
     meant to be read to Fitzjames,
     'with the pleasure which it always gives
     me to read his vigorous sense, clear and manly style, right-minded
and substantially kind-hearted writings.

     My respect for his understanding has been for a long time steadily
increasing, and is very unlikely to be ever diminished.... But I shall
best prove that respect by saying plainly that I do not like this
paper as well as those in which he writes argumentatively, speculatively,
and from the resources of his own mind.

His power consists in reasoning, in the exposition of truth and fallacies. I will not say,
for I do not know, that he wants the art of story-telling, but, taking this as a specimen,
it seems to me deficient in the great art of linking together a series of facts in such a
manner that the connection between them shall be at once perceptible to the most ignorant and
inattentive reader, and shall take easy and irresistible possession of the mind. That is Macaulay's
pre-eminent gift.' He goes on to apply this in detail. It may be useful to point out faults
now; though his criticisms upon anything which Fitzjames may publish in 1890 shall be 'all saccharine.'

In
a letter of April 27, 1856, he shows an alarm which was certainly not unnatural.
 This
checked the smith's first resolve, which was to follow them instantly to the Highlands, and
partake the fate which they might encounter.

But when he recollected his repeated feuds with divers of the Clan Quhele, and particularly
his personal quarrel with Conachar, who was now raised to be a high chief, he could not but
think, on reflection, that his intrusion on their place of retirement was more likely to disturb
the safety which they might otherwise enjoy there than be of any service to them. He was well
acquainted with Simon's habitual intimacy with the chief of the Clan Quhele, and justly augured
that the glover would obtain protection, which his own arrival might be likely to disturb,
while his personal prowess could little avail him in a quarrel with a whole tribe of vindictive
mountaineers. At the same time his heart throbbed with indignation, when he thought of Catharine
being within the absolute power of young Conachar, whose rivalry he could not doubt, and who
had now so many means of urging his suit. What if the young chief should make the safety of
the father depend on the favour of the daughter? He distrusted not Catharine's affections,
but then her mode of thinking was so disinterested, and her attachment to her father so tender,
that, if the love she bore her suitor was weighed against his security, or perhaps his life,
it was matter of deep and awful doubt whether it might not be found light in the balance. Tormented
by thoughts on which we need not dwell, he resolved nevertheless to remain at home, stifle
his anxiety as he might, and await the promised intelligence from the old man. It came, but
it did not relieve his concern.

Sir Patrick Charteris had not forgotten his promise to communicate to the smith the plans of
the fugitives. But, amid the bustle occasioned by the movement of troops, he could not himself
convey the intelligence. He therefore entrusted to his agent, Kitt Henshaw, the task of making
it known. But this worthy person, as the reader knows, was in the interest of Ramorny, whose
business it was to conceal from every one, but especially from a lover so active and daring
as Henry, the real place of Catharine's residence. Henshaw therefore announced to the anxious
smith that his friend the glover was secure in the Highlands; and though he affected to be
more reserved on the subject of Catharine, he said little to contradict the belief that she
as well as Simon shared the protection of the Clan Quhele. But he reiterated, in the name of
Sir Patrick, assurances that father and daughter were both well, and that Henry would best
consult his own interest and their safety by remaining quiet and waiting the course of events.

