"I perceive that the praises of your friend wound your modesty; let us occupy ourselves, then,
with your new good deeds, and forget that you are the author; but, first, let us speak of the
business you intrusted to my care. I have, according to your wishes, deposited in the Bank
of France, and in my name, the sum of one hundred thousand crowns, destined to the restitution
of which you are the intermediate agent and which was to pass through my hands. You have preferred
that this deposit should not remain in your possession, although it seems to me it had been
quite as secure there as in the bank."

"In that respect, M. l'Abbe, I have conformed to the intentions of the unknown author of this
restitution. It is an affair of conscience. At his request I have placed this sum in your hands,
and begged you to remit it to madame the widow Fermont, whose maiden name was Renneville" (the
voice of the notary trembled slightly in uttering these names), "when she should present herself
to you, and prove herself to be entitled to the same."

"I will accomplish the mission which you confided to me," said the priest.

"It is not the last, M. l'Abbe."

"So much the better, if the others resemble this; for without wishing to seek for the motives
which impel it, I am always touched by a voluntary restitution. These lofty acts, which conscience
alone dictates, are always the indications of sincere repentance, and it is no barren expiation."

"In truth, M. l'Abbe, to restore a hundred thousand francs at once is rare; as for me, I have
been more curious than you; but what availed my curiosity against the unshaken discretion of
Jacques! Thus, I am still ignorant of the person's name who has made this noble restitution."

"Whoever he may be," said the abbe, "I am certain that he stands very high in the esteem of
M. Ferrand."

"This honest man is indeed, M. l'Abbe, placed very high in my esteem," answered the notary,
with a bitterness badly disguised.

"And this is not all, M. l'Abbe," said Polidori, looking at Jacques Ferrand in a significant
manner; "you will see how far these generous scruples of this unknown extend; and, if I must
speak plainly, I suspect our friend of having contributed not a little to awaken these scruples,
and of having found the names to calm them."

"How is that?" asked the priest.

"What do you mean to say?" added the notary.

"And the Morels? this good and virtuous family."

"Ah! yes, yes; in truth, I forgot," said Jacques Ferrand, in a hollow voice.

"Imagine, M. l'Abbe," resumed Polidori, "that the author of this restitution, without doubt
advised by Jacques Ferrand, not content with restoring this considerable sum, wishes still--but
I will leave my worthy friend to explain; it is a pleasure of which I will not deprive him."

"I listen to you, my dear M. Ferrand," said the priest.

"You know," said Jacques Ferrand, with involuntary emotions of revolt against the part which
was imposed on him--feelings which were betrayed by the alteration of his voice and the hesitancy
of his speech; "you know, M. l'Abbe, that the misconduct of Louise Morel was such a terrible
blow for her father, that he has become mad. The numerous family of the artisan ran the risk
of dying from want, deprived of their sole support. Happily, Providence has come to their succor;
and the person who has made the voluntary restitution of which you are the agent, M. l'Abbe,
has not thought this a sufficient expiation for a great abuse of confidence. He asked me if
I did not know any deserving family in want of assistance. I mentioned the Morels, and he begged
me, at the same time giving me the necessary funds, which I will hand to you presently, to
request you to settle an annuity of two thousand francs on Morel, revertible to his wife and
children."

