"It means, sir, that you are a rascal and impostor," replied Mowbray, "who have assumed a name
to which you have no right."

"That, Mr. Mowbray, is an insult I cannot carry farther than this spot," said Etherington.

"If you had been willing to do so, you should have carried with it something still harder to
be borne," answered Mowbray.

"Enough, enough, my good sir; no use in spurring a willing horse.--Jekyl, you will have the
kindness to stand by me in this matter?"

"Certainly, my lord," said Jekyl.

"And, as there seems to be no chance of taking up the matter amicably," said the pacific Captain
MacTurk, "I will be most happy, so help me, to assist my worthy friend, Mr. Mowbray of St.
Ronan's, with my countenance and advice.--Very goot chance that we were here with the necessary
weapons, since it would have been an unpleasant thing to have such an affair long upon the
stomach, any more than to settle it without witnesses."

"I would fain know first," said Jekyl, "what all this sudden heat has arisen about."

"About nothing," said Etherington, "except a mare's nest of Mr. Mowbray's discovering. He always
knew his sister played the madwoman, and he has now heard a report, I suppose, that she has
likewise in her time played the ---- fool." 

"If ever island were enchanted," said I to myself, "this is it. This is the haunt of the few gentle
Fays who remain from the wreck of the race. Are these green tombs theirs?--or do they yield up their
sweet lives as mankind yield up their own?

With such friendly intentions, the ground was hastily meted out. Each was well known as an
excellent shot; and the Captain offered a bet to Jekyl of a mutchkin of Glenlivat, that both
would fall by the first fire. The event showed that he was nearly right; for the ball of Lord
Etherington grazed Mowbray's temple, at the very second of time when Mowbray's pierced his
heart. He sprung a yard from the ground, and fell down a dead man. Mowbray stood fixed like
a pillar of stone, his arm dropped to his side, his hand still clenched on the weapon of death,
reeking at the touch-hole and muzzle. Jekyl ran to raise and support his friend, and Captain
MacTurk, having adjusted his spectacles, stooped on one knee to look him in the face. "We should
have had Dr. Quackleben here," he said, wiping his glasses, and returning them to the shagreen
case, "though it would have been only for form's sake--for he is as dead as a toor-nail, poor
boy.--But come, Mowbray, my bairn," he said, taking him by the arm, "we must be ganging our
ain gait, you and me, before waur comes of it.--I have a bit powney here, and you have your
horse till we get to Marchthorn.--Captain Jekyl, I wish you a good morning. Will you have my
umbrella back to the inn, for I surmeese it is going to rain?"

Mowbray had not ridden a hundred yards with his guide and companion, when he drew his bridle,
and refused to proceed a step farther, till he had learned what was become of Clara. The Captain
began to find he had a very untractable pupil to manage, when, while they were arguing together,
Touchwood drove past in his hack chaise. As soon as he recognised Mowbray, he stopped the carriage
to inform him that his sister was at the Aultoun, which he had learned from finding there had
been a messenger sent from thence to the Well for medical assistance, which could not be afforded,
the Esculapius of the place, Dr. Quackleben, having been privately married to Mrs. Blower on
that morning, by Mr. Chatterly, and having set out on the usual nuptial tour.

In return for this intelligence, Captain MacTurk communicated the fate of Lord Etherington.
The old man earnestly pressed instant flight, for which he supplied at the same time ample
means, engaging to furnish every kind of assistance and support to the unfortunate young lady;
and representing to Mowbray, that if he staid in the vicinity, a prison would soon separate
them. Mowbray and his companion then departed southward upon the spur, reached London in safety,
and from thence went together to the Peninsula, where the war was then at the hottest.

There remains little more to be told. Mr. Touchwood is still alive, forming plans which have
no object, and accumulating a fortune, for which he has apparently no heir. The old man had
endeavoured to fix this character, as well as his general patronage, upon Tyrrel, but the attempt
only determined the latter to leave the country; nor has he been since heard of, although the
title and estates of Etherington lie vacant for his acceptance.

Since Tyrrel's departure, no one pretends to guess what old Touchwood will do with his money.
He often talks of his disappointments, but can never be made to understand, or at least to
admit, that they were in some measure precipitated by his own talent for intrigue and manoeuvring.
Most people think that Mowbray of St. Ronan's will be at last his heir. That gentleman has
of late shown one quality which usually recommends men to the favour of rich relations, namely,
a close and cautious care of what is already his own. Captain MacTurk's military ardour having
revived when they came within smell of gunpowder, the old soldier contrived not only to get
himself on full pay, but to induce his companion to serve for some time as a volunteer. He
afterwards obtained a commission, and nothing could be more strikingly different than was the
conduct of the young Laird of St. Ronan's and of Lieutenant Mowbray. The former, as we know,
was gay, venturous, and prodigal; the latter lived on his pay, and even within it--denied himself
comforts, and often decencies, when doing so could save a guinea; and turned pale with apprehension,
if, on any extraordinary occasion, he ventured sixpence a corner at whist. This meanness, or
closeness of disposition, prevents his holding the high character to which his bravery and
attention to his regimental duties might otherwise entitle him. The same close and accurate
calculation of pounds, shillings, and pence, marked his communications with his agent Meiklewham,
who might otherwise have had better pickings out of the estate of St. Ronan's, which is now
at nurse, and thriving full fast; especially since some debts, of rather an usurious character,
have been paid up by Mr. Touchwood, who contented himself with more moderate usage.

On the subject of this property, Mr. Mowbray, generally speaking, gave such minute directions
for acquiring and saving, that his old acquaintance, Mr. Winterblossom, tapping his morocco
snuff-box with the sly look which intimated the coming of a good thing, was wont to say, that
he had reversed the usual order of transformation, and was turned into a grub after having
been a butterfly. After all, this narrowness, though a more ordinary modification of the spirit
of avarice, may be founded on the same desire of acquisition, which in his earlier days sent
him to the gaming-table.

But there was one remarkable instance in which Mr. Mowbray departed from the rules of economy,
by which he was guided in all others. Having acquired, for a large sum of money, the ground
which he had formerly feued out for the erection of the hotel, lodging-houses, shops, &c.,
at St. Ronan's Well, he sent positive orders for the demolition of the whole, nor would he
permit the existence of any house of entertainment on his estate, except that in the Aultoun,
where Mrs. Dods reigns with undisputed sway, her temper by no means improved either by time,
or her arbitrary disposition by the total absence of competition.

