HISTORY

OF THE

EIGHTY-SIXTH REGIMENT

ILLINOIS VOLUNTEER INFANTRY,

DURING ITS TERM OF SERVICE.

By J. R. KINNEAR,

Cruger, Woodford County, Illinois.

CHICAGO: TRIBUNE COMPANY'S BOOK AND JOB PRINTING OFFICE.

1866.

TO THE

COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND ENLISTED MEN

OF THE

EIGHTY-SIXTH REGIMENT

ILLINOIS VOLUNTEER INFANTRY,

This volume is respectfully dedicated, by

THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.

The history of the Eighty-sixth Illinois was written in part while the regiment was yet in
the service, merely for the gratification of a personal desire; but since its muster out, the
author has been frequently urged by many of his friends to have it published, that they might
share what he alone enjoyed. He complied with an earnest request from Colonel Fahnestock to
meet himself, General Magee, Major Thomas, Dr. Guth, Captain Zinser and others at Peoria, to
have the manuscript examined before publication. It was met by their hearty approval, and an
eager desire on their part to have it published; at the same time giving the assurance that
they would lend their whole influence in getting it before the public. For these reasons the
author has been induced to present this little volume to his comrades and friends, in the hope
that it will receive their hearty welcome.

The history of the Eighty-sixth is also the history of the 85th, 125th and 110th Illinois,
together with the 52nd Ohio and 22nd Indiana, all of the same brigade. Particular mention has
been made of these regiments, for they were to the Eighty-sixth a band of faithful brothers.

The author acknowledges himself indebted to Colonel Fahnestock, Major Thomas, Captain Major,
and Acting Adjutant Loveland, for the kind assistance and encouragement they have given him
in preparing this history for publication, and to them he attributes the merit of this work,
if it possesses merit.

THE AUTHOR.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

  ORGANIZATION AND MARCH TO NASHVILLE--ABOUT NASHVILLE           9-18

CHAPTER II.

  MARCH TO CHATTANOOGA--THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA               19-28

CHAPTER III.

  MISSION RIDGE AND KNOXVILLE                                   29-36

CHAPTER IV.

  ABOUT CHATTANOOGA                                             37-46

CHAPTER V.

  CAMPAIGN AGAINST ATLANTA                                      47-71

CHAPTER VI.

  TO THE REAR                                                   72-78

CHAPTER VII.

  RAID TO THE SEA                                               79-91

CHAPTER VIII.

  RAID THROUGH SOUTH CAROLINA--BATTLES OF AVERYSBORO
  AND BENTONVILLE                                              92-108

CHAPTER IX.

  CAPTURE OF JOHNSTON'S ARMY                                  109-114

CHAPTER X.

  HOMEWARD BOUND                                              115-125

  REGIMENTAL ROSTER                                           126-128

  CAPTAIN BURKHALTER'S ADVENTURE                              129-130

  SOLDIERS' LETTERS                                           131-132

  BATTLE                                                      133-134

  FARMING IN THE SOUTH                                        135-137

  REBEL LETTER                                                138-139

HISTORY.

CHAPTER I.

ORGANIZATION, AND MARCH TO NASHVILLE--ABOUT NASHVILLE.

The Eighty-sixth Regiment of Illinois Volunteer Infantry was organized at Peoria in the latter
part of August, 1862. David D. Irons was made Colonel; David W. Magee, Lieutenant-Colonel;
J. S. Bean, Major, and J. E. Prescott, Adjutant.

On the 26th of August the captains of the several companies drew lots for the letters of their
companies, and on the next day the regiment was mustered into the United States service for
the period of three years or during the war. On the 29th of the same month it received one
month's pay, amounting to thirteen dollars. Nothing more of importance occurred until the 6th
of September, when the regiment drew its guns and its first suit of army blue. While at Peoria
the Eighty-sixth was rendezvoused at Camp Lyon, a name given it by Colonel Irons. Time passed
slowly, for all were anxious to move to the seat of war, and were not at rest till they did.
Finally, orders came, and on the 7th of September the regiment boarded the cars for Louisville.

Every member of the Eighty-sixth left Peoria with mingled feelings of pleasure and pain--pleasure,
that they were about to participate in the great struggle for Union and Liberty--pain, that
they were called upon to part with their nearest and dearest friends. It was on Sunday morning;
beautiful and bright the sun shone upon its bristling armor as the regiment marched through
the city with measured tread, bound for the "land of Dixie." The streets and balconies were
filled with anxious friends, and fair hands waved us an affectionate adieu--hands which were
not only true to us in our pride and strength, but also in the darkest hour of our trials and
suffering. In long days after this, when men turned copperheads by scores, these same fair
ones proved true. "God bless the fair!" The regiment arrived in Jeffersonville, opposite Louisville,
on the morning of the 9th, going into camp at Jo. Holt, on the Ohio river, across from the
city of Louisville. At this camp the regiment first began to soldier, taking its first lessons
in lying out in the open air. While at Jo. Holt it was drill, drill, almost constantly--the
boys were not able to do enough drilling; but for all that, this camp became dear to us; especially
in after times when water was scarce, memory would revert to the cool crystal waters of Jo. Holt.

After getting a partial outfit for campaigning, the regiment quit the Indiana side of the river,
and crossed over to Louisville on the 14th. It again took up camp two miles south of the city
in a very unpleasant situation, now remaining about Louisville until the 1st of October.

At one time, our brigade, which was formed on the 15th of September, and afterwards known as
the 36th brigade of General Sheridan's division of Gilbert's corps, was marched through Louisville
on grand review. This march was a severe one. The day was intensely hot and the roads dusty;
then, the narrow streets made it doubly suffocating. Many fell powerless and died, and others
received injuries for life. That day will long be remembered by those who were participators
in its toils. The 85th and 125th Illinois, together with the 52nd Ohio regiment, were in the
same brigade with the Eighty-sixth, and remained with it until all were discharged from the
service at Washington City. The history of the Eighty-sixth Illinois is their history, and
they were to each other as a band of brothers. Colonel Dan. McCook, of the 52nd Ohio, was placed
in command of this newly formed brigade.

Soon after the formation of our brigade it made two other marches over the dusty roads in the
direction of Bardstown, nearly as severe as the first one. They were doubtless unnecessary,
and for that reason harder to perform, amounting to nothing, only out in the country ten or
twelve miles and back again--training, no doubt. After these marches, the command was put in
the rifle-pits that encircled the city of Louisville, for the Confederate army under General
Bragg was near at hand menacing it. There was great excitement about this time, as we were
unaccustomed to the work, and it went odd. While remaining at Louisville, the Eighty-sixth
went on picket for the first time. Its acts and thoughts on this occasion were certainly novel,
and furnished a fund of great amusement in its after career. The regiment was just beginning
to experience many of the roughs and cuffs incidental to the opening scenes of soldier life.
Diarrhea became a plague to many, and a change of diet a source of discomfort to others, which,
upon the whole, caused us to lead a rather gloomy life at first; then we were ignorant of the
many advantages an old soldier has acquired by long experience, which advantages greatly modify
the hardships and discomforts of out-door life.

While the regiment lay at Louisville, a large army was being brought together in order to oppose
the encroachments of the enemy under Bragg, which had advanced as far as Bardstown. The forces
on our part were commanded by Major General Buell, a man of questionable loyalty, as future
events determined.

Finding that the enemy were not going to attack him, Gen. Buell issued orders for the advance
of his whole command on the 1st day of October. Accordingly, the line of march was taken up
at the time specified in the order, the 36th brigade being among the troops that went. As Buell's
army advanced, the enemy retreated, taking with him large supplies from the country. Our forces
followed rapidly for seven days, when Gen. McCook's command overtook a portion of Bragg's army
at Chaplin Hills or Perryville. Here, on the next day, the 8th of October, was fought the desperate
battle of Perryville.

The 36th brigade was on the left of the division and had moved forward early in the morning,
accompanied by Barnett's 2nd Illinois battery, and occupied its position. The 85th Illinois,
Colonel Moore, was deployed upon the right, and the 52nd Ohio on the left. The 125th Illinois,
Colonel Harmon, was held as a reserve, and the 86th Illinois was on the picket line. At an
early hour the rebel skirmishers opened a sharp fire on the 86th, and although this was the
first fight in which, it was ever engaged, it advanced steadily upon them and drove them back
in confusion with severe loss. Irritated at the loss of their position, the rebels massed upon
the right and left, and commenced a furious fire from their batteries upon the brigade.

The firing continued for an hour, but the brigade resolutely held its ground. About this time
Barnett's battery took position and silenced their guns. In the meantime, the 125th Illinois
came to the support of the battery, and did its work splendidly, and the rebels retired, leaving
the brigade in possession of the ground it had won.

A cavalry force now advanced in the direction the rebels were retreating, and were soon furiously
attacked. The situation became critical. The cavalry was hard pressed, but with the assistance
of the 2nd Missouri regiment, together with the 2nd Michigan and 15th Missouri, the enemy was
completely routed at this point, making no other effort until 3 o'clock P.M., when General
Bragg, in person, led his host against this position. After the most desperate fighting this
last effort proved abortive.

From the commencement of this battle it grew fiercer and fiercer as the day advanced, and the
sun of that day went down in blood. This was the first contest in which the 36th brigade was
called upon to take a part, and though it was not as active as many others, it did promptly
all that was required. Colonel McCook paid it high compliment for the soldierly manner in which
it did its duty. The loss of the Eighty-sixth in this engagement was one killed and thirteen
wounded. The battle of Perryville was evenly contested by the opposing forces, neither side
having gained material advantage, though if there was a balance due either party, it was in
favor of the Federals.

On the morning after the battle our brigade moved forward to the main portion of the battle-field,
the enemy having retreated under cover of night, leaving his dead and wounded on the field.
The brigade remained in its last position three days, when on the morning of the 12th the army
took up the line of pursuit, passing through Danville and Lancaster, and arriving at Crab Orchard
on the 16th. The pursuit was now no longer continued, the enemy being allowed to make good
his escape with all his forage and plunder.

Nashville now became Gen. Bragg's objective point, making it a race to see which army could
reach it first. Accordingly, on the 20th of October the line of march was taken up for Nashville,
the 36th brigade passing back through Lancaster and Danville, thence following the main road
leading to Bowling Green. It remained a few days near Mammoth Cave, in order to recruit its
strength, being sorely fatigued. Many of the Eighty-sixth took this opportunity to see that
great natural wonder. On the 31st of the month we arrived in Bowling Green, where the brigade
remained a few days to recruit and draw clothing, preparatory to its further march. Leaving
this place, it followed the main road to Nashville, where it arrived on the 7th of November.

The timely arrival of our army in Nashville relieved the anxious little garrison from further
apprehensions of danger, and after so long a time the city was once more opened to communication.
Here ended the arduous campaign against the forces of Gen. Bragg, the army being permitted
to go into winter-quarters in and about Nashville.

The campaign just ended was one that tried the bone and muscle of the new levy of troops that
had just entered the field. Water was very scarce, it being impossible to procure a sufficient
quantity for our real good, and even that was of the most inferior kind; it was, in fact, unfit
for a beast, and enough to sicken and kill a human. Our mode of cooking and eating then seems
now to be ridiculous indeed; it was every man for himself, boiling his coffee in a pint tin
and roasting his meat on a stick. Being barbarously ignorant of the profession of a soldier,
we would carry unnecessary loads which we were afterwards taught to discard; and undergoing
toilsome marches over a rough and desolate country, under the scorching rays of a Southern
sun, with not enough water to wash down the dust we were compelled to breathe. The men would
readily push away the thick green scum from every stagnant pool and drink with a relish. Lazy
swine were forced to leave their muddy beds to give place to the cup of the thirsty soldier.
The Eighty-sixth Regiment in after times was wont to look back on this campaign--its first
lesson in soldiering--with more commiseration and regret than any period of its subsequent
career. It consumed thirty-eight days of the severest toils and privations, than which no other
has surpassed, making a distance of over three hundred miles in pursuit of an exultant and
defiant enemy.

The regiment now remained in Edgefield from the 7th of November until the 23rd, when it was
marched to Mill Creek and took up encampment at a place known as Camp Sheridan. At this camp,
on the 4th of December, at 12 o'clock M., the regiment having just returned from drill, was
ordered to fall in and advance upon a force of the enemy's cavalry which was maneuvering in
the vicinity of the camp.

Company A and B were immediately thrown out as skirmishers; the remainder of the regiment kept
back in reserve. The rebels were soon dispersed, and the regiment returned at night on the
double-quick. On the 9th of December the command was marched to Nashville, taking up camp there,
and put on duty about the city. About this time was led a sad and disagreeable life, even more
so than at any other time. The boys were new in their profession and entirely ignorant as to
what conveniences a soldier might have even under circumstances so trying, and in consequence,
were compelled to render themselves most unhappy. Some twenty odd men would live in the same
tent, cook from a camp kettle swung in the middle of it, make their beds on the damp ground,
frequently without even straw or boards under them. Snow fell, and the cold, keen winds of
winter whistled without, while the poor soldiers lay cold and damp within.

Many were taken ill and died from this exposure; more died and were discharged during this
winter than in all our previous and after term of service. The hospitals were yet without proper
organization, the sick in them improperly cared for, for war was as yet a new thing, poorly
understood and carried on. The Icelander, in his frigid and icy home of the far north, in his
primeval ignorance, could not have lived in greater exposure than did the soldiers at this
time. The regiment was called upon to do a great deal of duty, such as picketing about the
city--a business that is anything but pleasant where there are a number of generals and other
fancy officers to be looked after. While on duty at this place the battles of Stone River were
fought. There was an exciting time in Nashville during this eventful period; everything was
hurry and bustle. The wounded and skulkers came back in great numbers, each bearing his own report.

During these battles the troops in and about the city had to be in line of battle at 3 o'clock
in the morning; it mattered not what was the condition of the elements, it was all the same
thing; and certainly, if anything would provoke a soldier to feelings of wrath, this kind of
business would. The first one is to be heard from who ever got used to it.

On the 25th of March, 1863, the Eighty-sixth was marched to Brentwood, where only a few hours
before the garrison there was surprised and captured. On the first alarm the regiment was sent
to its assistance, but it reached the fatal spot too late, the rebels having succeeded in their
enterprise and made good their escape. After this reconnoissance to Brentwood, the regiment
returned to Nashville, settling down again to its old business of picketing and guarding. Nearly
two weeks after this, on the 8th of April, the brigade was sent to Brentwood, in supporting
distance of Franklin. Brentwood was a fine situation for a camp, and as spring was at hand
it was rendered more pleasant still. Comfortable quarters were readily made, and for the first
time we began to live like men. It was here the boys began a happy reform in that respect;
for instead of lying on the bare ground in the dirt and grass, they put up bunks, thus leading
to their comfort. At this place the brigade built a fort called Fort Brentwood. It was triangular
in form, having embrazures in the corners of the triangle for guns. Much time and labor was
expended on this work, only to be completed that it might be demolished--a change in the situation
of our army affairs compelling the evacuation of the fort. Details were made, and on the 3rd
of June the work of demolition was consummated, and on the evening of the same day the brigade
returned to Nashville.

The Eighty-sixth Regiment now remained in Nashville until the first of July, when it, with
the rest of the brigade, was marched to Murfreesboro. At this encampment the command spent
much time and labor on its camp grounds, but did not remain to reap the fruits thereof, for
in a few days it returned to Nashville, where it remained until the 20th of August, 1863.

About this time occurred a sad epoch in the history of the Eighty-sixth Regiment--the death
of Colonel Irons. After a severe illness he departed this life on the 11th day of August, leaving
behind him a band of faithful friends to mourn his loss. 11.]

There is something singular in the manner in which the Quakers deliver
themselves when they preach.

In the beginning of their discourses, they generally utter their words with slowness; indeed,
with a slowness, which sometimes renders their meaning almost unintelligible to persons unaccustomed
to such a mode of delivery; for seconds sometimes elapse between the sounding of short sentences
or single words, so that the mind cannot always easily carry the first words, and join them to
the intermediate, and connect them with the last. As they proceed, they communicate their impressions
in a brisker manner; till, at length, getting beyond the quickness
of ordinary delivery, they may be said to utter them rapidly.

At this time, some of them appear to be much affected, and even agitated
by their subject.

This method of a very slow and deliberate pronunciation at first,
and of an accelerated one afterwards, appears to me, as far as I have
seen or heard, to be universal: for though undoubtedly some may make
less pauses between the introductory words and sentences than others,
yet all begin slower than they afterwards proceed.

This singular custom may be probably accounted for in the following manner. The Quakers certainly
believe that the spirit of God furnishes them with impressions on these occasions, but that the
description of these is left to themselves Hence a faithful watch
must be kept, that these may be delivered to their hearers conformably
to what is delivered to them.

But if so, it may perhaps be necessary to be more watchful, at the outset, in order to ascertain
the dimensions as it were of these impressions, and of their several tendencies and bearings,
than afterwards, when such a knowledge of them has been obtained. Or it may be that ministers,
who go wholly unprepared to preach, have but a small view of the subject at first. Hence they
speak slowly. But as their views are enlarged, their speech becomes quickened, and their feelings
become interested with it. These, for any thing I know, may be solutions, upon Quaker principles,
of this extraordinary practice.

Against the preaching of the Quakers, an objection is usually made by the world, namely, that their
ministers generally deliver their doctrines with an unpleasant tone. But it may be observed
that this, which is considered to be a defect, is by no means confined to the Quakers. Persons
of other religious denominations, who exert themselves in the ministry,
are liable to the same charge.

 On its route it
passed through Spring Hill, a very noted place. It was here that Gen. Van Dorn, of the Confederate
army, was shot for a gross insult extended to the wife of a prominent doctor.

On the evening of the 28th of August the regiment reached Columbia, Tenn., where it joined
the brigade which had arrived there a short time previous, taking up quarters in the outskirts
of the town until the 30th, when it was taken into it as a garrison. The remainder of the brigade
continued the march in the direction of Huntsville, leaving the Eighty-sixth with orders to
follow up as soon as relieved by a command of mounted infantry on its road from Kentucky. Columbia
was a handsome place and of much interest. James K. Polk had lived there, and Gen. Pillow's
plantation was not far distant from it. It had also several fine literary institutions, one
of which continued in operation while the regiment was staying there. It was at Columbia Colonel
Magee procured the famous whistle that ever afterwards remained with the regiment. By the mandates
of this little instrument, in the hands of its successive commanders, the actions of the Eighty-sixth
were controlled. It would advance, halt, retreat, lie down and get up, as designated by this
tiny whistle. Other regiments have prided themselves in their eagles and pets, and the Eighty-sixth
too, had long since concluded she "paid too dear for the whistle," not to cherish it in lasting
remembrance. In years hence, when all things else will seem to have passed away, memory will
not prove recreant to the faithful friend of all--the tiny whistle.

The regimental officers held an election here, and voted Captain A. L. Fahnestock Major of
the regiment, though it was a long time after this before he was commissioned. The desired
relief came on the 3rd of September, and the 86th took up the march on the 4th, following up
the brigade, which by this time had reached Huntsville. The 28th Kentucky mounted infantry
relieved us.

The weather was warm and the command marched slowly, feeling its way as it went. Colonel Magee
did a good part by his men, always keeping their good and comfort in view; he would not compel
them to overmarch themselves for personal gratification or that of his superiors, though always
prompt in the execution of orders.

The regiment was now alone, surrounded by all manner of enemies. The brigade, on its passage
down, was fired upon from houses in the little village of Lynnville, it now becoming a question
whether a single regiment could make the passage at all. For the purpose of warding off all
danger, the regiment observed the following order of march: One company two hundred yards in
advance of the main column, and two companies in rear of the regimental train. It passed through
Lynnville, the scene of former disturbances, without molestation, and camped near it.

Col. McCook had issued an order to the citizens, declaring that for every life taken by concealed
enemies he would retaliate on the country. This order had a good effect, for afterwards a citizen
would not harbor a guerrilla or bushwhacker.

The members of the Eighty-sixth will not forget how they transcended the liberties of the Colonel,
while camped at Lynnville, by killing hogs in camp, and raising "Ned" generally--the lecture
they received in consequence will not be forgotten. He admonished them never to permit a rebel
hog to be too insinuating without the proper chastisement, and at the same time not to be too
noisy and reckless, thus exposing him to the reprimand of his superiors.

The next place of encampment was at Pulaski, a small town that lay almost in ruins from some
cause or other. A novel incident occurred here respecting a couple of doctors. The first one
tried to elude the advance guard by riding off in break-neck style, but he was apprehended,
brought before Colonel Magee, and examined. He declared his object to be to save his favorite
pony and nothing more; he was of course released, but on further suspicion of being a spy,
was searched for, but could not be found. The other doctor came into camp of his own accord,
and going to the surgeon's tent, asked for a dose of morphine; whereupon, seeing a good opportunity,
he stole the whole bottle, and putting it in his hat walked off. He was detected, arrested,
and taken before the Colonel. He plead insanity and such like things to no purpose, but was
tied up to a tree and made to suffer punishment. No one can rightly determine the object of
these two men; they were doubtless enlisted sons of the Southern chivalry intent upon mischief.

The march was continued the next day from Pulaski, crossing Elk river at a place known as Elktown,
the boys dismantling themselves and wading, as the bridge had been destroyed. Four miles beyond
this stream is the State line, the regiment marching there and camping for the night near a
beautiful brook of water.

On the 7th of September, it crossed the line and camped twelve miles south of it. The next
day it reached Huntsville, and passing through, took up quarters in the outskirts. The Eighty-sixth
was the only Union troops in the vicinity, the brigade having passed on, leaving orders for
it to follow immediately. When night came on, the Colonel became uneasy, for citizens reported
a force of the enemy near at hand. Upon this intelligence he moved his command into town, and
took up position on the square. Companies were stationed in the different streets leading to
it, in anticipation of a surprise. The night passed in suspense, but no enemy appeared.

Huntsville was a beautiful town with a fine location. It was, before the war, the mart of Northern
Alabama. There is a large and handsome spring there, well worth the visit of the tourist and
passer-by. By its own force it runs machinery which pumps water for the whole town in sufficient
quantity.

The regiment greatly disliked to leave this place, and, in after times, when it was wont to
wish itself in some pleasant abode, it would fondly revert to Huntsville. But, early on the
morning of the 10th, it took up the line of march for Stevenson, Alabama, where it expected
it would certainly join the brigade. It had not marched from Huntsville more than three miles
when a soldier from Company H, Mr. Church by name, while walking in the woods near the road,
espied a squad of concealed bushwhackers, whereupon he fired at them, and killed one. The dead
body was brought to the road and left in plain view, being labeled with these words: "A bushwhacker."
A great number of negroes--men, women and children, of every age and size, of every hue of
the skin from yellow to concentrated blackness, followed out from Huntsville, presenting a
jolly scene.

The march to Bridgeport attaches nothing of much importance to it, only the usual occurring
incidents. The sick and barefooted were left at Brownville, to be transported from thence to
Stevenson on the cars, where they joined the command. The regiment reached Bridgeport on the
14th, where it received a mail--the first since Columbia. The brigade had gone on from this
place to Chattanooga, to join General Rosecrans' army, which was on the eve of battle with Bragg.

On the morning of the 15th, the regiment left Bridgeport, and on the evening of the 16th, tired
and worn out, it crossed Lookout mountain, and joined the brigade at Rossville, six miles south
from Chattanooga. In this vicinity was collected a large army, and the great battles that succeeded
were imminent. Here ended these hard marches after so long a time. The Eighty-sixth had been
in the campaign nearly twenty-seven days, seventeen of which it formed its own company, having
passed over the hostile country lying between Columbia and Chattanooga, which was infested
with strong bands of guerrillas of the most desperate kind, without the loss of a man. It was
now much fatigued and hoped to have a short respite from its labors--but not so, something
of a more terrible nature was forthcoming--the bloody battle of Chickamauga. General Bragg
turned on our forces under Rosecrans, on the 16th of September, on the 17th, skirmishing began,
and on the 18th, very hard skirmishing and some fighting came off. It was on the 18th that
the brigade, under command of Colonel Dan. McCook, was sent out to the Chickamauga creek to
burn a bridge, which it successfully accomplished. A force of the enemy came near capturing
it, having nearly surrounded it. During the fight that ensued, it lost a good many men. On
the evening of the 19th, the brigade returned to Rossville, afterwards moving out on the road
leading to McAfee church, and took up position just inside the Rossville Gap. Here it remained
in readiness for any emergency, all the night of the 19th.

Our corps, commanded by General Gordon Granger, was held in reserve at this battle, and was
not generally engaged on the 19th. The battle of the 19th was a hard contested one, and, when
night came, the advantages were about equal. The enemy were vastly superior in numbers, in
about the ratio of five to three, making him buoyant and desperate on this day and the next.
On the next day, the 20th of September, the fate of Chickamauga was to be decided.

The battle commenced at half-past eight A.M., the effort of the enemy being, as on the previous
day, to turn the left flank of our army, and then gain access to the Lafayette and Chattanooga
road. Thomas, who was in command at the left, was hard pressed from the start, and General
Rosecrans directed him to hold on, assuring him that he should be reinforced if necessary,
by the entire army. Our brigade was moved, early on the morning of the 20th, from its position
of the night previous, and marched out on the left wing of the army to an old church, known
as the McAfee church. Here it maneuvered about on the left flank of the army, taking different
positions, in readiness for the expected advance of the enemy in that quarter. The battle continued
to rage furiously on our right. From some misunderstanding, there was a gap left in the line
of battle on the right centre of the army. The rebels instantly worked into this breach, striking
our troops in flank and rear, throwing them into complete confusion, from which they never
recovered till they reached Rossville. Seven brigades, or about one-fourth of our entire force,
were thus swept away by this misfortune, and though the loss in killed and wounded was not
very heavy, and that in prisoners less than would have been expected, they were effectually
cut off from rendering further aid to the rest of the army during that day. Among those in
this rout, were, without fault of their own, Major-Generals Rosecrans, McCook, and Crittenden.
Each made repeated efforts to join the main body, but in vain, and finally fell back to Rossville,
whence General Rosecrans sent his chief of staff, General Garfield, to ascertain how Thomas
was succeeding in holding the rebels at bay, and himself, with Generals McCook and Crittenden,
went on to Chattanooga, to secure the trains and put the city in a state of defense, if, as
he feared, the army should be driven to retreat thither. The rout on the right wing took place
about one o'clock P.M. Notwithstanding the break on the right, General Thomas, though opposed
by a force at least five to two, stood grim and defiant, resisting the repeated assaults upon
his lines with a persistency never surpassed. From two o'clock till sunset, a terrible battle
raged along Thomas' line. About two in the afternoon, our brigade was ordered to the assistance
of Thomas, it then being some three miles to his left, and going this distance on the double-quick.
The General saw a cloud of dust in the direction we were coming, and, it is said, he was uneasy
at first, not knowing whose forces they were, Confederate or Union. A messenger was sent to
ascertain who they were and whence they came. When the brigade arrived and was taking up position,
the enemy opened a furious fire upon it, and had it advanced a short distance further, would
certainly have been captured. When the brigade got into position, Battery I, replied with spirit
to the fire of the enemy, which, by this time, had got the right range on us. Our position
now became fairly hideous; the woods roared and the very heavens quaked, while shot and shell
filled the air with frightful sounds. The grass and woods between our brigade and the enemy
had caught fire, which conspired to make our position more disagreeable than ever, though it
doubtless saved us a hard fight, for the rebels would not advance through it.

The other two brigades of our division, still on our right, led by General Steedman in person,
rushed upon the enemy in a furious charge, which was passing through a low gap to the rear
and flank of Brannan's position. The shock was terrible; and for a time, as the opposing forces
met in a hand-to-hand fight, success swayed from side to side; in a few minutes more the enemy
was repulsed, and dared not make the attempt again. A thousand of these brave men fell, killed
or wounded, in that brief half hour's struggle; but they held the gap.

When night came, the battle ceased, everything becoming still and hushed. The enemy now fell
back, leaving the field of battle in possession of General Thomas; but finding the ammunition,
food and water necessary for his men were exhausted, the General withdrew with his troops about
midnight to Rossville, where they arrived in good order. McCook's brigade was the last that
left the field, and the Eighty-sixth, the last regiment. It was after one o'clock at night
when it passed the Rossville Gap and went into camp. There laid down to sleep that night a
tired set of men, the fatigues of the day having almost overcome them. Many a brave comrade
fell on the bloody field of Chickamauga; and another such would have ruined our army.

On the next day, the 31st, our brigade took a position on the right of Rossville Gap. A strong
force was left here to keep back the enemy till the army could fall back on Chattanooga. The
rebels pushed buoyantly forward and opened on us a heavy cannonade. Our forces held the gap
until night, when they abandoned it, and retreated on Chattanooga. Our brigade arrived in Chattanooga
very late at night, and after much changing about, took up position and laid down to rest.

Here ends the battle and the retreat, a stirring epoch in our history. During this battle,
the regiment had the honor of conducting itself in a praiseworthy manner. There is but one
exception, and that is personal. It was the case of Major O. Fountain, who conducted himself
in a disrespectful manner by becoming intoxicated. On this account he was soon afterwards recommended
for a discharge, which was duly furnished him. Major Fountain had many qualifications of a
good soldier, and previous to this, had conducted himself in a proper manner.

After the battle, our brigade remained in Chattanooga three days, during which time it was
formed in line and held as a reserve. The enemy was hourly expected to pounce upon our forces
and attempt to regain the place, for unless they did, no real advantages were gained by their
successes at Chickamauga. Our troops were not disheartened or hopeless, but eager and determined
to conquer in a second engagement. The enemy, however, was severely punished, otherwise he
would have followed up his successes.

CHAPTER III.

MISSION RIDGE AND KNOXVILLE.

On the 24th of September, four days after the battle of Chickamauga, our regiment and brigade
was ordered to the north side of the Tennessee river, to guard a ford near the mouth of North
Chickamauga creek, some eight miles up the river from Chattanooga.

On its way to this ford, the brigade remained a few days near another ford about equidistant
from the upper one and Chattanooga, where it threw up works, and leaving the One Hundred and
Twenty-fifth Illinois to guard them, went on to the upper ford, arriving there on the 27th,
and taking up permanent quarters. This place was considered a prominent one in a military view,
and was accordingly strongly protected. The boys now set to work building shanties for their
comfort, as it was probable the command would make its winter-quarters there. They would fell
trees, chop off large cuts and split them into slabs. Out of these rough slabs snug shanties
were made, and to put on the finishing touch, fire-places were built in them. When cold, keen
winds blew fierce without, the soldier sat comfortable within, and soon our North Chickamauga
camp became a semi-paradise--a home in the woods. It was here the brigade suffered so much
from hunger; famine was our ghost, it haunted us by day and by night.

The troops were not supplied with half rations, for the transportation of the army was insufficient.
It was impossible to procure adequate supplies for a large army by hauling them sixty miles
over the horrible roads across the Cumberland and Walden ridges--roads in which six miles a
day was all the distance a six-mule team could accomplish. This state of affairs could not
last long.

The Tennessee river is very crooked. Below Chattanooga it makes two bends; the first, eight
miles in circuit, and only one and a half across; the other, thirty miles in circuit, and four
miles across. If these two peninsulas could be gained, wagon transportation would be reduced
to ten miles. To accomplish this, Hooker's command was ordered from Bridgeport through Shellmount
to the Lookout valley, thence to Brown's ferry. While Hooker was doing this, a detail from
Chattanooga, under command of General Hazen, proceeded down the river in pontoon boats to Brown's
ferry, and succeeded in laying a pontoon bridge.

From here there was a good road to Kelly's ferry, and loaded wagons could go from that point
to Chattanooga in half a day.

On the night of the 27th, General Geary's division of Hooker's command, pitched its camp in
advance of the main force, near Wauhatchie in the Lookout valley, and was attacked at two o'clock
on the morning of the 28th.

Geary held his ground, and Longstreet was defeated with severe loss. The night of this battle
was clear, and the moon shone bright. The roar of artillery and rattle of musketry could be
distinctly heard from our camp on the Chickamauga. Such an affair at the dead of night, when
all else is calm and hushed, presents a thrill of emotions that can be experienced under no
other circumstances.

On the 29th of October, Colonel Dan. McCook received orders to despatch two of his regiments
to the assistance of General Hooker, who was now in the Lookout valley. The Eighty-sixth Illinois
and Fifty-second Ohio, were accordingly ordered to report to him. They crossed to the south
side of the Tennessee on the pontoon bridge at Kelly's ferry, below Chattanooga. After crossing
the river, the Eighty-sixth was sent to guard a pass in the Raccoon ridge, and passed there
a most miserable night. It was perched on a hill-side, the rain falling in torrents, and every
man being obliged to hold to a sapling to keep from going down.

From this pass, the next day, the regiment went down the ridge to a position opposite Lookout
mountain, where it relieved a brigade of Hooker's men. The enemy had a battery planted on the
Lookout, at the Point of Rocks, whence he shelled us continually. The boys could tell when
this battery would shoot, and dodge accordingly. It was here we had our first intercourse with
Eastern troops. They had odd ways, peculiar to themselves, which the Western boys were unused
to, and in consequence, many taunting words were passed, for either party was loth to take
the jaw of the other. The Eighty-sixth and Fifty-second, remained in front of Lookout mountain
five days, when they were relieved and sent back to North Chickamauga, arriving there on the
evening of the 5th of November, after an absence of seven days.

Again the boys set themselves to refitting their shanties, for it now seemed probable there
would be no more moving for a long time. The weather was then disagreeably cold, and they must
work or freeze--they worked.

Most every mess soon had comfortable habitations, and some of them very neat ones indeed. But
after all their pains, it became evident they would not remain long at this camp. Our army
was beginning to strengthen, and everything indicated a move.

About the 20th of November, pontoons were placed in the mouth of the North Chickamauga for
some purpose, then unknown, but afterwards revealed. There were one hundred and sixteen pontoon
boats in number, in which Giles A. Smith's brigade of the Fifteenth Corps embarked on the night
of the 23rd, and entering the Tennessee, moved swiftly down three miles, closely hugging the
right bank; then crossed, and landed a small force above the West Chickamauga, and the remainder
just below it. Landing this force, the boats were dispatched to the opposite side for reinforcements.
Two divisions were ferried over, and by noon, a pontoon bridge across the Tennessee, fourteen
hundred feet long, and another across the West Chickamauga, two hundred feet long, were completed.

Long before daylight on the morning of the 24th, our division under command of Jefferson C.
Davis, was marched down the right bank of the Tennessee to a point opposite the mouth of the
West Chickamauga, where the pontoon bridge was being constructed. At one P.M., the Fifteenth
Corps, on the left bank of the river, advanced in three columns, and at half-past three were
in possession of the Missionary Hills without loss. Our division crossed the pontoons late
in the afternoon of the 24th, in a drizzling rain, and after much maneuvering took up a position
in a thick and swampy woods.

The night of the 24th passed off with some fighting, as the enemy made an effort to regain
his lost ground, but his effort proved abortive. During the battle of the 25th, our division
was held as support to General Sherman, who was ordered to make a demonstration on Fort Buckner,
on Tunnel Hill. When Sherman's persistence had drawn nearly one-half the force from Fort Bragg
to Fort Buckner, six signal guns, fired at intervals of two seconds, told the advance of the
Fourth Corps to the assault on Fort Bragg. This assault proved a complete success. The rebel
works were captured, and with Hooker on their left flank and rear, and their centre broken,
they were in a complete rout. Here ended the day, and under cover of night Bragg's army beat
a hasty and disorderly retreat.

During this battle our brigade was not engaged, but being held in close reserve, it could see
things well done. The next thing on the programme was the pursuit. Our division was ordered
to march at one o'clock A.M., on the 26th, and crossing the Chickamauga by the pontoon at its
mouth, pushed forward for the enemy's depot, and by eleven A.M. it appeared at the depot, just
in time to see it in flames. Entering with one brigade, General Davis found the enemy occupying
two hills partially entrenched, just beyond the depot. They were soon driven away. At this
place was to be found all manner of things, burning and broken. Corn and corn-meal, wagons,
caissons, guns, pontoons, balks, chesses, and the like, were lying around promiscuously.

As the command advanced, every kind of plunder lined the road, the private soldier having even
thrown away his provisions and clothing, being in the utmost confusion and excitement. When
the division reached Shepherd's run, some two miles north of Grayville, it found the enemy's
rear guard intending to camp, and showing a disposition for fight. Accordingly, General Davis
ordered it into line and to charge the rebels away. It was not long in executing orders. After
running a long distance, jumping fences, creeks and other obstacles, it found the enemy in
strong skirmish force, which was made to give ground, but night drawing near, no decisive advantage
was gained.

Our division held its position until morning, when it was again set off on the pursuit, marching
in supporting distance of General Hooker who was engaging the enemy at the Ringgold pass. After
several charges, Hooker finally succeeded in dislodging the rebel force, and took possession,
capturing three hundred prisoners. The loss of Hooker's command here was heavier than in the
capture of Lookout mountain.

The junction of Bragg and Longstreet was now no longer a possibility. In the meantime, the
siege of Knoxville was pressed with ardor by the forces under Longstreet, and Burnside found
himself in close quarters. Having disposed of Bragg, General Grant determined to send a force,
under Sherman, to the relief of Knoxville. Our division formed a part of this force.

Early on the 28th of November, bleak and cold, Sherman began his northern march through East
Tennessee, to the assistance of the beleaguered city. On its route to Knoxville, our division
passed near Cleveland on the 29th, and on December 1st, crossed the Hiawassee river. Marching
on, it arrived at a point on the Little Tennessee opposite Morgantown, on the 4th, and crossing,
marched up the river four miles when orders were countermanded; then, countermarching, recrossed
the river at Morgantown--Longstreet having abandoned the siege, and hastily retreating towards
Virginia.

The object of the expedition now being accomplished, the army began its return march on the
7th of December. General Jeff. C. Davis had orders to march to Columbus by way of Madisonville.
On its return, the division passed through Madisonville, on the first day's march, leaving
the Eighty-sixth Illinois to garrison it during the night. The regiment lived well while here,
nearly every family being set to work baking corn-bread, cakes, and such. It passed a pleasant
night with the good folks of this inland village, only regretting that it could not remain
longer and enjoy more of their forced hospitality.

Leaving Madisonville, the regiment plod on after the division, marching the distance of twenty-five
miles, through mud and rain, reaching the Conasauga Mills about ten o'clock on the night of
the 8th, when the division was encamped. No Eighty-sixth man will be so recreant to the memories
of the past as to forget this day's march. And no one will forget the manly action of our Colonel
on this occasion, who, to encourage his men, trudged along through mud and rain, allowing his
wearied boys to ride his horse by turns. The division remained encamped near these mills one
week, living fat on corn-meal, molasses and pork.

On the 15th, it again took up the march, bound for Chattanooga, and arrived there in the afternoon
of the 18th, after a toilsome march. Our brigade was detained several hours, waiting to be
ferried over the Tennessee. It was very late at night when the Eighty-sixth effected a crossing,
and when once over, it camped for the remainder of the night, marching up to its old camping
ground, on the morning of the 19th.

Here ends the Knoxville campaign, and the Eighty-sixth back in its old camp on the North Chickamauga.
This campaign consumed twenty-five days of the severest marching and suffering that ever soldiers
experienced. Many returned barefooted and threadbare, in the chill month of December, leaving
bloody tracks on the frozen ground. This march may be fairly numbered among the hardest of
our hardships. No men ever bore up under so many ills with more fortitude than did the men
in this arduous and difficult campaign to the relief of the besieged and almost subjugated
Knoxville. On this trip we saw more loyal people than in all our previous service.

Long live the good people of East Tennessee; may they live in peace and die in plenty!

On this march Company G, of the Eighty-sixth, met with a sad misfortune near Louden; it was
the accidental death of Sergeant Haynes. The column had just halted when one of his company
carelessly threw down his gun, which going off, shot the sergeant in the head, killing him
instantly.

The boys now made free to stick close to their shanties and fire-places, for their clothing
was scant and the weather extremely cold. The division did not remain at North Chickamauga
long, for, on the 26th of December, it crossed the Tennessee, taking up camp at McAfee's church,
on the left of the Chickamauga battle-field and six miles from Chattanooga.

CHAPTER IV.

ABOUT CHATTANOOGA.

The beginning of the year 1864 found the Eighty-sixth regiment in camp at McAfee's church,
busily engaged in building shanties and preparing for the winter, which was extremely cold
and disagreeable. These rude habitations were soon made comfortable, and had we been well provided
with provisions and clothing, everything would have passed off gay and lively. Eighteen hundred
and sixty-three passed away, taking with it many fond recollections, and many, too, that were
not pleasant. The hardships and privations we were called upon to endure, together with our
successes and pleasures, seemed now to be nothing more than an apologue of which the moral
is the only reliable feature. There was good cause for rejoicing, for success had attended
our arms on land and sea. The Mississippi had been opened, and the enemy amazingly defeated
at every point in the South-west.

Our encampment on the Chickamauga battle-ground had a fine location, and possessed many advantages
in wood and water. A deal of pains and labor was taken to make this camp comfortable and healthy.
Green trees were set out in front of the company grounds, which beautified and made them enchanting.

This vicinity of the South is noted for its grand natural scenery, nowhere to be surpassed.
We read of the romantic scenery of the Oriental world--of the versatility of Italia's summer
winds--of the magic charms of her hills, her rills, and dales; but the realities here presented
are more enchanting than the probabilities of a might be in other parts of the world. From
the heights of Lookout mountain the country around has the appearance of one vast field of
ridges, tending in their direction from north to south. This mountain is 2,500 feet above the
level of the Tennessee, and from the Point of Rocks, a man in the valley below appears to be
no larger than one's thumb, and a train of cars gliding along at its base has the appearance
of tiny toys. Chattanooga, a distance of more than five miles, seems to lie directly at its
base. The first range of ridges to the eastward of Lookout range is known as Missionary Ridge.
The next in succession are the Pea Vine, Pigeon, Taylor's, and Rocky Face.

Missionary Ridge, the scene of Bragg's disaster, breaks off from its regular course at Rossville,
in a curve to the eastward, striking the river some five miles above Chattanooga, thus forming
on the south and south-east a perfect wall of natural defenses, upon which, for two months,
lay the besieging forces of the Confederate army. To complete the semicircle of walls around
Chattanooga on the south side of the river, Lookout mountain stands in its huge dimensions,
a key to the South-west.

In the Chickamauga valley, on the south-east side of Missionary Ridge, from McAfee's church
to Lee and Gordon's Mills, is the site of the Chickamauga battle-field.

That place, even when we went there to camp, more than three months after the battle, presented
a repulsive sight. The enactment of that terrible conflict, when leaden rain fell thick and
fast around us, when the dying were gasping in the last agonies of death, when wounded and
dead men covered the gory field, and the terrible thought of immediate danger crowded our minds,--produced
not half the emotions of human misery that were experienced nearly four months afterwards when
we viewed the same field. Here and there could be seen the putrified form of a human creature
in Union garb. Sometimes the skull and other members of the body were seen detached along the
road-side or on a stump, having been taken from their peaceful repose by ruthful hands or hungry
dogs.

The entire field was yet cumbered with great numbers of our dead, and, in most cases, the flesh
had fallen from the bones, leaving nothing but the mere skeleton. Years hence, children yet
unborn will find, in their sports upon this field, a skull or a bone of these poor victims,
and wonder and ask what it is; then, some grandfather will tell them of the great battle of
Chickamauga.

But to return to Camp McAfee. For awhile at first, the boys were obliged, in a measure, to
furnish their own supplies. Every day, some one of each mess had to go six miles to mill and
try his hand for flour, sometimes being extremely lucky, but more frequently, to return without
a mite. These were, with propriety, called our "milling days." Thus our time dragged heavily on.

On the evening of the 27th of January, our division received orders to march the next morning
at daylight, with three days rations in their haversacks. Accordingly, on the morning of the
28th, it led out in the direction of Ringgold, still under the command of General Jeff. C.
Davis. General Batie's brigade followed Morgan's, and Colonel McCook's brought up the rear.
The evening of the same day the command camped at Ringgold, a distance of twelve miles. Here
it remained until ten A.M. the next day, waiting the result of a reconnoissance which was being
made in the direction of Tunnel Hill, when it returned to McAfee. The enemy was found in force
at that place, and his strength tolerably well ascertained, which was the real object of the
expedition. This reconnoissance resulted in the capture of forty prisoners, besides five killed
and seventeen wounded.

Again, on the 14th of February our brigade marched to Chickamauga Station to relieve the 1st
brigade which was there on outpost duty. The weather was now cold and wet, and we were without
shanties, but the boys, with their usual energy, set to work and soon constructed comfortable
quarters. The houses in the vicinity of the camp were made to suffer badly; in many instances
not even a nail was left to mark the spot where once stood a neat frame building. Colonel Magee
returned to his regiment while it was here, having been home on furlough, every one being glad
to see his familiar face. About the time we began to realize the benefit of our labors at this
place, the brigade was ordered to march, having been there eight days. On Tuesday morning,
the 23rd, the brigade received orders to march in one hour's time, it being reported that the
lines would not advance further than Grayville, and there go into camp.

In consequence of this understanding, almost every soldier carried a huge load of camp plunder;
but they were sadly mistaken, since the column marched rapidly on Ringgold, a distance of sixteen
miles, where the other two brigades of the division had previously arrived. Most of the command
became so much fatigued under their burden that they were obliged to fall out and come up at
their leisure.

On the next day the division continued the march from Ringgold through Tunnel Hill on to Buzzard's
Roost, a narrow defile in the Rocky Face Ridge, where it found the enemy in force and very
defiant. On reaching the position of the enemy at this place, our brigade was drawn up in line
of battle, advancing into position so as to cover the pass, during which time a heavy cannonade
was opened on our lines, and continued until dark. General Morgan's brigade having taken up
position on our left, pickets were now sent out, and comparative silence prevailed during the
night.

Companies E and H were detailed from the Eighty-sixth for picket duty on this occasion, company
A being sent on the skirmish line the next day at 12 M.

On the morning of the 25th the pass was enveloped in a dense fog, so much so that objects could
not be distinguished at any great distance, it being impossible to discover a vestige of the
enemy's lines until about ten A.M., when the fog had partially disappeared. About this time,
however, skirmishing began along the line, resulting in a few serious casualties on our part.

The main reason for delaying operations so long was in not knowing the exact situation of General
Cruft, who had been sent round the left of Rocky Face Ridge in order to flank the enemy's position
at Buzzard's Roost Gap. Cannon could be heard in that direction booming furiously, but nothing
definite could be determined by that.

It soon became evident, however, that he was advancing rapidly on their flank and rear, since
the roar of the cannon and rattle of musketry became more and more distinct; but no news came
respecting his progress until about ten A.M., when an orderly arrived with the desired information.
Towards noon the fog disappeared, and the sun having risen high, made it more favorable for
operations, since in the morning it shone in our eyes and blinded us. About one o'clock, Hotchkiss'
2nd Minnesota and Warren's 19th Indiana batteries moved into position in front of our brigade
on a high eminence, from whence they began to feel for the position of the enemy, which was
soon discovered strongly fortified on the adjacent hills. Soon after this the Eighty-sixth
was ordered to advance over the hill on which these batteries were stationed, and attack the
enemy's position. When it reached the crest of the hill, the rebels opened a furious fire upon
it, but this did not derange the line one particle, it marching on with as much good order
as if on battalion drill. The regiment advanced to the foot of a hill or ridge only a few hundred
yards from the enemy's line of works, where it halted and lay down. Colonel McCook urged Magee
to charge the works, but he would not until he got support on his right, as it was unprotected,
and would have resulted in the utter ruin of the regiment.

The 85th, it is true, was on the right of the Eighty-sixth, but not in supporting distance,
having partially changed its direction and ascended the acclivity on the right too high. At
the same time our brigade advanced on the right, General Morgan advanced on the left and made
a desperate charge on the enemy's position; but he was repulsed in great disorder, the steep
and rugged rocks affording a natural barrier against his assaulting force. The charge on the
left having failed of success, the right was ordered to maintain its own, it being the design,
however, to push forward the right had Morgan succeeded in his enterprise.

The Eighty-sixth remained in its position until night, when it was relieved by other troops,
and falling back to the rear, remained in comparative quiet during the night.

On the morning of the 26th the Eighty-sixth was marched to a position covering the right flank
of our forces in the gap. It was anticipated that a force of the enemy's cavalry would make
a demonstration in that direction. Here the regiment built good breastworks in readiness for
the expected attack; but no enemy came, though it remained until night, when it was withdrawn,
taking up the line of march for Ringgold. Soon after this the whole force was put on the retreat,
arriving in Ringgold late at night.

Every Eighty-sixth man will remember the odd sight that occurred on this retreat as it entered
Tunnel Hill. A large frame building had caught on fire and was in full blaze when we entered
town. While descending a ridge in closed ranks, the light from the burning building was reflected
from every face, presenting a multitude of bright, pleasing countenances, and as all else was
dark, nothing could be seen but a moving field of shining faces. Our brigade was not generally
engaged in the battle just recited, the Eighty-sixth and the 85th Illinois being the only regiments
brought into action, though the rest were in close reserve. The Eighty-sixth loss was one killed
and seven wounded, the company loss being as follows: Co. H, three; Co. G, one; Co. K, four.
The reconnoissance was now ended, and its objects accomplished.

The rebels had been sending troops to Mobile, but the movements of this expedition compelled
them to bring them back. On the next day, the 27th, the division was put on the march for Camp
McAfee, where it arrived at dusk of the same day, having been absent thirteen days. But after
all, we were destined to remain here only a short time. Just one week after the reconnoissance
to Buzzard's Roost we were again put on the move.

Our brigade received orders to march on Sunday, the 6th day of March, to Lee and Gordon's Mills,
situated on the right of the Chickamauga battle-ground, about eight miles distant from the
camps at McAfee. The command was sent here on account of this being a strategic point, and
soon began to lay off a camp, which day by day it adorned and beautified until it became an
enchanting place, the very prototype of the grand and beautiful, being situated on the banks
of the South Chickamauga, a handsome stream of water.

When good comfortable shanties had been erected, the boys began to ornament their grounds after
the first order of things, for neither time nor labor was spared in this work, each soldier
taking a pride in doing his part. All the companies of each regiment fabricated ornaments of
every conceivable workmanship, differing one from another, and on the whole really handsome.
These ornaments were made of pine and cedar boughs by the more dextrous and artistical of our
comrades. You might see well-fashioned eagles, letters, figures and animals hung up in conspicuous
places over a beautiful frame-work of gothic structure, astonishing and eliciting remark from
passers by. Besides these, there were all kinds of machinery fluttering and struggling in the
air on long poles. Flutter mills and gunboats could be seen making their hasty rounds; men
wrestling and turning many kinds of machinery could be taken in at the same glance of the eye.
Each regiment had a meeting house and bowers, weather-boarded and covered with pine and cedar
boughs, presenting the very picture of enjoyment.

This was the handsomest camp in the whole army, and drawings of it appeared in Harper's Weekly
and Frank Leslie, as model camps. It was here the brigade enjoyed soldiering more than at any
other time or place before or after, having learned to make its profession agreeable, and looking
more particularly to its comfort and enjoyment. Then, there was added to the pleasures of this
camp the noted springs, known as Crawfish Springs. A huge stream of bright clear water forces
itself from the foot of the hill from whence it issues. They are a natural wonder, and have
called forth the admiration of all who chanced to visit them. The slaveocracy of this portion
of the South made them their constant summer resort, and the soldiers also enjoyed them as
a pleasant retreat to drive dull time away.

The 3rd brigade remained at Lee and Gordon's Mills two months wanting three days, during which
time it contracted many fond attachments, and in after times the boys would revert to the memories
of this camp with more than ordinary pleasure. It was while here that Colonel Magee came from
Camp McAfee to bid the boys of his regiment good bye, having been unable to leave that place
with his command. The Colonel's health for a long time had been very poor, and Surgeon Hooton
assured him that he could not survive the service, nor do justice to himself and his command
by continuing in it. For these reasons he was induced to offer the resignation of his command,
which in due course of time was accepted. There was a universal feeling of sad regret with
the boys of the Eighty-sixth at this event, a regret that their beloved Colonel no longer had
the strength of body to remain with them through the trying events of the future, as he had
been their pride through those of the past.

Lieutenant-Colonel D. W. Magee was a man of humane and tender feeling. Having himself served
in the ranks in the Mexican war, he was well qualified to appreciate the hardships and difficulties
incident to a soldier's life. He was free to converse and associate with his men, at the same
time commanding their highest esteem and most submissive obedience. With his gayest humor there
mingled a settled air of resolution, which made those who approached him feel they must obey,
and which infused love and confidence in those with whom he was surrounded. His manners ingenuous
and open-hearted, concealed an imperturbable and calculating spirit. His dress--neither gaudy
nor striking, but neat--was such as to set off his person to advantage.

The Colonel took his departure from the regiment on Sunday, the 27th of March, with the consciousness
of taking with him the hearty "God bless you" of all his men.

Immediately after the resignation of Colonel Magee, the regimental and company officers held
an election, and unanimously voted Major Allen L. Fahnestock Colonel of the regiment, who received
his commission and was mustered in as such on the 13th of April, 1864, by Captain Cole, of
the 9th Indiana. Colonel Fahnestock entered upon the duties of his office with a spirit and
resolution that characterized him through all the future events of the regimental history,
worthy in every respect the honors of the position left vacant by his energetic predecessor.

At the same time that Colonel Fahnestock was promoted, Captain J. F. Thomas, of Company C,
was voted to the position of Major of the regiment.

Major Thomas was a man of a kind and affable disposition, easy and dignified in his intercourse
with others, and the real exemplification of the right man in the right place.

CHAPTER V.

CAMPAIGN AGAINST ATLANTA.

Early on the morning of the 3rd of May, 1864, the Third Brigade of the Second Division, Fourteenth
Army Corps, under command of Colonel Dan. McCook, left Lee and Gordon's Mills and arrived in
Ringgold, a distance of twelve miles, in the afternoon of the same day, and there joined the
other two brigades of the division. There was a large army camped in the vicinity of Ringgold,
and the hills and valleys were covered with camps, and rung merrily with the voices of many
soldiers. It now became evident that the indomitable Sherman was assembling his whole force
to make a crushing effort to drive back the threatening rebels under Jo. Johnston.

The few days we remained at Ringgold our army was continually augmenting, when by the 7th of
the month it had assembled in force, and set in motion against the enemy at Tunnel Hill and Dalton.

The grand army of the Mississippi, under the immediate command of Major-General Sherman, at
the commencement of this campaign, numbered ninety-eight thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven
effective men, and two hundred and fifty-four pieces of artillery, and was divided as follows:

The Army of the Cumberland, Major-General Thomas commanding--infantry, fifty-four thousand
five hundred and sixty-eight; artillery, two thousand three hundred and seventy-seven; cavalry,
three thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight. Total, sixty thousand seven hundred and seventy-three;
with one hundred and thirty guns. Army of the Tennessee, Major-General McPherson commanding--infantry,
twenty-two thousand four hundred and thirty-seven; artillery, one thousand four hundred and
four; cavalry, six hundred and twenty-four. Total, twenty-four thousand four hundred and sixty-five;
with ninety-six guns. Army of the Ohio, Major-General Schofield commanding--infantry, eleven
thousand one hundred and eighty-three; artillery, six hundred and seventy-nine; cavalry, one
thousand six hundred and ninety-seven. Total, thirteen thousand five hundred and fifty-nine;
with twenty-eight guns. These numbers continued relatively the same during the campaign, the
losses in battle and from sickness being about compensated by recruits, and returns from furlough
and hospitals.

The Fourteenth Corps, to which our division belonged, was commanded by Major-General Palmer,
and was assigned to a position under Thomas in the centre.

In the move of the grand army on the 7th, our division reached Tunnel Hill at noon, where the
enemy made a slight resistance, and while it was getting into position, a battery played upon
it from an eminence near the village. This battery was soon dislodged and the enemy put to
flight, retreating behind Rocky Face Ridge, where he took up position in Buzzard's Roost Gap,
our forces following up rapidly, confronting his position, and throwing up works in case of
an attack. The night of the 7th passed off with some skirmish firing in the gap at the Roost,
and the next day, nothing was done, only the division changed its front.

The command now held this front until the 12th, during which time there were various demonstrations
made on the rebel's invincible position, to no advantage. While here, the Eighty-sixth was
continually exposed to the fire of the enemy's sharpshooters, who occupied a position on the
highest and most abrupt portions of the Rocky Face Ridge, from whence they viewed us, on the
far-spread plain below, as mere Lilliputians of a vile Yankee descent, and shooting among us,
often did much injury.

The regiment went on the skirmish line on the afternoon of the 10th, where it spent a most
disagreeable night, not being allowed to pitch its tents. An almost continuous skirmish fire
was kept up on the 11th, resulting in no very serious casualties to the Eighty-sixth, though
the Fifty-second Ohio was made to suffer severely. On the evening of the 11th, our command
was relieved by General Cruft's division of the Fourth Army Corps.

In this vicinity was passed a dolesome time, the country being wild and rugged, affording handsome
scenery under different circumstances, but for us it had no enchantment. It was at this same
gap we fought the enemy on the 25th of February of the same year. Companies H and K had each
a man wounded at this place, being the only loss of the regiment.

On the morning of the 12th of May, the Fourteenth Corps, including our division, marched to
the right along Rocky Face Ridge, until it came to Snake Creek Gap, and passing through it
with much difficulty at a late hour at night, camped on the south-east side of the ridge. Previous
to this, General McPherson had taken possession of this gap, completely surprising a brigade
of Confederate cavalry which was coming to watch and hold it.

McPherson's and Hooker's commands had gone through before us, and Schofield's followed after
us, the Fourth Corps having been left to attract the enemy's attention in front. Thus, the
whole army, except Howard's Fourth Corps, moved through Snake Creek Gap, on Resaca. Major-General
Thomas took up position on the left of the line, and McPherson and Schofield on his right,
the enemy being completely flanked by this move, from his strong position at Buzzard's Roost
and Dalton, and compelled to fall back on Resaca. At this place, they determined to give our
forces a check, if possible, which moved on their position on the 13th.

On the next day, the 14th, there was hard fighting, our division taking a position late in
the afternoon, and building breastworks, the roar of artillery and musketry continuing furiously
all the day.

At dusk, on the evening of the 15th, the Eighty-sixth was sent on the skirmish line only a
short distance from the rebel works. The enemy was very conversant on this occasion, as was
usually the case when their forces took up the retreat, our boys telling them that they would
wager their last red that they would be gone before morning; and sure enough, when morning
came, every word of this prophecy was verified.

Our commanders, suspecting the action of the rebels, ordered our batteries to play freely on
their works. These batteries were stationed on the hills behind the regiment, the screaming
missiles from them passing over it, presenting, in the darkness of night, a scene of magnificent
grandeur.

In the morning, the rebels had evacuated their works, falling back for a better position, which
they never found. In this battle, the regiment lost five, in all; the company loss being as
follows: Company C, three wounded; Company H, one wounded, and Company I, one missing. No sooner
had the rebels evacuated Resaca than our skirmishers were aware of the fact, so that, by daylight
on the 16th, we were in possession of their works, the pursuit being taken up at an early hour. 

Man must wait for its inspirations. Like the wind, it bloweth when it listeth. Man also, when
he feels this divine influence, feels that it is distinct from his reason. When it is gone,
he feels the loss of it, though all his rational faculties be alive. "Those, says Alexander
Arscott, who have this experience, certainly know that as at times, in their silent retirements and
humble waitings upon God, they receive an understanding of his will, relating to their present
duty, in such a clear light as leaves no doubt or hesitation, so at other times, when this
is withdrawn from them, they are at a loss again, and see themselves, as they really are, ignorant
and destitute."

The Quakers again understand by these expressions of the Apostle, which is the point insisted
upon in this chapter, that human reason, or the spirit of man which
is within him, and the divine principle of life and light which is
the spirit of God residing in his body or temple, are so different
in their powers, that the former cannot enter into the province of
the latter.

         As water cannot penetrate the same bodies, which fire can, so neither
can reason the same subjects as the spiritual faculty.

    
    
    The Quakers, however,
    do not deny, that human
                      reason
      is powerful within its own province.

         It may discover in the beautiful structure of the Universe, and in
the harmony and fitness of all its parts, the hand of a great contriver.

    It may conclude upon
    attributes, as belonging
    to the same. It may
    see the fitness of virtue,
    and deduce from thence
                      a
      speculative morality.

They only say that it, is incompetent to spiritual discernment. But though they believe the
two spirits to be thus distinct in their powers, they believe them, I apprehend, to be so
far connected in religion that the spirit of God can only act upon a reasonable being. Thus
light and the power of sight are distinct things. Yet the power of sight is nothing without light,
nor can light operate upon any other organ than the eye to produce vision.

This proposition may be farther elucidated by making a comparison between the powers of men, and those
of the brute-creation. An animal is compounded of body and instinct. If we were to endeavour to cultivate
this instinct, we might make the animal tame and obedient. We might impress his sensitive powers,
so that he might stop or go forward at our voice. We might bring him in some instances, to
an imitation of outward gestures and sounds. Bat all the years of his life, and centuries of life
in his progeny would pass away, and we should never be able so to improve his instinct into intellect,
as to make him comprehend the affairs of a man. He would never understand the meaning of his
goings in, or of his goings out, or of his pursuits in life, or of
his progress in science.

So neither could any education so improve the reason of man into the divine principle of light
within him, as that he should understand spiritual things; for the things of God are only discernible
by the spirit of God.

This doctrine, that there is no understanding of divine things except through the medium of
the divine principle, which dwells in the temple of man, was no particular notion of George Fox,
or of the succeeding Quakers, though undoubtedly they have founded
more upon it than other Christians.

Those, who had the earliest access to the writings of the evangelists and apostles, believed
the proposition. All the ancient fathers of the church considered
it as the corner stone of the Christian fabric.

The most celebrated of the reformers held it in the same light. The divines, who followed these,
adopted it as their creed also; and by these it has been handed down to other Christian communities,
and is retained as an essential doctrine by the church of England,
at the present day.

The Quakers adduce many authorities in behalf of this proposition, but the following may suffice.

"It
is the inward master, says St. Augustine, that teacheth.

Where this inspiration is wanting, it is in vain that words from without are beaten in."

Luther says, "no man can rightly know God, unless he immediately receives it from his holy spirit,
except he finds it by experience in himself; and in this experience the holy spirit teacheth
as in his proper school, out of which school nothing is taught but mere talk."

Calvin, on Luke 10.

21. says, "Here the natural wisdom of man is so puzzled, and is at such a loss, that the first step
of profiting in the school of Christ is to give it up or renounce it.

For by this natural wisdom, as by a veil before our eyes, we are hindered from attaining the mysteries
of God, which are not revealed but unto babes and little ones. For
neither do flesh and blood reveal, nor doth the natural man perceive,
the things that are of the spirit. But the doctrine of God is rather
foolishness to him, because it can only be spiritually judged. The
assistance therefore of the holy spirit is in this case necessary,
or rather, his power alone is efficacious."

About this time, General Blair arrived at Ackworth, with two divisions of the Seventeenth Corps
and a brigade of cavalry--a reinforcement that amply compensated for our losses in battle,
and troops left in garrison at Resaca, Rome, Kingston and Altoona.

On the morning of the 9th, the entire army moved forward to Big Shanty, the next station on
the railroad. Here, we found ourselves surrounded by scenery of peculiar and lofty beauty.
To our left, and on the east of the railroad, were Sweet mountain and Black Jack, while to
the westward, and nearly in front, rose the bold and striking Kenesaw. To the right was Pine
mountain, and more distinctly to the right was Lost mountain.

Here we found the rebel General Johnston, strongly fortified on the northern slopes of Pine,
Kenesaw and Lost mountains. General Sherman says, in his official report: "The scene was enchanting;
too beautiful to be disturbed by the harsh clamors of war; but the Chattahouchie lay beyond,
and I had to reach it."

At this place, our division took a position at right angles with the railroad and a few miles
south of Big Shanty, where it threw up substantial breastworks, and remained until the 14th,
when the lines were advanced and another line of works thrown up. In front of these works there
was a deal of skirmishing carried on, creating undue excitement in the lines of battle, for
it was thought the Johnnies would make a trial on our strength and position.

About this time there was an incessant roar of artillery on the extreme right of our lines,
despite the heavy rains that fell, which afterwards proved to be the operations of Sherman's
"flanking machine."

On Saturday, the 18th, our lines were again moved forward and other works constructed, the
boys working with a vengeance all night to find the Johnnies gone in the morning; being flanked
and obliged to evacuate their position for another. They were followed up at early dawn on
the morning of the 19th, and chased to their next place of retreat. Their right was now found
resting on the Marietta and Canton road, with their centre on Kenesaw mountain, and left, across
the Lost mountain and Marietta road, behind Nose's creek, and covering the railroad back to
the Chattahoochie. Our division under Davis, took its position directly in front of the Big
Kenesaw and nearly up to its base.

Several batteries of our artillery soon moved up in short range of the Kenesaw and opened a
furious fire upon it, in order, if possible, to develop the whereabouts of the enemy's masked
batteries. During this cannonade it seemed that the very heavens were in agitation and the
earth in violent commotion, but no reply was received.

The troops stood from behind their works in full view of the enemy, looking on in silent amazement,
enjoying in their hearts the sublime grandeur of the scene. Finally, a locomotive was run up
to the base of the mountain, when behold, a masked battery opened on it in all its fury, the
engine immediately reversing its steam and running back.

On the night of the 20th and 21st, the rebels constructed several strong forts on the summit
of the Kenesaw, from whence they annoyed our position a great deal. On the 22nd and 23rd, interesting
duels were fought between these batteries of the enemy and our own; and certainly there never
was a more amusing and interesting scene portrayed than exhibited in these short, effective
engagements. 

The arbitrators are to hear both parties fully, in the presence of each other, whilst either has
any fresh matter to offer, for a time mutually limited. In the case of any doubtful point of
law, the arbitrators are jointly to agree upon a case, and consult
counsel.

It is recommended to arbitrators to propose to the parties, that they should give an acknowledgment
in writing, before the award is made; that they have been candidly and fully heard.

In the same manner as a Quaker proceeds with a Quaker in the case of any difference, he is led
by his education and habits to proceed with others, who are not members of the same society.
A Quaker seldom goes to law with a person of another denomination,
till he has proposed arbitration.

    

    Company A          1
    Company I          1
    Company E          1
    Company F          1
    Company D          2
    Company K          1
    Company B          2
                      --
      Total            9

On the 24th of June, General Sherman ordered that two assaults should be made on the 27th,
one by General McPherson's troops near Little Kenesaw, and another by General Thomas', about
one mile further south. This came wholly unexpected to his troops, all believing that he would
put "the flanking machine" in force whenever he made a demonstration on the enemy's position,
but Sherman resolved to execute any plan that promised success. These two assaults were made
at the time and manner prescribed in the order, and both failed.

General Thomas chose the 2nd division of the 14th Corps to aid in the work along his line,
and early on the morning of the 27th it was massed preparatory to a charge. The 3rd brigade,
Colonel Dan. McCook commanding, was on the left of the division; the 2nd brigade, Colonel Mitchell
commanding, was on the right, and the 1st brigade, General Morgan commanding, was held in the
rear as reserves. The signal for the charge was given at 8 A.M., by the simultaneous discharge
of a battery of guns; the lines advancing slow and steady, passing over our line of works,
descending a hill over a small stream, then crossing an open field, ascended the acclivity
on which the enemy's works were built, when a desperate rush was made upon them with all the
fortitude and heroism of men under a most galling fire of cannon and musketry.

The brigade on our right failing to come up, we had to receive the cross-fire of the enemy.
It was too withering, the men falling before it as the grass before the scythe. When the works
were reached by those who did not fall in the attack, they were too weak and too few in number
to effect a breach in them, the men lying down in front of the works and up against them, until
the order to fall back was given. When the order of retreat was given, it was hard to obey,
being attended with a greater slaughter than the assault, the enemy having the chance of taking
cool and deliberate aim. Thus our broken lines fell back, again taking position only thirty
yards from the enemy, and in the most difficult manner threw up a line of works, at the same
time hugging the ground for dear life, and where we remained in defiance of the exultant rebels.
This was our darkest day of the war.

The loss of the brigade on this occasion was truly severe. Colonel Daniel McCook fell mortally
wounded, and Colonel Harmon succeeding him, survived his command but one moment, when he was
carried off the field a corpse.

The total loss of the regiment in this charge, in killed, wounded and missing, was ninety-six men.

The company loss was as follows:

         KILLED.

    Company A          11
    Company C           4
    Company D           2
    Company F           3
    Company G           2
    Company H           2
    Company I           3
    Company K           1
                       --
      Loss in killed   28

         WOUNDED.

    Company A           7
    Company B           3
    Company C           6
    Company D           9
    Company E           5
    Company G           7
    Company H          13
    Company K           5
                       --
      Loss in wounded  55

         MISSING.

    Company A           6
    Company D           2
    Company F           1
                       --
    Loss in missing     9

      Officers wounded  4

Ninety-six men were lost from the Eighty-sixth on that fatal day. It was a loss to be remembered
and remarked, for they were among our foremost and best men. They were as noble, as true and
trusty men, as loving and as loyal as ever lived.

May a just Heaven reward them as their merit deserves! May the earth rest light on their bones!
Mourn them not; it was with them "dulce et decorum, est pro patria mori." How well these men
have fought and with what heroism they have suffered, let the battles of Chickamauga, Mission
Ridge and Kenesaw answer! They will be rewarded, for they have left their "footprints on the
sands of time."

It was now a busy time at the hospitals, for they were full of the most heart-rending cases.
Among the physicians conspicuous there for energy and ability, were the indefatigable Hooton
and Guth--men who justly deserved the confidence and respect of their boys. Among the most
trying positions in the army, the Surgeon's is first. The minds and dispositions of soldiers
are as varied as the colors of the kaleidoscope, and hard to comprehend even in a sound condition,
but when fretted by ill health no one man could come out best with all of them. A good Surgeon,
like the whimsical pages of Tristram Shandy, is pestily censured and admired alternately.

The 3rd brigade held its position in close proximity to the enemy's works for six days, until
the 3rd of July. It was a hard one indeed, for we were obliged to hug the works and keep concealed
all the time, night and day. Bullets were continually buzzing round in threatening and unfriendly
style. An interesting incident occurred, however, on the 29th, that broke the monotony of our
situation for a short time; it was an armistice of a few hours to bury our dead, the stench
having become so offensive to both parties that it could be no longer endured. Details were
sent from every company to perform the last office to the heroic dead. This having been done,
and a headboard erected with the name of each upon it, to mark the spot where rests the sleeping
brave, the armistice was concluded. Soon after the armistice our brigade, now under command
of Colonel Dillworth, began a trench with the intention of undermining the enemy's works, and
blowing them up, but suspecting something underhanded on our part, they threw turpentine balls
between the lines, which would certainly have disclosed any outward movement, but the movement
was inward, and their handsome fires availed them nothing. This experiment, however, was followed
by another, more successful. By placing a drum on the solid ground and a marble on the head
of it, they discovered a jar in the earth. This was sufficient, and gathering up their traps
they evacuated early in the evening of the 2nd of July, our forces following on the morning
of the 3rd. If the rebels had not evacuated when they did, the 3rd brigade would have had a
grand jubilee on the 4th, for by that time it would have succeeded in laying a magazine under
their works, and setting it off would have raised their ideas.

On the evening of the 3rd of July, our forces again came upon Johnston's army entrenched at
Smyrna Church, five miles from Marietta, and forming our lines so as to confront his position,
lay here until after the 4th.

On the morning of the 5th, Johnston had fallen back to another line of entrenchments on the
north side of the Chattahoochie, our lines advancing as usual until they came upon him. We
were now in sight of the Gate City, its steeples and spires appearing in the distance. For
the first time we beheld the object of our toils and marches, every heart rejoicing to behold
the doomed Atlanta. General Sherman was not content, however, until every vestige of the Confederate
army was upon the south side of the Chattahoochie. Accordingly, he ordered his "flanking machine,"
under command of General Schofield, to cross the river and operate on the enemy's flank.

General Schofield crossed the Chattahoochie on the 7th of July, compelling an evacuation of
the enemy's works on the 9th, their whole force crossing to the Atlanta side of the river and
burning the bridge after them; and thus, on the morning of the 10th, Sherman's army held undisputed
possession of the right bank of the Chattahoochie; one of the chief objects of his campaign
was gained, and Atlanta lay before him only eight miles distant. It was too important a place
in the hands of the enemy to be left undisturbed, with its magazines, stores, arsenals, work
shops, founderies and converging railways. But the army had worked hard and needed rest. Therefore
it was put in camp in favorable positions along the Chattahoochie, General Davis' division
of Palmer's corps camping near the railroad and wagon bridge across the river. While we were
encamped at this place, the adventuresome boys would go near the banks of the river and gather
blackberries, notwithstanding the continuous fire of the rebel pickets on the opposite side,
there being scarcely a soldier who would not risk his life for a blackberry.

The 3rd brigade remained in this camp just eight days, when on the 18th, it crossed the Chattahoochie
river at Paice's ferry several miles above our camp, the other two brigades having preceded
it on the same route.

After crossing the river, the division advanced cautiously in line of battle, preparatory for
any emergency. The advance was made over woody and uneven ground, although not to say very
broken. Shortly before night, the command took up a position on favorable ground, the front
lines building rail breastworks. During the night, there was some skirmish firing in our immediate
front, though it was not sufficient to prevent the boys from gathering blackberries, which
had to be had, Johnnies or no Johnnies.

On the morning of the 19th, at ten o'clock A.M., the division was again put on the move, going
further to the right and front. It halted a short time at Peach Tree creek until a crossing
could be made over it. The Eighty-sixth and One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Illinois were the
last of the 3rd brigade to cross over this creek, the other regiments having made the passage
and engaged the enemy in battle beyond the crest of the hills bordering on this stream, finding
them almost an overmatch. At this juncture, Colonel Fahnestock was ordered to hasten his regiment
to their assistance, for the left of the line was giving ground. In obedience to orders, the
Eighty-sixth crossed the creek on a foot log, being greatly scattered by the time all were
across. The scattered regiment formed at the foot of the hills on which our skirmishers were
engaging the rebels, and then advanced to their support. Having taken up position, and thrown
up a light line of works, the rebels in superior force charged on our skirmishers, driving
them back pell-mell on the main line, which, after a desperate struggle, repulsed them with
heavy loss. The enemy in this charge came near flanking the Eighty-sixth out of its position,
the right giving back a short distance at first, but soon resumed it again. Despite the disadvantage
in numbers, in this spirited engagement, our forces maintained their own, and when night came,
good earthworks were thrown up in readiness for any emergency.

The loss of the brigade in this battle was almost as great as was sustained in the charge on
Kenesaw; the regiments on the skirmish line being all cut to pieces, and half their number
killed and captured. Many a lifeless form was left unheralded on the field of battle, and the
evening shades of the ever memorable 19th of July drew her mantle of darkness over a field
of blood.

The loss of the Eighty-sixth, in this battle, was comparatively light, being ten in all. There
was nothing in them, however, but a small skirmish force, the main body having withdrawn. The
Eighty-sixth kept up a heavy skirmish fire on these works, not allowing a Johnny-reb to show
his head except he got a volley of musketry. Four pieces of artillery were brought on the line
and opened on these works, having great effect and causing them to be evacuated. When a rebel
would turn his back to run, half a regiment would salute him, in its modest way. This was fun
for the boys and they seemed to relish it.

On the 21st, a reconnoitering expedition was sent out to ascertain the strength and whereabouts
of the enemy, and after advancing one mile and a half found him in force, strongly intrenched,
and then returned.

There being now nothing to confront it, our division moved forward on the 22nd, and passing
a line of intrenchments which were found evacuated, arrived and camped within three or four
miles of Atlanta--the Gate City of the South. In this position, our brigade was left in reserve,
the first time on the whole campaign, having, however, to keep a regiment on a hill, half a
mile in advance of the main line of works, as a lookout. While on this eminence, the boys had
some sociable times with the Johnnies, trading and exchanging with them as long as agreeable,
there being an agreement that there should be no shooting while trafficking was going on.

On the 22nd, the day on which General McPherson was killed, there was hard fighting on the
left, Hood having massed his forces in the hope to crush it, but after the most desperate fighting
of the campaign, his efforts were foiled, and he was compelled to withdraw with an overwhelming
loss. Sherman's report of a few days after, gave the enemy's loss as six to our one.

The Second Division of the Fourteenth Corps was moved from its position on the morning of the
28th, and marched to the right. It was now that General James D. Morgan took command of it,
General Davis being indisposed. General Morgan was ordered to move his command by Turner's
ferry and East Point and come in on the flank of General Howard's new line, so that, in case
of an attack it would catch the attacking rebel force in flank or rear. This plan proved abortive
by the sickness of General Davis and mistake of roads by General Morgan, who, by this mishap
was greatly delayed. Meantime, Hardee and Lee sallied forth from Atlanta by the Bell's Ferry
road, and formed their masses in the open fields behind a swell of ground, and after some heavy
artillery firing, advanced in parallel lines against the Fifteenth Corps, expecting to catch
it in air; but Sherman was prepared for this very contingency; our troops were expecting this
attack and met it with a raking fire of musketry, which thinning the ranks of the enemy, compelled
him to withdraw in confusion. After this, at some points, six or seven successive efforts were
made to carry our works, but all of them proved futile.

Had our division not been delayed by causes beyond control, what was simply a complete repulse
of the enemy would have been a disastrous rout. The rebel slain in this day's fight was enormous.
Dead men never lay in greater numbers on the same sized piece of ground. Our men buried 2,840,
exclusive of those carried off by their own men.

Late in the evening of the 28th, or rather, early on the morning of the 29th, after a most
fatiguing tramp, our division reached the main line. In the afternoon of the 29th, the division
advanced the lines of battle and took position; and again, on the 30th, it moved to the right
and advancing the lines took up position. On the 31st, it left its works and marched still
further to the right, on a reconnoissance, returning to its works the same day. On this reconnoissance
we got a fine ducking, having left our rubbers in camp.

On the 4th of August, the division was again moved to the right, and advancing the lines at
least one mile, after several halts, built works under a severe cannonade from the enemy's
batteries. After some hard skirmishing and changing about, the 3rd division of the 14th Corps
relieved General Morgan's command; it moved further to the right and front, on the 12th, relieving
a command of raw troops of the 23rd Corps.

Here we found breastworks and were not constrained to labor as much as usual on such occasions.
The command remained in this last position without any unusual occurrences only the spirited
bombardment of the city of Atlanta by our batteries of heavy guns, being kept up at regular
intervals night and day. The skirmish firing was also kept up with animation on both sides
and along the entire lines. Now and then the monotony was broken by a conversation or trade,
but never to last a great while, the foe not allowing their men such liberties when it could
be helped, for they would not unfrequently take advantage of these occasions to desert.

However, on the 19th of August, our brigade was marched several miles to the right, in support
of the 23rd Corps, as it was thought the enemy would charge its lines on that occasion, but
the supposition did not prove a reality. The brigade returned the same day without adventure
to its former camp. Then again, on the succeeding day, the division was moved off in the same
direction of the day previous, but not stopping so soon as before. This time, we passed the
right wing of the army entirely, and bearing south-east struck the Atlanta and Montgomery railroad
not far distant from East Point. After injuring the railroad all that lay in its power, the
division returned to camp, having enjoyed a drenching rain. Nothing more of interest passed
off except the hum-drum picket firing, until the siege of the doomed Atlanta was raised.

It was on the memorable 27th of August, that Sherman's entire force was withdrawn from about
the beleaguered city, and the whole of it, except the 20th Army Corps, which moved to the fortifications
at the railroad on the Chattahoochie, marched in the direction of the Macon railway for the
purpose of severing the enemy's communications. Early on the morning of the 27th, all the troops
on the left of our division having changed front the day previous, it moved from the breastworks,
and during the day took its position on the new line.

On the evening of this same day, the Eighty-sixth regiment held its second anniversary. It
had been the intention had not the movement of the army interfered, to appropriate a part of
the day for this purpose, but as the regiment was on the move all day it was under the necessity
of taking the night.

Accordingly, in the evening, the men were assembled on the color line and the objects of the
meeting announced. A committee of three: Major Thomas, Captains Bogardus and French, were appointed
to draft resolutions.

The committee having retired, Chaplain Millsaps made a speech appropriate to the occasion,
when the resolutions were called for and read. They were strong in favor of the administration
and bitter against the copperheads. Though the regiment was not permitted to vote, it could,
nevertheless, express its sentiments to its friends, and in behalf of the country. These resolutions
were unanimously adopted, there being no dissenting voice, and ordered to be sent to the Chicago
Tribune, Peoria Transcript and Peoria Mail. Speeches were then made by Surgeon Hooton, Colonel
Dillworth, Major Thomas, Captain Bogardus and others, of a stirring and patriotic nature. This
anniversary was, under the circumstances, highly interesting indeed, and all the surviving
members who were there, will be duly wont to review it with feelings of pride.

When Sherman's army had withdrawn from the siege of Atlanta, the enemy supposed he had taken
up his line of retreat and abandoned the enterprise. While in this belief, they were destined
to have a jubilant time; and to make it the merrier still, a mandate was sent out to the country
about for all to come and partake of the fatted calf. Fair damsels flocked from the vicinity
about to partake in the joy over victory; but lo! in the meantime, the Yankees cut the Macon
railroad so that the birdies from the rural districts could not get to their homes, and aged
mothers cried in vain for their affectionate daughters, wishing the Yankees many a curse for
interfering in their jubilee. Ah! their day of rejoicing had too soon turned to one of tears,
their unhappy city had been relieved from a siege only to be captured. O, the bitter disappointments
that overtake short-sighted man! One hour he rejoices, the next he mourns! How varied the fortunes
of war; to-day the city is impenetrable, to-morrow it has fallen! Poor, proud Atlanta reveled,
rejoiced and wept the same day!

After the siege of Atlanta was abandoned it was not long until our division, under General
J. D. Morgan, arrived in the vicinity of Jonesboro, about twenty-two miles south of Atlanta.
At this place, on the 1st of September, and at five o'clock P.M., our division was formed for
a charge: the 2nd brigade on the right, the 3rd brigade in the centre, and the 1st brigade
on the left, and advanced to the attack in two lines of battle. The Eighty-sixth regiment in
this battle held a position in the second line. The enemy's works were handsomely carried,
capturing a greater part of rebel General Gowan's brigade, including its commander, with two
four-gun batteries. This brigade was among the choice men of the rebel army, having fought
with a desperation worthy a better cause.

This charge came like a flash upon the enemy, who were not aware of our coming until we pounced
upon them like an avalanche, and though they fought obstinately, they were completely conquered.

Our brigade was in the hottest of the fight, and among the first troops to scale the works
and capture them.

The loss of the Eighty-sixth Regiment in this battle was two killed and sixteen wounded. The
company loss was as follows:

         KILLED.

    Company F          1
    Company I          1
                      --
      Total            2

         WOUNDED.

    Company A          1
    Company B          1
    Company D          2
    Company G          4
    Company I          1
    Company H          5
    Company E          1
    Company K          1
                      --
      Total           16

The night after the battle of Jonesboro an explosion of a tremendous character was heard in
the direction of Atlanta, for the enemy were evacuating it and burning their magazines.

The disheartened and disorganized forces of the enemy now exerted all their energies to complete
a successful withdrawal, and save themselves from utter annihilation. One wing of Hood's army
fled precipitately down the Macon railroad, and the other retreated along the Augusta road.

Thus was Atlanta evacuated on the night of the 1st of September, after so long a period of
time. Remaining a few days in the vicinity of Jonesboro, the 3rd brigade was put in charge
of the prisoners and sent with them to Atlanta on the 4th. It kept a jealous eye to its charge,
conducting them to the desired place with undue rapidity. The day was hot and water scarce.
Many of the boys under their heavy loads gave out and laid down to rest. Rebel and Yank laid
down together, and as best they could followed up after they had become rested.

The blame of this unmasterly march was laid to Colonel Langley, who was then in command of
the brigade, Colonel Dillworth having been wounded in the late battle. When the command arrived
in Atlanta, not more than one-half the men were with it, being left tired and worn out along
the wayside. Many of the prisoners might have made their escape, for all were huddled and mixed
up in all manner of ways.

There was much sympathy expressed by the citizens of Atlanta towards these prisoners as they
were marched and counter-marched through several of the principal streets of the city. Weeping
and moaning and lamentation was the principal order of the occasion. The prisoners were finally
put in the "bull-pen," and the brigade permitted to go into camp. We were now in the great
city for the first time, that place for which we had so long fought and labored to possess.
It had been much impaired by the bombardment, the effects of our heavy guns being discernible
in various parts. Thus ended the great campaign against Atlanta--the Gate City of the South--after
one hundred and twenty days of the most trying scenes through which an army ever passed. During
this time we were under the almost continual fire of the enemy, amounting to little else than
an incessant battle. The Eighty-sixth Regiment was in eight regular engagements of the most
desperate and trying nature. Our dear comrades were daily falling around us and by us, but
still we pressed on and finished the work in which they were so ardently enlisted.

At the fall of Atlanta the hopes of the nation revived and the cause of the Union was materially
aided. The great anaconda of secession was palsied and made to fade! A new-born nation rejoiced
in the beginning dawn of peace and liberty! The heart of a free, loyal people was made to leap
for joy!

There were many thrilling and exciting incidents connected with this campaign, among which
we will narrate the one respecting Captain Jo. Major. In the charge on Kenesaw, on the 27th
of June, while only a few feet from the enemy's works, Captain Major was struck in the breast
with a stone thrown by a rebel, which knocked him senseless for a time, and during this state
the lines had fallen back, leaving him alone among the dead and dying. Regaining himself, by
and by he ascertained his condition, but determining not to be a prisoner, he resolved to play
the dying man. He lay, therefore, in a seemingly helpless state, closing his eyes and gasping
as if the next breath was to be his last. Finally, a rebel came to where he lay, and took his
sword and other valuables. The dying man made signs for water, and the rebel held a canteen
to his mouth, but, poor man! he could not drink. After this, other rebels from their works
shot at him, but he did not budge, and believing him really in the throes of death, they did
not bother him any more. The day was extremely hot; it was one of those warm summer days peculiar
to the South. He lay on his back in the burning sun--an impossible thing under other circumstances.
Flies and ants swarmed his face, and bit and stung him, but he dared not move.

He was kept in this position from 9 o'clock A.M. until after dark; but night coming on, he
took leg-bail for our works, reaching them without further adventure. He came to his company
hatless, swordless, moneyless, but sound as ever--the same old Jo.

CHAPTER VI.

TO THE REAR.

The casualties of the Eighty-sixth Regiment, on the long and arduous campaign against Atlanta,
was one hundred and seventy-nine men in killed, wounded and missing.

Besides this number, there were many who were taken sick and sent back to hospitals. Thus,
when the campaign had ended, the regiment was materially reduced in numbers. It was now not
much larger than two full companies; and then, the companies themselves were mere skeletons,
some of them not exceeding a corporal's squad. These were certainly trying times with the soldiers,
being attended with constant hardships, privations and adventures, from the beginning of the
campaign to its end. But still, those who did pass the fiery ordeal, stood up to it like men,
with fine spirits and light hearts, doing all that men could do.

After some changing about, the brigade took up permanent quarters in the outskirts of the city
on the south-west side near the railroad. The regiment now fixed up its camp in a substantial
manner, and for a long time took the military world easy, spending most of its time in going
to and from the city in pursuit of pleasure, and such.

There was not a little trading going on about this time with those who had a disposition that
way; in fact, it seemed that Sherman's whole army had been suddenly metamorphosed into tobacco
traders and other kinds of merchants.

Atlanta was overstocked with tobacco, held by private individuals, which was bought by the
soldiers at low rates and peddled out with handsome profits. Thus passed the time right briskly,
all seeming to have forgotten the past and to be living for the present only.

Shortly after the occupation of Atlanta, General Sherman ordered all non-combatants to leave
the city, going north or south as their inclinations and interests might lead them. This order
fell on the ears of the inhabitants of Atlanta like a thunderbolt. Though they had lent all
the moral and physical assistance in their power to the cause of the rebellion, they had begun
to dream of the advent of the Federal troops as the commencement of an era of quiet. They had
never imagined the war would reach Atlanta. Now that it had come, and kept its rough, hot hand
upon them for so many days, they were beginning to look forward to a long period when they
might enjoy at once the advantages of the protection of a just and powerful government, and
the luxuries it would thus afford them. It was indeed a pitiful sight to see these reluctant
people leave their homes and property, but such was the necessity in the case that it must be done.

Such are the cruel mandates of war, and they were obliged to abide its consequences, having
waged and maintained it.

About the middle of September there was an armistice of some days to provide an exit south
for these unfortunate people, and for the exchange of prisoners captured in the last campaign.

General James D. Morgan's division remained in Atlanta at its ease until the 29th of September,
when it boarded the cars and was transported, via Chattanooga and Huntsville, to near Athens,
Alabama. From this place it was sent on an expedition against General Forrest, who had been
making demonstrations on our railroads, having destroyed much of the Nashville and Decatur road.

When the division arrived at Athens, Forrest was crossing the Tennessee at Florence, retreating
out of our way as fast as possible. With rapid marches General Morgan reached Florence in two
days, distant from Athens about forty-five miles. The creeks and rivers on the route were swollen,
but he never stopped for them, for wading through, we went plodding on. The division arrived
within a few miles of Florence on the evening of the 5th of October, and entered it on the
6th without opposition, the enemy having completed his crossing. The division could follow
no further, and on the morning of the 10th began its return march, arriving back in Athens
on the 12th, where it boarded the cars on its return to Chattanooga. The command arrived at
Chattanooga in the night of the 14th, and went into camp where there was neither wood nor water.
The march from Athens to Florence and back again was, under the circumstances, probably the
severest the Eighty-sixth Regiment ever made; at least, it stands among the hardest. The rains
fell in torrents, but notwithstanding, the command was rushed headlong on through the mad waters
of Flint and Duck rivers, in many places up to the soldier's armpits.

While the division remained in Chattanooga there was a deal of excitement and uncertainty respecting
the movements of rebel General Hood, who was making a demonstration on our rear, the command
being in readiness to march at a moment's notice.

General Sherman, however, soon changed his course, so that Hood was obliged to take a circuitous
route to the west and north. To follow Hood indefinitely, without much prospect of overtaking
and overwhelming his army, would be for Sherman equivalent to being decoyed out of Georgia.
To remain on the defensive, on the other hand, would be to lose the main effectiveness of his
army. Sherman had previously proposed to General Grant to destroy the railway from Atlanta
to Chattanooga, and strike out through Georgia.

"By attempting to hold the roads," he wrote, "we will lose a thousand men monthly, and will
gain no result." I prefer to march through Georgia, smashing things, to the sea." And again,
"When you hear I am off, have lookouts at Morris' Island, S.C.; Ossabaw Sound, Georgia; Pensacola
and Mobile bays. I will turn up somewhere, and believe me I can take Macon, Milledgeville,
Augusta, and Savannah, Georgia, and wind up with closing the neck back of Charleston, so that
they will starve out. This movement is not purely military or strategic, but it will illustrate
the vulnerability of the South."

General Grant promptly authorized the proposed movement, indicating, however, his preference
for Savannah as the objective, and fixing Dalton as the northern limit for the destruction
of the railway. Preparations were immediately made for the execution of these plans.

Early on the morning of the 18th, General Morgan marched his division to rejoin the Army of
the Cumberland, which at this time lay in reserve at Galesville, Alabama, taking with him a
large drove of cattle for army consumption. The division reached the army and joined its corps
at 11 A.M. on the 22nd.

Sherman had issued orders for his army to subsist off the country, which it did with a good
will, foragers being sent out from the different commands daily. The country round Galesville
was wild and romantic, affording that beautiful scenery so peculiar to northern Georgia and
Alabama.

The army was soon again put on the move, part of it going with General Thomas, and the remainder,
the 14th, 20th, 15th and 17th Corps, going with Sherman down the railway towards Atlanta.

Morgan's division marched to Rome, where it remained a few days, after which it continued on
to Kingston, where it arrived on the 1st of November. At Kingston the army received eight months
pay, and a partial supply of clothing, having to wait until it arrived at Atlanta before a
complete supply would be issued.

While at Kingston, it will be remembered, the Eighty-sixth Regiment camped on a piece of ground
covered with all manner of stones, from the minutest pebble to those that were large enough
to make an uneven bed. Again, on the 8th of the month, the division marched on, passing through
the ruined Cassville on to Cartersville, where it halted a few days, at one time going to guard
the railroad, which did not last long enough to make it pay.

Cartersville is noted for the most remarkable of the monumental remains in the United States.
They are situated upon the right bank of the Etowah river near the railroad, some two miles
south of the town, in the midst of a perfectly level alluvial bottom, towering above all surrounding
objects, changeless amid the revolutions of centuries. On good testimony it has been urged
that these mounds were built by a race of people preceding the Indian race. Who they were,
and how great that population was, cannot now be determined. No historian has left the record
of their manners, government and laws; no voice save that silent speaking testimony of these
monuments, proclaims their past greatness. No reply is heard in definite response by those
who knock at their tombs. The morning the Eighty-sixth left this place, Billy Longfellow issued
rations on the summit of one of these mounds, and the regiment stacked arms along the road
near them.

On the morning of the 13th, the 2nd division of the 14th Corps was set in motion from Cartersville
toward Atlanta, destroying the railway, founderies, mills, etc., on its route. In not a few
instances private dwellings and private property were laid desolate. Previous to this, General
Sherman had directed all surplus artillery, all baggage not needed for the contemplated march,
all the sick and wounded, refugees and other encumbrances, to be sent back to Chattanooga.
On its march to Atlanta the division passed over much of the old campaign ground, which had
lost none of its familiarity, seeming as if there had been no lapse of time.

The Kenesaw was natural, and the dreadful battlefield of the 27th of June, where so many of
our slain comrades lie buried, and whose graves were yet fresh, had undergone no change except
that the leaves had ripened and fallen to the ground. Even as the leaves wither and fall, so
must man, and we were made sad in contemplating the fearful, bloody past.

The division crossed the Chattahoochie river in the forenoon of the 15th, and arrived in Atlanta
in time to draw clothing, provisions, etc., preparatory to the uncertain actions of the morrow.
Atlanta on this occasion seemed to be swallowed up in flames. Bright, lurid lights were seen
springing up in every quarter. It seemed that the once proud and defiant city was bidding earth
farewell! "But what is now to be done?" every one asks. "Has Sherman gone crazy, sure enough?"
Thus people talked, the country over. They could not tell what Sherman was up to now. He moved
out from Atlanta on the 16th of November into the darkness and wilderness of Dixie, leaving
the good folks at home to wonder where Sherman had gone. But several weeks elapsed before the
secret was divulged--before the lost hero rose up in the magic of his might on the great seaboard.

CHAPTER VII.

TO THE SEA.

With this chapter begins the narrative of the great raid through Georgia down to the sea. Now
was begun a military feat which when accomplished astonished the world, and proved false the
maxim laid down by military geniuses of every notoriety and age, that no army could subsist
any length of time without a permanent base of supplies. The undertaking of a raid of so great
magnitude and daring was an act bearing the tint of insanity and reckless daring beyond the
comprehension of learned critics and wire-cutters.

For the purpose of this great march, Sherman had divided his army into two wings; the right
commanded by Major General Oliver O. Howard, comprising the 15th and 17th Corps; the left under
Major General Henry W. Slocum, comprising the 14th and 20th Corps. The 14th Corps, to which
the Eighty-sixth Illinois belonged, was composed of three divisions, led by Brigadier Generals
William P. Carlin, James D. Morgan and Absalom Baird. The 3rd brigade of General Morgan's division,
to which the Eighty-sixth regiment more immediately belonged, was commanded on this great raid
by Colonel Langley, of the 125th Illinois. 

SECT. II.--Education of the children of the poor provided for--Observations on the number of the
Quaker-poor--and on their character.

RELIGION.

INTRODUCTION.

Invitation to a perusal of this part of the work--The necessity of humility and charity in religion
on account of the limited powers of the human understanding--Object of this invitation.

CHAPTER I.

God has given to all, besides an intellectual, a spiritual understanding--Some
have had a greater portion of this spirit than others, such as Abraham,
and Moses, and the prophets, and Apostles--Jesus Christ had it without
limit or measure.

CHAPTER II.

Except a man has a portion of the same spirit, which Jesus, and the Prophets, and the Apostles
had, he cannot know spiritual things--This doctrine confirmed by St. Paul--And elucidated
by a comparison between the faculties of men and of brutes.

CHAPTER III.

Neither except he has a portion of the same spirit, can he know the scriptures to be of divine
origin, nor can he spiritually understand them--Objection to this doctrine-Reply.

CHAPTER IV.

This spirit, which has been thus given to men in different degrees, has been given them as a teacher
or guide in their spiritual concerns--Way in which it teaches.

CHAPTER V.

This spirit may be considered as the primary and infallible guide--and the scriptures but a secondary
means of instruction--but the Quakers do not undervalue the latter on this account--Their opinion concerning
them.

CHAPTER VI.

This spirit, as a primary and infallible guide, has been given to men universally--From the
creation to Moses--From Moses to Christ--From Christ to the present day.

CHAPTER VII.

Sect. I.--And as it has been universally to men, so it has been given them sufficiently--Those
who resist it, quench it--Those who attend to it, are in the way of redemption.

Sect. II.--This spirit then besides its office of a spiritual guide, performs that of a Redeemer to
men--Redemption outward and inward--Inward effected by this spirit.

Sect. III.--Inward redemption produces a new birth--and leads to perfection--This inward redemption
possible to all.

Sect. IV--New birth and perfection more particularly
explained-New birth as real from "the spiritual seed of the kingdom"
as that of plants and vegetables from their seeds in the natural world--and
goes on in the same manner progressively to maturity.

CHAPTER VIII.

SECT.
I.--Possibility of redemption to all denied by the favours of "Election
and Reprobation"--Quaker-refutation of the later doctrine.

SECT.
II.--Quaker refutation continued.

CHAPTER IX.

Recapitulation of
all the doctrines advanced--Objection that the Quakers make every
thing of the Spirit and but little of Jesus Christ--Attempt to show
that Christians often differ without a just cause--Or that there is
no material difference between the creeds of the Quakers and that
of the objectors on this subject.

CHAPTER X.

SECT. I.--Ministers
of the Gospel--Quakers conceive that the spirit of God alone can qualify
for the ministry--Women equally qualified with men--Way in which ministers
are called and acknowledged among the Quakers.

SECT. II.--Quaker-ministers,
when acknowledged, engage in family visits--Nature of these--and sometimes
in missions through England--and sometimes in foreign parts.

CHAPTER
XI.

Elders--Their origin and their office--These are not to meddle
with the discipline of the church.

CHAPTER XII.

SECT I.--Worship--is
usually made to consist of prayer and preaching--But neither of these
are considered by the Quakers to be effectual without the aid of the
spirit--Hence no liturgy or studied form of words among the Quakers--Reputed
manner and character of Quaker-preaching--Observations upon these.

SECT.
II--Silent worship--Manner of it--Worship not necessarily connected
with words--Advantages of this mode of worship.

SECT. III.--Quakers
discard every thing formal and superstitious from their worship--No
consecrated ground--No priest's garments--No psalmody--No one day
esteemed by them holier than another--Reasons for these singularities.

CHAPTER
XIII.

Miscellaneous particularities--Quakers seldom use the words
"original sin," or "Trinity," and never "the word of God" for the
Scriptures--Believe in the manhood and divinity of Christ--In the
resurrection--Their ideas on sanctification and justification.

CHAPTER
XIV.

Quakers reject baptism and the Lord's supper--Indulgence solicited
for them on account of the difficulties connected with these subjects--These
difficulties explained.

CHAPTER XV.

SECT. I.--Two baptisms, that
of John and of Christ--That of John was by water--and a Jewish ordinance--John
the prophet left under the law.

SECT.

But there was no halting on Wheeler's account, for our troops made their way on, he and his
getting out of the way. While the division was at Sandersville it gave the country around a
healthy forage. A certain wealthy planter living near had five or six score of French or Spanish
negroes, with a dwarfish stature and a gabble like so many geese. This planter lived in Savannah
in high life, as most wealthy planters do. His possessions would seem changed when next he
saw them; his cotton and out-houses, his presses and gins were burned up, his productions taken
and plantation gleaned; but he is not alone in his misery, his neighbors are as bad off as himself.

It was amusing to see the slouchy negroes obey the soldiers' orders, for they had to be obeyed.
Twenty or thirty of them would run after the same chicken, heading and tripping each other
as they went. These, like all negroes, were delighted to see the Yankees waltz in and make
old massa "shell out." They would point out where things were concealed, and then! Oh, then!
take a regular nigger laugh when the Yanks "went in." However, about noon on the 28th, the
command having left Sandersville, arrived on the west bank of Rocky Comfort creek. The bridge
over this stream being burnt, it was obliged to wait till late in the evening before a crossing
could be effected into Louisville, where it went into camp one mile east of the town.

At this camp, on the evening of the 29th, Colonel Fahnestock took his regiment on picket, and
on the next day fought a force of the enemy's cavalry which was making a demonstration on our
lines in several places, keeping the pickets on the maneuver most of the day.

At the first alarm of the enemy on the lines of the Eighty-sixth, the Colonel ordered his men
to advance to a line two hundred yards to his front and throw up a line of barricades for protection.

While this was being done a constant fire was kept up on the rebels, whose course was soon
turned, being compelled to withdraw in confusion across a large cornfield. When they reached
the farther side of this field they formed their lines, and also threw up a line of barricades
which they held until late in the afternoon, when the regiment charged them away and took possession,
and following them up for more than a mile, returned. Though the casualties of the regiment
in this day's skirmish were not great, the excitement, nevertheless, ran high. Its loss was
four missing or captured. The company loss was as follows: Co. A, two; Co. F, one; Co. K, one.

The foragers from our division on this occasion were made to suffer severely. The enemy came
upon them so suddenly that they were unable to get back to the lines; not a few of them were
killed and captured, and many of them, being overbalanced with wines, were shot in cold blood.

On the first of December, the division moved from Louisville in the direction of Millen, and
crossing on its route, Big, Dry and Spring creeks, camped a short distance to the east of the
latter. It had the corps train in charge, while the other two divisions moved on the right
and left to protect it.

The next day a deflection was made in the line of march of our division, caused by the change
of direction of the 20th Corps, its course being turned northward, crossing Buckhead and Rocky
creeks, on pontoons laid for that purpose, and camping on the night of the 3rd at Lumpkin's
on the railroad. On the next day Carlin's and Morgan's divisions, with the three corps trains,
after destroying three miles of railway, moved in the direction of Jacksonboro, and camped
thirteen miles beyond Lumpkin's Station. On this same day, Baird and Kilpatrick, after some
fighting with Wheeler's cavalry, drove the enemy from Waynesboro and across Brier creek.

The march was continued on the morning of the 5th, passing through Jacksonboro into the north-eastern
edge of Effingham county, thence down the Savannah river, arriving in the vicinity of the city
of Savannah on the 11th of December.

Many new and exciting incidents occurred on the march from Louisville to Savannah. Larger caravans
of negroes than before followed our war-path, frequently being cut off by the enemy's cavalry,
but by circuitous routes and much hard marching, would make their appearance again.

There was at once a laughable and pitiful sight occurred respecting these poor unfortunates,
while the command was crossing the country in the vicinity of Buckhead and Rocky creeks. As
soon as the troops crossed these streams the pontoons were taken up and the Africans left behind.
This, however, did not have the effect to discourage them, for, after wandering up and down
the banks for a time, in mad excitement, some sturdy fellow among the rest, ventured in and
swam across. This was a signal for the rest, who followed like sheep in a drove. Many of the
women, with the darling calamity of their bosom in their arms, were washed under by the swift
current to rise no more.

The inhabitants of Georgia, on this unexpected raid through their country, used many devices
in the effort to hide their household affairs, horses, mules, wagons and all kinds of provisions
from the invading Yankee army, but to no material purpose. The foragers would first go to the
houses and inquire of the families where they kept their provisions, horses, mules and such,
the answer invariably being that "we'ens have none, are poor people," etc. The boys could not
be fooled out of a good thing by such talk as that, but proceeded immediately to an investigation
of the matter. Drawing the rammers from their guns they would insert them in the ground at
every suspicious place where fresh dirt might be seen, and if they should strike anything hard
with them, the process of digging would be the next thing on the programme, and behold! various
things of consecutive kinds would appear, probably the whole contents of a smoke-house or dwelling.
The soldier, making this discovery, would take of the treasure what he wanted, and tell the
next fellow he met, who, after satisfying his desires would do unto another as he was done
by, fulfilling the moral rules. In this manner, the whole treasure would soon be absorbed in
an arithmetical decreasing progression.

While some soldiers were pursuing this plan for finding things, others were pursuing other
plans. Calling a negro, they would inquire where his massa or missus had hid their mules, the
reply being, "I don't know, massa." "But you do know, you black rascal, now out with it, or
you'll hear a dead nigger fall," at the same time presenting a gun. It works like a charm,
the negro begs and agrees to tell. A Yankee can't be foiled, for he has more ways than a centipede
has legs.

No sooner had our army reached the Savannah river than many of the foragers crossed it into
South Carolina, on large flat-boats which they captured going down the river towards Savannah
laden with the choicest treasures. There was also a small stern-wheel gun-boat plying along
the river above Savannah, watching the movements of our forces, which General Morgan allowed
his foragers would gobble before his command reached Savannah.

In going down the Savannah river, the division passed near old Ebenezer church which was built
in 1739, nearly one hundred and twenty-seven years ago. It is the remains of the oldest church
in the United States, and bears with it much of historical interest.

On the afternoon of the 9th of December, when our column was within fourteen miles of Savannah,
our passage was disputed by a rebel battery planted at the crossing of two roads.

Two regiments of our brigade, the Eighty-sixth and 125th Illinois, were deployed as skirmishers,
with orders to advance until they found the enemy's works. By the time these orders were executed,
night drew on, and under its cover the rebels retreated. This battery was captured, however,
having mistaken the roads and running into other of our forces.

The Eighty-sixth regiment, in this skirmish, lost two men wounded. One from Company A, the
other from H.

After the skirmish, our division marched to the Ten-mile House and went into camp, giving the
road to the 20th Corps.

The next day, the command moved on to within three or four miles of Savannah, taking up position
around it. The siege of this place may be said to have begun on the 11th of December.

The forces under rebel General Hardee in the works around Savannah numbered about fifteen thousand
men.

The face of the country in this vicinity, was level and swampy, so that a large force well
handled would make a formidable resistance.

Our works were built close up to the enemy's, and constant skirmishing went on.

On the 13th, two days after the siege began, the 2nd division of the 15th Corps, charged on
Fort McAllister and took it. This gained us communication with our fleet, and a short time
after we eat hard tack from the great sea.

During the siege, the Eighty-sixth did not go on the front lines, but remained in camp in the
rear, spending most of its time pounding rice or seeing it well done by the natives.

In the siege of Savannah, the 20th Corps held the left of our lines, resting on the Savannah
river; the 14th Corps was on its right; the 17th Corps next, and the 15th Corps on the extreme
right, with its flank resting on the Gulf railway, at station No. 1. The army remained in this
position until the 21st, ten days from the commencement of the siege. In the meantime there
was a deal of foraging done, as the country began to fail to supply the demands made upon it.

The last few days of the siege, the foragers were compelled to go a long distance to the rear
in order to procure the necessary quota of rice, for this was eminently a rice country. The
soldiers always had regular meals of rice and pork for breakfast, pork and rice for dinner,
and vice versa for supper.

Up the Savannah river from the city of Savannah, and bordering on it upon either bank, were
large and nourishing rice plantations, cultivated by great numbers of negroes of every hue
of the skin and brogue of the tongue, some of them direct from Liberia, some from New Guinea,
and others from the swamps of Florida. It was amusing to see the soldiers act the place of
master and overseer over these deplorable creatures. One soldier would crowd together thirty
or forty of them, and march around them at right-shoulder-shift arms, keeping them at work
pounding rice with mortar and pestle. Great ricks of this precious produce, in every way resembling
oats, were stacked on each plantation, and from ten to twenty thousand bushels in a single
stackyard. Our army made use of it in various ways, much of it being threshed and hulled, and
then used by the soldiers, but a greater part fed to mules.

Thus, things passed merrily on, until the memorable 21st of December, when our forces marched
proudly into the "Forest City," Hardee having evacuated it on the night of the 20th. Now, the
whole army went into camp in and about it, being once more in communication with the outer world.

Here ends the great raid to the sea.

On this raid, the army marched over three hundred miles directly through the heart of Georgia,
living off the best of the land. No less than ten thousand negroes left the plantations of
their former masters and accompanied the army when it reached Savannah, without taking note
of thousands more who were left along the line of march. Over twenty thousand bales of cotton
were burned, besides twenty-five thousand captured at Savannah. Thirteen thousand head of beef
cattle, nine million five hundred thousand pounds of corn, and ten million five hundred thousand
of fodder, were taken from the country and issued to the men and animals.

Besides the history of this great raid, there are many other historical incidents connected
with this portion of the country. Savannah itself was the first settlement in the State, being
laid off in the year 1733. It was here where the great John Wesley first officiated as minister.
And it was the scene of many revolutionary incidents; where General Lincoln fought the British
in October, 1779; where Pulaski fell, and where Nathaniel Greene lies buried.

Savannah is located in a low, level country, surrounded by almost impassable swamps of a very
unhealthy nature. It has a canal running into it from the Ogechee, and three railroads radiating
from it; and from its beautiful shade trees, it is appropriately called the "Forest City."

Our great raid through Georgia, the Queen State of the Confederacy, was practically unobstructed
by the enemy. True, they attempted to arrest our progress, but without the slightest success.
Some of Wheeler's men, would, at times, make a stand behind an intrenchment and contest our
advance. Our skirmishers would push forward, reinforced by the reserve, a charge would be sounded
by the bugle, a rush follow--and amid the rattle of musketry and report of field pieces, the
ground would be swept over by our boys, the works carried, and enemy routed. These little fights
resulted in no check to our advancing columns. The head of the column would halt to let the
rear close up, and before that was done, the advance guard would have cleared the way, and
the column again set in motion.

Such too, was the case when fallen trees or destroyed bridges obstructed the road. The pioneers
had usually cleared away the impediments before the column had closed up, and no stoppage on
this account was experienced. Notwithstanding this arduous march down to the great sea, the
soldiers were not in the least dispirited. They wanted for nothing to eat or wear, and it seemed
to them more of a gala day than one of fatigue.

Before closing this chapter, we will give a summary of events from the time we left Lee and
Gordon's Mills until the close of the year 1864.

The total casualties of the Eighty-sixth Illinois, during this time, the most eventful period
of its history, were:

    Recruits                       16
    Transferred by promotion        1
    Transferred to other regiments 26
    Discharged                      9
    Ordinary deaths                 7
    Killed in action               45
    Missing                        25
    Deserted                        6
    Wounded in action             113
    Wounded accidental              8
    Died of wounds                 10
    Surrendered from desertion      1
                                 ----
      Aggregate                   267

The beginning of 1864 found us near Chattanooga with an army nearly equal to our own to contend
with; the end of it found us in Savannah, snugly encamped near the great sea. The whole year
had been resplendent with victory. Atlanta and Milledgeville and Savannah had fallen, and the
anaconda of Yankee vengeance had almost extinguished the lights of rebellion. Success seemed
mixed with doubt when the year began; when it closed, bright and buoyant was the hope of our
armies on land and sea.

Sherman had pushed from the mountain districts of the north to the level lowlands of the south;
no army having ever met with more signal success than his. No difficulties had been more successfully
overcome, at any time or age, than by his exultant army. With determined zeal and firm tread
it marched from one victory to another.

If it failed in driving the enemy at one or two or three trials, it was still fearless and
determined. And he was a brave and mighty man who led this army through so many perils to lasting
fame and achievements. It had been on an active campaign for eight long months, digging in
the dirt and marching like the wind.

At Savannah, General Sherman received instructions from the Lieutenant General to embark his
army on transports, and hasten to the James river, to participate in the final destruction
of the main army of the rebellion. However, upon Sherman's earnest representation of the difficulty
of moving sixty thousand infantry, and ten thousand cavalry, with their due allowance of artillery,
so great a distance by water, and on assurance that he could place his army at the desired
place sooner, in better condition, and with more injury to the enemy, General Grant consented
to this modification, and gave the necessary orders. A division was drawn from General Sheridan's
army of the Shenandoah, and sent to Savannah as a garrison. This enabled Sherman to take with
him the entire army with which he made the raid through Georgia. He determined to make the
distance between Savannah and Goldsboro at one stride. Some time was consumed in preparation,
and by the 15th of January, 1865, all was ready and the movement began.

On the 20th of this month, the 2nd division of the 14th Corps, still under the command of James
D. Morgan, moved out from Savannah eight miles in a north-western direction, camping near Tuly's
Station, where the command lay wind-bound for four days.

Just a short time prior to this move from Savannah, General Feering was placed in command of
the 3rd brigade, under General Morgan, thus relieving Colonel Langley of that command.

General Feering remained with his brigade, much beloved by all, until the battle of Bentonville,
N.C., where he was wounded, being so disabled that he never afterwards resumed command of it.
On the morning of the 25th, at seven A.M., the command resumed its march from Tuly's Station,
the 14th Corps with Geary's division of the 20th, and Corse's division of the 15th Corps, marched
up the west bank of the Savannah to Sister's ferry, where they crossed over to the South Carolina
side, on the 5th of February, having been detained one week on account of high water at this ferry.

On the 8th, the division again cut loose from communications, marching up the Savannah to a
point opposite Barnwell, where it left the river road and going to Barnwell, crossed the Salkahatchie
river on its route. From Barnwell it took a northern course, striking the Augusta and Charleston
railway at a small place known as Williston, thence, continuing north, crossed the South and
North Edisto rivers, and going within one and a half miles of Columbia, was headed off by other
troops, being compelled to move back up the Saluda river, some eight miles from Columbia, where,
on the 26th, it crossed it on a pontoon bridge, and thence marching north-east, round Columbia,
crossed Broad river at Fursell's Ferry, some twenty miles nearly north of Columbia. Our division
was ferried over this stream, as there were not enough pontoon boats to complete a bridge.
Crossing the river in the afternoon of the 18th, it went into camp, building breastworks for
a protection to our supply train, as it was reported that Hood was also crossing the river
above us.

Before going into camp, the eighty-sixth sent out a detail of foragers, under charge of Captain
Hall, of Company H, to scour the rich country beyond the Broad river, meeting with more than
ordinary success. This party had a skirmish with a squad of the enemy's videttes, driving them
pell-mell.

As the army remained here a few days, we will review the most interesting events of the march
up to this period.

The general features of the country over which the division passed, was that of a hilly, undulating
plain, becoming more hilly and broken the farther north it went, until these undulations had
gradually assumed the proportions of high hills. The country south of the North Edisto river,
in Carolina, is far richer in its soil and yields a better crop than that north of this river.

The plantations, too, are larger, and lie more in a body than in other parts of the State over
which we passed; and it is a curious fact, often remarked, that there is no rock or gravel
here. The soil is seldom black, but usually a yellow clay of a spongy texture. North of the
North Edisto river, the country begins to assume a stony and gravelly appearance, and rises
in ridges of hills until it becomes very broken indeed. There is a peculiarity in the soil
of this part of the country which deserves remark. It is this: fields are sometimes seen covered
over with a white sand, frequently an inch, and sometimes more, in depth. Off at a distance,
a person unaccustomed to this peculiarity, would mistake this sand for a sheet of water. All
soldiers are aware of this fact who have passed this portion of the country. There are places
again where the sand seems to have been drifted like snow over the surface of a plain, and
as much as one thing can resemble another, these drifts resemble snow, of a pure white color.

The swamps in this State are very different from those of Georgia. They are not so difficult
to travel through, and not near as numerous and large. In many of them, rice is extensively
cultivated, and is far superior in quality to that raised on high lands.

So far, the State furnished us an abundance of forage of every kind, and the very best.

The boys lived sumptuously on flour, molasses, cured hams and many other of the staunch things
of life--never fared better.

They always ate to satiety, and quit with plenty left. From the very first they treated South
Carolina as her acts of treason and atrocity deserved. Nearly every house all over the country
was fed on the flames of Yankee vengeance. When their houses were burnt, the proud chivalry
were obliged to seek refuge in negro shanties--an awful condescension, but scores of them have
had their pride thus broken.

To some, it may have seemed relentless barbarism to burn and devastate a country in the manner
in which Carolina was served, but when they remember she was the main actor in the rebellion,
fired the first gun, and led her sister States into a fratricidal war, and, moreover, prided
herself in such acts of inhumanity, who then can pity her, or sympathize with her? She dared
not ask sympathy, for multitudes of slain patriots answered, No sympathy for the venomous Carolina!
There was no time in the day when looking around you there might not be seen liquid flames
of fire lifting themselves in mad waves above the beautiful mansion, gin or fences; and even
the hills and valleys for miles around were blue with smoke.

These were truly the smoky days of Carolina! Such was the inveterate hatred our troops entertained
towards this State, and such the freedom allowed, that seldom the least of things were spared.
If there was more forage than was needed for army consumption, the dancing flames of Yankee
vengeance eat it up.

This portion of South Carolina was not thickly settled, owing to single persons owning very
large tracts of land. On nearly all of these extensive plantations there was usually two fine
dwellings: one for the lord, the other for the overseer. Round the overseer's dwelling there
was a large number of negro shanties, frequently from ten to fifty, somewhat resembling a town.
The lord's residence was invariably fixed off in gay colors, with its handsome yards, out-buildings
to break the summer's sun, with high walls inclosing a square for hounds, besides many other
things. Then inside the dwelling itself were the costliest and most beautiful decorations imaginable.
The richest Turkey carpet covered the floor; the finest sofas, chairs, tables, and other decorations
filled the rooms, and a large and extensive library was invariably to be found. But these gay
ornaments vanished before the "vandal Yanks," as the dew-drops before the rising sun.

The scenery from the high hills that border on the western bank of the Broad river, is grand
in the extreme. Excepting that in the vicinity of Chattanooga, it surpasses anything of the
kind that ever came under our observation. Looking eastward, you see the railroad and river
winding their snake-like course along the high and hilly plain. And from the same view, as
far as the eye can reach, one vast plain, undulating and broken, spreads itself before you,
diversified with a green forest of pine, and fields covered with pure white sand, resembling
high drifts of snow. Then around you, in whatever point of compass you should chance to look,
thick volumes of smoke might be seen rising out of the valleys, over the tops of intervening
hills, presenting a picturesque and novel scene.

Columbia, the capital of South Carolina, some twenty miles south of our position on Broad river,
was captured on the 17th of February, by the right wing of the army, under General Howard,
the mayor making a formal surrender of the place to Colonel Stone, commander of a brigade of
the 15th Corps. This brigade was the first organized body to enter it. The city was fired by
Wade Hampton's men before they left it, and nearly destroyed, notwithstanding the effort made
by our troops to save it. While our division remained on the east side of the Broad river,
it was engaged, for a time, in destroying the Spartansburg railway. It was a poor excuse for
a road, the iron being old and worn out.

From Broad river, our column took up the line of march at six o'clock on the morning of February
20th, moving in a north-eastern direction, crossing Little river, and striking the Charlotte
and Columbia railway at White Oak Station, four miles north of Winnsboro; thence marching up
the railway some six miles, crossed it at Blackstakes, and marching east, camped at twelve
M. on the 22nd, giving the road to the 20th Corps.

The march was resumed at eight A.M., on the 23rd, camping at night near Rocky Mount, on the
Catawba river, in the north-eastern corner of Fairfield district. On the 24th, the Eighty-sixth
Illinois was moved forward several miles, and camped on Rocky Mount, where it remained four
days. The 14th Corps having crossed the Catawba river by the 28th, resumed the march. General
Morgan's division now led the advance of the corps, and marching in a north-eastern course,
crossed Flat, and the two Lyncher creeks, and passing through Hickory Head on its route, arrived
on the Great Pedee, at a point eight miles above Cheraw, where it laid a pontoon bridge, and
crossed over on the 7th of March.

From the Great Pedee, the line of march was taken up in a direct course for Fayetteville, where
the command arrived on the 11th of March.

The country between the Broad and Catawba rivers is very broken indeed. One ridge of hills
closely succeeds another, and they are high and steep. The scenery here is exceedingly wild
and romantic. There has been a romance written of this part of the State, of the era of the
Revolution, called the Black Riders of the Congaree, which was interesting to read while we
were also acting a great drama there. This was also the campaign grounds in the times of the
Revolution. Rocky Mount, Camden, Sander's Creek and Hanging Rock are places of Revolutionary fame.

A great deal of trouble was experienced in completing a pontoon bridge across the Catawba,
on account of heavy rains and high waters. By the time it would be nearly done the swift current
would sweep it away. It was in consequence of this detention that General Sherman sent orders
to General Davis, in case he could not get the pontoon bridge to hold by the morning of the
28th, to burn his trains, swim his mules, ferry his men and come on. But as good luck would
have it, the bridge was finally made to stick, and on the 28th everything was landed safely
on the other side.

About midnight on the 27th, Colonel Fahnestock blew his whistle for the regiment to fall in
and cross the river. The winds blew and the rains fell, but for all that the Eighty-sixth had
to crawl out of its dry tents, do them up and go; and when it reached the pontoon it was not
yet done, causing us to lay round enjoying the benefit of the rain till morning. The Eighty-sixth
about this time thought it would get a permanent detail as train guards, get to ride and such;
but like many other of its hopes and plans, it was all "in a horn."

On the march from the Catawba there was a deal of corduroying to be done on the muddy roads,
and by the time our long trains had passed over they were far worse than ever. Our corps train
consisted of more than six hundred wagons, and when stretched out on the same road, as was
very often the case, it would string out from six to seven miles, making bad roads for the
rearmost wagons. General Davis was surprised at the rapidity with which General Morgan moved
his command from the Catawba to the Great Pedee, and complimented him for it. General Morgan
was, in every sense of the word, a go-ahead man; he was so kind and careful with his men that
they would speak of him altogether by the sobriquet of "Uncle Jimmy Morgan." He was odd and
peculiar in his manner; he stood in a position inclining forward, and when he walked he held
his hands behind him, his eyes striking the ground at an angle of forty-five degrees. In conversation
with others, he walked rapidly backwards and forwards as if in great mental excitement, doubtless,
as Artemus Ward would say, "a way he has." He was plain and unostentatious in his dress, wearing
a soldier's blouse, a soldier's hat, and soldier's shoes, being a private soldier out and out,
the only distinction consisting in the little star upon either shoulder--the insignia of his rank.

Those who did not know him would wonder what soldier that was using so much authority. General
Morgan was not only common to and among his men, but, better than all, he was careful with
them, and valued their lives as much as his own, never commanding them to go where he would
not accompany them. Whenever there was a battle pending, you would see him on the skirmish
line dodging round and looking about for himself; and when there was great danger, he would
tell his boys to be very careful and not get hurt, seeming really to love them. Before the
General entered the service he was said to have been a pork packer, though there was another
report that he was a Methodist preacher. These reports were often the source of amusing incidents.
Frequently on our long marches the boys would become tired and worn out, wanting to go into
camp. By and by Uncle Jimmy would come along while they were in this mood, when some mischievous
fellow would cry out--not to the General, but that he might hear it: "I'll be d----d if I sell
Uncle Jimmy my hogs if he don't camp pretty soon." This strikes the nail on the head; the General
laughs and goes ahead, jerking the reins as usual. Uncle Jimmy was certainly a man of the finest
feelings and respect for others, and possessed a true, brave and loyal heart.

In his order to his command, announcing the capture of Richmond, he said: "Let every true and
loyal heart rejoice."

There was a marked peculiarity in the country between the Catawba and Pedee, consisting in
a great many rocks scattered here and there of an enormous size and peculiar shape. They were
from eight to twelve feet in height, of an oval form, and covered with a thick green moss.

These curious rocks excited the wonder of all. On one we saw there was a spring, with its bright
waters trickling over its sides so beautiful and wonderful, and known as Hanging Rock of historic
fame.

The country between the Great Pedee and Cape Fear rivers is one vast, extensive pine forest.
In this section there are but few plantations, and they are small. The general features are
level, and the undulations, if any, are slight. Out of these forests, the inhabitants manufacture
turpentine, rosin and tar in great quantities. They hew the bark from two sides of the tree,
and near its roots cut a niche to receive the juice that does not gum on its sides. On nearly
every stream there is a factory for the making of turpentine, rosin and tar. On our passage
through, these factories were full, and when burning, made a huge fire and smoke, far surpassing
in grandeur anything of the kind we ever saw, or ever expect to see. Among the curiosities
of our march, the burning of these factories was the most curious. Just imagine one hundred
barrels of rosin and as many of turpentine and tar to be thrown together and ignited. It is
impossible for a person who has not witnessed such a scene, to form a proper idea of the real
grandeur and sublimity of these dense volumes of black, agitated smoke, brightened betimes
with lofty flames of liquid fire, that seem to lift themselves in the fury of their madness
to the very skies.

When our column was within twenty-four miles of Fayetteville, General Kilpatrick, who was several
miles to the left of our division, was surprised by the enemy and routed, though he afterwards
rallied his men and regained his camp.

The army now entered Fayetteville without further opposition, remaining from the 11th of March
until the 15th. During its stay several small steamers came up from Wilmington, bringing provisions
and mail.

The left wing of the army remained at Fayetteville the short space of four days, when it led
out on the main road to Raleigh, which follows the right bank of the Cape Fear river some sixteen
miles or more, and branching at Averysboro.

The supply train of the 14th Corps was left behind in charge of the 3rd division, to intercept
us by a nearer route whenever provisions enough arrived at Fayetteville to load it.

On the morning of the 16th the left wing moved from its camp of the night previous and discovered
the enemy with artillery, infantry and cavalry, in an entrenched position in front of the point
where the road branches off towards Goldsboro through Bentonville. Hardee, in retreating from
Fayetteville, had halted in the narrow swamp neck between Cape Fear and South rivers, in the
hope of holding Sherman there, in order to save time for the concentration of Johnston's army
at some point in his rear. Hardee's force was estimated at twenty thousand men. It was necessary
to dislodge him, that our army might have the use of the Goldsboro road, as also to keep up
the feint on Raleigh as long as possible. Slocum therefore advanced on his position, only difficult
by reason of the nature of the ground, which was so soft that horses and men would sink everywhere
and could scarcely make their way at all. The 20th Corps led the advance of Slocum's column,
the 14th Corps following with Kilpatrick's cavalry in the entire advance.

The 20th Corps, upon finding the enemy, drove him from his first line of works, and advancing,
took position confronting his second line, which was more formidable than the first. Then the
14th Corps took position on the left of the 20th Corps, our division being on the extreme left
of the line, with its left resting on the Cape Fear river. The whole line now advanced late
in the afternoon, drove the enemy well within his works, and pressed him so hard that he retreated
during the night in a hard storm over the worst of roads. From this position Hardee retreated
on Smithfield.

No member of the Eighty-sixth will forget with what difficulty it got its position in this
battle, having to wade through creeks and swamps up to one's armpits. There was no chance to
make a deflection to the right or left to shun a quagmire, right ahead being the only chance.
The Eighty-sixth skirmishers in this engagement experienced a hard time; but the main body
of the regiment was not brought into action.

The loss of the regiment was two killed and three wounded. The killed were Captain John F.
French, of Co. K, and Rileigh George, of Co. F. Captain French was a brave and accomplished
officer, and beloved by all the regiment. Co. K lost two wounded, and Co. C one.

As soon as Hardee was known to have retreated, our forces were again put on the move, taking
the road leading to the right, built a bridge across the swollen South river, and marched on
the Goldsboro road.

Our wounded were taken with us from the battlefield of Averysboro, and as there were not enough
ambulances for them, some were loaded in army wagons. The march was continued in the direction
of Bentonville, over a country rich with forage of every kind except molasses--a luxury we
were not often without. Meal and meat were to be had in abundance. No wanton destruction of
property was tolerated in this section of the country, for there was too much loyalty and poverty
for that, and soldiers are too magnanimous not to respect these; but where luxury and pomp
abound, they are hyenas and wolves.

On the night of the 18th, our division camped on the Goldsboro road, about five miles from
Bentonville and twenty-seven from Goldsboro, at a point where the road from Clinton to Smithfield
crosses the Goldsboro road.

General Sherman had been with our wing of the army up to this time, and anticipating no more
opposition in the occupation of Goldsboro, left General Slocum's column on the next morning
to accompany Howard's advance into Goldsboro.

Early on the morning of the 19th, the 14th Corps, being in advance of the 20th on the same
road, marched directly on to Bentonville. On arriving at that place it soon discovered the
enemy in force, strongly intrenched on the further side of a difficult swamp.

The 1st division, driving back his cavalry and skirmishers, took a position on the left of
the road, and the 2nd division to the right of the same. These divisions set to work and built
log breastworks.

As soon as General Slocum ascertained that the combined forces of Hoke, Hardee and Cheatham,
all under command of rebel General Johnston, were massed in his front, he ordered the two divisions
of the 20th Corps to form on the left of the 14th Corps, at the same time ordering up the two
divisions that were back with the supply trains.

Meantime the enemy sallied out on the left flank of the 1st division of the 14th Corps, driving
it back pell-mell, then pushing forward, struck the flank and rear of the 2nd division.

At this juncture our brigade was moved out from the works on the double-quick to cover its
left flank. Before it got its lines formed the rebels were upon it, and in the battle and confusion
that ensued it was driven back, but forming again it threw up logs and rails for protection,
which it held against six or seven successive charges.

The giving back of our brigade left exposed the rear of the other two brigades. These brigades
were formed in two lines, and were now attacked furiously in front and rear. Therefore the
rear line changed sides of its works, and thus the advance of the enemy was met from both ways.
These brigades fought heroically, and after a most desperate engagement came out victors, severely
chastising the enemy, and capturing over three hundred prisoners. It was about this stage of
the game that the 20th Corps was brought up to our assistance, Johnston's forces driven back,
and our lines mended. By these words the Quakers understand, that it was the intention of Jesus
Christ to turn the attention of his disciples from the type to the antitype, or from the paschal
lamb to the lamb of God, which was soon to be offered for them.

He declared, that all his passover suppers with them were in future to be spiritual. Such
spiritual passovers, the Quakers say, he afterwards ate with them on the day of pentecost, when
the spirit of God came upon them; when their minds were opened, and when they discovered, for
the first time, the nature of his kingdom. And these spiritual passovers he has since eaten,
and continues to eat with all those whose minds, detached from worldly pursuits and connexions, are
so purified and spiritualized, as to be able to hold communion with God.

It is reported of him next, that "he took bread, and gave thanks,
and brake it, and gave to his disciples, saying, this is my body which
is given for you."

On these words the Quakers make the following observations:--The word "this" does not belong
to the word "bread," that is, it does not mean that this bread is
my body.

For the word "bread" in the original Greek is of the masculine, and the word "this" is of the
neuter gender. But it alludes to the action of the breaking of the bread, from which the following
new meaning will result.

"This breaking of the bread, which you now see me perform, is a symbol or representation of
the giving, or as St. Paul has it, of the breaking of my body for you."

In the same manner, the Quakers say, that the giving of the wine in the cup is to be understood
as a symbol or representation of the giving of his blood for them.

The Quakers therefore are of opinion, when they consider the meaning of the sayings of Jesus Christ
both with respect to the bread and to the wine, that he endeavoured again to turn the attention
of his disciples from the type to the antitype; from the bread and
wine to his own body and blood; from the paschal lamb that had been
slain and eaten, to the lamb that was going to be sacrificed; and
as the blood of the latter was, according to St. Matthew, for the
remission of sins, to turn their attention from the ancient object
of the celebration of the passover, or salvation from Egyptian bondage,
to a new object, or the salvation of themselves and others by this
new sacrifice of himself.

It is reported of him again by St. Luke, after he had distributed the bread and said, "this is
my body which is given for you," that he added, "this do in remembrance of me."

These words the Quakers believe to have no reference to any new institution; but they contain a
recommendation to his disciples to meet in a friendly manner, and break their bread together,
in remembrance of their last supper with him, or if as Jews, they could not all at once leave
off the custom of the passover, in which they had been born and educated as a religious ceremony,
to celebrate it, as he had then modified and spiritualized it, with
a new meaning.

If they relate to the breaking of their bread together, then they do not relate to any passover
or sacramental eating, but only to that of their common meals; for
all the passovers of Jesus Christ with his disciples were in future
to be spiritual.

And in this sense the primitive Christians seem to have understood the words in question.
For in their religious zeal they sold all their goods, and, by means of the produce of their joint
stock, they kept a common table, and lived together. But in process of time, as this custom
from various causes declined, they met at each other's houses, or at their appointed places,
to break their bread together, in memorial of the passover-supper.
This custom, it is remarkable, was denominated the custom of breaking
of bread. Nor could it have had any other name so proper, if the narration
of St. Luke be true. For the words "do this in remembrance of me,"
relate solely, as he has placed them, to the breaking of the bread. Then, going to the houses, they would secure what provisions they wanted, and
loading them into a cart, would set a negro to work hitching up a horse or mule to it, then
putting him on the load to drive, leave a soldier with him to see things well done. After this
was done, some few of them would go back to the houses and rummage them from bottom to top,
ransacking every nook and corner for all kinds of precious things. Trunks, boxes, beds and
such, never escaped notice, their contents being thrown out on the floor and scattered to the
four winds.

The same was the case with the fine libraries: books that were not wanted, were sent whirling
on the floor. It was a caution to see them go in, paying no respect for anybody or anything.
Beautiful damsels and affectionate dames stood around with eyes suffused with tears, pleading
in vain. Negro houses met the same fate, for they too were turned topsy-turvy from one room
to another. There was always some mean enough to do it, in the hope to find a fortune, and
often his hopes were fulfilled, as the whites sometimes hid their money with the negroes, in
the belief it would not be disturbed. Out of one fine dwelling, on the Broad river, a soldier
took eighteen thousand dollars in gold, and thinking that was all, set it on fire. After it
had burned down and the fire died away, other curious soldiers took long poles and raking among
the embers brought to light a large bucket of molten silver.

Though nearly every house on the line of march was rummaged for gold and silver, it was done
by a few unprincipled men, who must needs accompany an army under all circumstances, ready
for any dirty work to which their evil propensities may lead them.

After these foragers had collected what mules and horses they could find, and what provisions
they wanted, they would travel on in the course the column was moving till near night, when
they would halt until it came up, and all go into camp together.

CHAPTER IX.

CAPTURE OF JOHNSTON'S ARMY.

As soon as Sherman's army encamped at Goldsboro, it began to prepare for a new campaign. Nearly
three weeks were required to refit and equip, and accumulate supplies necessary for the pursuit
of Johnston's army, which was held well in hand about Smithfield.

On the 9th of April, an order was read to our division, from General Grant to General Sherman,
directing him to move on Johnston and press him. Prior to this, an order had also been read,
announcing the capture of Richmond, which created universal joy. Accordingly, early on the
morning of the 10th of April, the army was set in motion against Johnston, whose entire force
was estimated at thirty-five thousand effective men.

The 14th Corps marched up the eastern bank of the Neuse river, and arrived at Smithfield on
the evening of the 11th. Johnston had rapidly retreated across the Neuse, and having his railway
to lighten up his trains, could fall back faster than we could pursue. The rains had also set
in, making the roads almost impassable, and rendering a deal of corduroying necessary.

On the morning of the 12th, the announcement of the surrender of rebel General R. E. Lee's
entire army, was made to our corps, causing feelings of inexpressible joy. To us, it was great,
grand and glorious news.

Upon this intelligence, General Sherman gave orders to drop all trains, and the army marched
rapidly on to Raleigh where our division arrived in the afternoon of the 13th, Johnston's army
having hastily retreated on the roads from Hillsboro to Greensboro. Remaining in Raleigh, over
the night of the 13th, the 14th Corps, resumed the march on the 14th, moving south-west in
the direction of Salisbury, Morgan's division arriving at Avon's Ferry on the Cape Fear river,
on the afternoon of the 15th.

Thus matters stood when General Sherman received a communication from General Johnston that
arrested all hostile movements for the time being. Our division now took up camp to await the
results of negotiations between the commanders of the two opposing armies, which finally resulted
in the surrender of Johnston's entire force.

The country between Goldsboro and Smithfield was usually low and swampy, affording good positions
for the enemy's cavalry, which, in small force, and for a short time, would take advantage
of them. On the contrary, however, the country between Smithfield and Raleigh was enchanting:
we had not seen its equal in all the South. When our division was within fourteen miles of
the city of Raleigh, a flag of truce train was sent to meet us, offering its surrender, which
being accepted, the rest of the march was unobstructed according to conditions.

Kilpatrick's command was the first to enter it, and while the General was riding at the head
of his men, some reprobate had the audacity to shoot at him. The offender was caught and hung.

The people of this place seemed glad that the "vandals" had come. Raleigh was the handsomest
city in all famous Dixie, it being neat and clean, and its situation grand, the surrounding
country affording an extensive view. Here was found many of the handsome feminine chivalry,
who having fled before us from the line of our raids, finally concluded to meet face to face
the "grim-visaged Yanks."

Our division now remained at Avon's Ferry, on the Cape Fear, five miles below the confluence
of the Haw and Deep rivers, for five days, in a sickly swamp. At this place, the Eighty-sixth
Illinois set to work and put up comfortable quarters, after which the boys lay round in the
shade, discussing the prospects of a speedy peace, when by and by, some one brought the dreadful
rumor of the assassination of President Lincoln, which became confirmed on the evening of the
18th, Sherman's order to that effect being read to our division.

This sad intelligence cast a deep gloom over their joy in the anticipations of peace. It was
heard by every member of the regiment, and division, with feelings and expressions of the keenest
sorrow.

Finally, a memorandum or basis of agreement, was drawn up by General Sherman, which, for the
time being, was satisfactory to General Johnston and all present as a proposition to be submitted
to the President of the United States for ratification or rejection, it being sent to Washington
with all possible haste.

While these things were pending, our division was moved from the Cape Fear river to Holly Springs,
on the 21st, that it might be nearer communications. When the memorandum between Sherman and
Johnston was received by the cabinet at Washington, it was disapproved, and General Grant,
with the following letter of instructions, was sent, in haste, to General Sherman:

                                        "WAR DEPARTMENT,
                              "Washington City, April 21, 1865.

    "TO LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT."

This dispatch was received on the morning of the 24th.

General Sherman now issued orders terminating the truce on the 26th, at 12 o'clock M., and
ordered all to be in readiness to march at that time.

Again, on the 25th, General Johnston invited General Sherman to another
conference, with a view to surrender. It now became the province of
General Grant to take the lead in negotiations, but he preferred that
Sherman should consummate the work. Nevertheless, General Johnston was
afforded another interview. The side-arms
    of officers, and their private horses and baggage to be retained by
    them.

Immediately on the conclusion of the definite cartel of surrender, General Sherman issued orders
for the future movements of his army. Its work was done, and nothing remained for the greater
portion of it not required to garrison the conquered country but to return home and disband.

The real and genuine feelings felt and expressed by the soldiers of our army at the surrender
of Johnston, the return of peace, and the fact of their immediate march towards the homes from
which they had been so long absent, cannot be written. It caused a thrill of emotions in every
heart beyond the reach of the pen to portray.

The Eighty-sixth Illinois was still camped at Holly Springs when the glorious news of the fall
of Johnston and the order for the homeward march was received. Every man was electrified with
the great, grand and glorious news. Horrid visions of the past no longer possessed a single
mind, but the hearty welcome, the joys and pleasures of a distant home, and the dear, beloved
friends that made it home, crowded the mind of every one with inexpressible feelings of delight.
Every man was more nimble, more talkative and more pleasant than ever before.

Nothing could be more enlivening, more vivifying and more devoutly to be wished than the very
position in which they stood. Long and tedious marches had lost their dread, and every one
became anxious to be homeward bound.

Bright visions of a future welcome at Peoria rose up before the minds of all--for there we
would be met by the joys of our long absent friends, and the kind hospitality of the noble
and generous-hearted ladies of the Women's National League--ladies who justly deserve our hearty
thanks for their humane and loyal efforts to cheer and aid us in the field and at home. Their
noble deeds will ever maintain a sacred spot on the tablets of our memory.

CHAPTER X.

HOMEWARD BOUND.

General Morgan's division, of the 14th Corps, led out from its camp at Holly Springs at half
past five o'clock on the morning of the 29th of April, and marching to the railroad camped
near it, eight miles west of Raleigh, at Page's Station, where it procured supplies for its
homeward march.

Remaining at this place until the 1st of May, it took up the march for the city of Richmond,
and crossing the Neuse river at Fisher's Dam, camped on the first night four miles north of
this dam and twenty miles from Oxford, after a hard march of twenty-two miles.

The column led out of camp the next morning at five o'clock A.M., and passing through Oxford,
camped three miles north, marching twenty-three miles. Led out of camp on the morning of the
3rd, and being cut off by the 3rd division of the 20th Corps, made a forced march round it,
and came in ahead of its advance, but Morgan gave the road; then continuing on, camped on the
Roanoke river, four miles into Virginia, having marched about eighteen miles.

Led out of camp on the 4th at half past three A.M., and crossing the Roanoke river at Faylor's
Ferry, six miles above Huskington, on a pontoon bridge, marched through Boydton and camped
on the Meherrin river. Marched twenty-three miles. Led out at five o'clock A.M. on the 5th;
crossed Little and Big Meherrin rivers, and marching through Lewiston, crossed Nottoway river
and camped four miles from Nottoway C.H., having marched twenty-seven miles over bad roads.
Resumed the march on the 6th at half past four o'clock, passing through Nottoway C.H. and Dennisville,
camped late at night at Good's Bridge on the Appomattox river, having made a hard march of
thirty miles under the pressure of a warm day.

Crossed the Appomattox river on the 7th, and marching camped on Falling creek, five miles from
Richmond. Made twenty-five miles. Now ended the march until the 11th.

It was a race between the corps commanders of Slocum's wing. Sherman ordered his Generals not
to march over fifteen miles per day, but instead, General Davis made from twenty-two to thirty.
It was an imposition of the worst feature, for many a good soldier was killed that might not
have been, all for a foot race.

On this march the Eighty-sixth traveled one hundred and sixty-one miles over a beautiful country,
in the latter part of spring, everything assuming a lovely aspect; and had the march been conducted
as it was ordered to have been, it might have enjoyed the trip. All the inhabitants came out
to see the Yankees; the old and young, the white and black, came from far and near to get a
view. The regiment now set to work after its usual manner in the erection of comfortable quarters,
which it had completed in a short time, and then took the world easy. It was encamped in a
vicinity made renowned by the wars of the great rebellion, where the contending forces of the
Rebel and Union armies had maneuvered for so long a time for the mastery.

At this camp, it will be remembered, the commanding officers issued a deal of their surplus
whisky to the division, which proved the harbinger of rows, riots, fights of a stirring and
noisy kind, too numerous to mention. After four days rest, the division resumed its march for
Washington City early on the morning of the 11th of May, and passing through Manchester, crossed
the James river and entered the city of Richmond from the south-west. Now, for the first time,
it beheld the once great Rebel Capital--the anaconda and boa-constrictor of rebel vengeance.
When the command reached the north side of the James, the Libby prison could be seen on the
right, where so many of our captured soldiers have languished and died under the cruel care
of its keeper. Then, a short distance above the Libby, and on the same side of the street,
stood Castle Thunder, also a place of infamous reputation. Passing on, it was met by hundreds
of peddlers dealing out their pies, cakes, cheese, and such, by the wholesale. The city did
not show the ravages of war as much as was expected; true, a part of it had been burnt on its
evacuation, but aside from this there was nothing to show that it had been so long the theatre
of war; neither racked nor ruined, but compact, neat and clean.

All were surprised not to see huge entrenchments, high as the Chinese walls; but alas! there
was nothing but an ordinary line of works around it, no stronger than the Eighty-sixth had
often made on the Atlanta campaign in one night! "As strong as Richmond" had become a by-word.
In front of Kenesaw, the Chattahoochie and Atlanta, may be found stronger works by far, thrown
up in just one mortal night, than are to be seen on the south-west and north of Richmond.

Jeff. Davis, in his Sodom and Gomorrah of the Confederacy, was not as secure as many were wont
to think. Sherman would have snaked him out sooner than he did if he had had his "flanking
machine" in operating distance. But time progressed, the world moved, and Richmond fell.

Passing through Richmond, the command marching northward, camped four miles from Hanover C.H.,
making sixteen miles. Led out of camp at twelve o'clock M. on the 12th, and passing through
Hanover C.H., crossed the Pamunky at Little Page's Bridge, and camped four miles above it,
making eight miles. The course of march on the 13th was north-west, crossing the railway at
Chesterfield, and camped one mile beyond Childsburg, making eighteen miles.

The march of the 14th was still north-west. The command camped on Plentiful creek by an old
mill, having made an easy march of eighteen miles. Resuming the march on the 15th in a north-western
direction, the command crossed the Rapidan river at Raccoon Ford, and camped for the night
on the north bank, having marched seventeen miles. Led out of camp on the Rapidan at seven
A.M. on the 16th, the Eighty-sixth Illinois being train guard and crossing the North Fork of
the Rappahanock at Kellie's Ford, marched and camped near Catlet's Station, making twenty-two
miles.

Marched from Catlett's Station at half past four A.M. on the 17th, and following the railway,
passed through Manassas Junction and camped on the Bull Run battlefield, having marched twenty-five
miles under a hot sun.

Resumed the march at five A.M. on the 18th, and passing through Fairfax C.H., camped within
nine miles of Washington, having marched fifteen miles. Again, at nine A.M. on the 19th, the
march was resumed, the command camping at a point equidistant from Washington and Alexandria,
and four miles from each, having marched five miles. From its camp at this place the Eighty-sixth
Illinois saw the distant dome of the Capitol for the first time.

Soon again the regiment had comfortable quarters, and enjoyed them hugely after so long and
arduous a march. It marched one hundred and forty-four miles on its journey from Richmond to
Washington, consuming eight days in doing it. On this march all were surprised not to find
the country cut up with all kinds of works incident to war, for such things were not to be
seen to any formidable extent. At Manassas Junction there were a few old forts, then in ruins,
that may have been at some time quite formidable, but never wonderful. At Bull Run was to be
seen the strongest entrenchments on the line of march, which had been built and held by the
rebel army.

The following are the casualties of the regiment from the time it left Savannah until its muster
out:

    Recruits               6
    Resigned               2
    Transferred            5
    Discharged            12
    Ordinary deaths        4
    Killed in action       3
    Died of wounds         5
    Missing in action      8
    Wounded in action     20
    Wounded, accidental    1
                         ---
      Aggregate           66

Immediately upon the arrival of Sherman's army at Washington City, General Grant issued orders
for the review of the Grand Army of the Potomac to take place on the 23rd, and that known as
Sherman's army to take place on the 24th. Thousands of people flocked from all parts of the
country to witness the grand pageant. The most ample preparations had been made for the occasion.
The President was seated on an elevated stand, surrounded by his Cabinet officers, foreign
ministers and distinguished strangers. Pennsylvania Avenue was lined on both sides from end
to end with admiring people; every window presented its tableau of fair spectators; and the
occasion was such as had never before been witnessed on the American continent. The daily papers
all over the land soon flourished lively descriptions of the great and grand review; and according
to them and the judgment of most of the spectators, the Army of the West bore off the palm;
they described it as more graceful, more stalwart and more intelligent than the Grand Army
of the Potomac.

On the occasion of this grand review of Sherman's army, a certain New York paper, the Independent,
paid our division a very high compliment. It said:

    "The finest looking set of men in either army--they were also said
    to be the best drilled--was the 2nd division of the 14th Corps,
    composed of Western troops, and commanded by General James D.
    Morgan, of Quincy, Illinois, one of the bravest of the brave, the
    idol of his soldiers, and called by them 'Our Jimmy Morgan.'"

But as for the soldiers themselves, grand pageantry in the line of reviews had "played out."
What was charming to the assembled multitude was no joyous affair to them. Their good time
came, however, when the attention of officials was turned to mustering out.

On the morning of the review of Sherman's army, our division led out of its camp at an early
hour, and by a slow and tiresome march it arrived at Washington and passed before the admiring
crowd between one and three o'clock P.M., marching back to camp in the evening, where it arrived
as much fatigued as if it had been pursuing rebels.

At twelve o'clock M. on the day after the grand review, General Morgan moved his division across
the long bridge over the Potomac into Washington City, and thence three miles north, where
he camped it near the President's summer houses.

While encamped here the boys were allowed many privileges in and around the Capitol; all the
guards being taken off, they were allowed to run wild, though they did not run riot.

Here also the Eighty-sixth Illinois, on the evening of the 6th of June, 1865, was mustered
out of the United States service, having been engaged in the service of its country as an organized
body for three years wanting two months and twenty-two days.

Immediately after this the boys of the regiment saluted each other as American citizens and
not as soldiers, and though the metamorphosis was sudden, it seemed to have the force of a
protracted transformation.

The following are the casualties of the regiment from the time it left Lee and Gordon's Mills
until its muster out:

    Recruits                                6
    Transferred by promotion                1
    Transferred to other regiments         31
    Discharged                             21
    Ordinary deaths                        11
    Killed in action                       48
    Missing                                33
    Deserted                                6
    Wounded in action                     133
    Wounded, accidental                     9
    Died of wounds                         15
    Resigned                                2
    Surrendered from desertion              1
                                         ----
      Aggregate                           323

The entire casualties of the Eighty-sixth Regiment, during its term of service, in killed and
died, discharged, transferred and deserted, was four hundred and sixty-seven men, the company
loss being as follows:

+-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-----------+ |             | Killed
and | Discharged. | Transferred. | Deserted. | |             |   Died.    |             | 
|           | +-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-----------+ | Company
A   |      29    |     16      |       9      |      1    | | Company B   |       5    |  
21      |      12      |      3    | | Company C   |      11    |     25      |       7   
|      8    | | Company D   |      16    |     19      |       9      |      3    | | Company
E   |      15    |     25      |       6      |      2    | | Company F   |      15    |  
26      |       4      |      3    | | Company G   |      16    |     10      |       6   
|      1    | | Company H   |      12    |     22      |       8      |      0    | | Company
I   |      22    |     18      |       7      |      8    | | Company K   |      20    |  
20      |       5      |      2    | +-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-----------+
|     Total   |     161    |    202      |      73      |     31    | +-------------+------------+-------------+--------------+-----------+

The regiment lost fifty-one men killed and one hundred and fifty-four wounded in battle, having
participated in twenty-two engagements, not mentioning many others in which it rendered assistance
by supporting, guarding flanks, or protecting rear. It marched thirty-five hundred and thirty
miles, and was transported by railroad about two thousand miles, making a total distance of
five thousand five hundred and thirty miles, besides a great deal of traveling about camps,
on picket, etc., that is not taken into account.

There were three hundred and seventy-nine men mustered out with the regiment; besides this
number there were many absent at hospitals and on detail who could not be present at the muster-out.
Two days after it was mustered out of the service, the regiment boarded the cars, at the depot
in Washington City, on its way to Chicago, there to receive its pay, disband and go home.

From Washington it passed through Baltimore via Harrisburg and Pittsburgh to Chicago, where
it arrived at twelve o'clock M., on the 11th of June. Everywhere on its route it received expressions
of the most cordial welcome. Every one seemed rejoiced that the soldier boys were coming home
from the bloody wars, in every way showing their grateful feeling of warmest sympathy for the
services they had rendered to Union and liberty.

At Pittsburgh it received the kindest welcome of them all. More genuine sympathy was manifested
there than the boys had yet experienced. In behalf of this people was engendered a feeling
of the most profound regard. The regiment was escorted from the cars to the city hall by a
band discoursing delightful music, where was prepared a dainty meal for all. After dinner,
it was escorted back to the train, by the same band, amid the waving of handkerchiefs from
the crowds that thronged the streets and balconies, and the "God bless you" from a thousand
lips. So long as our minds can retrace the past, and so long as our hearts are capable of a
generous emotion, will we continue to hold in sacred remembrance, the noble and generous-hearted
people of Pittsburgh.

Every one anticipated a hearty welcome at Chicago, inasmuch as it had been extended elsewhere
on the route; but we were cruelly and sadly disappointed. No one met the regiment at the depot
even to tell it where to go. Every window presented its tableaux of fair spectators, but no
signal was made in token of welcome, no hearty "God bless you" emanated in audible words from
a single heart, but they gazed as if upon a menagerie of southern wild beasts. The men were
chagrined, and would exclaim, "This is Richmond, not Chicago!"

The regiment finally found its way to Camp Fry and pitched its tents. Here it remained until
the 21st, waiting impatiently for its pay and discharge.

The good folks of Chicago, however, determined not to allow the boys to leave their city until
they had assuaged their anger. Accordingly, the Eighty-sixth and 125th Illinois received an
invitation to appear at the Sanitary Fair rooms, and partake of the fatted calf, where they
received not only a substantial dinner, but also several stirring speeches, among which was
one made by General Sherman.

The General spoke as follows:

    FELLOW SOLDIERS: I regret that it has fallen to my task to speak to
    you, because, I would rather that others should do what is most
    common to them, and less so to me. But, my fellow soldiers, it
    gives me pleasure to assure you that what the President of this
    Fair has told you just now is true--that a hearty welcome awaits
    you wherever you go, not only in Chicago but everywhere. Many
    people think you want bread and meat, but your faces and my
    knowledge tell me that you prefer the waving of handkerchiefs and
    the applause of the people to all the bread and meat that fill the
    warehouses of Chicago. (Cheers.) Those soldiers who are now before
    me know where bread and meat can and will be found. (Laughter.) All
    we ask and all we have ever asked, is a silent and generous
    acknowledgment of our services when rendered in the cause of our
    country.

    And, fellow soldiers, when you get home among those who will
    interest you more than anything I can say, just call to mind where
    you were twelve months ago. You remember the Kenesaw Peak and
    Little Kenesaw. It is not a year since you stormed them, and lost
    my old partner and friend, Dan. McCook. That was on the 27th June,
    1864. In June, 1865, you stand in the midst of Chicago, surrounded
    by bright colors, and ladies, and children. Then you were lying in
    the mud, the rocks and the dirt, and you knew that there was an
    enemy we had to fight with and conquer, and we did not exactly know
    how to do it. (Laughter.) But we were patient; we reconnoitered--we
    watched their flanks--we studied the ground--and in three days we
    had Johnston and his whole army pinned; he retired, and we did not
    give him a chance of stopping until he had put the Chattahoochie
    between us and him. That is a lesson to you. Temporary defeat is
    nothing when a man is determined to succeed. You are not
    conquered--you never can be conquered when the mind is clear and
    determined in its purpose; you must succeed--no temporary defeat
    can cause failure.

    You will remember that on the 4th of July we stood close to each
    other, and we told them then that they would have to go farther
    than Atlanta, for we should continue to go on. (Cheers.) You will
    remember how their pickets told us they had reinforcements. Yes,
    but what? They had one of our Corps--Schofield's. (Laughter.)
    Before General Johnston knew, or dreamed of it, I had reinforced
    his side of the Chattahoochie by General Schofield's 23rd Corps.

    From this, my fellow soldiers I want you to learn the lesson, no
    matter where you are, to-day or to-morrow, by keeping a purpose
    close in your mind, in the end you will succeed, whether it be in
    military, civil, social or family affairs. Let no difficulty appal
    you--let no check alarm you--let your purpose in life be clear and
    steadfast--keep in view the object and design of your life, and
    just as sure as you are now before me in health and strength, you
    will succeed.

    You are now returned to your homes, and the task now allotted to
    you is that of the future. The past is disposed of--it may soon be
    forgotten; but the future is before you, and that future will be
    more glorious than the past. Look at your own State of
    Illinois--look at the city of Chicago. It is hardly as old as any
    of you, for twenty-five years ago a little military garrison was
    here--a two-company post; and now it is a city of palaces, of
    streets, railroads, etc. You, the men of a city almost the second
    in the United States of America, are to assist in directing the
    affairs of this country. You have the patience and industry, and
    more than that, you have organization, discipline and drill, and if
    I have been instrumental in teaching you this--in maintaining
    discipline, order and good government in the army which I have had
    the honor to command, I am contented; for on this system, and on
    the high tone of honor which pervades your minds, must be built the
    empire of America. (Loud cheers.)

    I did not wish to address you, but I believe that there are no
    others here who desire to speak, and therefore I ask you to accept
    what is given in heartiness--a full, joyous, welcome home to
    Chicago. I know it is genuine, for I myself have experienced it.
    Feel you are at home--and that there are no more rebels, no more
    raking fire--no more shot; but that you have done with them all
    forever. Good morning.

On the afternoon of the 21st of June, having been in Chicago just ten days, every member of
the Eighty-sixth received his pay and final discharge. Soon, the boys scattered to the four
winds, bound for home and friends. Suddenly, the Eighty-sixth Illinois passed from existence!

                     *      *      *      *      *

Here ends the history of the good old Eighty-sixth Regiment of Volunteer Infantry, which had
undergone so many days of hardships, perils and privations for the maintenance of home, union
and liberty.

There is no surviving member of the regiment, but will always pride himself in having belonged
to that organization; he will never forget the sad and repulsive scenes of the past, in connection
with the merry days of yore; he will ever cherish in lasting remembrance the many noble and
heroic comrades who have fallen by his side--men with whom he has passed the most trying hours
of his existence--men who knowing the rights of their friends, their country and homes, dared
raise the strong right arm in defense. Ay! he will ever invoke a just Heaven to reward them
as their merit deserves, and in his hours of sad reflection, he will drop a tear to their memory.

REGIMENTAL ROSTER.

REGIMENTAL STAFF.

Colonel David D. Irons; August 27, 1862; died August 11, 1863, at Nashville, Tennessee.

Lieutenant-Colonel David W. Magee; August 27, 1862; resigned March 25, 1864, at Camp McAfee,
Georgia.

Lieutenant-Colonel Allen F. Fahnestock; April 13, 1864; mustered out with regiment at Washington
City.

Major J. S. Bean, August 27, 1862; resigned December 26, 1862, at Nashville, Tennessee.

Major O. Fountain; December 26, 1862; resigned October 30, 1863, at North Chickamauga.

Major J. F. Thomas; April 13, 1864; mustered out with regiment at Washington City.

Surgeon M. M. Hooton; August 27, 1862; mustered out with regiment at Washington City.

First Assistant Surgeon J. Gregory; August 27, 1862; transferred to U.S.C., December 15, 1863.

Second Assistant Surgeon I. J. Guth; August 21, 1862; mustered out with regiment at Washington
City.

Adjutant C. D. Irons; ----; resigned April 25, 1863, at North Chickamauga.

Adjutant L. J. Dandy; ----; discharged April 25, 1865, per order War Department.

Regimental Quartermaster C. H. Dean; August 27, 1862; promoted A.Q.M., February 18, 1864.

Regimental Quartermaster A. Bracken; February 18, 1864; mustered out with regiment at Washington
City.

Chaplain G. W. Brown; August 27, 1862; resigned October 13, 1863, at Nashville, Tennessee.

Chaplain J. S. Millsaps; October 13, 1863; mustered out with regiment at Washington City.

NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF.

Sergeant-Major L. J. Dandy; promoted.

Sergeant-Major D. E. Ward; mustered out with regiment.

Quartermaster Sergeant J. Adams; died February 19, 1863.

Quartermaster Sergeant C. Magee; mustered out with regiment.

Commissary Sergeant T. A. McNorris; discharged.

Commissary Sergeant W. J. Longfellow; mustered out with regiment.

Hospital Steward Jo. Robinson; mustered out with regiment.

Principal Musician A. Webber; mustered out with regiment.

Principal Musician S. B. Silzell; mustered out with regiment.

COMPANY OFFICERS.

COMPANY A.

Captain W. S. Magarity; August 27, 1862; resigned October 10, 1863.

First Lieutenant Jo. Major; August 27, 1862; promoted Captain October 10, 1863, and mustered
out with regiment.

Second Lieutenant S. T. Rogers; Aug. 27, 1862; promoted First Lieutenant October 10, 1863,
and resigned from wounds received in battle, June 27, 1864. J. J. Jones, promoted First Lieutenant.

COMPANY B.

Captain E. C. Beasley; August 27, 1862; resigned January 28, 1863. J. P. Worrell, promoted Captain.

First Lieutenant J. C. Kingsley; August 27, 1862; mustered out with regiment at Washington City.

Second Lieutenant N. McVicker; August 27, 1862; resigned Jan. 17, 1863. P. W. Wycoff, promoted
Second Lieutenant.

COMPANY C.

Captain J. F. Thomas; August 27, 1862; promoted Major, April 13, 1864, and mustered out with
regiment. W. G. McDonald, promoted Captain.

First Lieutenant J. H. Batchelder; August 27, 1862; Brigade Commissary, and mustered out with
regiment.

Second Lieutenant R. B. Beebe; August 27, 1862; resigned Feb. 1, 1863. I. L. Gleares promoted
Second Lieutenant.

COMPANY E.

Captain O. Fountain; August 27, 1862; promoted Major Dec. 26, 1862. J. F. Waldrof, Captain,
resigned June 18, 1863. E. Van Antwerp, Captain, died July 15, 1864.

First Lieutenant M. Grave; August 27, 1862; resigned January 13, 1863.

Second Lieutenant S. W. Williams; August 27, 1862; resigned January 11, 1863. H. W. Wilson
promoted First Lieutenant.

Second Lieutenant John Hall; August 27, 1862; promoted First Lieutenant, and mustered out with
regiment at Washington City. A. P. Loveland promoted Second Lieutenant.

COMPANY G.

Captain W. B. Bogardus; August 27, 1862; died of wounds received in battle March 19, 1865.

First Lieutenant S. L. Zinser; August 27, 1862; promoted Captain; mustered out with regiment.

Second Lieutenant M. Kingman; August 27, 1862; promoted First Lieutenant; mustered out with
regiment. W. F. Hodge promoted First Lieutenant.

Second Lieutenant D. W. Merwin; August 27, 1862.

COMPANY I.

Captain A. L. Fahnestock; August 27, 1862; promoted Major January 31, 1864.

First Lieutenant A. A. Lee; August 27, 1862; promoted Captain Jan. 31, 1864.

Second Lieutenant J. L. Fahnestock; August 27, 1862; resigned Jan. 23, 1863. R. W. Groninger
promoted Second Lieutenant.

COMPANY K.

Captain J. F. French; August 27, 1862; killed March 16, 1865. L. A. Ross promoted Captain.

First Lieutenant J. B. Pete; August 27, 1862; discharged Dec. 24, 1864.

Second Lieutenant H. F. Irwin; August 27, 1862; dishonorably discharged Nov. 29, 1862. John
Morrow promoted Second Lieutenant.

CAPTAIN BURKHALTER'S ADVENTURE.

On the morning of the 20th of August, 1864, while our army was besieging Atlanta, General James
D. Morgan's division was ordered on a raid to cut the Montgomery and Atlanta Railroad. Our
brigade, the 3rd, left its baggage in the rifle pits, leaving a sufficient guard with it. The
skirmishers were also left on duty under the command of Capt. Burkhalter, the subject of our
narrative.

Sometime after the division had gone, the Captain became lonesome and anxious to know what
the division was doing, so he attempted to follow and see the fun. He followed it very well
until within three or four miles of the railroad, when a heavy rain overtook him; he stopped
under the shelter of a large tree until the storm had somewhat subsided, then mounting his
horse pursued what he supposed to be the right road, but the pelting rain had obliterated every
vestige of our course, and he in consequence was in a dilemma as to what was best. It did not
seem well to turn back after having gone so far, so he determined to follow in the probable
course of the column until he found more evidence one way or the other. On he went in a musing
mood, doubting as he went.

Having now gone a long distance without any favorable signs, he had about concluded to return,
when on a sudden a stalwart reb, armed to the teeth, stepped out from behind a tree and commanded
the unwary Captain to surrender. A complete surprise. What could he do; he had left his sword
and pistol in camp, not dreaming of this adventure.

He stopped instanter, obeying the summons of his captor, for there was no other alternative;
he was powerless. The next demand made of him was his watch and pocket book.

The rebel, for a short distance, marched the Captain a few paces in front, following close
in the rear with a cocked gun, and leading the horse by the reins; but this was not getting
along fast enough, for the horse would not lead good. The salvation of the Eight by water, and the
baptism of John, were both types of the baptism of Christ.

John was sent expressly before Jesus, baptizing the bodies of men with water, as a lively image,
as he himself explains it, of the latter baptizing their souls with the Holy Ghost and with
fire. The baptism of John, therefore, was both preparative and typical of that of Christ. And it
is remarked by the Quakers, that no sooner was Jesus baptized by John with water in the type,
than he was, according to all the Evangelists, baptized by the [161] Holy Ghost in the antetype.
It was this baptism of Jesus in the antetype which occasioned John
to know him personally, and enabled him to discover him to others.

The baptism of John, therefore, being a type or figure under the law, was to give way, when the antetype
or substance became apparent. And that it was to give way in its due time, is evident from the confession
of John himself.

[Footnote 161: Mat. 3. 16.--Mark 1. 10.]

[Footnote 162: John 3.

30.]

[Footnote 163: Heb. 9. 8. 9. 10.]

SECT. IV.

Quakers show that the baptism, included in the great commission, which appears not to be the baptism
of John, is the baptism of Christ, from a critical examination of the words in that commission--Way
in which the Quakers interpret these words--This interpretation confirmed by citations from
St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. Paul.

Having attempted to show, according to the method of the Quakers, that the baptism of John is not
the baptism included in the great commission, I shall now produce those arguments, by which they
maintain that that baptism, which is included in it, is the baptism
of Christ.

These arguments will be found chiefly in a critical examination of the words of that commission.

To
enable the reader to judge of the propriety of their observations upon these words, I shall
transcribe from St. Matthew the three verses that relate to this subject.

[Footnote 164: Mat. 23.18,19,20.]

The first observation, which the Quakers make, is upon the word "THEREFORE."
As all power is given unto me both in Heaven and in earth; and as
I can on that account, and as I will qualify you, go ye therefore,
that is, having previously received from me the qualification necessary
for your task, go ye.

The next observation is, that the commission
does not imply that the Apostles were to teach and to baptize as two
separate acts, but, as the words intimate, that they were to teach
baptizing.

The Quakers say again, that the word "teach" is an improper
translation of the original [165]Greek. The Greek word should have
been rendered "make disciples or proselytes." In several editions
of our own Bibles, the word "teach" is explained in the margin opposite
to it, "make disciples or Christians of all nations," or in the same
manner as the Quakers explain it.

Much has been said and written about battle, the greater portion of which is an exaggeration
of facts. Fireside writers and reporters have composed long manuscripts, beginning and ending
in frantic agonies and seas of blood, exhausting the vocabulary of pathetic epithets. That
battle is dreadful cannot be denied, but those who have passed through the fiery ordeal do
not experience half the convulsions and agony of soul that is written. If a comrade falls,
the column still moves on. No one, by the late rules of war, dare stop to bear off the wounded
or sympathize with those in the throes of death. There are men detailed for that purpose, who
follow up in the rear and give those in need due attention.

A soldier in a pitched battle does not pretend to know who is hurt until the battle is ended;
he must needs push ahead and do his part until he is no longer able. Many of your comrades
fall around you; they show unmistakable symptoms of severe wounds, but your attention is too
much engrossed to ever think to inquire the nature of their wounds. You are hardly conscious
of any suffering around you. Excitement has borne you off so that you never think to look and
see who is on your right or left, or whose spirit is winging its flight from the body over
which you are walking. The soldier does not seem to feel pangs of sorrow when arms clash the
loudest; he does not see danger and suffering and ghastly sights until all is over and quiet
restored. Those who are unacquainted with the mental condition of the soldier in time of battle,
wonder and ask why it is that those whom he knows so intimately are wounded and many times
killed by his side without knowing the nature of their wounds or the circumstances of their
death. The reason for this is manifest from what has already been said.

There is oftentimes more horror in the idea and dread of battle than in the thing itself. The
soldier becomes so accustomed to human butchery that it loses many, very many, of its horrors.

After battle, when the clash of arms has ceased, is when the soldier's sympathy is tried. The
solicitations of the maimed and dying raise a feeling of commiseration in the most obdurate
heart; and still this feeling is of but short duration and of a mild character.

FARMING IN THE SOUTH.

Farming in the Southern States is carried on in a very simple and seeming ignorant style. One
could not refrain from laughing at their oddity in agricultural pursuits. They are a great
many years behind the North in this respect, as well as in many others.

The whites and negroes are so sluggish, indolent and careless in their habits that their works
are a fair prototype of themselves. There is a difference between a farm and a plantation,
though they are carried on in nearly the same style; the main difference is that the one is
gotten up on a larger scale than the other. What is usually called a farm is owned by a poor
white man--while the plantation is owned by a wealthy planter, with his hundreds of negroes.
The farm is known by its small area, by its improvements and its little old log house with
its appendages; the plantation, by its vast area, its stately mansion and numerous negro shanties.
The improvements are usually very poor, with but few conveniences. On every plantation you
will see a cotton press and gin house, with the stable under the latter. The cotton press is
the first thing you get your eyes on when you approach a plantation, and then the gin house
next. And as for the farms or little plantations, you scarcely know anything about them until
you have them suddenly spread before your view. There is hardly ever anything external to warn
one of their presence.

It is, as it were, a swath mown in the deep pine forest--the labor of a poor ignorant being,
who, like the parrot, can talk and palaver with simple unmeaningness, but ignorant of the world
beyond a radius of ten miles. The people, for the most part, break up their ground with one
horse or ox, as the case may be, their plows being suited to the purpose.

This small plow is made after the fashion of our large two-horse breaking plows, and is, as
we are wont to say, right or left handed. Some farmers are too poor to afford a horse or mule;
in this case they work an ox as if he were a horse, hitch him to the plow and drive him with
ropes attached to his horns with as much precision as a horse or mule.

The oxen here may be of a more docile breed than found in our parts, and certainly are, for
it would be dangerous with us to hitch one to a plow and start him on a row through a cornfield,
for he would likely jump the fence before he reached the other end.

The rows of corn here are usually six feet apart, with a row of negro beans between. If one
man can tend eight acres he thinks he is doing good business; the corn is hardly ever plowed,
it being worked with the hoe for the most part.

The women work in the field as well as the men, they being used to it. They will not believe
us when we tell them that our women do not work in the field. When an acre of ground yields
twelve bushels of corn it is thought to be a fine crop. They gape with wonder when we tell
them we break our ground with two horses, plow our corn with a plow on which we can ride; that
one man can tend forty acres and raise forty bushels to the acre. When we tell them about our
reapers, our vast fields of wheat, oats, etc., etc., they gape, and wonder what we do with
it all. If we tell them about our large prairies, rich soil and productive land, they wonder
why they had not heard of that before.

Their principal diet is corn bread, meat and negro beans. These nigger beans, by the way, are
not so bad, just the thing for the soldier; many farmers raise them altogether, so to speak.
It is a common thing to see cribs of these beans as you pass through the country; it takes
them so short a time to cook, which adapts them to our use. Corn and beans are not their only
productions, for they sometimes grow a little wheat, oats, tobacco and cotton. Many reap their
grain with the sickle, not having known the existence of the cradle. There are no reapers to
be seen, or if at all, but seldom.

As a people, they have no enterprise; they live only to eat, and even that is done in a poor,
unhandy style.

There are a great many turpentine, rosin and tar factories in "the sunny land of Dixie." There
are vast tracts of land here, covered with dense forests of pine, that can be put to no other
use than the production of these things. In North Carolina these factories are most numerous.
They are built on small streams of water, and for miles around the trees are hewn on two sides;
the turpentine running out, gums on the tree where it is hewn. On our march we burned many
of these factories; they made a grand, huge smoke, most sublime.

REBEL LETTER.

This letter, written by a rebel soldier, was found on the battle-ground at Bentonville, N. C.

                                   BIVOUAC NEAR "RACCOON FORD," VA.,
                                              September 25th, 1863.

    DEAR COON--I have just received your kind favor of the 8th inst.,
    and am very much gratified with its contents. I could not expect a
    long letter from a soldier "in the field," and I suppose your time
    was fully taken up reorganizing your company and regiment.

    Since last writing you we had some little excitement ourselves.
    The Yankee, Meade, has tried to take advantage of our supposed
    decimated army, and has advanced across the Rappahannock river to
    the banks of the Rapidan. We have here checked his advance and are
    awaiting the attack which he is very slow about making. I think
    both sides are awaiting the decision of the battle in Tennessee and
    Georgia before a move is made.

    We are daily in receipt of glorious news from Bragg, but there are
    so many rumors without foundation that we hardly know what he has
    done. I hope he will not rest until he has driven the foe across
    the Ohio. You have our brag fighting general with you now, and I
    know you will be victorious.

    I have not heard a word from "Miss Mattie" since I left home, and
    if the truth must be told, I never want to again. I have found a
    new sweetheart, and I think the change is more agreeable, at least
    to me. I suppose you know that Miss Katie Furlow's father is
    running for Governor; of course you will support him.

    You recollect that pretty little woman that I showed you in the
    theatre in Augusta, the one I said was the belle of Augusta--Miss
    Fannie Hatch. Well, I have been told by one who knows and believes,
    that "Albert," who performed with the "Queen Sisters" that night,
    has betrayed her. I can scarcely believe that so much loveliness
    would have fallen so easily, yet they say 'tis true.

    I shall anxiously wait to hear further from you in reference to the
    lieutenancy. If you are successful in securing it for me (which I
    hope and pray you may be,) I shall be ever grateful to you.

    I have not seen Joe Holt since the reception of yours, his regiment
    being on picket guard. I know he would send you his kind regards,
    if he knew I was writing to you. Accept my best wishes, and believe
    me to be

                              Truly your Friend,

                                   A. KENT BISEL.

    P.S.--Please direct to Co. "K," 4th Georgia, Dole's Brigade,
    Rhodes' Division, Ewell's Corps, A.N.V., and always to Richmond,
    Virginia.

