"I am not responsible for the past, any more than I am for your prejudices against me. My purpose
is simple and honorable, as much so as that of any other man who may ask you for your daughter's
hand."

"Mr. Houghton," said Bodine, rising, "there is no use in prolonging this painful and intensely
disagreeable interview. I said to your father in this office that our relations could be only
those of business. Even these shall soon cease. I now understand you, sir. Of course the past
is nothing to you, and you are bent on obtaining what you imagine you wish at the present moment,
without any regard to others. Let me tell you once for all there can be no alliance between
your house and mine. I would as soon bury my daughter as see her married to you. I do find
fault with you personally. You are headlong and inconsiderate. You would lay your hands on
the best you can find in the South just as your armies and politicians have done. But you proceed
further at your peril--do you comprehend me?--at your peril," and the veteran's eyes gleamed
fiercely.

"Captain Bodine," said George, also rising, "you cannot make me lose my temper. I shall give
you no just reason for saying that I am headlong. I wish you could be more calm and fair yourself.
Before we part one point must be settled. My request must be met in one way or the other. If
you will give me your word that you will repeat the purport of what I have said to Miss Bodine,
I will make no effort to do so myself. However hostile you may be to me, I know that you are
a man of honor, and I will trust you. I merely wish Miss Bodine to know that I love her and
am willing to wait for her till I am gray."

"You wish me to tell her that you will wait and pray for my death, and seek to lead her to
do likewise," was the angry reply.

"It is useless for me to protest against your unjust and bitter words. The trust that I offer
to repose in you entitles me to better courtesy."

By a great effort Bodine regained self-control, and balanced himself for a few moments on his
crutches in deep thought. At last he said, "I accept the trust, and will be as fair to you
as it is possible for an outraged father to be. I forbid that you should have any communication
with my daughter whatever, and I shall forbid her to receive any from you. What is more, you
must take her answer as final."

"I promise only this, Captain Bodine, that I shall take no action without your knowledge. I
shall trust you implicitly in repeating the purport of this interview. The moment that I looked
into your face I recognized that you were a gentleman, and I again apologize for my rude remark
before I knew who you were. Good-evening, sir."

Bodine bowed stiffly, and departed with many conflicting emotions surging in his breast, none
of them agreeable. He scarcely knew whether he had acted wisely or not. Indeed, the impression
grew upon him that he had been worsted in the encounter, that George, in making him his messenger
to Ella, had acted with singular astuteness. This was true, but the young man's action was
not the result of the Yankee shrewdness with which the veteran was disposed to credit him.
A simple, straightforward course is usually the wisest one, and George instinctively knew that
Ella would appreciate such openness on his part. He was left in a very anxious and perturbed
condition, it is true, but in his heart he again thanked Mrs. Willoughby for putting him so
sacredly on his guard against his hasty temper.

Absorbed in thought, he sat till the gloom of night gathered in the office; then the shuffling
feet of the impatient janitor aroused him.

Solacing the old man with a dollar, he went out hastily, and walked a mile or two to work off
his nervous excitement, then sought a restaurant, muttering, "I haven't reached the point of
losing my appetite yet."

By the time Bodine reached home he was much calmer, and disposed to take a much more hopeful
view of the affair.

He again concluded that after all it was best that he should be the one to inform Ella, and
thus keep the matter entirely within his own hands. Believing her to be as yet untouched by
anything that Houghton might have said to her, he felt quite sure that he could readily induce
her to take the same attitude toward the objectionable suitor which he proposed to maintain
to the end.

He found her and his cousin very anxious about his late return--an anxiety not allayed by his
grim, stern expression.

"I have been detained by an unpleasant interview," he said.

"With that old--"

"No, not with Mr. Houghton. I will explain after dinner."

With the swiftness of light, Ella surmised the truth, and made but a very indifferent repast.
Her father noted this, and asked himself, "Could she have known of his purpose?" Then he reproached
himself inwardly for entertaining the thought.

The meal was comparatively a silent one, and soon over; then they all went to Mrs. Bodine's room.

"I wish you to be present, Cousin Sophy," said the captain, "for I have a very disagreeable
task to perform, and I can scarcely trust myself to do it fairly. You must prompt me if you
think I do not. Ella, my dear and only child, I trust that you will receive the message, which,
in a sense, I have been compelled to bring you, in the right spirit I feel sure that you will
do so, and that your course now and hereafter will continue to give me that same deep, glad
peace at heart which your fidelity to duty and your devotion to me have always inspired. You
have my happiness now in your hands as never before; but I do not fear that you will fail me.
The son of the man whom we all detest, and whose employ I shall leave presently, has asked
permission to pay you his addresses."

She turned pale as he spoke so gravely, and trembled visibly.

"Why do you tell me this, papa?" she faltered. "I would rather not have known it."

"Because he requested me to tell you. Because he said he wished you to know that he loved you,
and that if I did not tell you he would himself;" and he looked at her keenly.

"Then," cried Ella, impetuously, "although I may never speak to him again, I say he has acted
honorably. I told you that he was incapable of anything clandestine."

"I trust that you never will speak to him again," said her father, almost sternly. "I have
forbidden him to have any communication with you, and I certainly forbid your speaking with
him again."

"Father," said Ella, gently, with tears in her eyes, "I do not deserve that you should speak
to me in that tone. I've always tried to obey you."

"Forgive me, Ella, but I have been intensely annoyed by the interview inflicted upon me, and
I cannot think of it, or of his preposterous course, with patience. Moreover, pardon me for
saying it, you have shown a friendly interest in him which it has been very painful to note."

"I've only tried to be fair to him, papa."

"Please try merely to forget him, Ella--to think nothing about him whatever."

"I shall try to obey you, papa; but you are too old and wise to tell me not to think. As well
tell me not to breathe."

"Ella," began her father sternly, "can you mean--"

"Now, Hugh," interrupted his cousin, "be careful you don't do more mischief than young Houghton
can possibly accomplish. How men do bungle in these matters! Hough-ton hasn't bungled, though.
His making you his messenger strikes me as the shrewdest Yankee trick I ever heard of."

"I had the same impression on my way home," admitted Bodine, irritably.

Ella felt that she owed no such deference to Mrs. Bodine as she did to her father, and, with
an ominous flash in her eyes, said decidedly, "You are bungling, Cousin Sophy. George Houghton
is incapable of what you term a Yankee trick. I will be pliant under all motives of love and
duty to my father, but you must not outrage my sense of justice. You must remember that I have
a conscience, as truly as you have."

"There, forgive me, Ella. You've seen the young fellow, and I haven't. Cousin Hugh, remember
that Ella has your spirit, and the spirit of her ancestors. Show her what is right and best,
and she will do it."

Bodine looked at his daughter in deep perturbation. Could that flushed, beautiful woman be
his little Ella? With an indescribable pang he began to recognize that she was becoming a woman,
with an independent life of her own. The greatness of the emergency calmed him, as all strong
minds are quieted by great and impending danger. "Ella," he said, gently and sadly, "I do not
wish to treat you as a little, foolish girl, but as becomes your years. I wish your conscience
and reason to go with mine. You know that your happiness is the chief desire of my life. There
could be no happiness for either of us in such a misalliance. The father of this hasty youth
will be as bitterly opposed to it all as I am. We belong to different camps, and can never
have anything in common. You know my motive in taking employment from him. I have thought better
of it, and shall now leave his office as soon as I can honorably. I don't wish to outrage your
sense of justice, Ella, and I will mention one other essential point in the interview. I told
young Houghton that he must accept your answer as final, and that he would proceed further
at his peril, and he said he would only take a final answer from you after years of patient
waiting and wooing. How he proposes to do the latter I do not know, nor does he know himself.
He did say, however, that he would take no action without my knowledge. You see that I am trying
to be just to him."

"I would like to ask one question, papa. Did he use any angry, disrespectful language toward you?"

Bodine winced under this question, but said plainly, "No, he did not. He apologized for the
third time for a hasty remark he once made before he knew who I was. He said that he recognized
that I was a gentleman then, and that he would trust me as such to deliver his message."

The girl drew a long breath as if a deep cause for anxiety had been removed.

"Oh, come now, Cousin Hugh, you and Ella are taking this matter too much to heart. Why, Lor
bless you! I had nearly a dozen offers by the time I was Ella's age. There is nothing tragic
about this young fellow or his proceedings. Indeed, I think with Ella, that he has done remarkably
well, wonderfully well, considering. Nine out of ten of his kind wouldn't be so scrupulous.
He has done neither you nor Ella any wrong, only paid you the highest compliment in his power.
Regard it as such, and let the matter end there. He can't marry Ella out of hand any more than
he can me."

At this the girl, seeing inevitably the comic side of everything, burst into a laugh. "Cousin
Sophy," she cried, "you surpass Solomon himself. Come, dear papa, let us try to be sensible.
Of course Mr. Houghton can't marry me without your consent or mine."

"Then I may tell him that you will never give your consent--that what he terms his suit must
end at once and forever?"

She again became very pale, and did not answer immediately.

"Ella, my only child, the hope and solace of my life, can you hesitate?"

With a rush of tears, she threw herself upon his neck, and sobbed, "Tell him that I will never
do anything without your consent." Then she fled to her own room.

The captain and Mrs. Bodine sat looking at each other in consternation.

CHAPTER XXX

TEMPESTS

On his return home George found his father reading such of the Boston papers as most nearly
reflected his own views, and in which he had lost none of his early interest. He had always
looked upon himself somewhat in the light of an exile, and it had been his purpose to return
to his native State; but as time passed, a dread of its harsh climate had begun to reconcile
him to the thought of ending his days in Charleston. All morbid tendencies strengthen, if indulged.
The desire, therefore, to remain near the watery grave of his eldest son increased. Allied
to this motive was the pleasure of accumulating money, the excitement of business, and exultation
over the fact that he was taking tens of thousands from his enemies. As far as possible he
invested his capital at the North. The people among whom he dwelt knew this, knew that, unlike
Mr. Ainsley, he was doing as little as possible to build up the section from which he was drawing
his wealth.

George, as yet, had not been inducted into the spirit or knowledge of his father's business
methods, for the old man had believed that the time for this had not come. Moreover, as the
merchant became better acquainted with the maturer character of his son, he became convinced
that George would not, indeed could not, carry on the business as he had. There was a large,
tolerant good-nature about the youth which would render it impossible for him to deal with
any one in his father's spirit. He had not known his elder brother, and was merely proud of
his record as that of a brave soldier who had died in the performance of duty. George was like
many of the combatants, both Union and Confederate, capable of fighting each other to the death
during the war, but ready to shake hands after the battle was over.

No one understood this disposition better than Mr. Houghton, and he felt that the South was
no place for George. He wished his son to go back to Massachusetts, where wealth and influence
would open the way for a brilliant career; and the old man already saw in imagination his name
famous in the Old Commonwealth.

He had been thinking over this scheme on the present evening, and his mind was full of it when
George entered. "Glad to see you so early," he said genially. "Had a good dinner? Yes; well,
then, sit down a while, for I wish to talk to you. I've had a good nap, and so won't need to
go to bed very early. Well, my boy, you've reached that age when you should take your bearings
for your future career."

"Why, father, I've always expected to go into business with you, and gradually relieve you
of its burdens and cares."

"No, George, that wouldn't be best; that wouldn't suit me at all. You are fitted for something
better and larger. You wouldn't carry on the business as I do, and that would lead to differences
between us. I couldn't stand that. The iron entered into my soul before you were born. Your
brother had equal promise with yourself, and, to put it very mildly, I have no love for those
who destroyed him. I do business with them, but in much the same spirit that Antonio dealt
with the Jew on the Rialto. You would not do this, nor could I expect you to. The accursed
crime of rebellion has not smitten your soul as with lightning, nor broken your heart. The
young fall into the ways of those with whom they live, and I wish you to have as little to
do with this Southern people as possible. There is no career for you in this city, but in your
native State you can become almost what you please. If, for instance, with your splendid health
you entered upon the study of law and mastered it, I have influence and wealth enough to advance
you rapidly, until by your own grip you can climb to the top of the ladder. You can then eventually
marry into one of the best families in the State, and thus at the same time secure happiness
and double your chances of success."

George listened aghast as his father proceeded complacently, and with a touch of enthusiasm
rarely indulged. He was sitting by an open window, at some distance from Mr. Houghton, the
darkness concealing his face. He now began to realize the truth of Mrs. Willoughby's belief
and Bodine's conviction, that he might find as much trouble at home as elsewhere. It quickly
became clear to him that he must reveal the truth at once, but how to set about it he scarcely
knew, and he hesitated like one on the brink of icy water. What he considered a bright thought
struck him, and he said, "Speaking of marrying, you never told me how you came to marry mother."

"Oh!" replied the old man dreamily, "I was almost brought up to marry her. She was the daughter
of a near neighbor and dear friend of my father's. Your mother and I played together as children.
I scarcely think we knew when our mutual affection changed into love--it all came about so
gradually and naturally--and the union gave the deepest satisfaction to both families. Ah!
George, George, your brother's death shortened the life of your mother, and left me very sad
and lonely. I can never forgive this people for the irreparable injuries they have done to
me and mine. I know you cannot feel as I do; but love of country and your affection for me
should lead you to stand aloof from those who are still animated by the old, diabolical spirit
which caused the death of such brave fellows as your brother, and broke the hearts of such
women as your mother."

His son's distress was so deep that he buried his face in his hands.

"I don't wonder that your feelings are touched by my reminiscences, George," and the old man
wiped tears from his own eyes.

"Oh, father!" cried the son, springing up, and placing his hand on the old man's shoulder,
"I'm going to test your love for me severely. You are right in saying I cannot feel as you
do. I did not know that you felt so strongly. I've given my love to a Southern girl."

Moments of oppressive silence followed this announcement, and the old man's face grew stern
and rigid.

"Father, listen patiently," George began. "She is not to blame for the past, nor am I. If you
only knew how good and noble and lovely she is--"

"Who is she? What is her name?"

"Ella Bodine."

"What! A relative of that double-dyed rebel in my office?"

"His daughter."

"George Houghton!" and his father sprang up, and confronted his son with a visage distorted
by anger. Never had the youth called forth a look like that, and he trembled before the passion
he had evoked.

"Father," he said entreatingly, "sit down. Do not look at me so, do not speak to me till you
are calm. Remember I am your son."

The old man paced the room for a few moments in strong agitation, for he had been wounded at
his most vulnerable point. The thought that his only son would ally himself with those whom
he so detested, and whom for years he had sought to punish, almost maddened him. As we have
seen before, there was a slumbering volcano in this old man's breast when adequate causes called
it into action, and now the deepest and strongest forces of his nature were awakened.

At last he said in a constrained voice: "I hope you also will remember that I am your father.
It would appear that you had forgotten the fact, when you made love to one whom I never can
call daughter."

"I have not made love to her yet. You--"

"Has she been making love to you then?"

"Father, please don't speak in that way. There never were harsh words between us before, and
there must not be now."

Again the dreadful silence fell between them, but it was evident that Mr. Houghton was making
a great effort for self-control.

"You are right, George," he said at last. "I have never spoken to you before as I have to-night,
and, I hope to God, I may never have cause to do so again. I have not been a harsh father,
nor have I inflicted my unhappiness on you. I have given you large liberty, the best education
that you would take, and ample means with which to enjoy yourself. I had expected that in return
you would consult my wishes in some vital matters--as vital to your happiness as mine. I never
dreamed that such incredible folly as you have mentioned was possible. Your very birthright
precluded the idea. You said that you would have to test my love severely. I shall not only
have to test your love, but also your reason, your common-sense, almost your sanity. What is
thought of a man who throws away everything for a pretty face?"

"That I shall never do, father. The beauty in Ella Bodine's face is but the reflex of her character."

"That's what every enamored fool has said from the beginning of time," replied Mr. Houghton,
in strong irritation. "What chance have you had to learn her character? I know more about the
girl and her connections than you do. She works with that Wallingford girl, and that old fire-eater,
Mrs. Hunter, in the baking trade. She lives with her cousin old Mrs. Bodine, who thinks of
little else than what she is pleased to consider her blue blood, forgetting that it is not
good, loyal, American blood. This little patch of a State is more to her than the Union bequeathed
to us by our fathers. As to Bodine himself, if the South rose again, he'd march away on his
crutches with the rebellious army. Can you soberly expect to live among such a set of people?
Can you expect me to fraternize with them, to stultify all my life, to trample on my most sacred
convictions, to be disloyal to the memory of wife and son, who virtually perished by the action
of just such traitors?" and he laughed in harsh, bitter protest.

George sat down, again buried his face in his hands, and groaned aloud.

"You may well groan, young man, when you face the truth which you have so strangely forgotten.
But come, I'm not one to yield weakly to any such monstrous absurdity. You are young and strong,
and should have a spirit equal to your stature and muscle. You have not made love to this girl,
you say. Never do it. Steer as wide of her as you would of a whirlpool, and all will soon be
well. I won't believe that a son of mine can be so wretchedly, miserably, and contemptibly
weak as to throw himself away in this fashion."

George was silent and overwhelmed. His father's words had opened an abyss at his feet. He loved
the old man tenderly and gratefully, and, under his burning, scathing words, felt at the time
that his course was black ingratitude. Even if he could face the awful estrangement which he
saw must ensue, the thought of striking such a blow at his father's hopes, affection and confidence
made him shudder in his very soul. It might be fatal even to a life already held in the feeble
grasp of age. He could not speak.

At last Mr. Houghton resumed, very gravely, and yet not unkindly: "You are not the first one
of your age who has been on the verge of an irreparable blunder. Thank God it is not too late
for you to retreat! Do not let this word jar upon you, for it often requires much higher courage
and manhood to retreat than to advance. To do the latter in this case would be as foolhardy
as it would be wrong and disastrous to all concerned. It would be as fatal to me as to you,
for I could not long survive if I learned that I had been leaning on such a broken reed. It
would be fatal to you, for I would not leave my money so you could enrich these people. You
would have nothing in the world but the pretty face for which you sold your birthright. I will
say no more now, George. You will wake in the morning a sane man, and my son. Good-night."

"Good-night, father," George answered in a broken voice. Then, when alone, he added bitterly:
"Wake! When shall I sleep again?"

The eastern horizon was tinged with light before, exhausted by his fierce mental conflict,
he sank into a respite of oblivion. For a long time he wavered, love for his father tugging
at his heart with a restraining power far beyond that of words which virtually were threats.
"He could keep his money," the young fellow groaned, "if I could only keep his affection and
confidence, if I could only be sure that I would not harm his life and health. I could be happy
in working as a day-laborer for her."

At last he came to a decision. He had given both his love and his word to Ella. She only could
reject the one, and absolve him from the other.

He was troubled to find that the forenoon had nearly passed when he awoke. Dressing hastily,
he went down to make inquiries for his father.

"Marse Houghton went to de sto' at de us'l time," said the colored waiter. "He lef word not
to 'sturb you, an' ter hab you'se breakfus' ready."

George merely swallowed a cup of coffee, and then hastened down town. Meanwhile, events had
occurred at the office which require attention.

A very few moments after Mr. Houghton entered his private room he touched a bell. To the clerk
who entered he said, "Take this letter to Mr. Bodine."

The veteran's face was as rigid and stern with his purpose as the employer was grim in his
resolves; but when the captain read the curt note handed to him, his face grew dark with passion.
It ran as follows:

"MR. BODINE--I have no further need of your services. Inclosed find check for your wages to
the end of the month."

The captain sat still a few moments to regain self-control then quietly put his desk in order.
He next halted to the private office, and the two men looked steadily and un-blenchingly into
each other's eyes for a moment. Then the Southerner began sternly, "That hair-brained son of
yours has told you of the interview he forced upon me last night."

"This is my private office, sir," replied Mr. Houghton, with equal sternness. "You have no
right to enter it, or to use such language."

"Yes, sir, I have the right. Were it not for the folly and presumption of your headlong boy,
I would have left your employ quietly in a few days, and had nothing more to do with you or
yours. To save my daughter annoyance from his silly sentimentality I was compelled to come
into this hated place wherein you concoct your schemes to suck dry our Southern blood. He asked
for permission to pay his addresses to my daughter, and I forbade it. I told him that he could
only do so at his peril."

"You are certainly right, sir. I also have told him that he would do so at his peril."

"I also told him that I would rather bury my daughter than see her married to him."

"Truly, sir, I never imagined we could agree so perfectly on any question," was Mr. Houghton's
sarcastic reply. "Can we not now part with this clear understanding? I have much to attend
to this morning."

"I have but one word more, and then trust I am through with his sentimentality and your insolence.
Tell the boy that my daughter says she will have nothing to do with him without my consent.
Now if there is even the trace of a gentleman in his anatomy he will leave us alone. Good-morning,
sir." And tearing the check in two, he dropped it on the floor and halted away.

Mr. Houghton coolly and contemptuously turned to his writing till the door closed on Bodine,
and then he smiled and rubbed his hands in self-felicitation. "This is better than I had hoped,"
he said. "I've often laughed at the idiotic pride of these black-blooded, rather than blue-blooded,
fire-eaters, but I shall bless it hereafter."

"As you virtually say, you hardened old rebel, if George is worth the powder to blow him up,
he'll drop you all now as if you had the plague. I've only to tell him what you and your doll-daughter
have said."

CHAPTER XXXI

"I ABSOLVE YOU"

When George reached the counting-rooms, he saw that Bodine was not in his accustomed place.
Surmising the truth at once, he hastened to his father's room, and asked almost sternly:

"Where is Captain Bodine?"

"I neither know nor care," was the cool reply. "He is dismissed from my service."

"You have acted unjustly, sir," his son began hotly, "you have punished him for my--"

"George," interrupted his father gravely, "remember what you said about angry words between us."

The young man paced the office excitedly for a few moments in silence and then sat down.

"That's right," resumed his father quietly. "I am glad you are able to attain self-control,
for you now require the full possession of all your faculties. Fortunately for both of us,
this man, Bodine, has said more than enough to end this folly forever," and he began to repeat
the conversation which had taken place.

At a certain point George started, and, looking at his father with a shocked expression, asked,
"Did you mean, sir, that you also would rather see me buried than married to a good woman whom
I love?"

"That is your way of putting it," replied Mr. Houghton, somewhat disconcerted, for his son's
tone and look smote him sorely. "You will understand my feelings better when you have heard
that rebel's final words;" and he repeated them, ending with the sentences, "'Tell the boy
that my daughter says she will have nothing to do with him without my consent. Now if there
is even the trace of a gentleman in his anatomy he will leave us alone.' In this final remark
I certainly do agree with him most emphatically," concluded the old man sternly. "Any human
being, possessing a particle of self-respect, would prefer death to the humiliation and dishonor
of seeking to force himself on such people."

"I suppose you are right, sir, but I cannot help having my own thoughts."

"Well, what are they?"

"That the girl has met in her home the same harsh, terrible opposition that I have found in mine."

"Undoubtedly, thank heaven! Whether she needed it or not she has evidently had the sense to
take the wholesome medicine. The probabilities are, however, that she has laughed at the idea
of receiving attentions so repugnant to her father and to me."

"No doubt," said George wearily. "Very well, there is a trace of a gentleman in my anatomy.
I would like to leave town for a while."

"A very sensible wish, George," said his father kindly. "Go where you please, and take all
the money you need. When you have come to see this affair in its true light come back to me.
I will try to arrange my business so that we can make a visit North together in the early autumn."

"Very well, sir," and there was apathy in his tones. After a moment he added, "Please give
me some work this morning."

"No, my boy. Go and make your preparations at once. Divert your thoughts into new channels.
Be a resolute man for a few days, and then your own manhood will right you as a boat is righted
when keeled over by a sudden gust."

George was not long in forming the same plan which Clancy had adopted. He would go to the mountains
in the interior, fish, hunt and tramp till the fever in his blood subsided. He told his father
of his purpose.

"All right, George. I only wish I were young and strong enough to go with you. It will not
be long before you will see that I have had at heart only what was best for you."

"I hope so, father; I truly do, for I have had a new, strange experience. Even yet I can scarcely
comprehend that you and Mr. Bodine could speak to your children, and dictate to them in matters
relating to their happiness as you both have done. It savors more of feudal times than of this
free age."

"In all times, George, the hasty passions and inconsiderate desires of the young, when permitted
gratification, have led to a lifetime of wretchedness. But we need not refer to this matter
again. Bodine's final words have settled it for all time."

"It would certainly seem so," said young Houghton. "Well, I will make my preparations to start
to-morrow."

His first step was to go direct to Mrs. Willoughby, and his dejected expression revealed to
the lady that her anticipations of strong opposition were correct.

