Certainly, things HAVE changed since those days; and that they have changed is due, far more
than to any other human being, to Miss Nightingale herself. It is not to be wondered at that
her parents should have shuddered at the notion of their daughter devoting her life to such
an occupation. 'It was as if,' she herself said afterwards, 'I had wanted to be a kitchen-maid.'
Yet the want, absurd and impracticable as it was, not only remained fixed immovably in her
heart, but grew in intensity day by day. Her wretchedness deepened into a morbid melancholy.
Everything about her was vile, and she herself, it was clear, to have deserved such misery,
was even viler than her surroundings. Yes, she had sinned--'standing before God's judgment
seat'. 'No one,' she declared, 'has so grieved the Holy Spirit'; of that she was quite certain.
It was in vain that she prayed to be delivered from vanity and hypocrisy, and she could not
bear to smile or to be gay, 'because she hated God to hear her laugh, as if she had not repented
of her sin'.

A weaker spirit would have been overwhelmed by the load of such distresses-- would have yielded
or snapped. But this extraordinary young woman held firm, and fought her way to victory. With
an amazing persistency, during the eight years that followed her rebuff over Salisbury Hospital,
she struggled and worked and planned. While superficially she was carrying on the life of a
brilliant girl in high society, while internally she was a prey to the tortures of regret and
of remorse, she yet possessed the energy to collect the knowledge and to undergo the experience
which alone could enable her to do what she had determined she would do in the end. In secret
she devoured the reports of medical commissions, the pamphlets of sanitary authorities, the
histories of hospitals and homes. She spent the intervals of the London season in ragged schools
and workhouses. When she went abroad with her family, she used her spare time so well that
there was hardly a great hospital in Europe with which she was not acquainted; hardly a great
city whose shims she had not passed through. She managed to spend some days in a convent school
in Rome, and some weeks as a 'Soeur de Charite' in Paris. Then, while her mother and sister
were taking the waters at Carlsbad, she succeeded in slipping off to a nursing institution
at Kaiserswerth, where she remained for more than three months. This was the critical event
of her life. The experience which she gained as a nurse at Kaiserswerth formed the foundation
of all her future action and finally fixed her in her career.

But one other trial awaited her. The allurements of the world she had brushed aside with disdain
and loathing; she had resisted the subtler temptation which, in her weariness, had sometimes
come upon her, of devoting her baffled energies to art or literature; the last ordeal appeared
in the shape of a desirable young man. Hitherto, her lovers had been nothing to her but an
added burden and a mockery; but now-- for a moment-- she wavered. A new feeling swept over
her--a feeling which she had never known before-- which she was never to know again. The most
powerful and the profoundest of all the instincts of humanity laid claim upon her. But it rose
before her, that instinct, arrayed--how could it be otherwise?-- in the inevitable habiliments
of a Victorian marriage; and she had the strength to stamp it underfoot. 'I have an intellectual
nature which requires satisfaction,' she noted, 'and that would find it in him. I have a passionate
nature which requires satisfaction, and that would find it in him. Another strong effect: Death,
in person, walks about the stage in every act. So far as I could make out, he was supposably
not visible to any excepting two persons--the one he came for and
Appelles.

He used various costumes: but there was always more black about them than any other tint; and so they
were always sombre. Also they were always deeply impressive and, indeed, awe-inspiring. The face
was not subjected to changes, but remained the same first and last--a ghastly white. To me
he was always welcome, he seemed so real--the actual Death, not a play-acting artificiality.
He was of a solemn and stately carriage; and he had a deep voice, and used it with a noble dignity.
 A profession, a trade,
a necessary occupation, something to fill and employ all my faculties, I have always felt essential
to me, I have always longed for. The first thought I can remember, and the last, was nursing
work; and in the absence of this, education work, but more the education of the bad than of
the young...  Everything has been tried-- foreign travel, kind friends, everything. My God!
What is to become of me?' A desirable young man? Dust and ashes! What was there desirable in
such a thing as that? 'In my thirty-first year,' she noted in her diary, 'I see nothing desirable
but death.'

Three more years passed, and then at last the pressure of time told; her family seemed to realise
that she was old enough and strong enough to have her way; and she became the superintendent
of a charitable nursing home in Harley Street. She had gained her independence, though it was
in a meagre sphere enough; and her mother was still not quite resigned: surely Florence might
at least spend the summer in the country.

II

Miss NIGHTINGALE had been a year in her nursing-home in Harley Street, when Fate knocked at
the door. The Crimean War broke out; the battle of the Alma was fought; and the terrible condition
of our military hospitals at Scutari began to be known in England. It sometimes happens that
the plans of Providence are a little difficult to follow, but on this occasion all was plain;
there was a perfect coordination of events. For years Miss Nightingale had been getting ready;
at last she was prepared-- experienced, free, mature, yet still young (she was thirty-four)--
desirous to serve, accustomed to command: at that precise moment the desperate need of a great
nation came, and she was there to satisfy it. If the war had fallen a few years earlier, she
would have lacked the knowledge, perhaps even the power, for such a work; a few years later
and she would, no doubt, have been fixed in the routine of some absorbing task, and moreover,
she would have been growing old.

Nor was it only the coincidence of time that was remarkable. It so fell out that Sidney Herbert
was at the War Office and in the Cabinet; and Sidney Herbert was an intimate friend of Miss
Nightingale's, convinced, from personal experience in charitable work, of her supreme capacity.
After such premises, it seems hardly more than a matter of course that her letter, in which
she offered her services for the East, and Sidney Herbert's letter, in which he asked for them,
should actually have crossed in the post. Thus it all happened, without a hitch. The appointment
was made and even Mrs. Nightingale, overawed by the magnitude of the venture, could only approve.
A pair of faithful friends offered themselves as personal attendants; thirty-eight nurses were
collected; and within a week of the crossing of the letters Miss Nightingale, amid a great
burst of popular enthusiasm, left for Constantinople.

Among the numerous letters which she received on her departure was one from Dr. Manning, who
at that time was working in comparative obscurity as a Catholic priest in Bayswater. 'God will
keep you,' he wrote, 'and my prayer for you will be that your one object of worship, Pattern
of Imitation, and source of consolation and strength, may be the Sacred Heart of our Divine Lord.'

To what extent Dr. Manning's prayer was answered must remain a matter of doubt; but this much
is certain: that if ever a prayer was needed, it was needed then for Florence Nightingale.
For dark as had been the picture of the state of affairs at Scutari, revealed to the English
public in the dispatches of "The Times Correspondent", and in a multitude of private letters,
yet the reality turned out to be darker still. What had occurred was, in brief, the complete
breakdown of our medical arrangements at the seat of war. The origins of this awful failure
were complex and manifold; they stretched back through long years of peace and carelessness
in England; they could be traced through endless ramifications of administrative incapacity--
from the inherent faults of confused systems, to the petty bunglings of minor officials, from
the inevitable ignorance of Cabinet Ministers, to the fatal exactitudes of narrow routine.

In the inquiries which followed, it was clearly shown that the evil was in reality that worst
of all evils-- one which has been caused by nothing in particular and for which no one in particular
is to blame. The whole organisation of the war machine was incompetent and out of date. The
old Duke had sat for a generation at the Horse Guards repressing innovations with an iron hand.
There was an extraordinary overlapping of authorities and an almost incredible shifting of
responsibilities to and fro. As for such a notion as the creation and the maintenance of a
really adequate medical service for the army-- in that atmosphere of aged chaos, how could
it have entered anybody's head? That would have killed them.'

I believed that. I remarked--rather wittily, as I thought--that he had been a lamb all day,
but now had all of a sudden developed into a ram--battering-ram; but with dulcet frankness and
simplicity he said no, a battering-ram was quite a different thing, and not in use now. This was maddening,
and I came near bursting out and saying he had no more appreciation of wit than a jackass--in
fact, I had it right on my tongue, but did not say it, knowing there was no hurry and I could say it
just as well some other time over the telephone.

We started to Boston
the next afternoon. The smoking compartment in the parlour-car was
full, and he went into the regular smoker. The principal medical officer of the Army, Dr. Hall, was summoned
from India at a moment's notice, and was unable to visit England before taking up his duties
at the front. And it was not until after the battle of the Alma, when we had been at war for
many months, that we acquired hospital accommodations at Scutari for more than a thousand men.
Errors, follies, and vices on the part of individuals there doubtless were; but, in the general
reckoning, they were of small account-- insignificant symptoms of the deep disease of the body
politic-- to the enormous calamity of administrative collapse.

Miss Nightingale arrived at Scutari-- a suburb of Constantinople, on the Asiatic side of the
Bosphorus-- on November 4th, 1854; it was ten days after the battle of Balaclava, and the day
before the battle of Inkerman. The organisation of the hospitals, which had already given way
under the stress of the battle of the Alma, was now to be subjected to the further pressure
which these two desperate and bloody engagements implied. Great detachments of wounded were
already beginning to pour in. The men, after receiving such summary treatment as could be given
them at the smaller hospitals in the Crimea itself, were forthwith shipped in batches of 200
across the Black Sea to Scutari. This voyage was in normal times one of four days and a half;
but the times were no longer normal, and now the transit often lasted for a fortnight or three
weeks. It received, not without reason, the name of the 'middle passage'. Between, and sometimes
on the decks, the wounded, the sick, and the dying were crowded-- men who had just undergone
the amputation of limbs, men in the clutches of fever or of frostbite, men in the last stages
of dysentry and cholera-- without beds, sometimes without blankets, often hardly clothed. The
one or two surgeons on board did what they could; but medical stores were lacking, and the
only form of nursing available was that provided by a handful of invalid soldiers who were
usually themselves prostrate by the end of the voyage. There was no other food beside the ordinary
salt rations of ship diet; and even the water was sometimes so stored that it was out of reach
of the weak. For many months, the average of deaths during these voyages was seventy-four in
1,000; the corpses were shot out into the waters; and who shall say that they were the most
unfortunate? At Scutari, the landing-stage, constructed with all the perverseness of Oriental
ingenuity, could only be approached with great difficulty, and, in rough weather, not at all.
When it was reached, what remained of the men in the ships had first to be disembarked, and
then conveyed up a steep slope of a quarter of a mile to the nearest of the hospitals. The
most serious cases might be put upon stretchers-- for there were far too few for all; the rest
were carried or dragged up the hill by such convalescent soldiers as could be got together,
who were not too obviously infirm for the work. At last the journey was accomplished; slowly,
one by one, living or dying, the wounded were carried up into the hospital. And in the hospital
what did they find?

Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate: the delusive doors bore no such inscription; and yet
behind them Hell yawned. Want, neglect, confusion, misery-- in every shape and in every degree
of intensity-- filled the endless corridors and the vast apartments of the gigantic barrack-house,
which, without forethought or preparation, had been hurriedly set aside as the chief shelter
for the victims of the war. The very building itself was radically defective. Huge sewers underlay
it, and cesspools loaded with filth wafted their poison into the upper rooms. The floors were
in so rotten a condition that many of them could not be scrubbed; the walls were thick with
dirt; incredible multitudes of vermin swarmed everywhere. And, enormous as the building was,
it was yet too small. It contained four miles of beds, crushed together so close that there
was but just room to pass between them. Under such conditions, the most elaborate system of
ventilation might well have been at fault; but here there was no ventilation. The stench was
indescribable. 'I have been well acquainted,' said Miss Nightingale, 'with the dwellings of
the worst parts of most of the great cities in Europe, but have never been in any atmosphere
which I could compare with that of the Barrack Hospital at night.' The structural defects were
equalled by the deficiencies in the commonest objects of hospital use. There were not enough
bedsteads; the sheets were of canvas, and so coarse that the wounded men recoiled from them,
begging to be left in their blankets; there was no bedroom furniture of any kind, and empty
beer bottles were used for candlesticks. There were no basins, no towels, no soap, no brooms,
no mops, no trays, no plates; there were neither slippers nor scissors, neither shoe-brushes
nor blacking; there were no knives or forks or spoons. The supply of fuel was constantly deficient.
The cooking arrangements were preposterously inadequate, and the laundry was a farce. As for
purely medical materials, the tale was no better. Stretchers, splints, bandages--all were lacking;
and so were the most ordinary drugs.

To replace such wants, to struggle against such difficulties, there was a handful of men overburdened
by the strain of ceaseless work, bound down by the traditions of official routine, and enfeebled
either by old age or inexperience or sheer incompetence. They had proved utterly unequal to
their task. The principal doctor was lost in the imbecilities of a senile optimism. The wretched
official whose business it was to provide for the wants of the hospital was tied fast hand
and foot by red tape. A few of the younger doctors struggled valiantly, but what could they
do? Unprepared, disorganised, with such help only as they could find among the miserable band
of convalescent soldiers drafted off to tend their sick comrades, they were faced with disease,
mutilation, and death in all their most appalling forms, crowded multitudinously about them
in an ever-increasing mass. They were like men in a shipwreck, fighting, not for safety, but
for the next moment's bare existence-- to gain, by yet another frenzied effort, some brief
respite from the waters of destruction.

In these surroundings, those who had been long inured to scenes of human suffering-- surgeons
with a world-wide knowledge of agonies, soldiers familiar with fields of carnage, missionaries
with remembrances of famine and of plague-- yet found a depth of horror which they had never
known before. There were moments, there were places, in the Barrack Hospital at Scutari, where
the strongest hand was struck with trembling, and the boldest eye would turn away its gaze.

Miss Nightingale came, and she, at any rate, in that inferno, did not abandon hope. For one
thing, she brought material succour. Before she left London she had consulted Dr. Andrew Smith,
the head of the Army Medical Board, as to whether it would be useful to take out stores of
any kind to Scutari; and Dr. Andrew Smith had told her that 'nothing was needed'. Even Sidney
Herbert had given her similar assurances; possibly, owing to an oversight, there might have
been some delay in the delivery of the medical stores, which, he said, had been sent out from
England 'in profusion', but 'four days would have remedied this'. She preferred to trust her
own instincts, and at Marseilles purchased a large quantity of miscellaneous provisions, which
were of the utmost use at Scutari. Their prayer fails. The Spirit of Life prophesies Zoe's martyrdom;
it will take place before night. Soon Appelles arrives, young and vigorous and full of enthusiasm:
he has led a host against the Persians and won the battle; he is
the pet of fortune, rich, honoured, believed, 'Master of Palmyra'.

He has heard that whoever stretches himself out on one of those rocks there and asks for a deathless
life can have his wish. He laughs at the tradition, but wants to make the trial anyway.
 'I cannot conceive,'
wrote an eye-witness, 'as I now calmly look back on the first three weeks after the arrival
of the wounded from Inkerman, how it could have been possible to have avoided a state of things
too disastrous to contemplate, had not Miss Nightingale been there, with the means placed at
her disposal by Mr. Macdonald.' But the official view was different. What! Was the public service
to admit, by accepting outside charity, that it was unable to discharge its own duties without
the assistance of private and irregular benevolence? Never! And accordingly when Lord Stratford
de Redcliffe, our ambassador at Constantinople, was asked by Mr. Macdonald to indicate how
The Times Fund could best be employed, he answered that there was indeed one object to which
it might very well be devoted-- the building of an English Protestant Church at Pera.

Mr. Macdonald did not waste further time with Lord Stratford, and immediately joined forces
with Miss Nightingale. But, with such a frame of mind in the highest quarters, it is easy to
imagine the kind of disgust and alarm with which the sudden intrusion of a band of amateurs
and females must have filled the minds of the ordinary officer and the ordinary military surgeon.
They could not understand it-- what had women to do with war? Honest Colonels relieved their
spleen by the cracking of heavy jokes about 'the Bird'; while poor Dr. Hall, a rough terrier
of a man, who had worried his way to the top of his profession, was struck speechless with
astonishment, and at last observed that Miss Nightingale's appointment was extremely droll.

Her position was, indeed, an official one, but it was hardly the easier for that. In the hospitals
it was her duty to provide the services of herself and her nurses when they were asked for
by the doctors, and not until then. At first some of the surgeons would have nothing to say
to her, and, though she was welcomed by others, the majority were hostile and suspicious. But
gradually she gained ground. Her good will could not be denied, and her capacity could not
be disregarded. With consummate tact, with all the gentleness of supreme strength, she managed
at last to impose her personality upon the susceptible, overwrought, discouraged, and helpless
group of men in authority who surrounded her. She stood firm; she was a rock in the angry ocean;
with her alone was safety, comfort, life. And so it was that hope dawned at Scutari. The reign
of chaos and old night began to dwindle; order came upon the scene, and common sense, and forethought,
and decision, radiating out from the little room off the great gallery in the Barrack Hospital
where, day and night, the Lady Superintendent was at her task. Progress might be slow, but
it was sure.

The first sign of a great change came with the appearance of some of those necessary objects
with which the hospitals had been unprovided for months. The sick men began to enjoy the use
of towels and soap, knives and forks, combs and tooth-brushes. Dr. Hall might snort when he
heard of it, asking, with a growl, what a soldier wanted with a tooth-brush; but the good work
went on. Eventually the whole business of purveying to the hospitals was, in effect, carried
out by Miss Nightingale. She alone, it seemed. whatever the contingency, knew where to lay
her hands on what was wanted; she alone could dispense her stores with readiness; above

all, she alone possessed the art of circumventing the pernicious influences of official etiquette.
This was her greatest enemy, and sometimes even she was baffled by it. On one occasion 27,000
shirts, sent out at her instance by the Home Government, arrived, were landed, and were only
waiting to be unpacked. If he could be let off this time he would give no cause of complaint
again. The compromise was accepted.
As we walked away, the Major said:

'Now, you see, that was diplomacy--and
you see how it worked. It wouldn't do any good to bluster, the way
people are always doing.
A little later, however, on a similar occasion, Miss Nightingale felt that she could assert
her own authority. She ordered a Government consignment to be forcibly opened while the miserable
'Purveyor' stood by, wringing his hands in departmental agony.

Vast quantities of valuable stores sent from England lay, she found, engulfed in the bottomless
abyss of the Turkish Customs House. Other ship-loads, buried beneath munitions of war destined
for Balaclava, passed Scutari without a sign, and thus hospital materials were sometimes carried
to and fro three times over the Black Sea, before they reached their destination. The whole
system was clearly at fault, and Miss Nightingale suggested to the home authorities that a
Government Store House should be instituted at Scutari for the reception and distribution of
the consignments. Six months after her arrival this was done.

