II In Room B

      III "I Have Something to Show You"

       IV A Strategic Move

        V Three Where Two Should Be

       VI The Man in the Gallery

      VII "You Think that of Me!"

BOOK II--MR. X

     VIII On the Search

       IX While the City Slept

        X "And He Stood Here?"

       XI Footsteps

      XII "Spare Nobody! I Say, Spare Nobody!"

     XIII "Write Me His Name"

      XIV A Loop of Silk

       XV News from France

BOOK III--STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS

      XVI Friends

     XVII The Cuckoo-Clock

    XVIII Mrs. Davis' Strange Lodger

      XIX Mr. Gryce and the Timid Child

       XX Mr. Gryce and the Unwary Woman

      XXI Perplexed

     XXII He Remembers

    XXIII Girls, Girls! Nothing but Girls!

     XXIV Flight

      XXV Terror

     XXVI The Face in the Window

BOOK IV--NEMESIS

    XXVII From Lips Long Silent

   XXVIII "Romantic! Too Romantic!"

     XXIX A Strong Man

      XXX The Creeping Shadow

     XXXI Confronted

    XXXII "Why Is that Here?"

   XXXIII Again the Cuckoo-Clock

    XXXIV The Bud--Then the Deadly Flower

BOOK I

A PROBLEM OF THE FIRST ORDER

I

"LET SOME ONE SPEAK!"

The hour of noon had just struck, and the few visitors still lingering among the curiosities
of the great museum were suddenly startled by the sight of one of the attendants running down
the broad, central staircase, loudly shouting:

"Close the doors! Let no one out! An accident has occurred, and nobody's to leave the building."

There was but one person near either of the doors, and as he chanced to be a man closely connected
with the museum,--being, in fact, one of its most active directors,--he immediately turned
about and in obedience to a gesture made by the attendant, ran up the marble steps, followed
by some dozen others.

At the top they all turned, as by common consent, toward the left-hand gallery, where in the
section marked II, a tableau greeted them which few of them will ever forget.

I say "tableau" because the few persons concerned in it stood as in a picture, absolutely motionless
and silent as the dead. Sense, if not feeling, was benumbed in them all, as in another moment
it was benumbed in the breasts of these new arrivals. Tragedy was there in its most terrible,
its most pathetic, aspect. The pathos was given by the victim,--a young and pretty girl lying
face upward on the tessellated floor with an arrow in her breast and death stamped unmistakably
on every feature,--the terror by the look and attitude of the woman they saw kneeling over
her--a remarkable woman, no longer young, but of a presence to hold the attention, even if
the circumstances had been of a far less tragic nature. Her hand was on the arrow but she had
made no movement to withdraw it, and her eyes, fixed upon space, showed depths of horror hardly
to be explained even by the suddenness and startling character of the untoward fatality of
which she had just been made the unhappy witness.

The director, whose name was Roberts, thought as he paused on the edge of the crowd that he
had never seen a countenance upon which woe had stamped so deep a mark; and greatly moved by
it, he was about to seek some explanation of a scene to which appearances gave so little clue,
when the tall but stooping figure of the Curator entered, and he found himself relieved from
a task whose seriousness he had no difficulty in measuring.

To those who knew William Jewett well, it was evident that he had been called from some task
which still occupied his thoughts and for the moment somewhat bewildered his understanding.
But as he was a conscientious man and quite capable of taking the lead when once roused to
the exigencies of an occasion, Mr. Roberts felt a certain interest in watching the slow awakening
of this self-absorbed man to the awful circumstances which in one instant had clouded the museum
in an atmosphere of mysterious horror.

When the full realization came,--which was not till a way had been made for him to the side
of the stricken woman crouching over the dead child,--the energy which transformed his countenance
and gave character to his usually bent and inconspicuous figure was all if not more than the
anxious director expected.

Finding that his attempts to meet the older woman's eye only prolonged the suspense, the Curator
addressed her quietly, and in sympathetic tones inquired whose child this was and how so dreadful
a thing had happened.

She did not answer. She did not even look his way. With a rapid glance into the faces about
him, ending in one of deep compassion directed toward herself, he repeated his question.

Still no response--still that heavy silence, that absolute immobility of face and limb. If
her faculty of hearing was dulled, possibly she would yield to that of touch. Stooping, he
laid his hand on her arm.

This roused her. Slowly her eyes lost their fixed stare and took on a more human light. A shudder
shook her frame, and gazing down into the countenance of the young girl lying at her feet,
she broke into moans of such fathomless despair as wrung the hearts of all about her.

It was a scene to test the nerve of any man. To one of the Curator's sympathetic temperament
it was well-nigh unendurable. Turning to those nearest, he begged for an explanation of what
they saw before them:

"Some one here must be able to tell me. Let that some one speak."

At this the quietest and least conspicuous person present, a young man heavily spectacled and
of student-like appearance, advanced a step and said:

"I was the first person to come in here after this poor young lady fell. I was looking at coins
just beyond the partition there, when I heard a gasping cry. I had not heard her fall--I fear
I was very much preoccupied in my search for an especial coin I had been told I should find
here--but I did hear the cry she gave, and startled by the sound, left the section where I
was and entered this one, only to see just what you are seeing now."

The Curator pointed at the two women.

"This? The one woman kneeling over the other with her hand on the arrow?"

"Yes, sir."

A change took place in the Curator's expression. Involuntarily his eyes rose to the walls hung
closely with Indian relics, among which was a quiver in which all could see arrows similar
to the one now in the breast of the young girl lying dead before them.

"This woman must be made to speak," he said in answer to the low murmur which followed this
discovery. "If there is a doctor present----"

Waiting, but receiving no response, he withdrew his hand from the woman's arm and laid it on
the arrow.

This roused her completely. Loosing her own grasp upon the shaft, she cried, with sudden realization
of the people pressing about her:

"I could not draw it. That causes death, they say. Wait! she may still be alive. She may have
a word to speak."

She was bending to listen. It was hardly a favorable moment for further questioning, but the
Curator in his anxiety could not refrain from saying:

"Who is she? What is her name and what is yours?"

"Her name?" repeated the woman, rising to face him again. "How should I know? I was passing
through this gallery and had just stopped to take a look into the court when this young girl
bounded by me from behind and flinging up her arms, fell with a deep sigh to the floor. I saw
an arrow in her breast, and----"

Emotion choked her, and when some one asked if the girl was a stranger to her, she simply bowed
her head; then, letting her gaze pass from face to face till it had completed the circle of
those about her, she said in her former mechanical way:

"My name is Ermentrude Taylor. I came to look at the bronzes. I should like to go now."

But the crowd which had formed about her was too compact to allow her to pass. Besides, the
director, Mr. Roberts, had something to say first. Working his way forward, he waited till
he had attracted her attention and then remarked in his most considerate manner:

"You will pardon these importunities, Mrs. Taylor. I am a director of this museum, and if Mr.
Jewett will excuse me,"--here he bowed to the Curator,--"I should like to inquire from what
direction the arrow came which ended this young girl's life?"

For a moment she stood aghast, fixing him with her eye as though to ask whither this inquiry
tended. Then with an air of intention which was not without some strange element of fear, she
allowed her glance to travel across the court till it rested upon the row of connected arches
facing them from the opposite gallery.

"Ah," said he, putting her look into words, "you think the arrow came from the other side of
the building. Did you see anyone over there,--in the gallery, I mean,--at or before the instant
of this young girl's fall?"

She shook her head.

"Did any of you?" he urged, with his eyes on the crowd. "Some one must have been looking that way."

But no answer came, and the silence was fast becoming oppressive when these words, whispered
by one woman to another, roused them anew and sent every glance again to the walls--even hers
for whose benefit this remark had possibly been made:

"But there are no arrows over there. All the arrows are here."

She was right. They were here, quiver after quiver of them; nor were they all beyond reach.
As the woman thus significantly assailed noted this and saw with what suspicion others noted
it also, a decided change took place in her aspect.

"I should like to sit down," she murmured. Possibly she was afraid she might fall.

As some one brought a chair, she spoke, but very tremulously, to the director:

"Are there no arrows in the rooms over there?"

"I am quite sure not."

"And no bows?"

"None."

"If--if anyone had been seen in the gallery----"

"No one was."

"You are sure of that?"

"You heard the question asked. It brought no answer."

"But--but these galleries are visible from below. Some one may have been looking up from the
court and----"

"If there was any such person in the building, he would have been here by this time. People
don't hold back such information."

"Then--then--" she stammered, her eyes taking on a hunted look, "you conclude--these people
conclude what?"

"Madam,"--the word came coldly, stinging her into drawing herself to her full height,--"it
is not for me to conclude in a case like this. That is the business of the police."

At this word, with its suggestion of crime, her air of conscious power vanished in sudden collapse.
Possibly she had seen the significant gesture with which the Curator pointed out a quiver from
which one of the arrows was missing. That this was so, was shown by her next question:

"But where is the bow? Look about on the floor. You will find none. How can an arrow be shot
without a bow?"

"It cannot be," came from some one at her back. "But it can be driven home like a dagger if
the hand wielding it is sufficiently powerful."

A cry left her lips; she seemed to listen as for some echo; then in a wild abandonment which
ignored person and place she flung herself again at the dead girl's side, and before the astonished
people surrounding her could intervene, she had caught up the body in her arms, and bending
over it, whispered word after word into the poor child's closed ear.

II

IN ROOM B

Five minutes later the Curator was at the 'phone calling up Police Headquarters. A death had
occurred at the museum. Would they send over a capable detective?

"What kind of death?" was the harsh reply. "We don't send detectives in cases of heart-failure
or simple accident. Is it an accident?"

"No--no--hardly. It looks more like an insane woman's attack upon a harmless stranger. It's
the oddest sort of an affair, and we feel very helpless. No common officer will do. We have
one of that kind in the building. What we want is a man of brains; he will need them."

A muffled sound at the other end--then a different voice asking some half-dozen comprehensive
questions--which, having been answered to the best of the Curator's ability, were followed
by the welcome assurance that a man on whose experience he could rely would be at the museum
doors within five minutes.

With an air of relief Mr. Jewett stepped again into the court, and repelling with hasty gestures
the importunities of the small group of men and women who had lacked the courage to follow
the more adventurous ones upstairs, crossed to where the door-man stood on guard over the main
entrance.

"Locked?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. Such were the orders. Didn't you give them?"

"No, but I should have done so, had I known. No one's to go out, and no one's to come in but
the detective whom I am expecting any moment."

They had not long to wait. Before their suspense had reached fever-point, a tap was heard on
the great door. It was opened, and a young man stepped in.

"Coast clear?" he sang out with a humorous twist of his jaw as he noted the Curator's evident
chagrin at his meager and unsatisfactory appearance. "Oh, I'm not your man," he added as his
eye ran over the whole place with a look which seemed to take in every detail in an instant.
"Mr. Gryce is in the automobile. Wait till I help him up."

He was gone before the Curator could utter a word, only to reappear in a few minutes with a
man in his wake whom the former at first blush thought to be as much past the age where experience
makes for efficiency as the other seemed to be short of it.

But this impression, if impression it were, was of short duration. No sooner had this physically
weak but extremely wise old man entered upon the scene than his mental power became evident
to every person there. Timorous hearts regained their composure, and the Curator--who in his
ten years of service had never felt the burden of his position so acutely as in the last ten
minutes--showed his relief by a volubility quite unnatural to him under ordinary conditions.
As he conducted the detectives across the court, he talked not of the victim, as might reasonably
be expected, but of the woman who had been found leaning over her with her hand on the arrow.

"We think her some escaped lunatic," he remarked. "Only a demented woman would act as she does.
First she denied all knowledge of the girl. Then when she was made to see that the arrow sticking
in the girl's breast had been taken from a quiver hanging within arm's reach on the wall and
used as lances are used, she fell a-moaning and crying, and began to whisper in the poor child's
senseless ear."

"A common woman? One of a low-down type?"

"Not at all. A lady, and an impressive one, at that. You seldom see her equal. That's what
has upset us so. The crime and the criminal do not seem to fit."

The detective blinked. Then suddenly he seemed to grow an inch taller.

"Where is she now?" he asked.

"In Room B, away from the crowd. She is not alone. A young lady detained with the rest of the
people here is keeping her company, to say nothing of an officer we have put on guard."

"And the victim?"

"Lies where she fell, in Section II on the upper floor. There was no call to move her. She
was dead when we came upon the scene. She does not look to be more than sixteen years old."

"Let's go up. But wait--can we see that section from here?"

They were standing at the foot of the great staircase connecting the two floors. Above them,
stretching away on either side, ran the two famous, highly ornamented galleries, with their
row of long, low arches indicating the five compartments into which they were severally divided.
Pointing to the second one on the southern side, the Curator replied:

"That's it--the one where you see the Apache relics hanging high on the rear wall. We shall
have to shift those to some other place just as soon as we can recover from this horror. I
don't want the finest spot in the whole museum made a Mecca for the morbid and the curious."

The remark fell upon unheeding ears. Detective Gryce was looking, not in the direction named,
but in the one directly opposite to it.

"I see," he quietly observed, "that there is a clear view across. Was there no one in the right-hand
gallery to see what went on in the left?"

"Not that I have heard of. It's the dullest hour of the day, and not only this gallery but
many of the rooms were entirely empty."

"I see. And now, what about the persons who were here? How many of them have you let go?"

"Not one; the doors have been opened twice only--once to admit the officer you will find on
guard, and the other to let in yourself."

"Good! And how many have you here, all told?"

"I have not had time to count them, but I should say less than thirty. This includes myself,
as well as two attendants."

With a thoughtful air Mr. Gryce turned in the direction of the few persons he could see huddled
together around one of the central statues.

"Where are the others?" he asked.

"Upstairs--in and about the place where the poor child lies."

"They must be got out of there. Sweetwater!"

The young man who had entered with him was at his side in an instant.

"Clear the galleries. Then take down the name and address of every person in the building."

"Yes, sir."

Before the last word had left his lips, the busy fellow was halfway up the marble steps. "Lightning,"
some of his pals called him, perhaps because he was as noiseless as he was quick. Meanwhile
the senior detective had drawn the Curator to one side.

"We'll take a look at these people as they come down. I have been said to be able to spot a
witness with my eyes shut. Let's see what I can do with my eyes open."

"Young and old, rich and poor," murmured the Curator as some dozen persons appeared at the
top of the staircase.

"Yes," sighed the detective, noting each one carefully as he or she filed down, "we sha'n't
make much out of this experiment. Not one of them avoids our looks. Emotion enough, but not
of the right sort. Well, we'll leave them to Sweetwater. Our business is above."

The Curator offered his arm. The old man made a move to take it--then drew himself up with
an air of quiet confidence.

"Many thanks," said he, "but I can go alone. Rheumatism is my trouble, but these mild days
loosen its grip upon my poor old muscles." He did not say that the prospect of an interesting
inquiry had much the same effect, but the Curator suspected it, possibly because he was feeling
just a little bit spry himself.

Steeled as such experienced officers necessarily are to death in all its phases, it was with
no common emotion that the aged detective entered the presence of the dead girl and took his
first look at this latest victim of mental or moral aberration. So young! so innocent! so fair!
A schoolgirl, or little more, of a class certainly above the average, whether judged from the
contour of her features or the niceties of her dress. With no evidences of great wealth about
her, there was yet something in the cut of her garments and the careful attention to each detail
which bespoke not only natural but cultivated taste. On her breast just above the spot where
the cruel dart had entered, a fresh and blooming nosegay still exhaled its perfume--a tragic
detail accentuating the pathos of a death so sudden that the joy with which she had pinned
on this simple adornment seemed to linger about her yet.

The detective, with no words for this touching spectacle, stretched out his hand and with a
reverent and fatherly touch pressed down the lids over the unseeing eyes. This office done
to the innocent dead, he asked if anything had been found to establish the young girl's identity.

"Surely," he observed, "she was not without a purse or handbag. All young ladies carry them."

For answer the officer on guard thrust his hand into one of his capacious pockets, and drawing
out a neat little bag of knitted beads, passed it over to the detective with the laconic remark:

"Nothing doing."

And so it proved. It held only a pocket handkerchief--embroidered but without a monogram--and
a memorandum-book without an entry.

"A blind alley, if ever there was one," muttered Mr. Gryce; and ordering the policeman to replace
the bag as nearly as possible on the spot from which it had been taken, he proceeded with the
Curator to Room B.

Prepared to encounter a woman of disordered mind, the appearance presented by Mrs. Taylor at
his entrance greatly astonished Mr. Gryce. There was a calmness in her attitude which one would
scarcely expect to see in a woman whom mania had just driven into crime. Surely lunacy does
not show such self-restraint; nor does lunacy awaken any such feelings of awe as followed a
prolonged scrutiny of her set but determined features. Only grief of the most intense and sacred
character could account for the aspect she presented, and as the man to whom the tragedies
of life were of daily occurrence took in this mystery with all its incongruities, he realized,
not without a sense of professional pleasure, no doubt, that he had before him an affair calling
for the old-time judgment which, for forty or more years, had made his record famous in the
police annals of the metropolis.

She was seated with no one near her but a young lady whom sympathetic interest had drawn to
her side. Mr. Roberts stood in one of the windows, and not far from him a man in the museum
uniform.

At the authoritative advance of the old detective, the woman, whose eye he had caught, attempted
to struggle to her feet, but desisted after a moment of hopeless effort, and sank back in her
chair. There was no pretense in this. Though gifted with a strong frame, emotion had so weakened
her that she was simply unable to stand. Quite convinced of this, and affected in spite of
himself by her look of lofty patience, Mr. Gryce prefaced his questions with an apology--quite
an unusual proceeding for him.

Whether or no she heard it, he could not tell; but she was quite ready to answer when he asked
her name and then her place of residence--saying in response to the latter query:

"I live at the Calderon, a family hotel in Sixty-seventh Street. My name"--here she paused
for a second to moisten her lips--"is Taylor--Ermentrude Taylor.... Nothing else," she speedily
added in a tone which drew every eye her way. Then more evenly: "You will find the name on
the hotel's books."

"Wife or widow?"

"Widow."

What a voice! how it reached every heart, waking strange sympathies there! As the word fell,
not a person in the room but stirred uneasily. Even she herself started at its sound; and moved,
perhaps, by the depth of silence which followed, she added in suppressed tones:

"A widow within the hour. That's why you see me still in colors, but crushed as you behold--killed!
killed!"

That settled it. There was no mistaking her condition after an expression of this kind. The
Curator and Mr. Gryce exchanged glances, and Mr. Roberts, stepping from his corner, betrayed
the effect which her words had produced on him, by whispering in the detective's ear:

"What you need is an alienist."

Had she heard? It would seem so from the quick way she roused and exclaimed with indignant
emphasis:

"You do not understand me! I see that I must drink my bitter cup to the dregs. This is what
I mean: My husband was living this morning--living up to the hour when the clock in this building
struck twelve. I knew it from the joyous hopes with which my breast was filled. But with the
stroke of noon the blow fell. I was bending above the poor child who had fallen so suddenly
at my feet, when the vision came, and I saw him gazing at me from a distance so remote--across
a desert so immeasurable--that nothing but death could create such a removal or make of him
the ghastly silhouette I saw. He is dead. At that moment I felt his soul pass; and so I say
that I am a widow."

Ravings? No, the calm certainty of her tone, the grief, touching depths so profound it had
no need of words, showed the confidence she felt in the warning she believed herself to have
received. Though probably not a single person present put any faith in occultism in any of
its forms, there was a general movement of sympathy which led Mr. Gryce to pass the matter
by without any attempt at controversy, and return to the question in hand. With a decided modification
of manner, he therefore asked her to relate how she came to be kneeling over the injured girl
with her hand upon the arrow.

"Let me have a moment in which to recover myself," she prayed, covering her eyes with her hand.
Then, while all waited, she gave a low cry, "I suffer; I suffer!" and leaped to her feet, only
to sink back again inert and powerless. But only for an instant: with that one burst of extreme
feeling she recovered her self-control, answering with apparent calmness the detective's question:

"I was passing through the gallery as any other visitor might, when a young lady rushed by
me--stopped short--threw up her arms and fell backward to the floor, pierced to the heart by
an arrow. In a moment I was on my knees at her side with hand outstretched to withdraw this
dreadful arrow. But I was afraid--I had heard that this sometimes causes death, and while I
was hesitating, that vision came, engulfing everything. I could think of nothing else."

She was near collapsing again; but being a woman of great nerve, she fought her weakness and
waited patiently for the next question. It was different, without doubt, from any she had expected.

"Then you positively deny any active connection with the strange death of this young girl?"

A pause, as if to take in what he meant. Then slowly, impressively, came the answer:

"I do."

"Did you see the person who shot the arrow?"

"No."

"From what direction would it have had to come to strike her as it did?"

"From the opposite balcony."

"Did you see anyone there?"

"No."

"But you heard the arrow?"

"Heard?"

"An arrow shot from a bow makes a whizzing sound as it flies. Didn't you hear that?"

"I don't know." She looked troubled and uncertain. "I don't remember. I was expecting no such
thing--I was not prepared. The sight of an arrow--a killing arrow--in that innocent breast
overcame me with inexpressible grief and horror. If the vision of my husband had not followed,
I might remember more. As it is, I have told all I can. Won't you excuse me? I should like
to go. I am not fit to remain. I want to return home--to hear from my husband--to learn by
letter or telegram whether he is indeed dead."

Mr. Gryce had let her finish. An inquiry so unofficial might easily await the moods of such
a witness. Not till the last word had been followed by what some there afterward called a hungry
silence, did he make use of his prerogative to say:

"I shall be pleased to release you and will do so just as soon as I can. But I must put one
or two more questions. Were you interested in the Indian relics you had come among? Did you
handle any of them in passing?"

"No. I had no interest. I like glass, bronzes, china--I hate weapons. I shall hate them eternally
after this." And she began to shudder.

The detective, with a quick bend of his head, approached her ear with the whispered remark:

"I am told that when your attention was drawn to these weapons, you fell on your knees and
murmured something into the dead girl's ears. How do you explain that?"

"I was giving her messages to my husband. I felt--strange as it may seem to you--that they
had fled the earth together--and I wanted him to know that I would be constant, and other foolish
things you will not wish me to repeat here. Is that all you wish to know?"

Mr. Gryce bowed, and cast a quizzical glance in the direction of the Curator. Certainly for
oddity this case transcended any he had had in years. With this woman eliminated from the situation,
what explanation was there of the curious death he was there to investigate? As he was meditating
how he could best convey to her the necessity of detaining her further, he heard a muttered
exclamation from the young woman standing near her, and following the direction of her pointing
finger, saw that the strange silence which had fallen upon the room had a cause. Mrs. Taylor
had fainted away in her chair.

III

"I HAVE SOMETHING TO SHOW YOU"

Mr. Gryce took advantage of the momentary disturbance to slip from the room. He was followed
by the Curator, who seemed more than ever anxious to talk.

"You see! Mad as a March hare!" was his hurried exclamation as the door closed behind them.
"I declare I do not know which I pity more, her victim or herself. The one is freed from all
her troubles; the other--Do you think we ought to have a doctor to look after her? Shall I
telephone?"

"Not yet. We have much to learn before taking any decided steps." Then as he caught the look
of amazement with which this unexpected suggestion of difficulties was met, he paused on his
way to the stair-head to ask in a tentative way peculiarly his own: "Then you still think the
girl died from a thrust given by this woman?"

"Of course. What else is there to think? You saw where the arrow came from. You saw that the
only bow the place contained was hanging high and unstrung upon the wall, and you are witness
to this woman's irresponsible condition of mind. The sight of those arrows well within her
reach evidently aroused the homicidal mania often latent in one of her highly emotional nature;
and when this fresh young girl came by, the natural result followed. I only hope I shall not
be called upon to face the poor child's parents. What can I say to them? What can anybody say?
Yet I do not see how we can be held responsible for so unprecedented an attack as this, do you?"

Mr. Gryce made no answer. He had turned his back toward the stair-head and was wondering if
this easy explanation of a tragedy so peculiar as to have no prototype in all of the hundreds
of cases he had been called upon to investigate in a long life of detective activity would
satisfy all the other persons then in the building. It was his present business to find out--to
search and probe among the dozen or two people he saw collected below, for the witness who
had seen or had heard some slight thing as yet unrevealed which would throw a different light
upon this matter. For his mind--or shall we say the almost unerring instinct of this ancient
delver into human hearts?--would not accept without question this theory of sudden madness
in one of Mrs. Taylor's appearance, strange and inexplicable as her conduct seemed. Though
it was quite among the possibilities that she had struck the fatal blow and in the manner mentioned,
it was equally clear to his mind that she had not done it in an access of frenzy. He knew a
mad eye and he knew a despairing one. Fantastic as her story certainly was, he found himself
more ready to believe it than to accept any explanation of this crime which ascribed its peculiar
features to the irresponsibilities of lunacy.

However, he kept his impressions to himself and in his anxiety to pursue his inquiries among
the people below, was on the point of descending thither, when he found his attention arrested,
and that of the Curator's as well, by the sight of a young man hastening toward them through
the northern gallery. (The tragedy, as you will remember, had occurred in the southern one.)
He was dressed in the uniform of the museum, and moved so quickly and in such an evident flurry
of spirits that the detective instinctively asked:

"Who's that? One of your own men?"

"Yes, that's Correy, our best-informed and most-trusted attendant. Looks as if he had something
to tell us. Well, Correy, what is it?" he queried as the man emerged upon the landing where
they stood. "Anything new? If there is, speak out plainly. Mr. Gryce is anxious for all the
evidence he can get."

With an ingenuousness rather pleasing than otherwise to the man thus presented to his notice,
the young fellow stopped short and subjected the famous detective to a keen and close scrutiny
before venturing to give the required information.

Was it because of the importance of what he had to communicate? It would seem so, from the
suppressed excitement of his tone, as after his brief but exceedingly satisfactory survey,
he jerked his finger over his shoulder in the direction from which he had come, with the short
remark:

"I have something to show you."

Something! Mr. Gryce had been asking for this something only a moment before. We can imagine,
then, the celerity with which he followed this new guide into the one spot of all others which
possessed for him the greatest interest. For if by any chance the arrow which had done such
deadly work had been sped from a bow instead of having been used as a dart, then it was from
this gallery and from no other quarter of the building that it had been so sped. Any proof
of this could have but the one effect of exonerating from all blame the woman who had so impressed
him. He had traversed the first section and had entered the second, when the Curator joined
him; together they passed into the third.

For those who have not visited this museum, a more detailed description of these galleries
may be welcome. Acting as a means of communication between the row of front rooms and those
at the back, they also serve to exhibit certain choice articles which call for little space,
and are of a nature more or less ornamental. For this purpose they are each divided into five
sections connected by arches narrower but not less decorative than those which open in a direct
row upon the court. Of these sections the middle one on either side is much larger than the
rest; otherwise they do not differ.

It was in the midst of this larger section that Correy now stood, awaiting their approach.
There had been show-cases filled with rare exhibits in the two through which they had just
passed, but in this one there was nothing to be seen but a gorgeous hanging, covering very
nearly the whole wall, flanked at either end by a pedestal upholding a vase of inestimable
value and corresponding ugliness. A highly decorative arrangement, it is true, but in what
lay its interest for the criminal investigator?

Correy was soon to show them. With a significant gesture toward the tapestry, he eagerly exclaimed:

"You see that? I've run by it several times since the accident sent me flying all over the
building at everybody's call. But only just now, when I had a moment to myself, did I remember
the door hid behind it. It's a door we no longer use, and I'd no reason for thinking it had
anything to do with the killing of the young lady in the opposite gallery. But for all that
I felt it would do no harm to give it a look, and running from the front, where I happened
to be, I pulled out the tapestry and saw--but supposing I wait and let you see for yourselves.
That will be better."

Leaving them where they stood face to face with the great hanging, he made a dive for the pedestal
towering aloft at the farther end, and edging himself in behind it, drew out the tapestry from
the wall, calling on them as he did so to come and look behind it. The Curator did not hesitate.
He was there almost as soon as the young man himself.

But the detective was not so hasty. With a thousand things in mind, he stopped to peer along
the gallery and down into the court before giving himself away to any prying eye. Satisfied
that he might make the desired move with impunity, Mr. Gryce was about to turn in the desired
direction when, struck by a new fact, he again stopped short.

He had noticed how the heavy tapestry shivered under Correy's clutch. Had this been observed
by anyone besides himself? If by chance some person wandering about the court had been looking
up--but no, the few people gathered there stood too far forward to see what was going on in
this part of the gallery; and relieved from all further anxiety on this score, he joined Correy
at the pedestal and at a word from him succeeded in squeezing himself around it into the small
space they had left for him between the pushed-out hanging and the wall. An exclamation from
the Curator, who had only waited for his coming to take his first look, added zest to his own
scrutiny. It would take something more than the sight of a well-known door to give it such
a tone of astonished discovery. What? Even he, with the accumulated surprises of years to give
wings to his imagination, did not succeed in guessing. But when his eyes, once accustomed to
the semi-darkness of the narrow space which Correy had thus opened out before him, saw not
the door but what lay within its recess, he acknowledged to himself that he should have guessed--and
that a dozen years before, he certainly would have done so.

It was a bow--not like the one hanging high in the Apache exhibit, but yet a bow strong of
make and strung for use.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here was a discovery as important as it was unexpected, eliminating Mrs. Taylor at once from
the case and raising it into a mystery of the first order. By dint of long custom, Mr. Gryce
succeeded in hiding his extreme satisfaction, but not the perplexity into which he was thrown
by this complete change of base. The Curator appeared to be impressed in much the same way,
and shook his head in a doubtful fashion when Correy asked him if he recognized the bow as
belonging to the museum.

"I should have to see it nearer to answer that question with any sort of confidence," he demurred.
"From such glimpses as I can get of it from here I should say that it has not been taken from
any of our exhibits."

"I am sure it has not," muttered Correy. Then with a side glance at Mr. Gryce, he added: "Shall
I slip in behind and get it?"

The detective, thus appealed to, hesitated a moment; then with an irrelevance perhaps natural
to the occasion, he inquired where this door so conveniently hidden from the general view led
to. It was the Curator who answered.

"To a twisting, breakneck staircase opening directly into my office. But this door has not
been used in years. See! Here is the key to it on my own ring. There is no other. I lost the
mate to it myself not long after my installation here."

The detective, working his way back around the pedestal, cast another glance up and down the
gallery and over into the court. Still no spying eye, save that of the officer opposite.

"We will leave that bow where it is for the present," he decided, "a secret between us three."
And motioning for Correy to let the tapestry fall, he stood watching it settle into place,
till it hung quite straight again, with its one edge close to the wall and the other sweeping
the floor. Had its weight been great enough to push the bow back again into its former place
close against the door? Yes. No eye, however trained, would, from any bulge in the heavy tapestry,
detect its presence there. He could leave the spot without fear; their secret would remain
theirs until such time as they chose to disclose it.

As the three walked back the way they had come, the Curator glanced earnestly at the detective,
who seemed to have fallen into a kind of anxious dream. Would it do to interrupt him with questions?
Would he obtain a straight answer if he did? The old man moved heavily but the now fully alert
Curator could not fail to see that it was with the heaviness of absorbed thought. Dare he disturb
that thought? They had both reached the broad corridor separating the two galleries at the
western end before he ventured to remark:

"This discovery alters matters, does it not? May I ask what you propose to do now? Anything
in which we can help you?"

The detective may have heard him and he may not; at all events he made no reply though he continued
to advance with a mechanical step until he stood again at the top of the marble steps leading
down into the court. Here some of the uncertainty pervading his mind seemed to leave him, though
he still looked very old and very troubled, or so the Curator thought, as pausing there, he
allowed his glance to wander from the marble recesses below to the galleries on either side
of him, and from these on to the seemingly empty spaces back of the high, carved railing guarding
the great well. Would a younger man have served them better? It began to look so; then without
warning and in a flash, as it were, the whole appearance of the octogenarian detective changed,
and turning with a smile to the two men so anxiously watching him, he exclaimed with an air
of quiet triumph:

"I have it. Follow and see how my plan works."

Amazed, for he looked and moved like another man,--a man in whom the almost extinguished spark
of early genius had suddenly flared again into full blaze,--they hastily joined him in anticipation
of they knew not what. But their enthusiasm received a check when at the moment of descent
Mr. Gryce again turned back with the remark:

"I had forgotten. I have something to do first. If you will kindly see that the people down
there are kept from growing too impatient, I will soon join you with Mrs. Taylor, who must
not be left on this floor after we have gone below."

And with no further explanation of his purpose, he turned and proceeded without delay to Room B.

IV

A STRATEGIC MOVE

He found the unhappy woman quite recovered from her fainting spell, but still greatly depressed
and not a little incoherent. He set himself to work to soothe her, for he had a request to
make which called for an intelligent answer. Relieved from all suspicion of her having been
an active agent in the deplorable deed he was here to investigate, he was lavish in his promises
of speedy release, and seeing how much this steadied her, he turned to Mr. Roberts, who was
still in the room, and then to the young lady who had been giving her a woman's care, and signified
that their attentions were no longer required and that he would be glad to have them join the
people below.

When the door had closed and Mr. Gryce found himself for the first time alone with Mrs. Taylor,
he drew up a chair to her side and remarked in his old benevolent way:

"I feel guilty of cruelty, madam, in repeating a question you have already answered. But the
conditions are such that I must, and do it now. When this young lady fell so unexpectedly at
your feet, was your first look at her or at the opposite gallery?"

For an instant her eyes held his--something which did not often happen to him.

"At her," she vehemently declared. "I never thought of looking anywhere else. I saw her at
my feet, and fell on my knees at her side. Who wouldn't have done so! Who would have seen anything
but that arrow--that arrow! Oh, it was terrible! Do not make me recall it. I have sorrows enough----"

"Mrs. Taylor, you have my utmost sympathy. But you must realize how important it is for me
to make sure that you saw nothing in the place from which that arrow was sent which would help
us to locate the author of this accident. The flitting of an escaping figure up or down the
opposite gallery, even a stir in the great tapestry confronting you from that far-away wall,
might give us a clue."

"I saw nothing," she replied coldly but with extreme firmness, "nothing but that lifeless child
and the picture of desolation which rose in my own mind. Do not, I pray, make me speak again
of that. It would sound like delirium, and it is my wish to impress you with my sanity, so
that you will allow me to go home."

"You shall go, after the Coroner has had an opportunity to see you. We expect him any moment.
Meanwhile, you will facilitate your release and greatly help us in what we have to do, if you
will carry your fortitude to the point of showing me in your own person just where you were
standing when this young girl dashed by you to her death."

"Do you mean for me to go back to that--that----"

"Yes, Mrs. Taylor. Surely you can do so if you will. When you have time to think, you will
be as anxious as ourselves to know through whose carelessness (to call it nothing worse) this
child came to her death. Though it may prove to be quite immaterial whether you stood in one
place or another at that fatal moment, it is a question which will be sure to come up at the
inquest. That you may be able to answer correctly I urge you to return with me to the exact
spot, before your recollection of the same has had time to fade. After that we will go below
and I will see that you are taken to some quiet place where you can remain undisturbed till
the Coroner comes."

Had she been a weak woman she would have succumbed again at this. But she was a strong one,
and after the first moment of recoil she rose tremulously to her feet and signified her willingness
to follow him to the scene of death.

"Is--is she there alone?" was her sole question as they crossed the corridor separating the
room they had been in from the galleries.

"No--you will find an officer there. We could not leave the place quite unguarded."

If she shuddered he did not observe it. Having summoned up all her forces to meet this ordeal,
she followed him without further word, and re-entering the spot she had so lately left in great
agony of mind, stopped for one look and for one look only at the sweet face of the dead girl
smiling up at her from the cold floor, then she showed Mr. Gryce as nearly as she could just
where she had paused in shock and horror when the poor child smitten by the fatal arrow fell
back almost into her arms.

The detective, with a glance at the opposite gallery, turned and spoke to the officer who had
stepped aside into the neighboring section.

"Take the place just occupied by this lady," he said, "and hold it till you hear from me again."
Then offering his arm to Mrs. Taylor, he led her out.

"I see that you were approaching the railing overlooking the court when you were stopped in
this fearful manner," he remarked when well down the gallery toward its lower exit. "What did
you have in mind? A nearer glimpse of the tapestry over there and the two great vases?"

"No, no." She was wrought up by now to a tension almost unendurable. "It was the court--what
I might see in the court. Oh!" she impulsively cried: "the child! the child! that innocent,
beautiful child!" And breaking away from his arm, she threw herself against the wall in a burst
of uncontrollable weeping.

He allowed her a moment of unrestrained grief, then he took her on his arm again and led her
down into the court where he gave her into the charge of Correy. He had gone as far as he dared
in her present hysterical condition. Besides, he could no longer defer the great experiment
by means of which he hoped to reach the heart of this mystery.

Taking the slip of paper handed him by Sweetwater, he crossed the court to where the various
visitors, detained, some against their will and some quite in accordance with it, stood about
in groups or sat side by side on the long benches placed along the front for their comfort.
As he confronted them, his face beamed with that benevolent smile which had done so much for
him in days gone by. Raising his hand he called attention to himself; then, when he was quite
sure of being heard by them all, he addressed them with a quiet emphasis which could not fail
to gain and hold their attention:

"I am Detective Gryce, sent here from Police Headquarters to look into this very serious matter.
Till the Coroner arrives, I am in authority here, and being so, will have to ask your indulgence
for any discomfort you may experience in helping me with my investigation. A young girl, full
of life an hour ago, lies dead in the gallery above. We do not know her name; we do not know
who killed her. But there is some one here who does. The man or woman who, wittingly or unwittingly,
launched that fatal shaft, is present with us in this building. This person has not spoken.
If he will do so now, he will save us and himself, too, no end of trouble. Let him speak, then.
I will give him five minutes in which to make this acknowledgment. Five minutes! If that man
is wise--or can it be a woman?--he will not keep us waiting."

Silence. Heads moving, eyes peering, excitement visible in every face, but not a word from
anybody. Mr. Gryce turned and pointed up at the clock. All looked--but still no word from man
or woman.

One minute gone!

Two minutes!

Three!

The silence had become portentous. The movement, involuntary and simultaneous, which had run
through the crowd at first had stopped. They were waiting--each and all--waiting with eyes
on the minute-hand creeping forward over the dial toward which the detective's glance was still
turned.

The fourth minute passed--then the fifth--and no one had spoken.

With a sigh Mr. Gryce wheeled himself back and faced the crowd again.

"You see," he quietly announced, "the case is serious. Twenty-two of you, and not one to speak
the half-dozen words which would release the rest from their present embarrassing position!
What remains for us to do under circumstances like these? My experience suggests but one course:
to narrow down this inquiry to those--you will not find them many--who from their nearness
to the place of tragedy or from some other cause equally pertinent may be looked upon as possible
witnesses for the Coroner's jury. That this may be done speedily and surely, I am going to
ask you, every one of you, to retake the exact place in the building which you were occupying
when you heard the first alarm. I will begin with the Curator himself. Mr. Jewett, will you
be so good as to return to the room, and if possible to the precise spot, you were occupying
when you first learned what had occurred here?"

The Curator, who stood at his elbow, made a quick bow and turned in the direction of the marble
steps, which he hastily remounted. A murmur from the crowd followed this action and continued
till he disappeared in the recesses of the right-hand gallery. Then, at a gesture from Mr.
Gryce, it suddenly ceased, and with a breathless interest easy to comprehend, they one and
all waited for his next word. It was a simple one.

"We are all obliged to Mr. Jewett for his speedy compliance with so unusual a request. He has
made my task a comparatively easy one."

Then, glancing at the list of names and addresses which had been compiled for him by Sweetwater,
he added:

"I will read off your names as recorded here. If each person, on hearing his own, will move
quickly to his place and remain there till my young man can make a note of the same, we shall
get through this matter in short order. And let me add"--as he perceived here and there a shoulder
shrugged, or an eye turned askance--"that once the name is called, no excuse of non-recollection
will be accepted. You must know, every one of you, just where you were standing when the cry
of death rang out, and any attempt to mislead me or others in this matter will only subject
the person making it to a suspicion he must wish to avoid. Remember that there are enough persons
here for no one to be sure that his whereabouts at so exciting a moment escaped notice. Listen,
then, and when your own name is spoken, step quickly into place, whether that place be on this
floor or in the rooms or galleries above.--Mrs. Alice Lee!"

You can imagine the flurry, the excitement and the blank looks of the average men and women
he addressed. But not one hesitated to obey. Mrs. Lee was on the farther side of one of the
statues before her name had more than left his lips. Her example set the pace for those who
followed. Like soldiers at roll-call, each one responded to the summons, going now in one direction
and now in another until on reaching the proper spot he or she stopped.

Only six persons followed the Curator upstairs--an old woman who shook her head violently as
she plodded slowly up the marble steps; Correy; a man with a packet of books under his arm
(the same who had been studying coins in Section II); a young couple whose movements showed
such a marked reluctance that more than one eye followed them as they went hesitatingly up,
clinging together with interlocking hands and stopping now on one step and now on another to
stare at each other in visible consternation; and a boy of fourteen who grinned from ear to
ear as he bounded gayly up three steps at a time and took his position on the threshold of
one of the upper doors with all the precision of a soldier called to sentry-duty--a boy scout
if ever there was one.

There were twenty-two names on the list, and with the calling out of the twenty-second, Mr.
Gryce perceived the space before him entirely cleared of its odd assortment of people. As he
turned to take a look at the result, a gleam of satisfaction crossed his time-worn face. By
this scheme, which he may be pardoned for looking upon as a stroke of genius worthy of his
brilliant prime, he had set back time a full hour, restoring as by a magician's wand the conditions
of that fatal moment of initial alarm. Surely, with the knowledge of that hidden bow in his
mind, he should be able now to place his hand upon the person who had made use of it to launch
the fatal arrow. No one, however sly of foot and quick of action, could have gone far from
the gallery where that bow lay in the few minutes which were all that could have elapsed between
the shooting of the arrow and the gasping cry which had brought all within hearing to the Apache
section. The man or woman whom he should find nearest to that concealed door in the northern
gallery would have to give a very good account of himself. Not even the Curator would escape
suspicion under those circumstances.

However, it is only fair to add that Mr. Gryce had no fear of any such embarrassing end to
his inquisition as that. He had noticed the young couple who had betrayed their alarm so ingenuously
to every eye, and had already decided within himself that the man was just such a fool as might
in a moment of vacuity pick up a bow and arrow to test his skill at a given mark. Such things
had been and such results had followed. The man was a gawk and the woman a ninny; a few questions
and their guiltiness would appear--that is, if they should be found near enough the tapestry
to warrant his suspicion. If not--the alternative held an interest all its own, and sent him
in haste toward the stairway.

To reach it Mr. Gryce had to pass several persons standing where fate had fixed them among
the statuary grouped about the court, and had his attention been less engrossed by what he
expected to discover above, he would have been deeply interested in noting how these persons,
or most of them at least, had so thoroughly accepted the situation that they had taken the
exact position and the exact attitude of the moment preceding the alarm. Those who were admiring
the great torsos or carved chariots of the ancients, made a show of admiring them still. The
man or woman who had been going in an easterly direction, faced east; and those who had been
on the point of entering certain rooms, stood halting in the doorways with their backs to the
court.

Unfortunately, he did not take note of all this, or give the poor pawns thus parading for his
purpose more than a cursory glance. When he did think, which was when he was halfway up the
staircase, it was to look back upon a changed scene. For with his going, interest had flagged
and the tableau lost its pointedness. No one had ventured as yet to leave his place, but all
had turned their faces his way, and on many of these faces could be seen signs of fatigue if
not of absolute impatience. He had ordered them to stand and they had stood, but to be left
there while he went above was certainly trying. The one spot which held the interest was in
the southern gallery. If they could only follow him there----

All this was to be seen in their faces, and possibly the cunning old man read it there; but
if he did, it was to ask himself if their conclusions were quite correct. The locale of interest
had shifted in the last half hour; and while most of these people believed him to be searching
for the witness who could tell him what had occurred in the death gallery, he really was hunting
for one who could add to his knowledge of what had happened in the opposite one. And this witness
might not be found in the gallery, or even on the upper floor. It was well among the probabilities
that there might be among the various persons he saw posing in the court below some who by
an upward look might take in a part of if not the whole broad sweep of that huge square of
tapestry upon which his thoughts were centered. It was for him to make a note of these persons.
A diagram of the court as it looked to him at that moment is shown for your enlightenment.

Sixteen persons! Ten in view from the steps and six not. Of the sixteen, only the following
seemed to afford any excuse for future interrogation: Numbers Two, Six, Ten, Seven, Eight and
Thirteen. Making a mental note of these, during which operation the poor unfortunates who had
just been considering themselves as quite out of the game revived in a startling manner under
his eye, he proceeded on his way.

As the action has now shifted to the upper floor, a diagram of this second story is now in order.

As you will see, a straight glimpse is given down either gallery from the arches opening into
the broad corridor into which Mr. Gryce had stepped on leaving the central staircase. He had
therefore only to choose which of the two would better repay his immediate investigation.

He decided upon the northern one, which you will remember was the one holding the tapestry;
since, to find anybody there, no matter whom, would certainly settle the identity of the person
responsible for that flying arrow. For, as all conceded, too little time had elapsed between
its delivery and the discovery of the victim for the quickest possible attempt at escape to
have carried the concealer of the bow very far from the spot where he had thrown it. It was
possible--just possible--that he might have got as far as one of the four large rooms opening
into the corridor stretching across the front, but that he was not in the gallery itself Mr.
Gryce soon convinced himself by a rapid walk through its entire length.

That he did not follow up this move by an immediate searching of the rooms I have mentioned
was owing to a wish he had to satisfy himself on another point first.

What was this point?

In passing along the rear on his way to this gallery, he had noticed the narrow staircase opening
not a dozen feet away to his left. This undoubtedly led down to the side-entrance. If by any
chance the user of the bow had fled to the rear instead of to the front, he would be found
somewhere on this staircase, for he never could have got to the bottom before the cry of "Close
the doors! Let no man out!" rendered this chance of immediate exit unavailable. So Mr. Gryce
retraced his steps, and barely stopping to note the boy eying him with eager glances from the
doorway of Room A, he approached the iron balustrade guarding the small staircase, and cautiously
looked over.

A man was there! A man going down--no, coming up; and this man, as he soon saw from his face
and uniform, was Correy the attendant.

"So that is where you were," he called down as he beckoned the man up.

"As near as I can remember. I was on my way in search of Mr. Jewett, for whom I had a message,
and had got as far as you saw me, when I heard a cry of pain from somewhere in the gallery.
This naturally quickened my steps and I was up and on this floor in a jiffy."

"Did you notice, as you stepped from the landing, whether the boy staring at us from the doorway
over there was facing just as we see him now?"

"He was. I remember his attitude perfectly."

"Coming out of the door--not going in?"

"Sure. He was on the run. He had heard the cry too."

"And followed you into the gallery?"

"Preceded me. He was on the scene almost as soon as the man who stepped in from the adjoining
section."

"I see. And this man?"

"Was well within my view from the minute I entered the first arch. But a maid-servant, who had
seen him go in, ran and told the mother, who betook herself thither in great wrath. When the
girl heard her coming, she said, weeping, to the merchant--"Alas!
sweetheart, the love that I bear you will now cost me dear.

Here comes my mother, who will know for certain what she has always
feared and suspected."

The merchant, who was not a bit confused by this accident, straightway
left the girl and went to meet the mother.

Stretching out his arms, he hugged her with all his might, and, with the same ardour with
which he had begun to entertain the daughter, threw the poor old
woman on to a small bed.

She was so taken aback at being thus treated that she could find nothing to say but--"What do you
want? Are you dreaming?"

For all that he ceased not to press her as closely as if she had been
the fairest maiden in the world, and had she not cried out so loudly
that her serving-men and women came to her aid, she would have gone
by the same road as she feared her daughter was treading.

However, the servants dragged the poor old woman by main force out
of the merchant's arms, and she never knew for what reason he had
thus used her.

Meanwhile, her daughter took refuge in a house hard by where a wedding was going on. Since then
she and the merchant have ofttimes laughed together at the expense of the old woman, who was
never any the wiser.

"By this story, ladies, you may see how, by the subtlety of a man, an old woman was deceived
and the honour of a young one saved. Any one who would give the names, or had seen the merchant's
face and the consternation of the old woman, would have a very tender conscience to hold from
laughing.

It is sufficient for me to prove to you by this story that a man's
wit is as prompt and as helpful at a pinch as a woman's, and thus
to show you, ladies, that you need not fear to fall into men's hands.

If your own wit should fail you, you will find theirs prepared to
shield your honour."

"In truth, Hircan," said Longarine, "I grant that the tale is a very
pleasant one and the wit great, but the example is not such as maids
should follow.

I readily believe there are some whom you would fain have approve
it, but you are not so foolish as to wish that your wife, or her whose
honour you set higher than her pleasure,(1) should play such a game.

I believe there is none who would watch them more closely or shield
them more readily than you."

1 M. Frank, adopting the generally received opinion that Hircan is King Henry of Navarre, believes
this to be an allusion to one of the King's sisters--Ann, who married the Count of Estrac,
or Isabel, who married M. de Rohan--but it is more likely that Henry's daughter, Jane d'Albret,
is the person referred to.--Ed.

"By my conscience," said Hircan, "if she whom you mention had done such a thing, and I knew
nothing about it, I should think none the less of her. For all I know, some one may have played
as good a trick on me; however, knowing nothing, I am unconcerned."

At this Parlamente could not refrain from saying--

"A wicked man cannot but be suspicious; happy are those who give no
occasion for suspicion."

"I have never seen a great fire from which there came no smoke," said
Longarine, "but I have often seen smoke where there was no fire.

The wicked are as suspicious when there is no mischief as when there is."

"Truly, Longarine," Hircan forthwith rejoined, "you have spoken so well in support of the honour
of ladies wrongfully suspected, that I give you my vote to tell the eighth tale. I hope, however,
that you will not make us weep, as Madame Oisille did, by too much
praise of virtuous women."

At this Longarine laughed heartily, and thus began:--"You want me to make you laugh, as is my
wont, but it shall not be at women's expense. I will show you, however, how easy it is to deceive
them when they are inclined to be jealous and esteem themselves clever
enough to deceive their husbands."

APPENDIX.

A. (Prologue, Page 31.)

The dedication with which Anthony Le Maçon prefaces his translation of Boccaccio contains several
curious passages.

In it Margaret is styled "the most high and most illustrious Princess Margaret of France, only
sister of the King, Queen of Navarre, Duchess of Alençon and of Berry;" while the author describes
himself as "Master Anthoine Le Maçon, Councillor of the King, Receiver General of his finances
in Burgundy, and very humble secretary to this Queen." He then proceeds to say:--

"You remember, my lady, the time when you made a stay of four or five months in Paris, during
which you commanded me, seeing that I had freshly arrived from Florence,
where I had sojourned during an entire year, to read to you certain
stories of the Decameron of Boccaccio, after which it pleased you
to command me to translate the whole book into our French language,
assuring me that it would be found beautiful and entertaining.

I then made you reply that I felt my powers were too weak to undertake such a work.... My principal
and most reasonable excuse was the knowledge that I had of myself, being a native of the land
of Dauphiné, where the maternal language is too far removed from
good French.... However, it did not please you to accept any of my
excuses, and you showed me that it was not fitting that the Tuscans
should be so mistaken as to believe that their Boccaccio could not
be rendered in our language as well as it is in theirs, ours having
become so rich and so copious since the accession of the King, your
brother, to the crown, that nothing has ever been written in any language
that could not be expressed in this; and thus your will still was
that I should translate it (the Decameron) when I had the leisure
to do so.

Seeing this and desiring, throughout my life, to do, if I can, even more than is possible
to obey you, I began some time afterwards to translate one of the said stories, then two, then
three, and finally to the number of ten or twelve, the best that I could choose, which I afterwards
showed as much to people of the Tuscan nation as to people of ours,
who all made me believe that the stories were, if not perfectly, at
least very faithfully translated.

Wherefore, allowing myself to be thus pleasantly deceived, if deceit
there was, I have since set myself to begin the translation at one
end and to finish it at the other...."

This dedicatory preface is followed by an epistle, written in Italian by Emilio Ferretti, and
dated from Lyons, May I, 1545; and by a notice to the reader signed by Etienne Rosset, the
bookseller, who in the King's license, dated from St. Germain-en-Laye, Nov. 2, 1544, is described
as "Rosset called the Mower, bookseller, residing in Paris, on the bridge of St. Michael, at
the sign of the White Rose." The first edition of Le Maçon's translation (1545) was in folio;
the subsequent ones of 1548, 1551, and 1553 being in octavo. It should be remembered that Le
Maçon's was by no means the first French version of the Decameron.

Laurent du Premier-Faict had already rendered Boccaccio's masterpiece into French in the reign of
Charles VI., but unfortunately his translation, although of a pleasing naïveté, was not at all
correct, having been made from a Latin version of the original. Manuscript copies of Laurent's translation
were to be found in the royal and most of the princely libraries of the fifteenth century.--Ed.

B.
(Tale I., Page 50.)

The letters of remission which at the instance of Henry VIII. were granted to Michael de St. Aignan
in respect of the murder of James du Mesnil are preserved in the National Archives of France
(Register J. 234, No. 191), and after the usual preamble, recite
the culprit's petition in these terms:--

"Whereas it appears from
the prayer of Michael de St. Aignan, lord of the said place, (1) that
heretofore he for a long time lived and resided in the town of Alençon
in honour and good repute; but, to the detriment of his prosperity,
life, and conduct there were divers evil-minded and envious persons
who by sinister, cunning, and hidden means persecuted him with all
the evils, wiles, and deceits that it is possible to conceive, albeit
the said suppliant had never caused them displeasure, injury, or detriment;
among others, one named James Dumesnil, a young man, to whom the said
suppliant had procured all the pleasure and advantages that were in
his power, and whom he had customarily admitted to his house, thinking
that the said Dumesnil was his loyal friend, and charging his wife
and his servants to treat him when he came as though he were his brother;
by which means St. Aignan hoped to induce the said Dumesnil to espouse
one of his relatives.

1 This was in all probability the village of St. Aignan on the Sarthe,
between Moulins-la-Marche and Bazoches, and about twenty miles from
Alençon.

The personage here mentioned should not be confounded with Emery
de Beauvilliers, whom Francis I. created Count of St. Aignan (on the
Cher), and whose descendants, many of whom were distinguished generals
and diplomatists, became dukes of the same place.--Ed.

"But Dumesnil ill-requited the aforesaid good services and courtesies,
and rendering evil for good, as is the practice of iniquity, endeavoured
to and did cause an estrangement between the said St. Aignan and his
wife, who had always lived together in good, great, and perfect affection.

And the better to effect his purpose he (Dumesnil) gave the said wife
to understand, among other things, that St. Aignan bore her no affection;
that he daily desired her death; that she was mistaken in trusting
him; and other evil things not fitting to be repeated, which the wife
withstood, enjoining Dumesnil not to use such language again, as should
he do so she would repeat it to her husband; but Dumesnil, persevering,
on divers occasions when St. Aignan had absented himself, gave the
wife of the latter to understand that he (St. Aignan) was dead, devising
proofs thereof and conjectures, and thinking that by this means he
would win her favour and countenance.

But she still resisted him, which seeing, the said Dumesnil gave her to understand that St.
Aignan would often absent himself, and that she would be happier
if she had a husband who remained with her.

And plotting to compass the death of the said St. Aignan, Dumesnil
gave her to understand that if she would consent to the death of her
husband he would marry her; and, in fact, he promised to marry her.

And whereas she still refused to consent, the said Dumesnil found
a means to gain a servant woman of the house, who, St. Aignan being
absent and his wife in bed, opened the door to Dumesnil, who compelled
the said wife to let him lie with her.

And thenceforward Dumesnil made divers presents to the servant woman, so that she should poison
the said suppliant; and she consented to his face; but at Easter
confessed the matter to St. Aignan, entreating his forgiveness, and
also saying and declaring it to the neighbours.

And the said Dumesnil, knowing that he would incur blame and reproach
if the matter were brought forward, seized and abducted the said servant
woman in all diligence, and took her away from the town, whereby a
scandal was occasioned.

"Moreover, it would appear that the said Dumesnil had been found several
times by night watching the gardens and the door in view of slaying
St. Aignan, as is notorious in Alençon, by virtue of the admission
of the said Dumesnil himself.

Whereupon St. Aignan, seeing his wife thus made the subject of scandal by Dumesnil, enjoined
him to abstain from coming to his house to see his wife, and to consider
the outrage and injury he had already inflicted upon him; declaring
moreover that he could endure no more.

To which Dumesnil refused to listen, declaring that he would frequent the house in spite of every
one; albeit, in doing so, he might come by his death. Thereupon St. Aignan, being acquainted
with the evil obstinacy of Dumesnil and desirous of avoiding greater
misfortune, departed from the town of Alençon, and went to reside
in the town of Argentan, ten leagues distant, whither he took his
wife, thinking that Dumesnil would abstain from coming.

Withal he did not abstain, but came several times to the said town of Argentan, and frequented
his (St. Aignan's) wife; whereby the people of Argentan were scandalised. And the said St. Aignan
endeavoured to prevent him from coming, and employed the nurse of his child to remonstrate
with Dumesnil, but the latter persevered, saying and declaring that he would kill St. Aignan,
and would still go to Argentan, albeit it might cause his death. Insomuch that the said Dumesnil,
on the eighth day of this month, departed from Alençon between two and three o'clock in the morning,
a suspicious hour, having disguised himself and assumed attire unsuited to his calling, which
is that of the law; wearing a Bearnese cloak,(2) a jacket of white woollen stuff underneath,
all torn into strips, with a feathered cap upon his head, and having his face covered. In this
wise he arrived at the said town of Argentan, accompanied by two
young men, and lodged in the faubourgs at the sign of Notre Dame,
and remained there clandestinely from noon till about eleven o'clock
in the evening, when he asked the host for the key of the backdoor,
so that he might go out on his private affairs, not wishing to be
recognised.

"At the said suspicious hour, with his sword at his side,(3) and dressed and accoutred in the said
garments, he started from his lodging with one of the said young men.

2 See ante, p. 24, note 8.

3 The French word is basion, which in the sixteenth century was often used to imply a sword; arquebuses
and musketoons being termed basions à feu by way of distinction. Moreover, it is expressly stated
farther on that Dumesnil had a sword.--Ed.

"In this wise Dumesnil reached the house of St. Aignan, which he found a means of entering, and gained
a closet up above, near the room where the said St. Aignan and his
wife slept.

St. Aignan was without thought of this, inasmuch as he was ignorant of the enterprise of the said
Dumesnil, being in the living room with one Master Thomas Guérin, who had come upon business.
Now, as St. Aignan was disposing himself to go to bed, he told one of his servants, named Colas, to bring
him his cas (4) and the servant having occasion to go up into a closet
in which St. Aignan's wife was sleeping, and in which the said Dumesnil
was concealed, the latter, fearing that he might be recognised, suddenly
came out with a drawn sword in his hand; whereupon the said Colas
cried: 'Help!

There is a robber!' And he declared to St. Aignan that he had seen a strange man who did not seem
to be there for any good purpose; whereupon St. Aignan said to him: 'One must find out who it is.
Is there occasion for any one to come here at this hour?' Thereupon
Colas went after the said personage, whom he found in a little alley
near the courtyard behind the house; and the said personage, having
suddenly perceived Colas, endeavoured to strike him on the body with
his weapon; but Colas withstood him and gave him a few blows,(5) for
which reason he cried out 'Help!

Murder!' Thereupon St. Aignan arrived, having a sword in his hand; and after him came the
said Guérin. St. Aignan, who as yet did not know Dumesnil on account of his disguise, and also
because it was wonderfully dark, found him calling out: 'Murder! Confession!' By which cry
the said St. Aignan knew him, and was greatly perplexed, astonished, and angered, at seeing his
enemy at such an hour in his house, he having been found there, with a weapon, in the closet.
And the said St. Aignan recalling to memory the trouble and worry
that Dumesnil had caused him, dealt him two or three thrusts in hot
anger, and then said to him: 'Hey!

Wretch that thou art, what hast brought thee here? Wert thou not content with the wrong thou
didst me in coming here previously? I never did thee an ill office.' Whereupon the said Dumesnil
said: 'It is true, I have too grievously offended you, and am too wicked; I entreat your pardon.'
And thereupon he fell to the ground as if dead; which seeing, the said St. Aignan, realising the
misfortune that had happened, said not a word, but recommended himself to God and withdrew
into his room, where he found his wife in bed, she having heard nothing.

4 The en cas was a kind of light supper provided in case one felt hungry at night-time. Most
elaborate en cas, consisting of several dishes, were frequently provided for the kings of France.--Ed.

5
In the story Margaret asserts that it was Thomas Guérin who attacked
Dumesnil.--D.

"On the night of the said dispute, and a little later,
St. Aignan went to see what the said Dumesnil was doing, and finding
him in the courtyard dead, he helped to carry him into the stable,
being too greatly incensed to act otherwise.



"But I was going the other way. My back was to it, not my face--like this." And wheeling herself
about, she showed him that she had been walking toward the rear of the building rather than
advancing toward the front.

His disappointment was great; but it would have been greater if he had not realized that under
these conditions she was in the precise position to meet face to face any person emerging into
the court from the foot of the small staircase. If she could tell him of having seen any such
person, and closely enough to be able to give a description of this person's appearance, then
she might prove to be his prime witness, after all. But she could not satisfy him on this point.
She had been on her way out, and was too busy searching in her bag for her umbrella check to
notice whether there were people about her or not. She had not found it when the great shout came.

"And then?"

Oh, then she was so frightened and so shocked that everything swam before her eyes and she
nearly fell! Her heart was not a strong one and sometimes missed a beat or two, and she thought
it must have done so then, for when her head steadied again, she found herself clinging to
the balustrade of the great staircase.

"Then you have nothing whatever to add to what the others have told?"

Her "no," if a shaky one, was decisive, and seeing no reason for detaining her further, he
gave her permission to depart.

Disturbed in his calculations, but not disheartened, Mr. Gryce next proceeded to interrogate
the door-man at this end of the building. From his position, facing as he did the approach
from the small staircase, he should be able to say, if the old lady could not, whether anyone
had crossed the open strip of court toward which she had been advancing. But Mr. Gryce found
him no more clear-headed on this point than she. He was the oldest man connected with the museum,
and had been very much shaken up by what had occurred. Really, he could not say whether anyone
had passed across his line of vision at that time or not. All he could be sure of was that
no attempt had been made by anyone to reach the door after he had been bidden to close it.

So this clue ended like the rest in no thoroughfare. Would he have any better luck with the
subject of his next inquiry? The young lady tabulated as No. 13 was where she could have seen
the upper edge of the tapestry shake if she had been looking that way; but she was not. She
also was going from instead of toward the point of interest--in other words, entering and not
leaving the room on whose threshold she stood.

Only two men were left from whom he could hope to obtain the important testimony he was so
anxiously seeking: Nos. 10 and 11. He had turned back toward the bench where they should be
awaiting his attention and was debating whether he would gain more by attacking them singly
or together, when he suddenly became aware of a fact which drove all these small considerations
out of his mind.

According to every calculation and according to the chart, there should be only these two men
on that bench. But he saw three. Who was this third man, and where had he come from?

VI

THE MAN IN THE GALLERY

Beckoning to Sweetwater, Mr. Gryce pointed out this extra man and asked him if he recognized
him as one of the twenty-two he had tabulated.

The answer was a vigorous no. "It's a new face to me. He must have dropped from the roof or
come up through the flooring. He certainly wasn't anywhere about when I made out my list. He
looks a trifle hipped, eh?"

"Troubled--decidedly troubled."

"You might go a little further and say done up."

"Good-looking, though. Appears to be of foreign birth."

"English, I should say, and just over."

"English, without a doubt. I'll go speak to him; you wait here, but watch out for the Coroner,
and send him my way as soon as he's at leisure."

Then he reapproached the bench, and observing, with the keenness with which he observed everything
without a direct look, that with each step he took the stranger's confusion increased, he decided
to wait till after he had finished with the others, before he entered upon an inquiry which
might prove not only lengthy but of the first importance.

He was soon very glad that he had done this. He got nothing from Mr. Simpson; but the questions
put to Mr. Turnbull were more productive. Almost at the first word, this gentleman acknowledged
that he had seen a movement in the great square of tapestry to which Mr. Gryce drew his attention.
He did not know when, or just where he stood at the time, but he certainly had noticed it shake.

"Can you describe the movement?" asked the gratified detective.

"It swayed out----"

"As if blown by some wind?"

"No, more as if pushed forward by a steady hand."

"Good! And what then?"

"It settled back almost without a quiver."

"Instantly?"

"No, not instantly. A moment or two passed before it fell back into place."

"This was before the attendant Correy called out his alarm, of course?"

Yes, of course it was before; but how long before, he couldn't say. A minute--two minutes--five
minutes--how could he tell! He had no watch in hand.

Mr. Gryce thought possibly he might assist the man's memory on this point but forbore to do
so at the time. It was enough for his present purpose that the necessary link to the establishment
of his theory had been found. No more doubt now that the bow lying in the niche of the doorway
overhead had been the one made use of in this desperate tragedy; and the way thus cleared for
him, he could confidently proceed in his search for the man who had flung it there. He believed
him to be within his reach at that very moment, but his countenance gave no index to his thought
as reapproaching the young man now sitting all alone on the bench, he halted before him and
pleasantly inquired:

"Do I see you for the first time? I thought we had listed the name of every person in the building.
How is it that we did not get yours?"

The tide of color which instantly flooded the young man's countenance astonished Mr. Gryce
both by its warmth and fullness. If he were as thin-skinned as this betokened, one should experience
but little difficulty in reaching the heart of his trouble.

With an air of quiet interest Mr. Gryce sat down by the young man's side. Would this display
of friendliness have the effect of restoring some of his self-possession and giving him the
confidence he evidently lacked? No, the red fled from his cheek, and a ghastly white took its
place; but he showed no other change.

Meantime the detective studied his countenance. It was a good one, but just now so distorted
by suffering that only such as were familiar with his every look could read his character from
his present expression. Would a more direct question rouse him? Possibly. At all events, Mr.
Gryce decided to make the experiment.

"Will you give me your name?" he asked, "--your name and residence?"

The man he addressed gave a quick start, pulled himself together and made an attempt to reply.

"My name is Travis. I am an Englishman just off the steamer from Southampton. My home is in
the county of Hertfordshire. I have no residence here."

"Your hotel, then?"

Another flush--then quickly: "I have not yet chosen one."

This was too surprising for belief. A stranger in town without rooms or hotel accommodations,
making use of the morning hours to visit a museum!

"You must be very much interested in art!" observed his inquisitor a little dryly.

Again that flush and again the quick-recurring pallor.

"I--I am interested in all things beautiful," he replied at last in broken tones.

"I see. May I ask where you were when that arrow flew which killed a young lady visitor? Not
in this part of the court, I take it?"

Mr. Travis gave a quick shudder and that was all. The detective waited, but no other answer came.

"I am told that as she fell she uttered one cry. Did you hear it, Mr. Travis?"

"It wasn't a cry," was his quick reply. "It was something quite different, but dreadful, dreadful!"

Mr. Gryce's manner changed.

"Then you did hear it. You were near enough to distinguish between a scream and a gasp. Where
were you, and why weren't you seen by my man when he went through the building?"

"I--I was kneeling out of sight--too shocked to move. But I grew tired of that and wanted to
go; but on reaching the court, I found the doors closed. So I came here."

"Kneeling! Where were you kneeling?"

He made a quick gesture in the direction of the galleries.

The detective frowned, perhaps to hide his secret satisfaction.

"Won't you be a little more definite?" he asked; then as the man continued to hesitate he added,
but as yet without any appreciable loss of kindliness: "Every other person here has been good
enough to show us the exact place he was occupying at that serious moment. I must ask you to
do the same; it is only just."

Was the look this called up one of fear or of simple repugnance? It might be either; but the
detective was disposed to consider it fear.

"Will you lead the way?" he pursued. "I shall be glad to follow."

A glance of extreme reproach; then these words, uttered with painful intensity:

"You want me to go back there--where I saw--where I can see again--I cannot. I'm not well.
I suffer. You will excuse me. You will allow me to say what I have to say, here."

"I'm sorry, but I cannot do that. The others have gone without question to their places; why
should not you?"

"Because----" The word came brokenly and was followed by silence. Then, seeing the hopelessness
of contending with police authority, he cast another glance of strong repulsion in the direction
of the gallery and started to his feet. Mr. Gryce did the same, and together they crossed the
court. But they got no further at this time than the foot of the staircase. Coroner Price,
by an extra effort which seemed to be called for by the circumstances, had succeeded in picking
up a jury from the people collected on the street, and entering at this moment, created a diversion
which effectively postponed the detective's examination of his new witness.

When the opportunity came for resuming it, so much time had elapsed that Mr. Gryce looked for
some decided change in the manner or bearing of the man who, unfortunately for his purposes,
had thus been given a quiet hour in which to think. Better, much better, for the cause of justice,
if he could have pushed him to the point at once, harried him, as it were, in hot blood. Now
he might find him more difficult.

But when, in company with the Coroner, who now found himself free to assist him in his hunt
for witnesses, he reapproached the Englishman sitting as before alone on his bench, it was
to find him to all appearance in the same mind in which he had left him. He wore the same look
and followed with the same reluctance when he was made to understand that the time had now
come for him to show just where he was standing when that arrow was sped on its death-course.
And greatly impressed by this fact, which in a way contradicted all his expectations, Mr. Gryce
trod slowly after, watching with the keenest interest to see whether, on reaching the top of
the steps, this man upon whose testimony so much depended would turn toward the southern gallery
where the girl had fallen, or toward the northern one, where Correy had found the bow.

It looked as if he were going to the left, for his head turned that way as he cleared the final
step. But his body soon swayed aside in the other direction, and by the time the old detective
had himself reached the landing, Travis, closely accompanied by the Coroner, had passed through
the first of the three arches leading to that especial section of the gallery where the concealing
tapestry hung.

"The man is honest," was Mr. Gryce's first thought. "He is going to show us the bow and confess
to what was undoubtedly an accident." But Mr. Gryce felt more or less ready to modify this
impromptu conclusion when, on passing through the arch himself he came upon the young man still
standing in Section VI, with his eyes on the opposite gallery and his whole frame trembling
with emotion.

"Is she--the young lady who was shot--still lying on those cold stones alone, forsaken and----"

Mr. Gryce knew misery when he saw it. This man had not overstated the case when he had said
"I suffer." But the cause! To what could this excess of sensibility be attributed? To remorse
or to an exaggerated personal repulsion? It looked like remorse, but that there might be no
doubt as to this, Mr. Gryce hastened to assure the Englishman that on the departure of the
jury the body had been removed to one of the inner rooms. The relief which this gave to Mr.
Travis was evident. He showed no further reluctance to proceed and was indeed the first of
the three to enter where the great drapery hung, flanked by the two immense vases. Would he
pause before it or hurry by into the broad corridor in front? If he hurried by, what would
become of their now secretly accepted theory?

But he did not hurry by; that is, he did not pass beyond the upper end, but stopped when he
got there and looked back with an air of extreme deprecation at the two officials.

"Have we arrived?" asked Mr. Gryce, his suspicions all returning, for the man had stepped aside
from the drapery and was standing in a spot conspicuously open to view even from the lower court.

The Englishman nodded; whereupon Mr. Gryce, approaching to his side, exclaimed in evident doubt:

"You were standing here? When? Not at the moment the young girl fell, or you would have been
seen by some one, if not by everyone, in the building. I want you to take the exact place you
occupied when you first learned that something had gone wrong in the opposite gallery."

The stranger's distress grew. With a show of indecision scarcely calculated to inspire confidence
in either of the two men watching him, he moved now here and now there till he finally came
to a standstill close by the pedestal--so close, indeed, to its inner corner that he was almost
in a line with its rear.

"It was here," he declared with a gulp of real feeling. "I am sure I am right now. I had just
stepped out----"

"From behind the tapestry?"

"No." His blank astonishment at the quickness with which he had been caught up left him staring
for a moment at the speaker, before he added:

"From behind the pedestal. The--the vase, as you see, is a very curious one. I wanted to look
at it from all sides."

Without a word the Coroner slipped past him and entering the narrow space behind the pedestal
took a look up at the vase from his present cramped position.

As he did this, two things happened: first Sweetwater, who had stolen upon the scene, possibly
at some intimation from Mr. Gryce, took a step toward them which brought him in alignment with
the Englishman, of whose height in comparison with his own he seemed to take careful note;
and secondly, the sensitive skin of the foreigner flushed red again as he noticed the Coroner's
sarcastic smile, and heard his dry remark:

"One gets a better view here of the opposite gallery than of the vase perched so high overhead.
Had you wished to look at those ladies, without being seen by them, you could hardly have found
a better loophole than the one made by the curving in of this great vase toward its base."
Then quickly: "You surely took one look their way; that would be only natural."

The answer Mr. Travis gave was certainly unexpected.

"It was after I came out that I saw them," he stammered. "There were two ladies, one tall and
one very young and slight. The older lady was stepping toward the front, the other entering
from behind. As I looked, the younger made a dash and ran by the first lady. Then----"

"Proceed, Mr. Travis. Your emotion is very natural; but it is imperative that we hear all you
have to tell us. She ran by the older lady, and then?"

Still silence. The Englishman appeared to be looking at Coroner Price, who in speaking emerged
from behind the pedestal; but it is doubtful if he saw him. A tear was in his eye--a tear!

Seeing it, Mr. Gryce felt a movement of compassion, and thinking to help him, said kindly enough:

"Was it so very dreadful?"

The answer came with great simplicity:

"Yes. One minute she was all life and gaiety; the next she was lying outstretched on the hard
floor."

"And you?"

Again that look of ingenuous surprise.

"I don't remember about myself," he said. "I was thinking too much about her. I never saw anyone
killed before."

"Killed? Why do you say killed? You say you saw her fall, but how did you know she was killed?"

"I saw the arrow in her breast. As she fell backward, I saw the arrow."

As he uttered these words, the three men watching him perceived the sweat start out on his
forehead, and his eyes take on a glassy stare. It was as if he were again in gaze upon that
image of youthful loveliness falling to the ground with the arrow of death in her heart. The
effect was strangely moving. To see this event reflected as it were in horror from this man's
consciousness made it appear more real and much more impressive than when contemplated directly.
Why? Had remorse given it its poignancy? Had it been his own hand which had directed this arrow
from behind the pedestal? If not, why this ghastly display of an emotion so far beyond what
might be expected from the most sentimental of onlookers?

In an endeavor to clear the situation, the Coroner intervened with the following question:

"Have you ever seen a shot made by a bow and arrow before, Mr. Travis? Archery-practice, I
mean. Or--well, the shooting of wild animals in India, Africa or elsewhere?"

"Oh, yes. I come from a country where the bow and arrow are used. But I never shoot. I can
only speak of what I have seen others do."

"That is sufficient. You ought to be able to tell, then, from what direction this arrow came."

"It--it must have come from this side of the gallery. Not from this section, as you call it,
but from some one of the other open places along here."

"Why not from this one?"

"Because there was nobody here but me," was the simple and seemingly ingenuous answer.

It gave them an unexpected surprise. Innocence would speak in this fashion. But then the bow--the
bow which was lying not a dozen feet from where they stood! Nothing could eliminate that bow.

After a short consultation between themselves, which the Englishman seemed not to notice, the
Coroner addressed him with the soothing remark:

"Mr. Travis, you must not misunderstand me. The accident which has occurred (we will not yet
say crime) is of so serious a nature that it is imperative for us to get at the exact facts.
Only yourself and one other person whom we know can supply them. I allude to the lady you saw,
first in front of and then behind the girl who was shot. Her story has been told. Yours will
doubtless coincide with it. May I ask you, then, to satisfy us on a point you were in a better
position than herself to take note of. It is this: When the young girl gave that bound forward
of which you both speak, did she make straight for the railing in front, or did she approach
it in a diagonal direction?"

"I do not know. You distress me very much. I was not thinking of anything like that. Why should
I think of anything so immaterial. She came--I saw her smiling, beaming with joy, a picture
of lovely youth--then her arms went suddenly up and she fell--backward--the arrow showing in
her breast. If I told the story a hundred times, I could not tell it differently."

"We do not wish you to, Mr. Travis. Only there must be somewhere in your mind a recollection
of the angle which her body presented to the railing as she came forward."

The unhappy man shook his head, at which token of helplessness Mr. Gryce beckoned to Sweetwater
and whispered a few words in his ear. The man nodded and withdrew, going the length of the
gallery, where he disappeared among the arches, to reappear shortly after in the gallery opposite.
When he reached Section II, Mr. Gryce again addressed the witness, who, to his surprise and
to that of the Coroner as well, had become reabsorbed in his own thoughts to the entire disregard
of what this movement might portend. It took a sharp word to rouse him.

"I am going to ask you to watch the young man who has just shown himself on the other side,
and tell us to what extent his movements agree with those made by the young lady prior to her
collapse and fall to the floor."

For an instant indignation robbed the stranger of all utterance. Then he burst forth:

"You would make a farce of what is so sad and dreadful, and she scarcely cold! It is dishonoring
to the young lady. I cannot look at that young man--that hideous young man--and think of her
and of how she looked and walked the instant before her death."

The two officials smiled; they could not help it. Sweetwater was certainly no beauty, and to
associate him in any kind of physical comparison with the dead girl was certainly incongruous.
Yet they both felt that the point just advanced by them should be settled and settled now while
the requisite remembrance was fresh in the mind of this invaluable witness. But in order to
get at what they wanted, some show of consideration for his feelings was evidently necessary.
Police persistence often defeats its own ends. If he was to be made to do what they wished,
it would have to be through the persuasion of some one outside the Force. To whom should they
appeal? The question answered itself. Mr. Roberts was approaching from the front, and to him
they turned. Would he use his influence with this stranger?

"He may listen to you," urged the Coroner in the whispered conference which now followed, "if
you explain to him how much patience you and all the rest of the people in the building have
had to exercise in this unhappy crisis. He seems a good enough fellow, but not in line with
our ideas."

Mr. Roberts, who saw the man for the first time, surveyed him in astonishment.

"Where was he standing?" he asked.

"Just where you see him now--or so he says."

"He couldn't have been. Some one would have observed him--the woman who was in the compartment
with the stricken girl, or the man studying coins in the one next to it."

"So it would seem," admitted the Coroner. "But if he were behind the pedestal----"

"Behind the pedestal!"

"That's where we think he was. But no matter about that now!--we can explain that to you later.
At present all we want is for you to reassure him."

Not altogether pleased with his task, but seeing no good reason for declining it, the affable
director approached the Englishman, who, recognizing one of his own social status, seemed to
take heart and turn a willing ear to Mr. Roberts' persuasions. The result was satisfactory.

When the Coroner again called Mr. Travis' attention to Sweetwater awaiting orders in the opposite
gallery he did not refuse to look, though his whole manner showed how much he was affected
by this forced acquiescence in their plans.

"You will watch the movements of the young man we have placed over there," the Coroner had
said; "and when he strikes a position corresponding to that taken by the young lady at the
moment she was shot, lift up your hand, thus. I will not ask you to speak."

"But you forget that there is blood on that floor. That man will step in it. I cannot lend
myself to such sacrilege. It is wrong. Let the lady be buried first."

The outburst was so natural, the horror so unfeigned, that not only the men he addressed but
all within hearing showed the astonishment it caused.

"One would think you knew the victim of this random shot!" the Coroner intimated with a fresh
and close scrutiny of this very reluctant witness. "Did you? Was she a friend of yours?"

"No, no!" came in quick disavowal. "No friend. I have never exchanged a word with her--never."

"Then we will proceed. One cannot consider sensibilities in a case like this." And he made
a signal to Sweetwater, who turned his body this way and that.

The distressed Englishman watched these movements with slowly dilating eyes.

"It's the angle we want--the angle at which she presented her body to the gallery front," explained
the relentless official.

A shudder, then the rigidity of fixed attention, broken in another moment, however, by an impulsive
movement and the unexpected question:

"Is it to find the man who did it that you are enacting this horrible farce?"

Somewhat startled, the Coroner retorted:

"If you object on that account----"

But Mr. Travis as vehemently exclaimed:

"But I don't! I want the man caught. One should not shoot arrows about in a place where there
are beautiful young women. I want him caught and punished."

As they were all digesting this unexpected avowal, they saw his hand go up. The Coroner gave
a low whistle, and the detective in obedience to it stood for one instant stock-still--then
bent quickly to the floor.

"What is he doing?" cried Mr. Travis.

"Yes, what is he doing?" echoed Mr. Roberts.

"Running a mark about his shoes to fix their exact location," was the grim response.

VII

"YOU THINK THAT OF ME!"

"We're certainly up against it this time," were the words with which Dr. Price led the detective
down the gallery. "What sort of an opinion can a man form of a fellow like that? Is he fool
or knave?"

Mr. Gryce showed no great alacrity in answering. When he did speak it was to say:

"We shall have to go into the matter a little more deeply before we can trust our judgment
as to his complete sincerity. But if you want to know whether I believe him to have loosed
the arrow which killed that innocent child, I am ready from present appearances to say yes.
Who else was there to do it? He and he only was on the spot. But it was a chance action, without
intention or wish to murder. No man, even if he were a fool, would choose such a place or such
a means for murder."

"That's true; but how does it help to call it accident? Accident calls for a bow in hand, an
arrow within reach, an impulse to try one's skill at a fancied target. Now the arrow--whatever
may be said of the bow--was not within the reach of anyone standing in this gallery. The arrow
came from the wall at the base of which this young woman died. It had to be brought from there
here. That does not look like accident, but crime."

Yet as the Coroner uttered this acknowledgment, he realized as plainly as Mr. Gryce how many
incongruous elements lay in the way of any such solution of the mystery. If they accepted the
foreigner's account of himself,--which for some reason neither seemed ready to dispute,--into
what a maze of improbabilities it at once led them! A stranger just off ship! The victim a
mere schoolgirl! The weapon such an unusual one as to be outré beyond belief. Only a madman--But
there! Travis had less the appearance of a lunatic than Mrs. Taylor. It must have been an accident
as Gryce said; and yet--

If there is much virtue in an if, there is certainly a modicum of the same in a yet, and the
Coroner, in full recognition of this stumbling-block, remarked with unusual dryness:

"I agree with you that some half-dozen questions are necessary before we wade deeper into this
quagmire. Where shall we go to have it out?"

"The Curator will allow us to use his office. I will see that Mr. Travis joins us there."

"See that he comes before he has a chance to fall into one of his reveries."

But quickly as Mr. Gryce worked, he was not speedy enough to prevent the result mentioned.
The man upon whose testimony so much hinged did not even lift his eyes when brought again into
their presence.

The Coroner, in his determination to be satisfied on this point, made short work of rousing
him from his abstraction. With a few leading questions he secured his attention and then without
preamble or apology asked him with what purpose he had come to America and why he had been
so anxious to visit the museum that he hastened directly to it from the steamer without making
an effort to locate himself in some hotel.

The ease with which this apparently ingenuous stranger had managed to meet the opening queries
of this rough-and-ready official was suddenly broken. He stammered and turned red and made
so many abortive attempts to reply that the latter grew impatient and finally remarked:

"If the truth will incriminate you, you are quite justified in holding it back!"

"Incriminate me!" With the repetition of this alarming word, a change of the most marked character
took place in young Travis' manner. "What does that mean?" he asked. "I am not sure that I
understand your use of that word incriminate."

Dr. Price explained himself, to the seeming horror of the startled Englishman.

"You think that of me!" he cried, "of me, who----"

But here indignation made him speechless, till some feeling stronger than the one subduing
him to silence forced him again into speech, and he supplemented in broken tones: "I am only
a stranger to you and consequently am willing to pardon your misconception of my character
and the principles by which I regulate my life. I have a horror of crime and all violence;
besides, the young lady--she awakened my deepest admiration and reverence. I,"--again he stopped;
again he burst forth,--"I would sooner have died myself than seen such angel graces laid low.
Let my emotion be proof of what I say. It was a man of the hardest heart who killed her."

"It would seem so."

It was the Coroner who spoke. He was nonplussed; and Mr. Gryce no less so. Never had either
of them been confronted by a blinder or more bewildering case. An incomprehensible crime and
a suspect it was impossible to associate with a deed of blood! There must be some other explanation
of the mournful circumstance they were considering. There had been twenty or more people in
the building, but--and here was the rub--if the chart which they had drawn up was correct and
the calculations which they had drawn from it were to be depended upon, this man was the only
person who had been in this gallery when the arrow was shot.

With a side glance at Mr. Gryce, who seemed content to remain silent in the background, Dr.
Price turned again to Mr. Travis.

"Your admiration of the young lady must have been as sudden as it was strong. Or possibly you
had seen her before you hid behind the pedestal. Had you, Mr. Travis? She was a charming child;
perhaps you had been attracted by her beauty before you even entered the galleries."

Instantly the man was another being.

"You are right," he acquiesced with undue alacrity. "I had seen her crossing the court. Her
beauty was heavenly. I am a gentleman, but I followed her. When she moved, I moved; and when
she went upstairs, I followed her. But I would not offend. I kept behind,--far behind her,--and
when she entered the gallery on one side, I took pains to enter it on the other. This is how
I came to be looking in her direction when she was struck down. You see, I speak with candor;
I open my whole heart."

Dr. Price, stroking his long beard, eyed the man with a thoughtful air which changed to one
of renewed inquiry. Instead of being convinced by this outburst, he was conscious of a new
and deepening distrust. The transition from a low state of feeling to one so feverishly eager
had been too sudden. The avidity with which this man just off ship had made a grasp at the
offered explanation had been too marked; it lacked sincerity and could impose on no one. Of
this he seemed himself aware, for again the ready flush ran from forehead to neck, and with
a deprecatory glance which included the silent detective he vehemently exclaimed:

"I am poor at a lie. I see that you will have the whole truth. It was on her account I crossed
the ocean. It was by dogging her innocent steps that I came to the museum this morning. I am
a man of means, and I can do as I please. When I said that I had never exchanged a word with
her, I spoke the truth. I never have; yet my interest in her was profound. I have never seen
any other girl or woman whom I was anxious to make my wife. I hoped to meet and woo her in
this country. I had no opportunity for doing so in my own. I did not see her till a night or
so before she sailed, and then it was at the theater, where she sat with some friends in an
adjoining box. She talked, and I heard what she said. She was leaving England. She was going
to America to live; and she mentioned the steamer on which she expected to sail. It may strike
you as impetuous, unnatural in an Englishman, and all that, but next morning I secured my passage
on that same ship. As I have just said, I am my own master and can do as I please, and I pleased
to do that. But for all the opportunity which a voyage sometimes gives, I did not succeed in
making her acquaintance on shipboard, much as I desired it. I was ill for the first three days
and timorous the rest. I could only watch her moving about the decks and wait for the happy
moment in which I might be able to do her some service. But that moment never came, and now
it never will come."

The mournfulness with which this was uttered seemed genuine. The Coroner was silenced by it,
and it was left to Mr. Gryce to take up the conversation. This he did with the same show of
respect evinced by Dr. Price.

"We are obliged to you for your confidence," said he. "Of course you can tell us this young
girl's name."

"Angeline--Angeline Willetts. I saw it in the list of passengers."

"What ship?"

"The Castania, from Southampton."

"We are greatly obliged to you for this information. It gives us the much-wanted clue to her
identity. Angeline Willetts! Whom was she with?"

"A Madame Duclos, a French lady. I once spoke to her."

"You did? And what did you say?"

"I bade her good morning as we were passing on the main-deck stairs. But she did not answer,
and I was not guilty of the impertinence again."

"I see. Such, then, was the situation up to this morning. But since? How did it happen that
a young girl, six hours after landing in this country, should come to a place like this without
a chaperon?"

"I don't know what brought her here; I can only tell you why I came. When she left the dock,
I was standing near enough to hear the orders Madame Duclos gave on entering a cab. Naturally,
mine were the same. I have been in New York before, and I knew the hotel. If you will consult
the Universal's register for the day, you will find my name in it under hers. You will understand
why I shrank from confessing to this fact before. I held her in such honor--I was and am so
anxious that no shadow should fall upon her innocence from my poor story of secret and unrecognized
devotion. She knew nothing of what led me to follow every step she took. I was a witness of
her fate, but that is all the connection between us. I hope you believe me."

It would be difficult not to, in face of his direct gaze, from which all faltering had now
vanished. Yet the matter not being completely thrashed out, Mr. Gryce felt himself obliged
to say in answer to this last:

"We see no reason to doubt your word or your story, Mr. Travis. All that you have said is possible.
But how about your following the young girl here? How did that come about?"

"That was occasioned by my anxiety for her--an anxiety which seems to have been only too well-founded."

"How? What?" Both of the officials showed a greatly increased interest. "Please explain yourself,
Mr. Travis. What reason had you for any such feeling in regard to a person with whom you had
held no conversation? Anything which you saw or heard at the hotel?"

"Yes. I was sitting in the foyer. I knew that the ladies were in the house, but I had not seen
them. I was anxious to do so (see, I am telling all) and was watching the door of the lift
from behind my journal, when they both stepped out. Miss Willetts was dressed for the street,
but Madame Duclos was not, which seemed very strange to me. But I felt no concern till I caught
some fragments of what Madame said in passing me. She spoke in French, a language I understand,
and she was exclaiming over her misfortune at not being allowed to accompany her young charge
to whatever place she was going. It was bad, bad, she cried, and she would not have a moment's
peace till her dear Angeline got back. Anxiety of this kind was natural in a Frenchwoman not
accustomed to see a young lady enter the streets alone; but the force with which she expressed
it betrayed a real alarm--an alarm which communicated itself to me. Where could this unprotected
girl be going, alone and in a hotel cab?

"I could not imagine, and when I saw Madame stop in the middle of her talk to buy some fresh
flowers and pin them to Miss Willetts' corsage, I got a queer feeling, and flinging my newspaper
aside, I strolled to the door and so out in time to hear Madame's orders to the chauffeur.
The young lady was to be taken to a museum. To a museum, at this early hour! and alone, alone!
Such a proceeding is not at all in accord with French ideas, and I feared a plot. Though it
was far from being my affair, I determined to make it so; and as soon as I dared, I followed
her just as I had followed her from the dock. But fruitlessly! Not knowing the danger, how
could I avert it? I was in one gallery, she in the other. It was my evil fate to see her fall,
but by whose hand I am as ignorant as yourselves. Now I have told it all. Will you let me go?"

"Not yet," interposed the Coroner. "There are one or two questions more which you will undoubtedly
answer with the same frankness. Were you standing in front of the pedestal or behind it when
you saw Miss Willetts fall?"

"I was standing just where I said, somewhere near it in the open gallery."

This seemed so open to question that the Coroner paused a moment to recall the exact situation
and see if it were possible for a man as conspicuous in figure as Mr. Travis to have stood
thus in full view of gallery and court, without attracting the attention of anyone in either
place. He found, after a moment's consideration, that it was possible. Mr. Gryce, for all his
efforts and systematic inquiry into the position which each person had held at or near this
time, had been able to find but one who chanced to be looking in the direction of this gallery,
and he with a limited view which took in only the upper part of the tapestry.

A probe in a fresh direction might reach a more vulnerable spot.

"But you had been behind the pedestal?" Dr. Price suggested.

"Yes"--the quick flush coming again. "My old timidity led me to conceal myself where I could
watch undetected her bright young figure pass from arch to arch along the opposite gallery.
Not till she had got past my line of view did I step out, and then--then it was to see what
I have already told you--her rush toward the front--the start she gave--the fall--that cruel
arrow! I own that I shrank back into my narrow hiding-place when I realized that all was at
an end--that she was dead."

"Why? You had been witness to a deed of blood--a deed which must have recalled to you the anxiety
expressed by the woman whom you regarded as the young girl's guardian; and yet you shrank back--out
of sight--away from those who had the right to make inquiries! How do you explain that, Mr.
Travis?"

"I cannot, except that I was so dazed, so stricken, that I was hardly conscious of what I did.
And, sirs, believe me or not, had it not been for the refuge afforded by that narrow space
behind the pedestal, I think I should have fallen headlong to the floor. When I came again
to myself, which was after some of the confusion had abated, I had only one thought in mind:
to suppress myself and my story lest some shadow should fall across her sweet purity. Waiting
till the attention of the man you had placed on guard over her body was attracted another way,
I slid out and hastened to the front, where I managed to find a quiet room in which to sit
down and brood again over my misfortune. Forewarned, as you have said, and on the spot, with
every wish to protect her, I had failed to do so. I fear it will make me mad some day."

Had it made him insane already? Was his story to be trusted? It was full of incongruities;
were they those of a disordered mind? Such had been the excuse made for Mrs. Taylor when she
had been thought guilty of this attack; why should it not be applied to this man who certainly
had given evidences of not being of the usual type of young Englishman? With a sidelong look
at Mr. Gryce, which that individual perfectly understood, Dr. Price thanked Mr. Travis for
his candor and asked if he could point out the room in which he had sat while their young man
had gone through the building checking off the position of everybody in it.

To his surprise, the Englishman answered quite simply, "I will try," and rose when they rose.

The glances exchanged between the other two men were eloquent. Where was he about to take them?
Sweetwater was no fool; how had this man of marked appearance and generous proportions managed
to elude him?

As has happened before, it proved to be easily explainable when once the conditions were known.
The room to which he led them was that on the upper story marked H on Chart Two. It was devoted,
like one or two others near it, to a line of famous paintings at once the hope and despair
of young girl copyists. The one most favored for this purpose hung just behind the door "X,"
which, half-open as they found it, made with the easel, the canvas upon it and an apron hanging
carelessly over all, an impromptu screen behind which a man crouched in misery on the copyist's
stool might easily remain unnoticed by anyone passing hurriedly by him.

And thus vanished one hindrance to a full belief in young Travis' story.

But a greater one remained. The bow! the bow found behind the tapestry at the edge of which
he had stood in timorous hiding! In the hope that a shock might startle him into some admission
which would give a different aspect to the case, they now led him back to this place of first
concealment. He was showing strain by this time, and no delay was made to press their point.
Giving the tapestry a pull, the Coroner bade him tell what he saw behind it.

The answer came with much emotion.

"The bow! The bow which sped the arrow which killed Miss Willetts. I do not want to see it.
It hurts me--hurts me physically. Let me go, I entreat."

"Mr. Travis," urged the Coroner as they again emerged upon the open gallery, "you have said
that there was no one with you in the section where you stood. If that was so, how came this
bow to be where you have just seen it?"

A bewildered look, a slow shake of the head and nothing more.

"Did you know it was there? Did you see it thrown there?"

"No, I saw nothing. I am an honest man. You may believe me."

The Coroner scrutinized him closely but not unkindly.

"We shall know before night who handled that bow, Mr. Travis. It carries its own clue with it."

A gleam of unmistakable joy lighted up the Englishman's features.

"I am glad," he cried. "I am glad."

Coroner Price was a man of experience. He recognized the ring of truth in the Englishman's
tones, and saying no more, led the way from the gallery.

A few minutes later he was on the lower floor. He had a short conversation with the two doormen;
then he proceeded to the telephone and called up the Universal.

The result was startling.

Asked if the name of Rupert Henry Travis, Hertfordshire, England, was on their register, the
answer was yes.

"The date of his arrival?"

"Early this morning."

"Any other arrivals to-day from the other side?"

"Yes, a Madame Duclos and a Miss Willetts."

The Coroner's tone altered. So much of the stranger's story was true, then.

"Will you connect me with Madame Duclos. I have important news to give her. Some woman had
better be with her when she receives it."

"I am sorry, but I cannot do this. Madame Duclos has left."

"Left? Gone out, you mean?"

"No, left the hotel. She's been gone about half an hour. The young lady who came with her has
gone out too, but we expect her back."

"You do. And what took the older woman away? What excuse did she give, and where has she gone?"

"I cannot tell you where she has gone. She left after receiving a telephone message from some
one in town. Came down to the desk looking extremely distressed, said that she had had bad
news and must go at once. I made out her bill and, at her request, that of the young lady,
whom she said would be called for by a friend on her return to the hotel. These bills she paid;
after that she left the hotel on foot, carrying her own bag. The young lady has not returned----"

"Enough. The young lady is dead, killed by chance here at the museum. A plain-clothes man will
be with you shortly from Headquarters. Meanwhile keep your eyes and ears open. If a message
comes for either Madame Duclos or Miss Willetts, notify me here; and if anyone calls, detain
the party at all hazards. That's all; no time to talk."

And now Gryce entered the room. He was accompanied by an inspector. This was a welcome addition
to their force. Coroner Price greeted him with cordiality:

"You've come in good time, Inspector. The death of this young girl struck down by an arrow
shot by an unknown hand from the opposite side of the building bids fair to make a greater
call on your resources than on mine. The woman who appears to have acted as companion to Miss
Willetts has fled the hotel where they both took rooms immediately upon leaving the steamer.
Either she has heard of the accident which has occurred here--and if so, how?--or she's but
carrying out some deep-laid plan which it is highly important for us to know. It looks now
like a premeditated crime."

"With this Englishman involved?"

"I doubt that; I seriously doubt that--don't you, Gryce? A more subtle head than his planned
this strange crime."

"Yes; there can be little doubt about that. Shall I set the boys to work, Inspector? This Frenchwoman
must be found."

"At once--a general alarm. You can get a description of her from the clerk at the Universal.
She must not be allowed to leave town."

Mr. Gryce sat down before the telephone. Coroner Price proceeded to acquaint the Inspector
with such details of the affair as were now known. The Curator moved restlessly about. Gloom
had settled upon the museum. On only one face was there a smile to be seen, but that was a
heavenly one, irradiating the countenance of her who had passed from the lesser to the larger
world with the joy of earth still warm in her innocent heart.

BOOK II

MR. X

VIII

ON THE SEARCH

It was late in the afternoon. The Inspector's office had hummed for hours with messages and
reports, and the lull which had finally come seemed grateful to him. With relaxed brow and
a fresh cigar, he sat in quiet contemplation of the facts brought out by the afternoon's inquiries.
He was on the point of dismissing even these from his mind, when the door opened and Gryce came in.

Instantly his responsibilities returned upon him in full force. He did not wait for the expected
report, but questioned the detective at once.

"You have been to the hotel," he said, pointing out a chair into which the old man dropped
with a sigh as eloquent of anxiety as of fatigue. "What more did you learn there?"

"Very little. No message has come; no persons called. For them and for us these two women,
Madame Duclos and Miss Willetts, are still an unknown quantity. Their baggage, which arrived
while I was there, supplied the only information I was able to obtain."

"Their baggage! But that should tell us everything."

"It may if you think best to go through it. It is not heavy--a trunk for each, besides the
one they brought with them from the steamer. From the pasters to be seen on them, they have
come from the Continental Hotel, Paris, by way of the Ritz, London. At this latter place their
stay was short. This is proved by the fact that only the steamer-trunk is pasted with the Ritz
label. And this trunk was the one I found in their room at the Universal. From it Miss Willetts
had taken the dress she wore to the museum. Her other clothes--I mean those she wore on arriving--lay
in disorder on the bed and chairs. I should say that they had been tossed about by a careless
if not hasty hand, while the trunk----"

"Well?"

"Stood open on the floor."

"Stood open?"

"Yes, I went through it, of course."

"And found nothing?"

"Nothing to help us to-day. No letters--no cards. Some clothing--some little trifles (bought
in Paris, by the way) and one little book."

"A name in it?"

"Yes--Angeline; and one line of writing from some poem, I judge. I put it back where I found
it. When we know more, it may help us to find her friends."

"And is that all?"

"Almost, but not quite. The young girl had a bag too. It stood on a table----"

"Well?"

"Empty. Everything had been tumbled out--turned upside down and the contents scattered. I looked
them carefully over. Nothing, positively nothing, but what you would be likely to find in any
young girl's traveling-bag. There's but one conclusion to be drawn."

"And what is that?"

"That all these things, such as they were, had been pushed hastily about after being emptied
out on the table. That was not the young girl's work."

"Madame Duclos'!"

"You've hit it. She was in search of some one thing she wanted, and she took the quickest way
of finding it. And----"

"Yes, Gryce?"

"She was in a desperate hurry, or she wouldn't have left the trunk open or all those dainty
things lying about. Frenchwomen are methodical and very careful of their belongings. One other
thing I noted. There was a loose nail in the lock of the trunk. Sticking to this nail was a
raveling of brown wool. Here it is, sir. The woman--Madame Duclos--wore a dress of brown serge.
If my calculations are not wrong and we succeed in getting a glimpse of that dress, we shall
find a tear in the skirt--and what is more, one very near the hem."

"Made to-day?"

"Yes--another token of haste. She probably jerked at the skirt when she found herself caught.
She could not have been herself to have done this--for which we may be glad."

"You mean that by this thoughtless action she has left a clue in our hands?"

"That and something more. That tear in her decent skirt will bother her. She will either make
an immediate attempt to mend it, or else do the other obvious thing--buy a new one. In either
case it gives us something by which to trace her. I have put Sweetwater on that job. He never
tires, never wearies, never lets go. No report in yet from the terminals?"

"Not a word. But she will not get far. Sooner or later we shall find her if she does not come
forward herself after reading the evening papers."

"She will never come forward."

"I am not so sure. Something not a little peculiar happened at the museum after you left. We
had Reynolds up, and he made a most careful examination of that bow for finger-prints. He did
not find any. But fortune favored us in another way almost as good."

"Now you interest me."

"We had brought the bow into the Curator's office, and it lay on the long table in the middle
of the room. I had been looking it over (this was after Reynolds had gone, of course) and had
already noted a certain defect in it, when on chancing to look up, my eyes fell on a mirror
hanging in a closet the door of which stood wide open. A face was visible in it--a very white
face which altered under my scrutiny into a semblance more natural. It was that of Correy--you
remember Correy, one of the assistants, and an honest fellow enough, but more troubled at this
moment than I had ever seen him. What could have happened?

"Wheeling quickly about, I caught him just as he started to go. He had openly declared that
he did not know this bow; but it was evident that he did, and I did not hesitate to say so.
Taken unawares, he could not hide his distress, which he proceeded to explain thus: He did
remember the bow, now that he had the opportunity of seeing it closer. He pointed to the nick
I had myself noticed and said that owing to this defect the bow had been cast aside, and the
last time he had handled it----Here he caught his breath and stopped. Another memory had evidently
returned to embarrass him."

"Did you succeed in getting him to acknowledge what it was?"

"Yes, after I had worked with him for some time. He didn't want to talk. In a moment you will
see why. Going back to the time he had seen it before, he said that he had found it in the
cellar in an old box, the contents of which he had been pulling over in a search for something
very different. Amazed to find it there, he had taken it out, examined it carefully, noted
the nick I mentioned and tossed it back again into the box. This he told, but reluctantly.

"Why reluctantly, I was soon to find out. He was not alone in the cellar. The shadow of some
person at his back had fallen across the lid of the box as he was closing it. He did not recognize
the shadow and had not given it at the time a second thought, but the remembrance of it came
back vividly when he saw the bow lying before him and realized the part it had played in the
morning's tragedy. Was it because he knew that only a person actively connected with the museum
would have access to that part of the cellar? I asked. I did not expect an answer, and I did
not get it. We looked at each other for a moment, then I let him go."

A momentary silence, which the Inspector broke by saying:

"Later I called the Curator in, and he also recognized the bow as belonging to the museum.
But he volunteered no explanations and in fact had little to say on the subject. He was evidently
too much startled by the direct connection which had thus been made between the crime (or accident,
if you will) and the personnel of the museum."

"That was natural. He should be the first to see that the bow which shot the arrow must of
necessity have been brought into the building by some other door than those at which the doormen
stood guard. I had a talk with those men, and they both declared that no sticks or umbrellas
or anything of that nature ever went by them or would be allowed to go by them, no matter how
concealed or wrapped up. But to revert to the matter in hand. So Correy made absolutely no
attempt to explain how this weapon had been carried from cellar to gallery without his knowledge?"

"No. He for one will have a sleepless night."

"Not he alone. I must and will see a way through this maze. To-morrow may bring luck. Ah, I
forgot to say that I spent an hour of the three you allowed me with the captain of the steamer
which brought over these two women. As might be expected, he had no information of any significance
to give me; nor could I obtain much from such members of the crew as I could get hold of. One
steward remembered the Englishman, chiefly because he never showed himself unless the young
lady was on deck. But he never saw them speak."

"Which bears out Travis' story to the last detail."

"Exactly. I think we can depend upon him; otherwise we should be at sea."

"Yet his story is a very strange one."

"The whole affair is strange--the strangest I ever knew. But that isn't against it. It's the
commonplace case which baffles. We shall get the key to the whole mystery yet."

"I've no doubt. Is Mr. Travis to be detained?"

"Yes, as witness."

"Does he object?"

"Not at all. Having spoken--told his whole story, as he says--he is rather glad than otherwise
to be relieved from the common curiosity of strangers. He's a rare bird, Gryce. If he stops
to think, he must see that he stands in a more or less ticklish position. But he does not betray
by look or action any doubt of our entire belief in the truth of all his statements. His only
trouble seems to be that he has lost, by these inhuman means, the girl upon whom he had set
his heart. To-morrow we will confront him with Mrs. Taylor. She should be able to say whether
he did or did not stand out in the open gallery at the moment Miss Willetts fell."

But Mr. Gryce had no encouragement to give him on this head.

"Mrs. Taylor is ill--very ill, as I take it. I stopped at her hotel to inquire. I was anxious
about her for more than one reason and the report I got of her condition was far from favorable.
She is suffering cruelly from shock. How occasioned, whether by the peculiar and startling
death to which she was a witness or by the strangely coincident fancy to which she herself
attributes her deep emotion, will have to be decided by further developments. Nothing which
I was able to learn from doctor or nurse settled this interesting question. Meanwhile, no one
is allowed to see her--or will be till she is on the direct road to recovery. Let us hope that
this may be soon, or the inquest may be delayed indefinitely."

"I don't know as that is to be deplored. I imagine we shall find enough to fill in our time....
Any communications made by her before she collapsed? Did she send out or receive messages of
any kind since her return from the museum?"

"She received none; but it is impossible to say whether or not she sent any out. There is a
letter-chute very near her door. She may have dropped a letter in that any time before a watch
was put upon her. You are thinking, of course, of the anxiety she expressed about her husband,
and whether she took any measures for ascertaining if her fears for him had any foundation
in fact?"

"I was, yes; but I presume this fancy had passed, or else she is too ill to remember her own
aberrations. Were you able to effect an understanding with her nurse?"

"Yes; that's fixed. I had a short talk, too, with the proprietor of the hotel. He thinks very
highly of Mrs. Taylor. She has lived in the one apartment for years, and he cannot say enough
of her discreet and uniform life. Though she made no secret of the fact that she does not live
with her husband, her conduct has always been such as to insure universal respect. He did not
even make mention of eccentricities. If she is crazy, it is a late development. She seemed
to have been all right up to this morning. Whichever way you turn, you encounter mystery and
a closed door."

"The papers may spring the lock of that door at any moment. Publication does much in a case
of this kind. To-morrow we may be in a much more favorable position. Meantime, let us recount
the facts it is our business to clear up."

"On what hypothesis?"

"On all hypotheses. We are not sure enough of our premises, as yet, to confine ourselves to one."

"Very good, these are the ones which seem to me to be of the greatest importance:

"Whose hand carried the bow from cellar to gallery?

"Was it the same which carried the arrow from one gallery to the other?

"Is it possible for an arrow, shot through the loophole made by the curving-in of the vase,
to reach the mark set for it by Mr. Travis' testimony?

"Which one of the men or women known to be in the museum when this arrow was released has enough
knowledge of archery to string a bow? A mark can be reached by chance; but only an accustomed
hand can string a bow as unyielding as this one.

"Who telephoned to Madame Duclos; and of what nature was the message which sent her from the
hotel so precipitately that she not only left the most important part of her baggage behind
but went away without making adequate provision for the young girl confided to her charge?

"Does this mean that she had been made acquainted with the fate of the young girl; and if so,
by whom?"

"Business enough for us all," was the Inspector's comment as Gryce paused in this enumeration.
"As you put it, I am more and more convinced that the key you spoke of a short time ago will
be found in this missing woman's tightly shut hand."

"Which brings us round full-circle to our first conclusion: that Miss Willetts' death is not
only a crime, but a premeditated one."

"Carried out, not by the one benefited, but by an agent selected for the purpose."

"An agent, moreover, who knew the ways and possibilities of the place."

"A logical conclusion; but still too incredible for belief. I find it hard to trust to appearances
in this case."

"And I also. But as we have both said, time may clear away some of its incongruities. Meanwhile
I have an experiment to propose." And leaning close to the Inspector, notwithstanding the fact
that there was nobody within hearing and he knew it, he whispered a few words in his ear.

The Inspector stared.

"To-night?" he asked.

The detective nodded.

IX

WHILE THE CITY SLEPT

Night--the night of a great city with its myriad of garish lights and its many curious and
incongruous activities.

Who has not felt his imagination stirred by the contrasts thus offered--contrasts never more
apparent than at these hours of supposed rest? Grim walls, with dimpled children sleeping behind
them! Places of merrymaking athrob with music and dazzling with jets of incandescent light,
with grief in the heart of the dancer and despair making raucous the enforced laugh!

But nowhere in the great city of which we write on this night of May 23, 1913, was there to
be found a scene of greater contradictions than in the court and galleries of its famous museum.

Lighted as for a reception, the architectural beauties of its Moorish arcades and carven balustrades
flashed in full splendor. Gems of antique art, casts in which genius had stored its soul and
caused to live before us the story of the ancients, pillars from desert sands, friezes from
the Parthenon and bas-reliefs from Nineveh and Heliopolis, filled every corner, commanding
the eye to satisfy itself in forms of deathless grace or superhuman power. And no one to heed!
Not an eye to note that the Venus in one corner seemed to smile in the soft light with more
than its accustomed allurement, or that the armor in which kings had fought wore a menacing
sparkle exceeding that of other times and quieter days. Ghosts of vanished ages might parade
at will among the chattels of their time or drain the iridescent beaker to their unknown gods--no
one would have noticed or turned aside to see. For there was something else within these walls
to-night for the men assembled there to look upon, and a story to be read which shut the imagination
upon the past by amply filling it with the present.

What is this something? Let us follow the gaze of the half-dozen persons grouped in front of
the tapestry hanging in the northern gallery, and see.

But first, of whom is this small and mystic group composed? Who are these men who in the middle
of the night, in the security of a completely shuttered building, busy themselves, not with
the inestimable treasures surrounding them, but with an odd and seemingly mountebank adventure
totally out of keeping with the place and their absorbed demeanor? We will name them:

Mr. Roberts and a second director seen here for the first time, Inspector Jackson, Mr. Gryce,
two lesser detectives, and a strange young man of undoubted Indian extraction who kept much
in the background and yet stood always at attention like one awaiting orders.

Are these all? Yes, in the one gallery; but in the other, shadowy figures are visible among
the arches at one end, with whose identity we shall probably soon be made acquainted.

At what are these various persons, in the one gallery as in the other, looking so intently
that all are turned one way--the way of greatest interest--the way the fatal arrow had flown
some fourteen hours before, carrying death to the innocent girl smiling upon life in youthful
exuberance? Is it at some image of herself they see restored to hope and joy? An image is there,
but alas! it is but a dummy taken from one of the exhibits and so set up as to present the
same angle to the gallery-front as her young body had done, according to Mr. Travis' reluctant
declaration.

Why so placed, and why regarded with such concentrated interest by the men confronting it from
the opposite gallery, will become apparent when, upon the Indian's being summoned from his
place of modest retirement, it can be seen that the bow he carries in one hand is offset by
the arrow he holds in the other. A test is to be made which will settle, or so they hope, the
truth of Mr. Travis' story. If an arrow launched from before the pedestal or even from behind
it through the loophole made by the curving-in of the vase toward its base can be made to reach
its mark in the breast of this dummy, then they would feel some justification in doubting his
statement that the arrow, whatever the appearances, was not shot from this gallery. If it could
not, belief in his statements would be confirmed and their minds be cleared of a doubt which
must hamper all their future movements.

The second director, whose name was Clayton, stood at the left of the Inspector and close against
the tapestry. To him that official now turned with this explanation:

"The bow you see in Mr. La Flèche's hand is similar in length and weight to the one found lying
strung for use in the doorway back of where you are now standing. The arrow is from the same
quiver as the one which entered Miss Willetts' breast.... Did you speak?"

No, Mr. Clayton had not spoken; yet for some reason a thrill had passed through the small group
surrounding him, which had heightened the consciousness of them all. Eyes and ears became alert;
only the Indian showed stolidity.

"Mr. La Flèche, you will first stand here," continued the Inspector, pointing to the spot which
Mr. Travis had finally settled upon as the one where he had been standing at the moment he
saw Miss Willetts fall.

The Indian took the place, sighted the figure diagonally opposite and laid his finger on the
string.

"An inch to the left of the bunch of flowers pinned on the dummy's breast," murmured Mr. Gryce
almost in his ear.

It was a breathless moment; even the two detectives showed excitement.

But the Indian failed to shoot. Instead, he looked around at the Inspector and quietly remarked:

"I will shoot standing, since you so request, but I think you will find that the arrow which
caused death was delivered by a man kneeling."

A flash of the eye between the two detectives, which only one man saw! All the others were
watching the lightning flight of the arrow. It struck the dummy full and square. Everyone shuddered,
even the Inspector; it brought the real tragedy so vividly to mind.

Meanwhile a movement had taken place in the small group of men watching from the other side.
One of them stepped fully into view and approaching the figure thus attacked, drew out the
arrow and made close examination of the hole it had made and shook his head. It was Coroner Price.

"Try again, and from behind the pedestal this time," he called out across the intervening space
as he stepped back into his former place of observation.

The Inspector motioned his wishes to the Indian, who with a subtle twist of his body slipped
behind the pedestal.

"That's better," was the Inspector's quick comment. "Can you handle the bow easily from where
you now stand?"

"There is plenty of room."

"Very well. But wait! Before we proceed further, there is a matter to which I wish to call
the attention of these gentlemen. It must have been apparent to you all that a person standing
where Mr. La Flèche did a moment ago would be easily visible to anyone looking up from the
court or across from the opposite gallery, or even from the broad corridors at either end of
the building. But would the same hold true if instead of being in front he had been behind
the pedestal, as Mr. La Flèche is now? Run below, Barney; and, gentlemen, disperse yourselves
in different directions and give me your opinion. Now!" he demanded after a few minutes' wait,
during which there had been a scattering to right and left along the galleries, "what do you say?"

"If anyone chanced to be looking directly there, yes," was shouted up from below.

"What do you say, Coroner Price?"

"Ask the man to kneel."

The Inspector gave the word.

"Ah, that's different! The bulge of the vase hides the upper part of his head, and the pedestal
itself the lower. He might shoot from his present position with impunity."

"Do you all agree?"

"Yes, yes!" came from different parts of the building.

"Then, Mr. La Flèche, here's another arrow from the same quiver. Take fresh aim and shoot."

Another breathless moment--more breathless than the other; then a second arrow flew across
the court and hung quivering in the breast of the dummy.

From both ends of the gallery men came running, and leaning eagerly over the gallery-rail they
watched the Coroner as he stepped again into view to make a second examination.

This time he kept them several minutes in suspense, and when he had drawn out the arrow, he
looked long at the hole it had made. Then, instead of shouting his decision across the court,
he could be seen leaving the gallery and coming around their way.

What had he to say? As they waited, a clock struck from some neighboring steeple--three sonorous
peals! The two directors glanced at each other. Doubtless they felt the weirdness of the hour
as well as of the occasion. It was a new experience for these amateurs in police procedure.

Arrived on their side, the Coroner advanced quickly. When close upon the reassembled group,
he remarked quickly but with great decision:

"Mr. Travis seems to have been correct in denying that the arrow flew either from before or
behind this pedestal. The first arrow sent by Mr. La Flèche entered the dummy almost at a right
angle; the last departed but a little from this same line. But the real wound which I probed
and located to a hair was a decidedly slanting one. It must have been sent from a place further
off."

"From behind the other pedestal!" spoke up Mr. Gryce, all fire and interest at once. "Either
the Englishman deceived us, or each pedestal had its man."

"We'll see! Another shot, and from behind the further pedestal, Mr. La Flèche!"

The Indian glided into view and started for the other end of the tapestry, followed by the
Inspector, his detectives and the two directors. As they passed one by one across the face
of the great hanging, they had the appearance not of living men but of a parade of specters,
so silent their step and so somber their air. The dread of some development hitherto unacknowledged
made their movements slow instead of hasty. The upper pedestal instead of the lower! Why should
this possible fact make any difference in their feelings. Yet it did--perhaps because it meant
deception on the part of one they had instinctively believed trustworthy, or--

But why pursue conjecture when actuality only is of moment? Let us proceed with our relation
and await the result.

Arrived at the upper pedestal, Mr. La Flèche took his place, received the third arrow and presently
delivered it. The Coroner, who had already started for the other side, hastily approached the
dummy, made his examination and threw up his hand with the loud shout:

"The shot was made from there; the matter is settled!"

Question: Had Mr. Travis wilfully misled them, or had the presumption in his favor been strengthened
by this proof that it had been shown possible for another hand than his to have shot the arrow
from this same section of the gallery, without disturbing his belief that he was the only person
in it at the time?

X

"AND HE STOOD HERE?"

The Inspector, finding himself very much disturbed by the doubt just mentioned, felt inclined
to question whether any perceptible advancement had been made by this freak business of his
canny subordinate. He was hardly ready to say yes, and was not a little surprised when on his
way toward the head of the staircase he heard the exultant voice of Mr. Gryce whisper in his ear:

"That's all right. We've gained a point. We know now the exact place from which the arrow was
shot."

"But not who shot it."

"No--except that it was not the man Travis."

"How can you be sure of that?"

"For two reasons. This is the first one: If it is difficult to understand how a man could slip
from behind the eastern pedestal and make his way along the open gallery to Room H, without
attracting the attention of the officer posted opposite, how next to impossible we should find
it, if thirty feet were added to his course--which is the distance between the two pedestals!"

"What was that fellow doing, that he shouldn't have seen this effort at escape, whether it
involved a short flight or a long one?"

"He says he was not given detective-duty--that he was placed there to keep watch over the body
of the young girl;--that at a certain moment he imagined himself to hear a stealthy footstep
approaching from the farther end of the gallery, and anxious to spot the man yielding to so
doubtful a curiosity, he approached the arch separating his section from the adjoining one,
and stopping just inside, stood for a moment or so, listening. As this involved the turning
of his back upon the court and consequently upon the opposite gallery, it gave Travis just
the opportunity he needed for an unobserved escape. But I see you are not very much impressed
by the reason I have advanced for believing his story and placing him where he says he was
placed, behind the eastern pedestal. You doubtless think that if the officer opposite had stood
long enough with his back to the court, Travis might have taken those extra thirty steps as
easily as the twenty he had confessed to. Listen, then, to my second reason, or rather, step
this way."

Leading his superior toward Room B, the door of which stood wide open, he paused just outside
the threshold to note the effect produced upon the Inspector by what he saw inside. Evidently
it was as marked with surprise as the detective had calculated upon, for with an air of great
astonishment the Inspector turned upon him with the whispered exclamation:

"Travis here! where he could listen--see----"

"Yes. Take a good look at him, Inspector. It won't trouble him any. I doubt if he would notice
us if we stepped into the room."

And such was the opinion of the Inspector himself, as he remarked the extreme excitement under
which the Englishman was laboring. Absorbed in thoughts of his own, he was pacing the room
with long strides, turning mechanically as he met some impediment, but otherwise oblivious
to his surroundings, even to the point of not noting the presence of Sweetwater, who stood
quietly watching him from one of the corners.

This display of feeling was certainly eloquent enough to attract anyone's attention, but what
gave it impressiveness to the official mind was this: his excitement was that of triumph, not
fear, of hope without any trace of confusion.

"It is not of himself he is thinking," muttered Gryce.

"And he stood here?"

"No--we left him free to move about at will, and his will carried him into full view of the
whole performance."

"And Sweetwater?"

"Was near enough to note his every move, but of course kept himself well out of sight." 

It was cold as a serpent's skin, and yet its impress remained upon my wrist, burnt there as though
branded by a glowing iron. It was she. 'Unhappy man! Unhappy man! What hast thou done?' she exclaimed in
a low voice, and immediately disappeared in the crowd.

The aged bishop passed by. He cast a severe and scrutinising look upon me. My face presented
the wildest aspect imaginable: I blushed and turned pale alternately;
dazzling lights flashed before my eyes.

A companion took pity on me. He seized my arm and led me out. I could not possibly have found
my way back to the seminary unassisted.

At the corner of a street, while the young priest's attention was momentarily turned in another
direction, a negro page, fantastically garbed, approached me, and without pausing on his way
slipped into my hand a little pocket-book with gold-embroidered corners, at the same time giving
me a sign to hide it.

I concealed it in my sleeve, and there kept it until I found myself alone in my cell. Then I
opened the clasp.

There were only two leaves within, bearing the words, 'Clarimonde. At the Concini Palace.'
So little acquainted was I at that time with the things of this world that I had never heard
of Clarimonde, celebrated as she was, and I had no idea as to where the Concini Palace was situated.
I hazarded a thousand conjectures, each more extravagant than the last; but, in truth, I cared
little whether she were a great lady or a courtesan, so that I could
but see her once more.

My love, although the growth of a single hour, had taken imperishable root. I did not even dream
of attempting to tear it up, so fully was I convinced such a thing would be impossible. That
woman had completely taken possession of me. One look from her had
sufficed to change my very nature.

She had breathed her will into my life, and I no longer lived in
myself, but in her and for her.

I gave myself up to a thousand extravagancies.

  I kissed the place upon my hand which she had touched, and I repeated
  her name over and over again for hours in succession. I only
  needed to close my eyes in order to see her distinctly as though she
  were actually present; and I reiterated to myself the words she had uttered
  in my ear at the church porch: 'Unhappy man!

  Unhappy man! What hast thou done?' I comprehended at last the full horror
  of my situation, and the funereal and awful restraints of the state
  into which I had just entered became clearly revealed to me. To be a
  priest!--that is, to be chaste, to never love, to observe no distinction
  of sex or age, to turn from the sight of all beauty, to put out one's
  own eyes, to hide for ever crouching in the chill shadows of some church
  or cloister, to visit none but the dying, to watch by unknown corpses,
and ever bear about with one the black soutane as a garb of mourning
for oneself, so that your very dress might serve as a pall for your
coffin.

  
  

  And I felt life rising within me like a subterranean lake, expanding
  and overflowing; my blood leaped fiercely through my arteries; my long-restrained
  youth suddenly burst into active being, like the aloe which blooms
but once in a hundred years, and then bursts into blossom with a clap
of thunder.

  

What could I do in order to see Clarimonde once more? I had no pretext to offer for desiring
to leave the seminary, not knowing any person in the city.

I would not even be able to remain there but a short time, and was
only waiting my assignment to the curacy which I must thereafter occupy.

I tried to remove the bars of the window; but it was at a fearful
height from the ground, and I found that as I had no ladder it would
be useless to think of escaping thus.

And, furthermore, I could descend thence only by night in any event,
and afterward how should I be able to find my way through the inextricable
labyrinth of streets?

All these difficulties, which to many would have appeared altogether insignificant, were gigantic
to me, a poor seminarist who had fallen in love only the day before for the first time, without
experience, without money, without attire.

'Ah!' cried I to myself in my blindness, 'were I not a priest I could have seen her every day;
I might have been her lover, her spouse. Instead of being wrapped in this dismal shroud of mine
I would have had garments of silk and velvet, golden chains, a sword, and fair plumes like
other handsome young cavaliers. My hair, instead of being dishonoured by the tonsure, would
flow down upon my neck in waving curls; I would have a fine waxed moustache; I would be a
gallant.' But one hour passed before an altar, a few hastily articulated words, had for ever cut
me off from the number of the living, and I had myself sealed down
the stone of my own tomb; I had with my own hand bolted the gate of
my prison!

I went to the window.

The sky was beautifully blue; the trees had donned their spring robes;
nature seemed to be making parade of an ironical joy.

The Place was filled with people, some going, others coming; young beaux and young beauties were
sauntering in couples toward the groves and gardens; merry youths passed by, cheerily trolling
refrains of drinking-songs--it was all a picture of vivacity, life, animation, gaiety, which formed
a bitter contrast with my mourning and my solitude. On the steps of the gate sat a young mother
playing with her child. She kissed its little rosy mouth still impearled with drops of milk,
and performed, in order to amuse it, a thousand divine little puerilities such as only mothers
know how to invent. The father standing at a little distance smiled gently upon the charming group,
and with folded arms seemed to hug his joy to his heart. I could not endure that spectacle.
I closed the window with violence, and flung myself on my bed, my heart filled with frightful
hate and jealousy, and gnawed my fingers and my bedcovers like a tiger that has passed ten
days without food.

I know not how long I remained in this condition, but at last, while writhing on the bed in a fit
of spasmodic fury, I suddenly perceived the Abbé Sérapion, who was standing erect in the centre
of the room, watching me attentively. Filled with shame of myself, I let my head fall upon my
breast and covered my face with my hands.

'Romuald, my friend, something very extraordinary is transpiring within you,' observed Sérapion,
after a few moments' silence; 'your conduct is altogether inexplicable. You--always so quiet,
so pious, so gentle--you to rage in your cell like a wild beast! Take heed, brother--do not
listen to the suggestions of the devil The Evil Spirit, furious that you have consecrated yourself
for ever to the Lord, is prowling around you like a ravening wolf and making a last effort to
obtain possession of you. Instead of allowing yourself to be conquered, my dear Romuald, make
to yourself a cuirass of prayers, a buckler of mortifications, and combat the enemy like a
valiant man; you will then assuredly overcome him. Virtue must be proved by temptation, and gold
comes forth purer from the hands of the assayer. Fear not. Never allow yourself to become discouraged.
The most watchful and steadfast souls are at moments liable to such temptation. Pray, fast, meditate,
and the Evil Spirit will depart from you.'

The words of the Abbé Sérapion restored me to myself, and I became
a little more calm.

'I came,' he continued, 'to tell you that you have been appointed
to the curacy of C------.

The priest who had charge of it has just died, and Monseigneur the
Bishop has ordered me to have you installed there at once.

Be ready, therefore, to start to-morrow.' I responded with an inclination
of the head, and the Abbé retired.

I opened my missal and commenced reading some prayers, but the letters
became confused and blurred under my eyes, the thread of the ideas
entangled itself hopelessly in my brain, and the volume at last fell
from my hands without my being aware of it.

To leave to-morrow without having been able to see her again, to add
yet another barrier to the many already interposed between us, to
lose for ever all hope of being able to meet her, except, indeed,
through a miracle!

Even to write to her, alas! would be impossible, for by whom could
I dispatch my letter?

With my sacred character of priest, to whom could I dare unbosom myself, in whom could I confide?
I became a prey to the bitterest anxiety.

Then suddenly recurred to me the words of the Abbé Sérapion regarding
the artifices of the devil; and the strange character of the adventure,
the supernatural beauty of Clarimonde, the phosphoric light of her
eyes, the burning imprint of her hand, the agony into which she had
thrown me, the sudden change wrought within me when all my piety vanished
in a single instant--these and other things clearly testified to the
work of the Evil One, and perhaps that satiny hand was but the glove
which concealed his claws.

Filled with terror at these fancies, I again picked up the missal which had slipped from my knees
and fallen upon the floor, and once more gave myself up to prayer.

Next morning Sérapion came to take me away. Two mules freighted with our miserable valises awaited
us at the gate. He mounted one, and I the other as well as I knew how.

As we passed along the streets of the city, I gazed attentively at
all the windows and balconies in the hope of seeing Clarimonde, but
it was yet early in the morning, and the city had hardly opened its
eyes.

Mine sought to penetrate the blinds and window-curtains of all the palaces before which we
were passing. Sérapion doubtless attributed this curiosity to my admiration of the architecture,
for he slackened the pace of his animal in order to give me time to look around me. At last we passed
the city gates and commenced to mount the hill beyond. When we arrived at its summit I turned
to take a last look at the place where Clarimonde dwelt.

The shadow of a great cloud hung over all the city; the contrasting colours of its blue and
red roofs were lost in the uniform half-tint, through which here
and there floated upward, like white flakes of foam, the smoke of
freshly kindled fires.

By a singular optical effect one edifice, which surpassed in height all the neighbouring buildings
that were still dimly veiled by the vapours, towered up, fair and lustrous with the gilding
of a solitary beam of sunlight--although actually more than a league away it seemed quite near.
The smallest details of its architecture were plainly distinguishable--the turrets, the platforms,
the window-casements, and even the swallow-tailed weather-vanes.

'What is that palace I see over there, all lighted up by the sun?'
I asked Sérapion.

He shaded his eyes with his hand, and having looked in the direction
indicated, replied: 'It is the ancient palace which the Prince Concini
has given to the courtesan Clarimonde.

Awful things are done there!'

At that instant, I know not yet whether it was a reality or an illusion,
I fancied I saw gliding along the terrace a shapely white figure,
which gleamed for a moment in passing and as quickly vanished.

It was Clarimonde.

Oh, did she know that at that very hour, all feverish and restless--from the height of the rugged
road which separated me from her, and which, alas!

I could never more descend--I was directing my eyes upon the palace where she dwelt, and which a mocking
beam of sunlight seemed to bring nigh to me, as though inviting me to enter therein as its
lord? Undoubtedly she must have known it, for her soul was too sympathetically united with
mine not to have felt its least emotional thrill, and that subtle sympathy it must have been
which prompted her to climb--although clad only in her nightdress--to the summit of the terrace,
amid the icy dews of the morning.

The shadow gained the palace, and the scene became to the eye only a motionless ocean of roofs
and gables, amid which one mountainous undulation was distinctly visible. Sérapion urged his
mule forward, my own at once followed at the same gait, and a sharp
angle in the road at last hid the city of S------ for ever from my
eyes, as I was destined never to return thither.

At the close of a weary three-days' journey through dismal country
fields, we caught sight of the cock upon the steeple of the church
which I was to take charge of, peeping above the trees, and after
having followed some winding roads fringed with thatched cottages
and little gardens, we found ourselves in front of the façade, which
certainly possessed few features of magnificence.

A porch ornamented with some mouldings, and two or three pillars
rudely hewn from sandstone; a tiled roof with counterforts of the
same sandstone as the pillars--that was all.

To the left lay the cemetery, overgrown with high weeds, and having
a great iron cross rising up in its centre; to the right stood the
presbytery under the shadow of the church.

It was a house of the most extreme simplicity and frigid cleanliness.

We entered the enclosure. A few chickens were picking up some oats scattered upon the ground; accustomed,
seemingly, to the black habit of ecclesiastics, they showed no fear of our presence and scarcely
troubled themselves to get out of our way. A hoarse, wheezy barking fell upon our ears, and we
saw an aged dog running toward us.

It was my predecessor's dog.

He had dull bleared eyes, grizzled hair, and every mark of the greatest age to which a dog
can possibly attain.

I patted him gently, and he proceeded at once to march along beside me with an air of satisfaction
unspeakable. A very old woman, who had been the housekeeper of the former curé, also came to meet
us, and after having invited me into a little back parlour, asked
whether I intended to retain her.

I replied that I would take care of her, and the dog, and the chickens, and all the furniture
her master had bequeathed her at his death. At this she became fairly transported with joy,
and the Abbé Sérapion at once paid her the price which she asked for her little property.

As soon as my installation was over, the Abbé Sérapion returned to the seminary. I was, therefore,
left alone, with no one but myself to look to for aid or counsel. The thought of Clarimonde
again began to haunt me, and in spite of all my endeavours to banish it, I always found it
present in my meditations.

One evening, while promenading in my little garden along the walks bordered with box-plants,
I fancied that I saw through the elm-trees the figure of a woman,
who followed my every movement, and that I beheld two sea-green eyes
gleaming through the foliage; but it was only an illusion, and on
going round to the other side of the garden, I could find nothing
except a footprint on the sanded walk--a footprint so small that it
seemed to have been made by the foot of a child.

The garden was enclosed by very high walls. I searched every nook and corner of it, but could discover
no one there. I have never succeeded in fully accounting for this circumstance, which, after
all, was nothing compared with the strange things which happened to me afterward.

For a whole year I lived thus, filling all the duties of my calling with the most scrupulous
exactitude, praying and fasting, exhorting and lending ghostly aid to the sick, and bestowing alms
even to the extent of frequently depriving myself of the very necessaries
of life.

But I felt a great aridness within me, and the sources of grace seemed closed against me. I never
found that happiness which should spring from the fulfilment of a holy mission; my thoughts
were far away, and the words of Clarimonde were ever upon my lips like an involuntary refrain. Oh,
brother, meditate well on this! Through having but once lifted my eyes to look upon a woman, through
one fault apparently so venial, I have for years remained a victim to the most miserable agonies,
and the happiness of my life has been destroyed for ever.

I will not longer dwell upon those defeats, or on those inward victories invariably followed
by yet more terrible falls, but will at once proceed to the facts
of my story.

One night my door-bell was long and violently rung.

The aged housekeeper arose and opened to the stranger, and the figure of a man, whose complexion
was deeply bronzed, and who was richly clad in a foreign costume,
with a poniard at his girdle, appeared under the rays of Barbara's
lantern.

Her first impulse was one of terror, but the stranger reassured her, and stated that he desired
to see me at once on matters relating to my holy calling. Barbara invited him upstairs, where
I was on the point of retiring. The stranger told me that his mistress, a very noble lady, was
lying at the point of death, and desired to see a priest.

I replied that I was prepared to follow him, took with me the sacred
articles necessary for extreme unction, and descended in all haste.

Two horses black as the night itself stood without the gate, pawing the ground with impatience,
and veiling their chests with long streams of smoky vapour exhaled from their nostrils. He held
the stirrup and aided me to mount upon one; then, merely laying his hand upon the pommel of the
saddle, he vaulted on the other, pressed the animal's sides with his knees, and loosened rein.
The horse bounded forward with the velocity of an arrow. Mine, of which the stranger held the
bridle, also started off at a swift gallop, keeping up with his companion. We devoured the
road. The ground flowed backward beneath us in a long streaked line of pale gray, and the black
silhouettes of the trees seemed fleeing by us on either side like
an army in rout.

We passed through a forest so profoundly gloomy that I felt my flesh creep in the chill darkness with
superstitious fear. The showers of bright sparks which flew from the stony road under the
ironshod feet of our horses remained glowing in our wake like a fiery
trail; and had any one at that hour of the night beheld us both--my
guide and myself--he must have taken us for two spectres riding upon
nightmares.

Witch-fires ever and anon flitted across the road before us, and the night-birds shrieked fearsomely
in the depth of the woods beyond, where we beheld at intervals glow the phosphorescent eyes
of wild cats. The manes of the horses became more and more dishevelled, the sweat streamed
over their flanks, and their breath came through their nostrils hard
and fast.

But when he found them slacking pace, the guide reanimated them by uttering a strange, gutteral,
unearthly cry, and the gallop recommenced with fury. At last the whirlwind race ceased; a huge
black mass pierced through with many bright points of light suddenly rose before us, the hoofs of
our horses echoed louder upon a strong wooden drawbridge, and we rode under a great vaulted archway
which darkly yawned between two enormous towers. Some great excitement
evidently reigned in the castle.

Servants with torches were crossing the courtyard in every direction, and above lights were
ascending and descending from landing to landing.

I obtained a confused glimpse of vast masses of architecture--columns, arcades, flights of steps,
stairways--a royal voluptuousness and elfin magnificence of construction worthy of fairyland.
A negro page--the same who had before brought me the tablet from Clarimonde, and whom I instantly
recognised--approached to aid me in dismounting, and the major-domo, attired in black velvet
with a gold chain about his neck, advanced to meet me, supporting
himself upon an ivory cane.

Large tears were falling from his eyes and streaming over his cheeks and white beard. 'Too late!'
he cried, sorrowfully shaking his venerable head.

'Too late, sir priest! But if you have not been able to save the soul, come at least to watch by the
poor body.'

He took my arm and conducted me to the death-chamber. I wept not less bitterly than he, for
I had learned that the dead one was none other than that Clarimonde whom I had so deeply and
so wildly loved.

A prie-dieu stood at the foot of the bed; a bluish flame flickering in a bronze patern filled all the
room with a wan, deceptive light, here and there bringing out in
the darkness at intervals some projection of furniture or cornice.

In a chiselled urn upon the table there was a faded white rose, whose leaves--excepting one
that still held--had all fallen, like odorous tears, to the foot of the vase. A broken black mask,
a fan, and disguises of every variety, which were lying on the armchairs, bore witness that death
had entered suddenly and unannounced into that sumptuous dwelling. Without daring to cast my
eyes upon the bed, I knelt down and commenced to repeat the Psalms for the Dead, with exceeding
fervour, thanking God that He had placed the tomb between me and the memory of this woman,
so that I might thereafter be able to utter her name in my prayers
as a name for ever sanctified by death.

But my fervour gradually weakened, and I fell insensibly into a reverie.

That chamber bore no semblance to a chamber of death. In lieu of the fetid and cadaverous odours
which I had been accustomed to breathe during such funereal vigils, a languorous vapour of Oriental
perfume--I know not what amorous odour of woman--softly floated through
the tepid air.

That pale light seemed rather a twilight gloom contrived for voluptuous pleasure, than a substitute
for the yellow-flickering watch-tapers which shine by the side of corpses. I thought upon the
strange destiny which enabled me to meet Clarimonde again at the very moment when she was lost
to me for ever, and a sigh of regretful anguish escaped from my breast.

Then it seemed to me that some one behind me had also sighed, and I turned round to look. It
was only an echo.

But in that moment my eyes fell upon the bed of death which they
had till then avoided.

The red damask curtains, decorated with large flowers worked in embroidery
and looped up with gold bullion, permitted me to behold the fair dead,
lying at full length, with hands joined upon her bosom.

She was covered with a linen wrapping of dazzling whiteness, which
formed a strong contrast with the gloomy purple of the hangings, and
was of so fine a texture that it concealed nothing of her body's charming
form, and allowed the eye to follow those beautiful outlines--undulating
like the neck of a swan--which even death had not robbed of their
supple grace.

She seemed an alabaster statue executed by some skilful sculptor to place upon the tomb of
a queen, or rather, perhaps, like a slumbering maiden over whom the
silent snow had woven a spotless veil.

I could no longer maintain my constrained attitude of prayer. The air of the alcove intoxicated
me, that febrile perfume of half-faded roses penetrated my very brain,
and I commenced to pace restlessly up and down the chamber, pausing
at each turn before the bier to contemplate the graceful corpse lying
beneath the transparency of its shroud.

Wild fancies came thronging to my brain.

I thought to myself that she might not, perhaps, be really dead;
that she might only have feigned death for the purpose of bringing
me to her castle, and then declaring her love.

 Bank account more than sufficient for his small wants.

XIII--Miss Charlotte Hunsicker, one of last season's débutantes. Given to tennis and all outdoor
sports generally. Offhand but stanch. It was she who gave a woman's care to Mrs. Taylor when
the latter fainted in Room B.

XIV--Museum attendant coming up from basement.

XV--Eliza Blake a school-teacher, convalescing after a long illness.

XVI--Officer Rudd.

XVII--Tommy Evans, boy scout. Did not lose his game. Went to the field after lunching on pie
at a bakery.

XVIII--Mrs. Nathaniel Lord, wealthy widow, living at the St. Regis.

XIX--Mrs. Ermentrude Taylor. (Nothing to add to what is already known.)

XX--Henry Abbott, Columbia student, good-hearted and reliable, but living in a world of his
own to such an extent as to make him the butt of his fellow students.

XXI-XXII--Young couple from Haverstraw. Just married. He a drug-clerk, she a farmer's daughter.
Both regarded in their home town as harmless.

XXIII--James Correy, attendant. Bachelor, living with widowed mother. Fair record on the whole.
Reprimanded once, not for negligence, but for some foolish act unbecoming his position. Thorough
acquaintance with the museum and its exhibits. A valuable man, well liked, notwithstanding
the one lapse alluded to. At home and among his friends regarded as the best fellow going.
A little free, perhaps, when unduly excited, but not given to drink and very fond of games.
A member once of a club devoted to contests with foils and target-shooting. Always champion.
Visits a certain young lady three times a week.

XXIV--Curator Jewett. A widower with two grandchildren--a daughter married to an Englishman
and living in Ringold, Hants, and a son, owner of a large ranch in California. Lives, when
in city, at Hotel Gorham. Known too well for any description of himself or character to be
necessary here. If he has a fault, or rather a weakness, it is his extreme pride in the museum
and his own conduct of its many affairs.

As on the evening before, Mr. Gryce lingered longest over one name. He was still brooding anxiously
over it when the telephone rang at his elbow and he was called up from Headquarters. Cablegrams
had been received from London and Paris in acknowledgment of those sent, and in both these
cablegrams promises were made of a full examination into the antecedents of Madame Duclos and
her companion, Miss Willetts.

That was all. No further news regarding them from any quarter. Mr. Gryce hung up the receiver
with a sigh.

"It is likely to be a long road full of unexpected turns and perilously near the precipice's
edge," he muttered in weary comment to himself. "Nothing to start from but----"

Here Sweetwater walked in.

Mr. Gryce showed surprise. He had not expected to see the young man himself. Perhaps he was
not quite ready to, for he seemed to shrink, for one brief instant, as from an unwelcome presence.

But the cheer which always entered with Sweetwater was contagious, and the old detective smiled
as the newcomer approached, saying significantly:

"I had those dreams you spoke of last night, Mr. Gryce, and found them too weighty for the
telephone."

"I see, I see! Sit down, Sweetwater, and tell me how they ran. I haven't as much confidence
in my own dreams as I hope to have in yours. Speak up! Mention names, if you want to. No echo
follows confidences uttered in this room."

"I know that; but for the present perhaps it will be best for me to follow your lead, and when
I have to speak of a certain person, say X as you do. X, Mr. Gryce, is the man who for reasons
we do not yet understand brought up the discarded bow from the cellar and stored it somewhere
within reach on the floor above. X is also the man who for the same unknown reason robbed the
quiver hanging in the southern gallery of one of its arrows and kept the same on hand or in
hiding, till he could mate it with the bow. My dreams showed me this picture:

"A man with a predominating interest in sport, but otherwise active in business, correct in
his dealings and respectable in private life, sees and frequently handles weapons of ancient
and modern make which rouse his interest and awaken the longing, common to such men, to test
his skill in their use. Sometimes it is a sword, which he twirls vigorously in sly corners.
Again, it is a bow calling for a yeoman's strength to pull. He is a man of sense and for a
long time goes no further than the play I have just indicated. Perhaps he has no temptation
to go further until one unfortunate day he comes upon an idle bow, rotting away in the cellar."

Here Mr. Gryce looked sharply up--a proof of awakened interest which Sweetwater did not heed.
Possibly he was not expected to. At all events he continued rapidly:

"It was a fine, strong bow, a typical one from the plains. He took it up--examined it closely--noted
a slight defect in it somewhere--and put it back. But he did not forget it. Before many days
had passed, he goes down cellar again and brings it up and stands it on end in--where do you
think, sir?--in the closet of the Curator's office!"

"How did you learn that?"

"From the woman who comes every day to wipe up the floors. I happened to think she might have
something worth while to tell us, so I hunted her up----"

"Go on, boy. Another long mark in your favor."

"Thank you, sir. I'm relating a dream, you know. He stands it on end then in this closet into
which nobody is supposed to go but the Curator and the scrubwoman, and there he leaves it,
possibly as yet with no definite intention. How long it stood there I cannot say. It was well
hidden, it seems, by something or other hanging over it. Nor am I altogether sure that it might
not be standing there yet if the impulse swaying X had not been strengthened by seeing daily
over his head a quiver full of arrows admirably fitted for this bow. Time has no place in dreams,
or I might be able to state the day and the hour when he stood looking at the ring of keys
lying on the Curator's desk, and struck with what it might do for him, singled out one of the
keys which he placed in the keyhole of a door opening upon a certain little iron staircase.
He was alone, but he stopped to listen before turning that key. I can see him, can't you? His
air is a guilty one; but it is the guilt of folly, not of premeditated crime. He wants a try
at that bow and recognizes his weakness and laughs.

"But his longing holds, and running up the little staircase to a second door, he unlocks this
also and after another moment of hesitation pulls it open. He has brought the bow with him,
but he does not take it past the drapery hanging straight down before his eyes. He simply drops
it in the doorway and leaves it there within easy reach from the gallery if ever his impulse
should be strong enough to lead him to make an attempt at striking a feather from the Indian
headdress on the other side of the court. You think him mad. So do I, but dreams are filled
with that kind of madness; and when I see him shut the door upon this bow, and steal back without
relocking it or the one below, I have no other excuse than this to give in answer to your criticisms."

"I do not criticise; I listen, Sweetwater."

"You will criticise now. As Bunyan says in his 'Pilgrim's Progress': 'I dreamed again!' This
time I saw the museum proper. It was filled with visitors. The morning of May twenty-second
was a busy one, I am told, and a whole lot of people, singly and in groups, were continually
passing up and down the marble steps and along the two galleries. Partaking of the feelings
of the one whose odd impulses I am endeavoring to describe, I was very uneasy and very restless
until these crowds had thinned and most of the guests vanished from the building. The hands
of the clock were stealing toward twelve--the hour of greatest quiet and fewest visitors. As
it reached the quarter mark, I saw what I was looking for, the man X reaching for one of those
arrows hanging in the southern gallery, and slipping it inside his coat.--Did you speak, sir?"

No, Mr. Gryce had not spoken; and Sweetwater, after an interval of uncertainty, went quietly on:

"As I saw both of his hands quite free the next minute, I judge that something had been attached
to the lining of that coat to hold the arrow by its feathered head. But this is a deduction
rather than a fact."

He stopped abruptly. An exclamation--one of Mr. Gryce's very own--had left that gentleman's
lips, and Sweetwater felt that he must pause if only for an instant, to enjoy his small triumph.
But the delay was short.

"Go on," said Mr. Gryce; and Sweetwater obeyed, but in lowered tones as though the vision he
was describing was actually before his eyes.

"Next, I see a sweep of tapestry, and an eager, peering figure passing slowly across it. It
is that of the love-lorn Travis watching his inamorata tripping up the marble staircase and
turning at its top in the direction of the opposite gallery. His is a timid soul, and anxious
as he is to watch her, he is not at all anxious to be detected in the act of doing so. So he
slips behind the huge pedestal towering near him, thus causing the whole gallery to appear
empty to the eyes of X, now entering it at the other end. This latter has come there with but
one idea in his head--to shoot an arrow across the court at the mark I have mentioned. It may
have been on a dare--sometimes I think it was; but shoot it he means to, before a fresh crowd
collects.

"He already has, as you will remember, the arrow hidden somewhere about his person, and it
is only a few steps to the edge of the tapestry behind which he has secreted the bow. If he
takes a look opposite, it is at the moment when both Mrs. Taylor and Miss Willetts are screened
from his view by one of the partitions separating the various sections. For unless he felt
the way to be free for his arrow, he would never have proceeded to slip behind his chosen pedestal,
secure the bow, pause to string it, then crouch for his aim in such apparent confidence. For
after he has left the open gallery and limited his outlook to what is visible beyond the loophole
through which he intends to shoot, he can see--as we know from Mr. La Flèche--little more than
the spot where the cap hangs and the one narrow line between. Unhappily, it was across this
line the young girl leaped just as the arrow left the bow. Don't you see it, sir? I do; and
I see what follows, too."

"The escape of X?"

"Yes. Inadvertently, as you see, he has committed a horrible crime; he can never recall it.
Whatever his remorse or shame, nothing will ever restore the victim of his folly to life, while
he himself has many days before him--days which would be ruined if his part in this tragedy
were known. Shall he confess to it, then, or shall he fly (the way is so easy), and leave it
to fate to play his game--fate, whose well-known kindness to fools would surely favor him?
It does not take long for such thoughts to pass through a man's head, and before the dying
cry of his innocent victim had ceased to echo through those galleries, he is behind the tapestry
and on his way toward the court. Beyond that, my dream does not go. How about yours, sir?"

"My dream was of a crime, not of an accident. No man could be such a fool as you have made
out this X of yours to be. Only an extraordinary purpose or some imperious necessity could
drive a man to shoot an arrow across an open court where people were passing hither and yon,
even if he didn't see anyone in the gallery."

"By which you mean----"

"That he had already marked the approach of his victim and was ready with his weapon."

"You are undoubtedly right, and I only wish to say this: that the purpose in my relation was
merely to show the method and manner of this shooting, leaving you to put on the emphasis of
crime if you saw fit."

The gravity with which Mr. Gryce received this suggestion had the effect of slightly embarrassing
Sweetwater. Yet he presently ventured to add after a moment of respectful waiting:

"Did you know that after I woke from my dream I had a moment's doubt as to its accuracy on
one point? The bow was undoubtedly flung behind the curtain, but the man----"

He paused abruptly. A morsel of clean white paper had just been pushed across the table under
his eyes, and a peremptory voice was saying:

"Write me his name. I will do the same for you."

XIV

A LOOP OF SILK

Sweetwater hesitated.

"I am very fond of the one of your own choosing," he smiled, "but if you insist----"

Mr. Gryce was already writing.

In another moment the two slips were passed in exchange across the table.

Instantly, a simultaneous exclamation left the lips of both.

Each read a name he was in no wise prepared to see. They had been following diverging lines
instead of parallel ones; and it took some few minutes for them to adjust themselves to this
new condition.

Then Mr. Gryce spoke:

"What led you into loading up Correy with an act which to accept as true would oblige us to
deny every premise we have been at such pains to establish?"

"Because--and I hope you will pardon me, Mr. Gryce, since our conclusions are so different--I
found it easier to attribute this deed of folly--or crime, if we can prove it such--to a man
young in years than to one old enough to know better."

"Very good; that is undoubtedly an excellent reason."

As this was said with an accent we will for want of a better word call dry, Sweetwater, hardy
as he was, flushed to his ears. But then any prick from Mr. Gryce went very deep with him.

"Perhaps," he ventured, "you will give even less indulgence to what I have to add in way of
further excuse."

"I shall have to hear it first."

"Correy is a sport, an incorrigible one; it is his only weakness. He bets like an Englishman--not
for the money, for the sums he risks are small, but for the love of it--the fun--the transient
excitement It might be"--here Sweetwater's words came slowly and with shamefaced pauses--"that
the shooting of that arrow--I believe I said something like this before--was the result of a dare."

A halt took place in the quick tattoo which Mr. Gryce's fingers were drumming out on the table-top.
It was infinitesimal in length, but it gave Sweetwater courage to add:

"Then, I hear that he wishes to marry a rich girl and shrinks from proposing to her on account
of his small salary."

"What has that got to do with it?"

"Nothing so far as I can see. I am only elaborating the meager report lying there under your
hand. But I recognize my folly. You ordered me to dream, and I did so. Cannot we forget my
unworthy vaporings and enter upon the consideration of what may prove more profitable?"

Here he glanced down at the slip of paper he himself held--the slip which Mr. Gryce had handed
him with a single word written on it, and that word a name.

"In a moment," was Mr. Gryce's answer. "First explain to me how, with the facts all in mind,
and your chart before your eyes, you reconciled Correy's position on the side staircase two
minutes after the shooting with your theory of a quick escape to the court by means of the
door back of the tapestry? Haven't you hurried matters to get him so far in such a short space
of time?"

"Mr. Gryce, I have heard you say yourself that this question of time has been, from the first,
our greatest difficulty. Even with these three means of escape in our minds, it is difficult
to see how it was possible for anyone to get from the gallery to the court in the minute or
so elapsing between the cry of the dying girl and the appearance at her side of the man studying
coins in the adjoining section."

"You are right. There was a delay somewhere, as we shall find later on. But granting this delay,
a man would have to move fast to go the full length of the court from the Curator's room even
in the time which this small delay might afford him. But perhaps you cut this inextricable
knot by locating Correy somewhere else than where he placed himself at the making of the chart."

"No, I cut it in another way. You remember my starting to tell you just now how, in my dissatisfaction
with a certain portion of my dream, I refused to believe in the escape of my Mr. X by the way
of the Curator's office. The tapestry was lifted, the bow flung behind, but the man stepped
back instead of forward. An open flight along the gallery commended itself more to him than
the doubtful one previously arranged for. If you will accept that for fact, which of course
you will not, it is easy to see how Correy might have been somewhere on that staircase when
the inspiration came to turn the appearance of flight into a show of his own innocence, by
a quick rush back into the further gallery and a consequent loud-mouthed alarm. But I see that
I am but getting deeper and deeper in the quagmire of a bad theory badly stated. I am forgetting----"

"Many things, Sweetwater. I will only mention a very simple one. The man who shot the arrow
wore gloves. You wouldn't attribute any such extraordinary precaution as that to a fellow shooting
an arrow across the court on a dare?"

"You wouldn't expect it, sir. But in going about the museum that afternoon, I came upon Correy's
coat hanging on its peg. In one of its pockets was a pair of kid gloves."

"You say the fellow is courting a rich girl," suggested Mr. Gryce. "Under those circumstances
some show of vanity is excusable. Certainly he would not carry his folly so far as to put on
gloves for the shooting match with which you credit him, unless there was criminal intent back
of his folly--which, of course, would be as hard for you as for me to believe."

Sweetwater winced, but noting the kindly twinkle with which Mr. Gryce softened the bitterness
of this lesson, he brightened again and listened with becoming patience as the old man went
on to say:

"To discuss probabilities in connection with this other name seems futile this morning. The
ease with which one can twist the appearances of things to fit a preconceived theory as exemplified
by the effort you have just made warns us to be chary of pushing one's idea too far without
the firmest of bases to support it. If you find a man's coat showing somewhere on its lining
evidences that there had once been sewed to it a loop of the exact dimensions of the one I
passed over to you last night, I should consider it a much more telling clue to the personality
of X than a pair of gloves in the pocket of a man who in all probability intends to finish
up the day with a call on the girl he admires."

"I understand." Sweetwater was quite himself again. "But do you know that this is no easy task
you are giving me, Mr. Gryce. Where a man has but two coats, or three at best, it might not
be so hard, perhaps, to get at them. But some men have a dozen, and if I don't mistake----"

"Sweetwater, I meant to give you a task of no little difficulty. It will keep you out of mischief."

XV

NEWS FROM FRANCE

For the next three days the impatience of the public met with nothing but disappointment. The
police were reticent,--more reticent far than usual,--and the papers, powerless to add to the
facts already published, had little but conjectures to offer.

The hunt for Madame Duclos continued, joined in now by the general public. But for all the
efforts made, aided by a careful search through her entire baggage, there was as little known
concerning her as on the morning of her disappearance.

Nor did any better success follow the exhibition at the morgue of the poor little victim's
innocent body. The mystery covering the whole affair seemed to be impenetrable, and the rush
made on the museum upon its first reopening to the public was such as to lead to its being
closed again till some limit could be put upon the attendance.

And thus matters stood when one morning the country was startled, and the keenest interest
again aroused in this remarkable case, by an announcement received from France to the effect
that the young lady so unfortunately killed in one of the public buildings in New York City
was, from the description sent, not the ward of the woman Antoinette Duclos, but her own child,
Angeline Duclos. That the two were well known in St. Pierre sur Loire, where they had lived
for many years in the relationship mentioned. At the convent where she was educated, she had
been registered under the name of Duclos--also at the hotel where she and her mother had spent
a few days before leaving for England. Though of pure French descent, the father being a Breton,
they could not furnish her birth-certificate, as she had not been born in France. According
to the records to be seen at the convent, the father, Achille Duclos, was a professor of languages,
whom her mother had met in England and married in France before going to the States. So far
as known, their story was a simple one, affording no reason, so far as could be learned, for
any change of name on the part of the young woman, in her visit to America.

This was supplemented by a word from Scotland Yard, England, received a few hours after the
other, to the effect that Madame Duclos and Miss Willetts arrived at the Ritz from Dover, on
the morning of May 16th, and left the next morning for Southampton. They spent the evening
at the theater with friends who called for them in a public automobile. These people had not
been found, but they had been advertised for and might yet show up. Nothing more could be learned
of either of them.

Now here was an astonishing discovery! That two women known and recognized as mother and daughter
in France should pass for unrelated companions on leaving that country to enter ours. What
were we Americans to think of this, especially in the light of the tragic event which so soon
terminated this companionship.

That the French records, imperfect as they were, were to be relied upon as stating the truth
as to the exact nature of the connection between these two, there could be no doubt. But granting
this, what fresh complexities were thus brought into an affair already teeming with incongruities--nay,
absolute contradictions.

Madame Duclos' conduct, as shown toward her young charge, had seemed sufficiently strange and
inconsistent when looked upon as that of governess or guardian. But for a mother, and a French
mother at that, to allow a young and inexperienced girl to go alone to a strange museum on
the very day of their arrival, and then, with or without knowledge of what had happened to
her there, to efface herself by flight without promise of return, was inconceivable to anyone
acquainted with the most ordinary of French conventions.

Some sinister secret, despite the seeming harmlessness of their lives, must hide behind such
unnatural conduct! Was it one connected with or entirely dissociated from the tragedy which
had terminated the poor child's existence? This was the great question. This was what gave
new zest to the search for the dark-skinned Frenchwoman, with her drooping eyelid and hesitating
walk, and led Sweetwater to whisper into Gryce's ear, as they stepped out that same day from
Headquarters:

"No more nonsense now. We must find that woman or her dead body before the next twenty-four
hours have elapsed. With our fingers on that end of the string----"

"We will get hold of some family secret, but not of the immediate one which especially concerns
us. Madame Duclos sent her daughter unattended to the museum, but she did not direct the shaft
which killed her. That was the work of our friend X. Let us then make sure that we fit the
right man to this algebraic symbol, and trust to her testimony to convict him."

By this time they had reached the taxi which was to convey Mr. Gryce home. But though Sweetwater
lent his arm to help the old man in, he did it with such an air of hesitation that it caused
the other to remark:

"You have not ended your argument. There is something more you want to say. What is it? Speak up."

"No, no. I am quite satisfied, so far as the Duclos matter is concerned. It is only--would
you mind stepping aside for a moment till I tell you a bit of gossip which has just come to
my ears? Thank you, sir. Forbes is all right" (Forbes was the chauffeur), "but confidences
are sacred and this thing was told me in confidence."

The humorous twist of his features as he said this quite transformed his very plain countenance.
Mr. Gryce, noting it, began to stare at the first isolated object handy, which in this case
happened to be the crooked end of his umbrella--a sign, to those who knew him well, of awakened
interest.

"Well? Let's hear," he said.

"It doesn't sound like much; but it will probably be news to you, as it certainly was to me.
It's this, Mr. Gryce: A certain gentleman we know has been contemplating matrimony; but since
this accident happened at the museum,--that is, within the last two days,--the engagement has
been broken off."

"So! But I thought he had not got so far as an engagement. You mean young Correy----"

"No, Mr. Gryce, I do not. I mean--the other."

"The other! Well, that's worth listening to. Engaged, eh, and now all of a sudden free again?
At whose instance, Sweetwater, his or hers? Did you hear?"

"Not exactly, but--it's quite a story, sir. I had it from his chauffeur and will tell it to
you later if you are in a hurry to go home."

"Home! Come back with me into Headquarters. I've got to sleep to-night."

Sweetwater laughed, and together they retraced their steps.

"You see, sir," the young detective began as they drew their chairs together in an unoccupied
corner, "you gave me a task the other day which called for the help of a friend--one at court,
I mean, a fellow who not only knows the gentleman but has access to his person and his wardrobe.
X does not keep a man-servant--men of his intellectual type seldom do--but does own a limousine
and consequently employs a chauffeur. To meet and make this chauffeur mine took me just two
days. I don't know how I did it. I never know how I do it," he added with a sheepish smile
as Mr. Gryce gave utterance to his old-fashioned "Umph!" "I don't flatter and I don't bring
out my pocketbook or offer drinks or even cigars, but I get 'em, as you know, and get 'em strong,
perhaps because I don't make any great effort.

"After an evening spent in the garage with this man, he was ready to talk, and this is what
slipped out, among a lot of nonsensical gossip. Mr. X, the real Mr. X this time, has, besides
his apartment in New York, a place on Long Island. The latter has been recently bought and,
though fine enough, is being added to and refitted as no man at his age would take the trouble
of doing, if he hadn't a woman in mind. The chauffeur--Holmes is his name--is no fool, and
has seen for some time that Mr. X, for all his goings to and fro and the many calls he is in
the habit of making on a certain young lady, did not expect him--that is, Holmes--to notice
anything beyond the limits of his work, or to recognize in any way his employer's secret intentions.
But fortunately for us, this man Holmes is just one of those singularly meddlesome people whose
curiosity grows with every attempt at repression; and when, coincident with that disastrous
happening at the museum, all these loverlike attentions ceased and no calls were made and no
presents sent, and gloom instead of cheer marked his employer's manner, he made up his mind
to sacrifice a portion of his dignity rather than endure the fret of a mystery he did not understand.
This meant not only keeping his eyes open,--this he had always done,--but his ears as well.

"The young lady, whose name he never mentioned, lives not in the city but in that same Long
Island village where Mr. X's country-house is in the process of renovation. If he, Holmes,
should ever be so fortunate as to be ordered to drive there again, he knew of a gravel walk
running under the balcony where the two often sat. He would make the acquaintance of that gravel
walk instead of sitting out the hour somewhere in the rear, as he had hitherto been accustomed
to do. What's the use of having ears if you don't use them? Nobody would be any the worse,
and his mind would be at rest.

"And do you know, sir, that he did actually carry this cowardly resolution through. There came
a night--I think it was Tuesday--when the order came, and they took the road to Belport. Not
a word did his employer utter the whole way. Solemn and still he sat, and when they arrived
he descended without a word, rang the bell and entered the house. It was very warm, that night,
Holmes said, and before long he heard the glass doors open onto the balcony, and knew that
his wished-for chance had come. Leaving the limousine, he crept around to secure a place among
the bushes, and what he heard while there seemed to compensate him for what he called his loss
of dignity. The young girl was crying, and the man was talking to her kindly enough but in
a way to end whatever hopes she may have had.

"Holmes heard him say: 'It cannot be, now. Circumstances have changed for me lately, and much
as I regret it I must ask you to be so good as to forgive me for giving up our plans.' Then
he offered her money,--an annuity, I believe they call it,--but she cried out at that, saying
it was love she wanted, to be petted and cared for--money she could do without. When he showed
himself again in front, he was stiffer and more solemn than ever, and said 'Home,' in a dreary
way which made the chauffeur feel decidedly uncomfortable.

"Of course Holmes is quite blind to what this all means, but you may possibly see some connection
between this sudden act of sacrifice on X's part and the work of the arrow. At all events,
I thought you ought to know that Mr. X's closet holds a skeleton which he will doubtless take
every pains to keep securely locked from general view. Holmes says that his last word to the
disappointed girl was in the way of warning. No mention of this break in their plans was to
be made without his sanction."

"Good work, Sweetwater! You have strengthened my hands wonderfully. Does this fellow Holmes
know you for a police-detective?"

"Indeed not, sir. That would be fatal to our friendship, I am sure. I haven't even let him
discover that what he was burning to tell had any especial interest for me. I let him ramble
on with just a word here and there to show I wasn't bored. He hasn't an idea----"

"Very good. Now, what do you propose to do next?"

"To take up my residence in Belport."

"Why Belport?"

"Because X proposes to move there, bag and baggage, this very week."

"Before his house is done?"

"Yes. He hates the city. Wants to have an eye to the changes being made. Perhaps he thinks
a little work of this kind may distract him."

"And you?"

"Was a master carpenter once, you know."

"I see."

"And have a friend on the spot who promises to recommend me."

"Are workmen wanted there?"

"A good one, very much."

"I'm sure you'll fill the bill."

"I shall try to, sir."

"But for the risk you run of being recognized, I should bet on you, Sweetwater."

"I know; people will not forget the unfortunate shape of my nose."

"You were up and down the museum for hours. He must know your face like a book."

"It can't be helped, I shall keep out of sight as much as possible whenever he is around. I
am an expert workman in the line wanted. I understand my trade, and he will see that I do and
doubt his eyes rather than stretch probabilities to the point of connecting me with the Force.
Besides, I get quite another expression when my hands get in touch with the wood; and I can
look a man in the eye, if I have to, without a quiver of self-consciousness. His will drop
before mine will."

"Your name as carpenter?"

"Jacob Shott. It's the name by which Holmes already knows me."

"Well, well, the game may be worth the candle. You can soon tell. I will keep you posted."

The rest was business with which we need not concern ourselves.

BOOK III

STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS

XVI

FRIENDS

A shaded walk, with a glimpse of sea beyond, embowering trees, a stretch of lawn on one side,
and on the other the dormer windows of a fine old house half hidden by scaffolding, from which
there came now and then the quick strokes of a workman's hammer.

It was half-past four, if the sharp little note of a cuckoo-clock, snapping out one, told the
time correctly.

Two men are pacing this leafy retreat, both of whom we have seen before, but under circumstances
so distracting that we took little note of their appearance, fine as it undoubtedly was in
either case. However, we are more at leisure now, and will pause for an instant to give you
some idea of these two prominent men, with one of whom our story will henceforth have very
much to do.

One of them--the Curator of our famous museum--lacks comeliness of figure, though at moments
he can be very impressive. We can therefore recognize him at a distance by means of a certain
ungainliness of stride sometimes seen in a man wholly given over to intellectual pursuits.
But when he turns and you get a glimpse of his face, you experience at once the scope of mind
and charm of spirit which make his countenance a marked one in the metropolis. A little gray
about the temples, a tendency--growing upon him, alas!--to raise his hand to his ear when called
upon to listen, show that he has already passed the meridian of life; but in his quick glance,
and clear and rapid speech, youth still lingers, making of him a companion delightful to many
and admirable to all.

The other--Carleton Roberts, his bosom friend, and the museum's chief director--is of a different
type, but no less striking to the eye. For him, personality has done much toward raising him
to his present status among the leading men of New York. While not tall, he is tall enough
never to look short, owing to the trim elegance of his figure and the quiet dignity of his
carriage. He does not need to turn his face to impress you with the idea that he is handsome;
but when he does so, you find that your expectations are more than met by the reality. For
though he may not have the strictly regular features we naturally associate with one of his
poise and matchless outline, there is enough of that quality, and more than enough of that
additional elusive something which is an attraction in itself, to make for handsomeness in
a marked degree. He, like his friend, has passed his fortieth year, but nowhere save in his
abundant locks can one see any sign of approaching age. They are quite white--cut close, but
quite white, so white they attracted the notice of his companion, who stole more than one look
at them as he chatted on in what had become almost a monologue, so little did Roberts join
in the conversation.

Finally the Curator paused, and stealing another look at that white head, remarked anxiously:

"Have you not grown gray very suddenly? I don't remember your being whiter than myself the
day I dined with you just preceding the horrible occurrence at the museum."

"I have been growing gray for a year," rejoined the other. "My father was white at forty; I
am just forty-three."

"It becomes you, and yet--Roberts, you have taken this matter too much to heart. We were not
to blame in any way, unless it was in having such deadly weapons within reach. How could one
suppose----"

"Yes, how could one suppose!" echoed the director. "And the mystery of it! The police seem
no nearer solving the problem now than on the night they practised archery in the galleries.
It does wear on me, possibly because I live so much alone. I see----"

Here he stopped abruptly. They had been strolling in the direction of the house, and at this
moment were not many paces from it.

"See what?" urged the Curator with an accent one might almost call tender--would have been
called tender, if used in addressing a woman.

"See her, that dead girl!--constantly--at night when my eyes are shut--in the daytime while
I go about my affairs, here, there and everywhere. The young, young face! so white, so still,
so strangely and so unaccountably familiar! Do you feel the same? Did she remind you of anyone
we know? I grow old trying to place her. I can say this to you; but not to another soul could
I speak of what has become to me a sort of blind obsession. She was a stranger. I know of no
Madame Duclos and am sure that I never saw her young daughter before; and yet I have started
up in my bed more than once during these past few nights, confident that in another moment
memory would supply the clue which will rid my mind of the eternal question as to where I have
seen a face like hers before? But memory fails to answer; and the struggle, momentarily interrupted,
begins again, to the destruction of my peace and comfort."

"Odd! but you must rid yourself of what unnerves you so completely. It does no good and only
adds to regrets which are poignant enough in themselves."

"That is true; but--stop a minute. I see it now--her face, I mean. It comes between me and
the house there. Even your presence does not dispel it. It is--no, it's gone again. Let us
go back once more and take another look at the sea. It is the one thing which draws me away
from this pursuing vision."

They resumed their stroll, this time away from the house and toward the oval cut in the trees
for a straight view out to the sea. Across this oval a ship was now sailing which attracted
the eyes of both; not till it had passed, did the Curator say:

"You live too lonely a life. You should seek change--recreation--possibly something more absorbing
than either."

"You mean marriage?"

"Yes, Roberts, I do. Pardon me; I want to see your eye beam again with contentment. The loss
of your late companion has left you desolate, more desolate than you have been willing to acknowledge.
You cannot replace her----"

"I am wedded to politics."

"An untrustworthy jade. When did politics ever make a man happy?"

"Happy!" They were turned toward the house again. When near, Roberts capped his exclamation
with the remark:

"You ask a great deal for me, more than you ask for yourself. You have not married again."

"But my mistress is not a jade. I find joy in my work. I have not had time to woo a woman as
she should be wooed if she's to be a happy second wife. I should have so much to explain to
her. When I get looking over prints, the dinner-bell might ring a dozen times without my hearing
it. A letter from an agent telling of some wonderful find in Mesopotamia would make me forget
whether my wife's hair were brown or black. I don't need diversion, Roberts."

"Yet you enjoy a couple of hours in the country, a whiff of fresh air----"

"And a chat with a friend. Yes, I do; but if the museum were open----"

Mr. Roberts smiled.

"I see that you are incorrigible." Then, with a gesture toward the house: "Come and see my
new veranda. Its outlook will surprise you."

As you have already surmised, he was the owner of this place; and the man for whose better
understanding Sweetwater had again taken up the plane and the hammer.

XVII

THE CUCKOO-CLOCK

As they made their way through scattered timber and the litter of fresh carpentry-work, the
man who was busy there and who certainly had outstayed his time took up his kit and disappeared
around the corner of the house. Neither noted him. The cuckoo-clock was chirping out its five
small notes from the cheerful interior, and the Curator was remarking upon it.

"That's a merry sound both sweet and stimulating; and what is still better, I can hear it without
effort. I believe I should like to have a clock of that kind."

"It goes where I go," muttered its strange owner with what seemed an involuntary emphasis.
Then as the Curator turned upon him in some surprise, he added with studied indifference: "I
brought it from Switzerland when I was younger than I am now--a silly memento, but I fancy it."

A commonplace explanation surely; why, then, did that same workman, who had stopped short after
rounding the corner to pick up something which he as quickly threw down, turn a quick head
and listen eagerly for what might be said next. Nothing came of it, for the veranda door was
near and the two gentlemen had stepped in; but to one who knew Sweetwater, the smile with which
he resumed his work had an element in it which, if seen, would have darkened still further
the gloom in the troubled eye of the speaker.

Switzerland! He had said Switzerland.

It was not long after this that the Curator and his host left for New York.

The house was not quite ready for occupancy, but was in the process of being made so by the
woman who had done duty as housekeeper for Mr. Roberts both before his marriage and since his
wife's death. During the fifteen years which had intervened, she had been simply the cook.

This woman, Huldah Weston by name, did not accompany them. She was in Belport to stay, and
as it behooves us to remain there for a while longer ourselves, we will join her in the quiet
rest she is taking on the kitchen steps before shutting up the house for the night.

She is not alone. A young man is with her--one to whom she is giving temporary board and lodging
in exchange for the protection of his presence and such slight help as he can afford her in
the heavy task of distributing and arranging the furniture.

We know this man. It is the one we have just seen halting at the corner of the house, on quitting
his work on the new veranda--Sweetwater.

He is a genial soul; she, though very old for the responsibilities she still insists upon carrying,
enjoys a good laugh. Nor is she averse to the numberless little kindly attentions with which
he shows his respect for her age if not a personal liking for herself. In short, they are almost
friends, and she trusts him as she has never trusted any young man yet, save the boy she lost
when she was still a comely widow.

Perhaps this is why, on this night when we find the two together, he ventures to turn the talk
upon the man she had so devotedly served during the better part of her life.

He began with the cuckoo-clock. Where did it come from? How long had they had it? What a jolly
little customer the wee bird was, darting out and darting in with his hurry-call to anyone
who would listen! It made a fellow feel ashamed to dawdle at his work. It wouldn't do to let
any mere bird get ahead of him--a wooden bird at that!

He got her talking. She had known Mr. Roberts' mother, and she had been in the house (a young
girl then) when he went away to Europe. He had not wanted to go. He was in love, or thought
he was, with a woman older than himself. But the mother did not approve of the match, though
the lady had a mint of money and everything in her favor but those seven years. She afterward
became his wife and for all his mother's fears they lived together very happily. Since her
death which occurred about a year ago he's been a different man; very sad and much given to
sitting alone. Anyone can see the effect it has had upon him if they look at him closely.

"She was a good woman, then?"

"Very good."

"Well, life must be lonesome for a widower, especially if he has no children. But perhaps he
has some married or at school?"

"No, he has no children, and no relations, to speak of."

"And he brought that clock from Switzerland? Did he ever say from what part of Switzerland?"

"If he did, I don't remember; I've no memory for foreign names."

This sent Sweetwater off on another tack. He knew such a good story, which, having told, he
seemed to have forgotten all about the clock, for he said nothing more about it, and not much
more about Mr. Roberts.

But when, a little later, he followed her into that gentleman's room for the purpose of unlocking
a trunk which had been delivered that day, he took advantage of her momentary absence in search
of the key to pull out that cuckoo-clock from the wall where it hung and read the small slip
of paper pasted across its back. As he hoped, it gave both the name and address of the merchant
from whom it had been bought. But that was not all. Running in diagonal lines across this label,
he saw some faded lines in fine handwriting, which proved to be a couplet signed with five
initials. The latter were not quite legible, but the couplet he could read without the least
difficulty. It was highly sentimental, and might mean much and might mean nothing. If the handwriting
should prove to be Mr. Roberts', the probabilities were in favor of the former supposition--or
so he said to himself, as he swung the clock back into place.

When Mrs. Weston returned, he was standing as patiently as possible in the middle of the room,
saying over and over to himself to insure remembrance till he could jot the lines down in his
notebook: Bossberg, Lucerne.... I love but thee--and thee will I love to eternity.

His interest in this slight and doubtful clue, however, sank into insignificance when, having
unlocked and unstrapped the trunk which Mrs. Weston pointed out, he saw to his infinite satisfaction
that it held Mr. Roberts' clothing--the one thing in the world toward which at this exact moment
his curiosity mainly pointed. If only he might help her handle the heavy coats which lay so
temptingly on top! Should he propose to do so? Looking at her firm chin and steady eye, he
felt that he did not dare. To rouse the faintest suspicion in this woman's intelligent mind
would be fatal to all further procedure, and so he stood indifferent, while she lifted garment
after garment and laid them carefully on the bed. He counted five coats and as many vests--and
was racking his brains for some plausible excuse for a nearer inspection, when she stopped
in the midst of her work, with the cheery remark:

"That will do for to-night. To-morrow I will look them all over for moths before hanging them
away in the closet."

And he had to go, leaving them lying there within reach of his hand, when one glance at the
lining of a certain coat which had especially attracted his eye might have given him the one
clue he most needed.

The room which had been allotted to him in this house was in the rear and at the top of a steep
flight of stairs. As he sought it that night, he cast a quick glance through the narrow passageway
opening just beyond his own door. Would it be possible for him to thread those devious ways
and reach Mr. Roberts' room without rousing Mrs. Weston, who in spite of her years had the
alertness of a watchdog with eye and ear ever open? To be found strolling through quarters
where he had no business would be worse than being suspected of taking a personal interest
in the owner's garments. He was of an adventurous turn, and ever ready to risk something on
the turn of a die, but not too much. A false move might hazard all; besides, he remembered
the airing these clothes were to get and the nearness of the clothes-yard to the pump he so
frequently patronized, and all the chances which this gave for an inspection which would carry
little danger to one of his ready wit.

So he gave up the midnight search he might have attempted under other circumstances, and shut
his room from the moon and his eyes to sleep, and dreamed. Was it of the great museum, with
its hidden mystery enshrouding its many wonders of high art, or of a far-off time and a far-off
scene, where in the stress of some great emotion the trembling hand of Carleton Roberts had
written on the back of this foolish clock for which he still retained so great a fancy the
couplet which he himself had so faithfully memorized:

          I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.

At eight o'clock on the following morning the quick strokes of the workman's hammer reawakened
the echoes at the end of the building where the big enclosed veranda was going up.

As the clock struck nine Mrs. Weston could be seen hanging up her master's coats and trousers
on a long line stretched across the clothes-yard. They remained there two hours, viewed from
afar by Sweetwater, but not approached till he saw the old woman disappear from one of the
gates with a basket on her arm. Then he developed thirst and went rearward to the pump. While
there, he took a look at the sea. A brisk wind was springing up. It gave him an idea.

Making sure that his fellow workmen were all busy, he loosened one end of the line holding
the fluttering garments and then went back to his work. As the wind increased, the strain on
the line became too great, and soon he had the satisfaction of seeing the whole thing fall
in one wild flap to the ground. With an exclamation calculated to draw the attention of the
men about him to what had happened, he rushed to the rescue, lifted the line and rearranged
the clothes. Then refastening--this time securely--the end of the line which had slipped loose,
he returned to his post, with just one quick and disappointed look thrown back at the now safe
if wildly fluttering garments.

He had improved his opportunity to examine the inside of every coat and had found nothing to
reward his scrutiny. But it was not this which had given him his chief annoyance. It was the
fact that the one coat from which he had expected the anticipated clue--the coat which Mr.
Roberts had certainly worn on that tragic day at the museum--was not there. A summer overcoat
had filled out the number, and his investigation was incomplete.

Why was that one coat lacking? He was sure he had seen it the night before lying on the bed
with the others. Was it still there, or had it been stowed away in drawer or closet, irrespective
of its danger from moths, for a reason he would give his eyeteeth to know but dared not inquire
into till he had clinched his friendship with this old woman so thoroughly that he could ask
her anything--which certainly was not the case as yet.

The absence of the one coat he wanted most to see afflicted him sorely. He told Mrs. Weston,
on her return, how the line had fallen and how he had replaced it, but for all his wits, he
could not get any further. With the close of the day's work and the reappearance of Mr. Roberts,
he slipped away to the village, to avoid an encounter of the results of which he felt very
doubtful. His dinner would not be ready till after Mr. Roberts had been served, and the three
hours which must necessarily elapse before that happy moment looked very long and very unproductive
to him, especially as he had found no answer as yet to the question which so grievously perplexed
him.

He had paced the main street twice and had turned into a narrow lane ending in the smallest
of gardens and the most infinitesimal of houses, when the door of this same house opened and
a man came out whose appearance held him speechless for a moment--then sent him forward with
a quickly beating heart. It was not the man himself that produced this somewhat startling effect;
it was his clothes. So far as his hat and nether garments went, they were, if not tattered,
not very far from it; but the coat he wore was not only trim but made of the finest cloth and
without the smallest sign of wear. It was so conspicuously fine, and looked so grotesquely
out of place on the man wearing it, that he could pass no one without rousing curiosity, and
he probably had all he wanted to do for the next few days in explaining how a fine gentleman's
coat had fallen to his lot.

But to Sweetwater its interest lay in something more important than the amusing incongruity
it offered to the eye. It looked exactly like the one belonging to Mr. Roberts which had escaped
his scrutiny in so remarkable a way. Should it prove to be that same, how fortunate he was
to have it brought thus easily within his reach and under circumstances so natural it was not
necessary for him to think twice how best to take advantage of them.

Father Dobbins--for that is the name by which this old codger was known to the boys--was, as
might be expected, very proud of his new acquisition and quite blind to the contrast it offered
to his fringed-out trouser-legs. He had a smile on his face which broadened as he caught Sweetwater's
sympathetic glance.

"Fine day," he mumbled. "Are ye wantin' somethin' of me that ye're comin' this way?"

"Perhaps and perhaps," answered Sweetwater, "--if that fine coat I see you wearing is the one
given you by Mrs. Weston up the road."

"'Deed, sir, and what's amiss? She gave it to me, yes. Came all the way into the village to
find me and give it to me. Too small for her master, she said; and would I take it to oblige
him. Does she want it back?"

"Oh, no--not she. She's not that kind. It's only that she has since remembered that one of
the pockets has a hole in it--an inside one, I believe. She's afraid it might lose you a dime
some day. Will you let me see if she is right? If so, I was to take you to the tailor's and
have it fixed immediately. I am to pay for it."

The old man stared in slow comprehension; then with the deliberation which evidently marked
all his movements, he slowly put down his basket.

"I warrant ye it's all right," he said. "But look, an ye will. I don't want to lose no dimes."

Sweetwater threw back one side of the coat, then the other, felt in the pockets and smiled.
But Gryce, and not ignorant Father Dobbins, should have seen that smile. There was comedy in
it, and there was the deepest tragedy also; for the marks of stitches forcibly cut were to
be seen under one of the pockets--stitches which must have held something as narrow as an umbrella-band
and no longer than the little strip at which Mr. Gryce had been looking one night in a melancholy
little short of prophetic.

XVIII

MRS. DAVIS' STRANGE LODGER

"If you will look carefully at this chart, and note where the various persons then in the museum
were standing at the moment Correy shouted his alarm, you will see that of all upon whom suspicion
can with any probability be attached there is but one who could have fulfilled the conditions
of escape as just explained to you."

Stretching forth an impressive finger, Mr. Gryce pointed to a certain number on the chart outspread
between him and the Chief Inspector.

He looked--saw the number "3" and glanced anxiously down at the name it prefigured.

"Roberts--the director! Impossible! Not to be considered for a moment. I'm afraid you're getting
old, Gryce." And he looked about to be sure that the door was quite shut.

Mr. Gryce smiled, a little drearily perhaps, as he acknowledged this self-evident fact.

"You are right, Chief: I am getting old--but not so old as to venture upon so shocking an insinuation
against a man of Mr. Roberts' repute and seeming honor, if I had not some very substantial
proofs to offer in its support."

"No doubt, no doubt; but it won't do. I tell you, Gryce, it won't do. There cannot be any such
far-fetched and ridiculous explanation to the crime you talk about. Why, he's next to being
the Republican nominee for Senator. An attack upon him, especially of this monstrous character,
would be looked upon as a clear case of political persecution. And such it would be, and nothing
less; and it would be all to no purpose, I am sure. I hope you are alone in these conclusions--that
you have not seen fit to share your ideas on this subject with any of the boys?"

"Only with Sweetwater, who did some of the work for me."

"And Joyce? How about him?"

"He had the same opportunities as myself, but we have not reached the point of mentioning names.
I thought it best to consult with you first."

"Good! Then we'll drop it."

It was decisively said, but Gryce gave no signs of yielding.

"I'm afraid that's impossible," said he. Then with the dignity of long experience, he added
with quiet impressiveness:

"I have, as you know, faced crime these many years in all its aspects. I have tracked the ignorant,
almost imbecile, murderer of the slums, and laid my hand in arrest on the shoulder of so-called
gentlemen hiding their criminal instincts under a show of culture and sometimes of wide education.
Human nature is not so very different in high and low; and what may lead an irresponsible dago
into unsheathing his knife against his fellow may work a like effect upon his high-bred brother
if circumstances lend their aid to make discovery appear impossible.

"Mr. Roberts is the friend of many a good man who would swear to his integrity with a clear
conscience. I would have sworn to it myself, a month ago, had I heard it questioned in the
slightest manner; and I may live to swear to it again, notwithstanding the doubts which have
been raised in my mind by certain strange discoveries which link him to this unhappy affair
by what we are pleased to call circumstantial evidence. For, as I am obliged to acknowledge,
the one great thing we rely upon, in accusations of this kind, is so far lacking in his case:
I mean, the motive.

"I know of none--can, in fact, conceive of none--which would cause a gentleman of even life
and ambitious projects to turn a deadly weapon upon an innocent child with whom he is not,
so far as we can discover, even acquainted. Dementia only can account for such a freak, and
to dementia we must ascribe this crime, if it is necessary for us to find cause before proceeding
to lay our evidence before the District Attorney. All I propose to do at present is to show
you my reasons for thinking that the arrow which slew Angeline Willetts--or, as we have been
assured by unimpeachable authority, Angeline Duclos masquerading under the name of Angeline
Willetts--was set to bow and loosed across the court by the gentleman we have just mentioned."

Here Mr. Gryce stopped for a look of encouragement from the severely silent man he was endeavoring
to impress. But he did not get it. With a full sense of his years weighing upon him as never
before, he sighed, but continued with little change of tone:

"In the first day or two of keen surprise following an event of so many complicated mysteries,
I drew up in my own mind a list of questions which I felt should be properly answered before
I would consider it my duty to submit to you a report to the disadvantage of any one suspect.
This was Question One:

"'Whose was the hand to bring up into the museum gallery the bow recognized by Correy as the
one which had been lying by for an indefinite length of time in the cellar?'

"Not till yesterday did I get any really definite answer to this. Correy would not talk; nor
would the Curator; and I dared not press either of them beyond a certain point, for equally
with yourself, I felt it most undesirable to allow anyone to suspect the nature of my theory
or whom it especially involved.

"The Curator had nothing to hide on this or any other point connected with the tragedy. But
it was different with Correy. He had some very strong ideas about that visit to the cellar--only
he would not acknowledge them. So yesterday, after the satisfactory settlement of another puzzling
question, I made up my mind to trap him--which I did after this manner. He has, as most men
have, in fact, a great love for the Curator. In discussing with him the mysterious fetching
up of the bow and its subsequent concealment in the Curator's office, I remarked, with a smile
I did not mean to have him take as real, that only the Curator himself would do such a thing
and then forget it; that it must have been his shadow he saw; and I begged him, in a way half
jocose, half earnest, to say so and have done with it.

"It worked, sir. He flushed like a man who had been struck; then he grew white with indignation
and blurted forth that it was no more his shadow than it was Mr. Roberts'--that indeed it was
much more like Mr. Roberts' than the Curator's. At which I simply remarked: 'You think so,
Correy?' To which he replied: 'I do not think anything. But I know that Curator Jewett never
brought up that bow from the cellar, or he would have said so the minute he saw it. There's
no better man in the world than he.' 'Nor than Mr. Roberts either,' I put in, and left him
comforted if not quite reassured.

"So much for Question One--

"Number Two is of a similar nature. 'Was the transference of the arrow from one gallery to
the other due to the same person who brought up the bow?' Now, in answer to that, I have a
curious thing to show you." And lifting into view a bundle of goodly size, wrapped in heavy
brown paper, he opened it up and disclosed a gentleman's coat. Spreading this out between them
lining side out, and pointing out two marks an inch or so apart showing the remains of stitches
for which there seemed to have been no practical use, he took from his own vest-pocket what
looked like a bit of narrow black tape. This he laid down on the upturned lining in the space
bounded by the two lines of marks I have mentioned, and drawing the Chief's attention to it,
observed in quiet explanation:

"The one fits the other--stitch for stitch. Look closely at them both, I beg, and tell me if
in your judgment it is not evident that this strap or loop, or whatever we may call it, has
been cut away from this coat to which it had been previously sewed--and by no woman either."

Anyone could see that this had been so. There could be but one reply:

"This coat I bought from an old man to whom it had been given by Mr. Roberts' housekeeper on
their arrival at his new home on Long Island. The strip was picked up at the museum in the
room where Mrs. Taylor spent an hour or so immediately upon leaving the scene of crime. With
her at the time was the young lady who had kindly offered to look after her and two or three
men directly associated with the museum, of whom Mr. Roberts was one. These and these only.
Now, this strap or let us say loop, since we are beginning to see for what purpose it was used,
was not on the floor previous to the entrance of these few persons into this room--or, indeed,
for some little time afterward. Otherwise this young lady, who was the one to open my eyes
to this clue, surely would have seen it in the half-hour she stood at Mrs. Taylor's side with
no one to talk to and quite free to look about her. But it was there after that lady had revived
from her fainting-fit--dropped, as you see--cut from its owner's coat and dropped! Chief, let
me ask why this should have been done in a time of such suspense if it had had nothing to do
with the crime then occupying everybody's attention--a good coat too, almost new, as you will
observe?"

The Chief, possibly with a shade less of irony in his manner, answered this direct question
with one equally direct:

"And what connection have you succeeded in establishing between this abominable crime and the
coat with or without a loop worn by the museum's leading director? One as straight and indisputable,
no doubt, as that you have just attempted to make between this same gentleman and the museum
bow," he added with biting incredulity.

"Yes," returned the other in calm disregard of the sarcasm, "straighter and more indisputable,
if anything. We are asking, as you will remember, how an arrow could have been carried from
the southern to the northern gallery without attracting anyone's attention. I will show you how."

With a rap on the table which brought Sweetwater into the room, he proceeded to pin again into
its old place on the lining of Mr. Roberts' coat the so-called tag. Then, taking the arrow
which Sweetwater proceeded to hand him, he slipped it into the loop thus made and showed how
securely it could be held there by its feather end.

"A man of Mr. Roberts' upright carriage might, with his coat well buttoned up, walk the length
of Broadway without disclosing the presence of this stick," remarked Mr. Gryce as, at his look,
Sweetwater doffed his own coat and put on the one thus discreetly weighted.

The Chief stared, paling slightly as he noted the result. Mr. Gryce, who never overemphasised
his effects, motioned Sweetwater to leave and proceeded to the next question.

"Number Three," he now observed, "should have come first, as it has already been answered.
It asks if it is possible to hit the mark in Section II of the museum's gallery, from behind
the pedestal in Section VIII. From the pedestal nearest the front, no; but from the one further
back--upon which, by the way, Stevens found the print of a gloved finger--yes.

"Who wore gloves that day--kid gloves, mind you, for the mark of the stitching is exact, as
you can see in this print of the same made by Stevens? All the ladies, except a young copyist
who was leaving in a hurry and had not stopped to put hers on. But of the men, only one--Mr.
Roberts, the careful dresser, who was never known to enter the street without this last touch
to his toilet. How do I know this? Look at the chart, Chief--this one which shows the court
and the persons in it at the precise minute of first alarm. You see how near the exit Mr. Roberts
was, and who was closest to him. I had a little talk--the most guarded one imaginable--with
this lady, who was the very one of whom I have just said that she had omitted to put on her
gloves; and she gave me the fact I have just passed on to you. She noted Mr. Roberts' hands,
because they shamed hers, and she was just stopping to pull her gloves from her coat-pocket
when Correy's voice rang out and everything else was forgotten.

"Corroborative, only corroborative, sir? I am quite aware of that. But what I have now to add
may give it weight. The stringing of a bow is no easy task for an amateur; nor is the discharge
of an arrow, under such dangerous circumstances as marked the delivery of the one we are discussing,
one which would be lightly attempted by a person altogether ignorant of archery. However strong
the evidence might be against a man who was not an utter fool, I would never have presumed
to lay it out before you if I had not verified the fact that the director, whatever his life
now, was once greatly addicted to sports, and thoroughly acquainted with the management of
a bow and arrow. It has taken time. Many cablegrams were necessary, but I have at last received
this copy of a report made sixteen years ago by a club in Lucerne, Switzerland, in which mention
is made of a prize given to one Carleton Roberts, an American, for twelve piercings of the
bull's-eye in as many shots, in an archery-contest which included all nationalities.

"Nor is that all. In a study of himself,--his home, his life, his secret interests,--we come
upon things which call for closer inspection. For instance, not a day has passed since that
poor child has been in the morgue that he has not been one on the line to see her. He dreams
of her, he says; he cannot get her face out of his mind--you notice that he has been growing gray.

"But I will stop here. I do not wonder that you look upon all this as the ravings of a man
on the verge of senility. If I were in your place, I should undoubtedly do the same. But ungracious
as the task has proved, I owed it to myself to rid my mind of its secret burden. It is for
you to say whether, all things considered, I am to drop the matter here or proceed blindly
in search of the motive lying back of every premeditated crime. I can imagine none in this
case, as I have frankly stated, save the very weak and improbable one already advanced by young
Sweetwater in connection with another party upon whom he had fixed his eye--that of the irresistible
desire of an expert to test his skill with a bow which comes unexpectedly into his hands."

"That wouldn't apply to Roberts--not in the least," affirmed the Chief with the emphasis of
strong conviction. "Even if we should allow ourselves to regard these stray bits of circumstantial
evidence as in any way conclusive of the extraordinary theory you have advanced, he's much
too able and cautious a man to yield to any such fool temptation as that. But to let that matter
pass for the present: why have you paid such close attention to one end of your string, and
quite ignored the other? Madame Duclos' hasty flight and continued absence, in face of circumstances
which would lead a natural mother to break through every obstacle put in the way of her return,
offers a field of inquiry more promising, it appears to me, than the one upon which you have
expended your best energies. You say nothing of her."

"I have nothing to say. I am glad to leave that particular line of investigation to you, and
more than glad if it has proved or is likely to prove fruitful. Have you heard----"

"Read that."

He tossed a letter within the detective's grasp and leaned back while Gryce laboriously perused it.

It was illy written, but well worth the pains he gave to it--as witness:

  To the Chief of Police:

  Dear Sir:--I am told that there is a reward out for a certain woman by
  the name of Duclos. I do not know any such person, but there is a woman
  who has been lodging in my house for the last two weeks who has acted
  so strangely at odd times that I have become very suspicious of her,
  and think it right for you to know what she did here one night.

  It's about a fortnight since she came to my house in search of
  lodgings. Had she been young, I would not have opened my doors to her,
  decent as she was in her dress and ways; for she was a foreign woman
  and I don't like foreigners. But being middle-aged and ready with her
  money in advance, I not only allowed her to come in but gave her my
  very best room. This is not saying much, because the elevated road runs
  by my door, darkening my whole front, besides making an awful clatter.
  But she did not seem to mind this, and I took little notice of her,
  till one of the other lodgers--a woman with a busy tongue--began to ask
  why this strange woman, who was so very dark and plain, went out only
  at night? Did she sew or write for a living? If not, what did she do
  with herself all day?

  As the last was a question I could easily answer, I said that she spent
  most of her time in reading the newspapers; and this was true, because
  she always came in with her arms full of them. But there I stopped, as
  I never discuss my lodgers. Yet I must acknowledge that my curiosity
  had been roused by all this talk, and I began to watch the woman, who I
  soon saw was in what I would call a flustered state of mind, and as
  unhappy as anyone could be who hadn't suffered some great bereavement.
  But still I wasn't really alarmed, being misled by the name she gave,
  which was Clery.

  Night before last I went to bed early. I am a heavy sleeper, as I need
  to be with those cars pounding by the house every few minutes. But
  there are certain noises which wake me, and I found myself all of a
  sudden sitting up in bed and listening with all my ears. Everything
  was quiet, even on the elevated road; but when the next train came
  thundering along, I heard, piercing shrilly through the rumble and
  roar, that same sharp ping which had wakened me. What was it? It
  seemed to come from somewhere in the house. But how could that be! I
  was startled enough, however, to get up and slip on some of my clothes
  and stand with ears astretch for the next train.

  It came and passed, and right in the middle of the noise it made I
  heard again that quick, sharp sound. This time I was sure it came from
  somewhere near, and opening my door, I slid out into the hall. All
  my lodgers were in but one, a young gentleman who has a night-key. And
  most of the rooms were dark, as I can very well tell from the fact that
  none of the doors fit as they ought to and there is sure to be a streak
  of light showing somewhere about them if the gas is burning inside.
  Everything looked so natural, and the house was so still, that I was
  going back again when another train swept by and that sound was
  repeated. This time I was sure it came from somewhere on the lower
  floor, and mindful of Mrs. Clery's queer ways, I stole downstairs to
  her door. She was up--that was plainly enough to be seen. But what was
  she doing? I was just a little frightened, or I would have knocked on
  the door and asked.

  As I was waiting for the passing by of the next train, my last lodger
  came in and caught me standing there before Mrs. Clery's door. I know
  him pretty well; so I put my finger to my lips and then beckoned him to
  join me. As the train approached, I seized him by the arm and pointed
  toward Mrs. Clery's door. He didn't know what I meant, of course, but
  he looked and listened, and when the train had gone by, I drew him down
  the hall and said, "You heard it!" and then asked him what it was. He
  answered that it was a pistol-shot, and he wanted to go back to see if
  any dreadful thing had happened. But I shook my head and told him it
  was one of five, each one taking place when the roar of the trains
  going by was at the loudest. Then he said that this woman was
  practising at a mark, and bade me look out or we should have a house
  full of anarchists. At that, I loudly declared she should go the first
  thing in the morning and so got rid of him. But I did not keep my word,
  and for this reason: When I went to do her room-work as I always do
  immediately after breakfast, I was all smiles and full of talk till I
  had taken a good look at the walls for the bullet-holes I expected to
  see there. But I didn't find any, and was puzzled enough you may be
  sure, for those bullets must have gone somewhere and I was quite
  certain that they had not been fired out of the window. I hardly
  dared to look at the ceiling, for she was watching me and kept me
  chatting and wondering till all of a sudden I noticed that one of the
  sofa-pillows was missing from its place. This set me thinking, and I
  was about to ask her what she had done with it when my attention was
  drawn away by seeing among the scraps in the wastebasket I had lifted
  to carry out the end and corner of what looked like a partly destroyed
  photograph.

  This was something too strange not to rouse any woman's curiosity, but
  I was careful not to give it another glance till I was well out of the
  room. Then, as you may believe, I drew it quickly out, to find that all
  the middle part was gone--shot to pieces by those tearing bullets. Not
  a particle of the face was to be seen, and only enough of the neck and
  shoulders to show that it had been the portrait of a man. I enclose it
  for you to see; and if you want to talk to the woman, she is still
  here, though I only keep her in the hope of her being that Madame
  Duclos for whom money is offered. I will tell you why I think this: Not
  because of a torn skirt,--you see I have been looking over the
  advertisement printed in the papers,--but because she is foreign and
  dark and has a decidedly drooping eyelid. Then too, she halts a little
  on one foot, as I noticed when I called her hurriedly to the window to
  see something. If you want to have a look at her, come after five and
  before seven; we are both in then.

  Yours respectfully,

  Caroline Davis.

"No doubt that's the woman," commented Gryce. "We are fortunate in hitting her trail at this
critical moment."

He had already glanced at the mutilated photograph lying before him, but now he took it up.

"Very little here," he remarked as he examined first the face of it and then the back. "But
if you will let me take it, I may find that its place is in our incompleted chain."

"Take it, and if you would like to have a talk with the woman herself----"

"Yes, Chief; I would like that above all things."

"Very good. I'm expecting her here any minute, but--Well, what now? What's up?"

An officer had entered hurriedly after one quick knock.

"Mrs. Davis' lodger is gone," said he. "Left without a word to anybody. When they went to her
room they found it empty, with a five-dollar bill pinned to the riddled cushion. As nobody
saw her go, we are as much at sea as ever."

A smile, both curious and fine, crossed Mr. Gryce's lips as he listened to this, and turning
earnestly to the Chief, he begged for the job of looking her up.

"I think with the little start we now have that I can find her," said he. "At all events, I
should like to try."

"And let the other matter rest quiescent meanwhile?"

"If it will."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I hardly know myself, Chief. All is hazy yet, but skies clear, and so do most of our problems.
If the two ends of my string should chance to come together----"

But here a look from his Chief stopped him.

"Let us pray that they won't. But if they do, we shall not shirk our duty, Gryce."

XIX

MR. GRYCE AND THE TIMID CHILD

"Assurance does it, sir--a great deal of assurance. Not that I have much----"

Here Mr. Gryce laughed, with the result that Sweetwater laughed also. A moment of fun was a
welcome relief, and they both made the most of it.

"Not that I lack it entirely," Sweetwater hastened to say. Then they laughed again--after which
their talk proceeded on serious lines.

"Sweetwater, what is that you once told me about a family named Duclos?"

"Why, this, sir: There is one such family in town, as Peters discovered in looking up the name
in the directory a day or two after Madame's disappearance. But there's nothing to be learned
from them. Mr. and Mrs. Edward Duclos are a most respectable couple and have but one answer
to every question. They know no one of their name outside their own family. Though the man
of the house is Breton born, he has lived many years in this country, and in all that time
has never met another Duclos."

"And Peters let it go at that?"

"Had to. What else could he do? However, he did make this admission--that there was a child
in the room who betrayed a nervousness under his questions which was not observable in her
elders, a girl of twelve or so who put her hands behind her when she found she could not control
their twitching. And I've an idea that if he could have got this child by herself, he might
have heard something quite different from the plain denial he got from the mother. I've always
thought so; but I've had too many other things to do to make an effort in this direction.

"Now, if you approve, I'll see what I can do with this girl, for it stands to reason there
must be some place in town where this woman, just off ship, found an immediate refuge and a
change of clothing and effects. Nor should I be much surprised if we should discover that she
is an inmate of this very house. What do you think, Mr. Gryce? Is it worth looking into?"

"It is worth my looking into. I have other work for you. Where does this Duclos family live?"

Sweetwater told him. It was in one of the Eighties, not a quarter of a mile from the Hotel
Universal.

This settled, Mr. Gryce took from his pocket the mutilated photograph which had served as a
target to the woman in Fifty-third Street.

"You see this," said he. "The face is all gone; only a sweep of the hair on one side, and a
bit of collar and the tip of a shoulder on the other, remain to act as a clue. Yet I expect
you to find the negative from which this photograph was printed. It should not be so difficult,--that
is, if in the course of time it has not been destroyed,--for look here." And turning over what
remained of the mutilated photograph he displayed the following:

  Cor. 9th Street
  w York)

"New York! The portrait was made here and--at Fredericks'. His studio was on the corner of
Ninth Street up to a few years ago. It's a trail after my own mind. If that negative is in
existence, I'll find it, if I have to ransack half the photograph-studios in town. About how
old do you think this picture is?"

"Old enough to give you trouble. But that you're used to. What we want to know--what we must
know--is this: The name of the man who has incurred Madame's enmity to such a degree that she
spends the small hours of the night in knocking out his features from a fifteen-year-old photograph.
If it should prove to be that of a public man, rich or otherwise, we might consistently lay
it to social hatred; but if, on the contrary, it turns out to be that of a private individual--well,
in that case, I shall have a task for you which may call for a little of that assurance of
which we have just acknowledged you possess a limited share."

That evening, just at dusk, a taxicab which had been wandering up and down a well-kept block
in Eighty-seventh Street stopped suddenly in front of a certain drug-store to let an old man
out. He seemed very feeble and leaned heavily on his cane while crossing the sidewalk toward
the store. But his face was kindly, and his whole aspect that of one who takes the ills of
life without bitterness or complaint. When halfway to his goal,--for twenty steps are a journey
to one who has to balance himself carefully with every one,--he slipped or stumbled, and his
cane flew out of his hand. Happily--because he seemed unable to reach it himself--a young girl
just emerging from the drug-store saw his plight and stooping for the stick, handed it to him.
He received it with a smile, and while it was yet in both of their hands, said in the most
matter-of-fact way in the world:

"Thank you, little Miss Duclos." Then suddenly: "Where's your aunt?"

She did not stop to think. She did not stop to ask herself what this question meant or whether
this old gentleman who seemed to know so much about her and the family's secrets had a right
to ask it, but blurted out in nervous haste as if she knew of nothing else to do, "She's gone,"
and then started to run away.

"Come back, little one." His tone was very imperative, but for all that of a nature to win
upon a frightened child. "I know she's gone," he added soothingly as she looked back, hesitating.
"And I'm sorry, for I have something for her. I recognized you the moment you stepped out of
the store; but I see that you don't remember me. But why should you? Little girls don't remember
old men."

Again that benevolent smile as he poked about in one of his pockets and finally drew out a
little parcel which he held out toward her.

"This belongs to your aunt. See, it has her name on it, Madame Antoinette Duclos. It came to
the lodging-house in Fifty-third Street just after she left, and I was asked to bring it to
her. I was going to your house as soon as I had done my little errand at this store, but now
that I have met you, I will ask you to see that she gets it."

The girl looked down at the parcel, then up at him, and reaching out her hand, took it.

His old heart, which had almost stopped, beat again naturally and with renewed strength. He
was on the correct trail. When Mrs. Duclos and the rest of them had said that they knew of
no one of their name in this country but themselves, it was because the Madame of the Hotel
Universal was of their family--the widow of their brother, as this child's acknowledgment showed.

He was turning back to his taxi when the child, still trembling very much, took a step toward
him and said:

"I don't know where to find my aunt. She didn't tell us where she was going; and--and I had
rather not take this parcel back with me. Mother don't like us to speak of Aunt Nettie; and--and
I don't believe Aunt Nettie would care to have this now. Won't--won't you forget about it,
sir, if I promise to tell her some day that it was brought back and I wouldn't take it?"

Mr. Gryce felt a qualm of conscience. The child really was too simple to be made game of. Besides,
he felt sure that she had spoken the truth, so far as she herself was concerned. She didn't
know where her erratic aunt had gone; and any further questioning would only frighten her without
winning him the knowledge he sought. He therefore took the parcel back, said some soothing
words and made his way across the walk to his taxi. But the number he gave the chauffeur was
that of the house where this little girl lived.

He arrived there first. To him, waiting in the parlor and very near the window, her shrinking
little figure looked pathetic enough, as glancing in at the taxi, and finding it empty, she
realized who might be awaiting her under her mother's eye. He remembered his grandchild, and
made up his mind, as she slid nervously in, that no matter what happened he would keep this
innocent child out of trouble.

The lady who presently came in to receive him was one who called him instinctively to his feet
in respect and admiration. She was an American and of the best type, a woman who, if she told
a lie, would not tell it for her own comfort or gain, but to help some one else to whom she
owed fealty or love. But would she lie for anyone? As he studied her longer, taking in, in
his own way, the candid expression of her eye and the sweet but firm set of her lips, he began
to think she would not, and the interest with which he proceeded to address her was as much
due to herself as to the knowledge he hoped to gain from her.

"Mrs. Duclos?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. And you?"

"I am a member of the New York police. My errand is one which you can probably guess. You have
a sister-in-law, the widow of your husband's brother. As her testimony is of the utmost importance
in the inquiry which is to be made into the cause and manner of her daughter's death, I should
be very glad to have a few minutes' talk with her if, as we have every reason to believe, she
is in this house at the present moment."

Mrs. Edward Duclos was a strong and upright woman, but this direct address, this open attack,
was too much for her. However, before replying, she had a question of her own to put, and she
proceeded to ask it firmly, quietly and apparently with every expectation of its being answered:

"How did you learn that Mr. Duclos had a brother and that this brother had left a widow?"

"Not from you, madam," he smiled. "Nor from your husband. I very much wish we had. We have
been waiting for some such word ever since our advertisement appeared. It has not come."

She gave him a quick interrogating glance, folded her hands and answered without further hesitation:

"We had our reasons for silence, reasons which we thought quite justifiable. But they don't
hold good if we are to be brought into conflict with the police. Mr. Duclos told me this morning
that if we were driven to speak we must do so with complete honesty and without quibble. What
do you want to know?"

"Everything. First, your sister-in-law's story, then her reasons for sending her child alone
to the museum, as well as the cause of her flight before she could have heard of that poor
child's fate. More hangs upon an understanding of these facts than I am at liberty to tell
you. She herself would agree with me in this if I could have a few minutes' conversation with her."

"She is not in the house. She left us late last night without giving us the least hint as to
where she was going. She is, as you can very well see, as little anxious to talk of her great
trouble as you are to have her, and recognizing that attempts were being made to find her and
make her speak, she fled before it was too late. I am sorry she did so, sorry for her and sorry
for ourselves. We do not approve her course, whatever reasons she may have for it. At the same
time, I feel bound to assure you that to her they are all-sufficient. She is a conscientious
woman, with many fine qualities, and when she says as she did to us, 'It is my duty to flee,'
and again as she bade us a final adieu, 'I will die rather than speak a word of what is on
my mind,' I know that it is no small matter which sends her wandering about like this."

"I should think not. A mother to leave her daughter to be exposed at the morgue, and never
intervene to protect her from this ignominy or to see that she has proper burial after that
dread display is over!"

"I know--it was dreadful--and we! Do you not think we felt the horror of this also?"

"Your own flesh and blood--that is, your husband's. I wonder you could stand it."

"We had promised. She made us promise the first day she came that we would keep still and make
no move, whatever happened."

"It was here she came then, directly from the hotel?"

"I am obliged to admit it."

"With her torn dress and her little bag?"

"Yes."

"And you procured her different clothes and the suit-case in which she now lugs about her effects?"

"You seem to know it all."

"Mrs. Duclos, I hope you will answer my next question as honestly as you have the previous
ones. Had Madame Duclos heard of her daughter's death when she first presented herself to you?"

"Since you ask me this, I must answer. She was in great distress, but did not tell me why,
till I asked her where Angeline was. Then she broke down utterly and flinging herself face
down on the sofa, sobbed and wailed and finally confided to us that a terrible accident had
happened to the child and that she was lying dead in one of the city's great museums."

"Did she say what accident?"

"No; she was almost delirious with grief, and we couldn't question her. After the papers came
and we had read the dreadful news, we tried to get from her some explanation of what it all
meant, but now she wouldn't answer; before, she couldn't."

"Did you ask her how she came to know that Angeline was dead, before the news was circulated
outside the museum?"

"Yes; but she did not answer, only looked at us. It was the most despairing look I ever saw
in my life. It made it easier for us to promise her all she wanted, though we regretted having
done this when we came to think the matter over."

"So you positively do not know any more than this of what she has so religiously held secret?"

"No; and I have got to the point where I do not wish to."

"Did you know she was coming to this country?"

"Yes--but not her reasons for doing so. She has been a little mysterious of late."

"Did she say she was going to bring her daughter with her?"

"Yes, she mentioned Angeline. Also the name of the ship on which they expected to sail."

"Was this letter mailed from Paris or London?"

"It came from Paris."

"Did you understand that she was leaving France for good?"

"I got that idea, certainly."

"But not her reasons for it?"

"No. The letter was very short and not very explicit. I really have given you all the information
I have on this subject."

"Mrs. Duclos, it is my duty to inform you that your sister-in-law had a deep and intense hatred
for a man to us at present unknown. Can you name him? Is there anything in her early history
or in what you know of her later life, here and abroad, to enlighten you as to his identity?"

With a steady look and a slow shake of her head, Mrs. Duclos denied any such knowledge, even
showing a marked surprise at what was evidently a new development to her.

"Antoinette has had little to do with the men since our brother's death," she said. "I can
hardly conceive of her being greatly interested either in favor of or against any of the opposite
sex."

"Yet she is--even to the point of wishing him dead."

Mrs. Duclos rose quickly to her feet, but instantly sat again.

"How do you know?" she asked.

Should he tell her? At first he thought not; then he reconsidered his decision and spoke out
plainly.

"Madam," said he, "some day you will hear what I had rather you heard now and from me. (See Gallia
Christiana, vol. xi. p. 702.) His successor in the See of Sees was Nicholas Danguye, or Dangu (a
natural son of Cardinal Duprat), with whom M. Frank tries to identify Dagoucin, one of the
narrators of the Heptameron.--L. and Ed.

Thus, from being a loyal servant, he became utterly adverse to them,
and at last sought out sorcerers to procure the death of the Duchess.(4)
Now for a long time the Bishop consorted with this unhappy woman,
who submitted to him from avarice rather than from love, and also
because her husband urged her to show him favour.

But there was a youth in the town of Alençon, son of the Lieutenant-General,(5)
whom she loved so much that she was half crazy regarding him; and
she often availed herself of the Bishop to have some commission intrusted
to her husband, so that she might see the son of the Lieutenant, who
was named Du Mesnil, at her ease.

4 This was of course Margaret herself.--Ed

5 Gilles du Mesnil, Lieutenant-General of the presidial bailiwick and Sénéchaussée of Alençon.--B.
J.

This mode of life lasted a long time, during which she had the Bishop
for her profit and the said Du Mesnil for her pleasure.

To the latter she swore that she showed a fair countenance to the Bishop only that their own
love might the more freely continue; that the Bishop, in spite of
appearances, had obtained only words, from her; and that he, Du Mesnil,
might rest assured that no man, save himself, should ever receive
aught else.

One day, when her husband was setting forth to visit the Bishop, she
asked leave of him to go into the country, saying that the air of
the town was injurious to her; and, when she had arrived at her farm,
she forthwith wrote to Du Mesnil to come and see her, without fail,
at about ten o'clock in the evening.

This the young man did; but as he was entering at the gate he met the maid who was wont to let him
in, and who said to him, "Go elsewhere, friend, for your place is taken."

Supposing that the husband had arrived, he asked her how matters stood.

The woman, seeing that he was so handsome, youthful, and well-bred, and was withal so loving and yet
so little loved, took pity upon him and told him of his mistress's wantonness, thinking that
on hearing this he would be cured of loving her so much.

She related to him that the Bishop of Sees had but just arrived, and was now in bed with the lady,
a thing which the latter had not expected, for he was not to have
come until the morrow.

However, he had detained her husband at his house, and had stolen
away at night to come secretly and see her.

If ever man was in despair it was Du Mesnil, who nevertheless was quite unable to believe the
story.

He hid himself, however, in a house near by, and watched until three hours after midnight,
when he saw the Bishop come forth disguised, yet not so completely
but that he could recognise him more readily than he desired.

Du Mesnil in his despair returned to Alençon, whither, likewise, his
wicked mistress soon came, and went to speak to him, thinking to deceive
him according to her wont.

But he told her that, having touched sacred things, she was too holy to speak to a sinner
like himself, albeit his repentance was so great that he hoped his sin would very soon be forgiven
him. When she learnt that her deceit was found out, and that excuses, oaths, and promises never
to act in a like way again were of no avail, she complained of it to her Bishop. Then, having weighed
the matter with him, she went to her husband and told him that she could no longer dwell in
the town of Alençon, for the Lieutenant's son, whom he had so greatly
esteemed among his friends, pursued her unceasingly to rob her of
her honour.

She therefore begged of him to abide at Argentan,(6) in order that all suspicion might be removed.

6
Argentan, on the Orne, twenty-six miles from Alençon, had been a distinct viscounty, but at this
period it belonged to the duchy of Alençon.--Ed.

The husband, who suffered himself to be ruled by his wife, consented; but they had not been long
at Argentan when this bad woman sent a message to Du Mesnil, saying that he was the wickedest man in
the world, for she knew full well that he had spoken evilly (sic.) of her and of the Bishop
of Sees; however, she would strive her best to make him repent of it.

The young man, who had never spoken of the matter except to herself,
and who feared to fall into the bad graces of the Bishop, repaired
to Argentan with two of his servants, and finding his mistress at
vespers in the church of the Jacobins,(7) he went and knelt beside
her, and said--

"I am come hither, madam, to swear to you before
God that I have never spoken of your honour to any person but yourself.

You treated me so ill that I did not make you half the reproaches you deserved; but if there be
man or woman ready to say that I have ever spoken of the matter to them, I am here to give them the lie
in your presence."

7 The name of Jacobins was given to the monks of the Dominican Order, some of whom had a monastery
in the suburbs of Argentan.--Ed.

Seeing that there were many people in the church, and that he was accompanied by two stout
serving-men, she forced herself to speak as graciously as she could. She told him that she had no doubt
he spoke the truth, and that she deemed him too honourable a man to make evil report of any one
in the world; least of all of herself, who bore him so much friendship;
but since her husband had heard the matter spoken of, she begged him
to say in his presence that he had not so spoken and did not so believe.

To

this he willingly agreed, and, wishing to attend her to her house, he offered to take her arm;
but she told him it was not desirable that he should come with her, for her husband would think
that she had put these words into his mouth.

Then, taking one of his serving-men by the sleeve, she said--

"Leave me this man, and as soon as it is time I will send him to seek you. Meanwhile do you go and
rest in your lodging."

He, having no suspicion of her conspiracy against him, went thither.

She gave supper to the serving-man whom she had kept with her, and who frequently asked her when
it would be time to go and seek his master; but she always replied that his master would come
soon enough.

When it was night, she sent one of her own serving-men to fetch Du Mesnil; and he, having
no suspicion of the mischief that was being prepared for him, went boldly to St. Aignan's house.
As his mistress was still entertaining his servant there, he had
but one with himself.

Just as he was entering the house, the servant who had been sent to him told him that the lady
wished to speak with him before he saw her husband, and that she
was waiting for him in a room where she was alone with his own serving-man;
he would therefore do well to send his other servant away by the front
door.

This he did. Then while he was going up a small, dark stairway, the Proctor St. Aignan, who
had placed some men in ambush in a closet, heard the noise, and demanded
what it was; whereupon he was told that a man was trying to enter
secretly into his house.

At the moment, a certain Thomas Guérin, a murderer by trade, who had
been hired by the Proctor for the purpose, came forward and gave the
poor young man so many sword-thrusts that whatever defence he was
able to make could not save him from falling dead in their midst.

Meanwhile the servant who was waiting with the lady, said to her--

"I
hear my master speaking on the stairway.

I will go to him."

But the lady stopped him and said--

"Do not trouble yourself; he will come soon enough."

A little while afterwards the servant, hearing his master say, "I am dying, may God receive
my soul!" wished to go to his assistance, but the lady again withheld him, saying--

"Do not trouble yourself; my husband is only chastising him for his follies. We will go and
see what it is."

Then, leaning over the balustrade at the top of the stairway, she asked her husband--

"Well, is it done?"

"Come and see," he replied. "I have now avenged you on the man who put you to such shame."

So
saying, he drove a dagger that he was holding ten or twelve times into the belly of a man whom,
alive, he would not have dared to assail.

When the murder had been accomplished, and the two servants of the dead man had fled to carry
the tidings to the unhappy father, St. Aignan bethought himself that
the matter could not be kept secret.

But he reflected that the testimony of the dead man's servants would not be believed, and that
no one in his house had seen the deed done, except the murderers, and an old woman-servant,
and a girl fifteen years of age. He secretly tried to seize the old woman, but, finding means
to escape out of his hands, she sought sanctuary with the Jacobins,(8) and was afterwards the
most trustworthy witness of the murder. The young maid remained for a few days in St. Aignan's
house, but he found means to have her led astray by one of the murderers, and had her conveyed
to a brothel in Paris so that her testimony might not be received.(9)

8
It was still customary to take sanctuary in churches, monasteries,
and convents at this date, although but little respect was shown for
the refugees, whose hiding-places were often surrounded so that they
might be kept without food and forced to surrender.

After being considerably restricted by an edict issued in 1515, the
right of sanctuary was abolished by Francis I. in 1539.--B. J. and
D.

9 Prostitutes were debarred from giving evidence in French courts
of law at this period.--D.

To conceal the murder, he caused the corpse
of the hapless dead man to be burnt, and the bones which were not
consumed by the fire he caused to be placed in some mortar in a part
of his house where he was building.

Then he sent in all haste to the Court to sue for pardon, setting
forth that he had several times forbidden his house to a person whom
he suspected of plotting his wife's dishonour, and who, notwithstanding
his prohibition, had come by night to see her in a suspicious fashion;
whereupon, finding him in the act of entering her room, his anger
had got the better of his reason and he had killed him.

But before he was able to despatch his letter to the Chancellor's,
the Duke and Duchess had been apprised by the unhappy father of the
matter, and they sent a message to the Chancellor to prevent the granting
of the pardon.

Finding he could not obtain it, the wretched man fled to England
with his wife and several of his relations.

But before setting out he told the murderer who at his entreaty had
done the deed, that he had seen expresses from the King directing
that he should be taken and put to death.

Nevertheless, on account of the service that he had rendered him,
he desired to save his life, and he gave him ten crowns wherewith
to leave the kingdom.

The murderer did this, and was afterwards seen no more.

The murder was so fully proven by the servants of the dead man, by the woman who had taken refuge
with the Jacobins, and by the bones that were found in the mortar, that legal proceedings were
begun and completed in the absence of St. Aignan and his wife.

They were judged by default and were both condemned to death. Their property was confiscated to the Prince,
and fifteen hundred crowns were to be given to the dead man's father
to pay the costs of the trial.

St. Aignan being in England and perceiving that in the eyes of the
law he was dead in France, by means of his services to divers great
lords and by the favour of his wife's relations, induced the King
of England (10) to request the King of France (11) to grant him a
pardon and restore him to his possessions and honours.

But the King of France, having been informed of the wickedness and enormity of the crime, sent
the process to the King of England, praying him to consider whether
the offence was one deserving of pardon, and telling him that no one
in the kingdom but the Duke of Alençon had the right to grant a pardon
in that duchy.

However, notwithstanding all his excuses, he failed to appease the
King of England, who continued to entreat him so very pressingly that,
at his request, the Proctor at last received a pardon and so returned
to his own home.(12) There, to complete his wickedness, he consorted
with a sorcerer named Gallery, hoping that by this man's art he might
escape payment of the fifteen hundred crowns to the dead man's father.

10 Henry VIII.

11 Francis I.

12 The letters of remission which were granted to St. Aignan on this occasion will be found
in the Appendix to the First Day (B). It will be noted that Margaret in her story gives various
particulars which St. Aignan did not fail to conceal in view of obtaining his pardon.--L.

To this end he went in disguise to Paris with his wife. She, finding that he used to shut himself
up for a great while in a room with Gallery without acquainting her
with the reason thereof, spied upon him one morning, and perceived
Gallery showing him five wooden images, three of which had their hands
hanging down, whilst two had them lifted up.(13)

"We must make waxen
images like these," said Gallery, speaking to the Proctor.

"Such as have their arms hanging down will be for those whom we shall
cause to die, and the others with their arms raised will be for the
persons from whom you would fain have love and favour."

"This one," said the Proctor, "shall be for the King by whom I would
fain be loved, and this one for Monseigneur Brinon, Chancellor of
Alençon."

(14)

13 This refers to the superstitious practice called envoûtement, which,
according to M. Léon de Laborde, was well known in France in 1316,
and subsisted until the sixteenth century.

In 1330 the famous Robert d'Artois, upon retiring to Brabant, occupied himself with pricking waxen
images which represented King Philip VI., his brother-in- law, and the Queen, his sister. (Mémoires
de l'Académie des Inscriptions, vol. xv. p. 426.) During the League
the enemies of Henri III. and the King of Navarre revived this practice.--(L.)
It would appear also from a document in the Harley MSS.

(18,452, Bib. N'at., Paris) that Cosmo Ruggieri, the Florentine astrologer, Catherine de' Medici's
confidential adviser, was accused in 1574 of having made a wax figure in view of casting a
spell upon Charles IX.--M.

14 John Brinon, Councillor of the King,
President of the Parliament of Rouen, Chancellor of Alençon and Berry,
Lord of Villaines (near Dreux), Remy, and Athueuil (near Montfort-l'Amaury),
belonged to an old family of judicial functionaries.

He was highly esteemed by Margaret, several of whose letters are addressed to him, and he was present
at the signing of her marriage contract with Henry II. of Navarre
(Génin's Lettres de Marguerite, p. 444).

He married Pernelle Perdrier, who brought him the lordship of Médan,
near Poissy, and other important fiefs, which after his death she
presented to the King.

His praises were sung by Le Chandelier, the poet; and M. Floquet,
in his History of the Parliament of Normandy, states that Brinon rendered
most important services to France as a negotiator in Italy in 1521,
and in England in 1524.

The Journal d'un Bourgeois de Paris mentions that he died in Paris in 1528, aged forty-four,
and was buried in the Church of St. Severin.--L. According to La Croix du Maine's Bibliothèque
Françoise, Brinon was the author of a poem entitled Les Amours de
Sydire.--B. J.

"The images," said Gallery, "must be set under the
altar, to hear mass, with words that I will presently tell you to
say."

Then, speaking of those images that had their arms lowered, the Proctor said that one should
be for Master Gilles du Mesnil, father of the dead man, for he knew that as long as the father
lived he would not cease to pursue him.

Moreover, one of the women with their hands hanging down was to be
for the Duchess of Alençon, sister to the King; for she bore so much
love to her old servant, Du Mesnil, and had in so many other matters
become acquainted with the Proctor's wickedness, that except she died
he could not live.

The second woman that had her arms hanging down was his own wife,
who was the cause of all his misfortune, and who he felt sure would
never amend her evil life.

When his wife, who could see everything through the keyhole, heard
him placing her among the dead, she resolved to send him among them
first.

On pretence of going to borrow some money, she went to an uncle she
had, named Neaufle, who was Master of Requests to the Duke of Alençon,
and informed him of what she had seen and heard.

Neaufle, like the old and worthy servant that he was, went forthwith
to the Chancellor of Alençon and told him the whole story.

As the Duke and Duchess of Alençon were not at Court that day, the Chancellor related this strange
business to the Regent,(15) mother of the King and the Duchess, and she sent in all haste for
the Provost of Paris,(16) who made such speed that he at once seized the Proctor and his sorcerer,
Gallery. Without constraint or torture they freely confessed their guilt, and their case was
made out and laid before the King.

15 Louise of Savoy.

16 John de la Barre, a favourite of Francis I. See note to Tale lxiii. (vol. v.), in which
he plays a conspicuous part.--Ed.

Certain persons, wishing to save their lives, told him that they had only sought his good graces
by their enchantments; but the King, holding his sister's life as dear as his own, commanded
that the same sentence should be passed on them as if they had made an attempt on his own person.

However,
his sister, the Duchess of Alençon, entreated that the Proctor's life might be spared, and
the sentence of death be commuted to some heavy punishment.

This request was granted her, and St. Aignan and Gallery were sent to the galleys of St. Blancart
at Marseilles,(17) where they ended their days in close captivity, and had leisure to ponder on
the grievousness of their crimes. The wicked wife, in the absence of her husband, continued in
her sinful ways even more than before, and at last died in wretchedness.

17 This passage is explained by Henri Bouché, who states in his Histoire Chronologique de Provence
(vol. ii. p. 554), that after Francis I.'s voyage in captivity to Spain it was judged expedient
that France should have several galleys in the Mediterranean, and
that "orders were accordingly given for thirteen to be built at Marseilles--four
for the Baron de Saint-Blancart, as many for Andrew Doria, &c."

The Baron de Saint-Blancart here referred to was Bernard d'Ormezan, Admiral of the seas of the Levant,
Conservator of the ports and tower of Aigues-Mortes, and General of the King's galleys. In 1523
he defeated the naval forces of the Emperor Charles V., and in 1525 conducted Margaret to
Spain.--L. (See Memoir of Margaret, p. xli.)

"I pray you, ladies, consider what evil is caused by a wicked woman, and how many evils sprang
from the sins of the one I have spoken of. You will find that ever since Eve caused Adam to sin,
all women have set themselves to bring about the torment, slaughter and damnation of men. For
myself, I have had such experience of their cruelty that I expect to die and be damned simply by
reason of the despair into which one of them has cast me.

And yet so great a fool am I, that I cannot but confess that hell coming from her hand is more
pleasing than Paradise would be from the hand of another."
 Then he straightway forgot her in the thought of that other woman whose track he
was following with such poor promise of success. Madame Duclos' image was in his mind as plainly
as if she sat before him in place of this chance passenger. He knew the sort of hat she would
wear (or thought he did). He also knew the color of her dress. Had he not been shown the piece
of goods from which it had been taken? And had he not understood her choice, bizarre as it
was, and for this very reason, that it was bizarre? Being a woman of subtle mind, she would
reason that since the police were seeking one of plain exterior and simple dress, a gaudy frock
would throw them off their guard and insure her immunity from any close inspection. Therefore
this striped material rather than the plain black she so much preferred. Then her eyes! She
would try to hide the defect which particularized them, by the use of glasses or, at least,
by a very heavy veil. While her walk--well! she might successfully conceal her halting step
if she were not hurried. But he promised himself that he would be very careful to see that
any woman rousing his suspicion should be given some reason for hurrying.

While thus musing, he had reached the farther end of the piazza. In wheeling about to come
back, the woman whose profile he now faced attracted his eye again, in spite of himself, and
he gave her another idle thought. How absorbing was the subject upon which she was brooding,
and how deeply it affected her!

It struck him as he quietly repassed her that he had never seen a sadder face. Then that impression
passed from his mind, for he saw Perry coming toward him with a pencil and telegram-blank in
hand. He had decided to let Sweetwater know where he could be reached that night, and Perry
had come for the message.

It must have been fully two hours later that Mr. Gryce, sitting down in his former chair, looked
up and found his view unobstructed to the river. The woman had gone.

Just for the sake of saying something to Perry, who had drawn up beside him, he remarked upon
the fact, adding in explanation of his interest in so small a matter:

"It's the thoughts and feelings of people which take hold of my curiosity now. Human nature
is a big book, a great book. I have only begun to thumb it, and I'm an old man. Some people
betray their emotions in one way, some in another. Some are loudest when most troubled, and
some are so quiet one would think them dead. The woman I was watching there was one of the
quiet ones; her trouble was deep; that was apparent from her outline--an outline which never
varied."

"Yes, she's a queer duck. I saw her: I even did an errand for her--that was before you sat
down here."

"You did an errand for her?"

"Yes; she wanted a newspaper. Of course I was glad to get it for her, as she said she was lame."

"Lame?"

"Yes; I suppose she spoke the truth. I didn't think of her being in any special trouble, but
I did think her an odd one. She seemed to be wearing two dresses."

Mr. Gryce started and turned sharply toward him.

"What's that you say? What do you mean by that?"

"Why, this: when she stopped to get her money out of some hidden pocket, she pulled up the
skirt of her dress, and I saw another one under it. Perhaps she thought that was the easiest
way of carrying it. I noticed that her suit-case was a small one."

"Describe that under-frock to me." Mr. Gryce's air and tone were unaccountably earnest. "What
was its color?"

"Why, reddish, I think. No, it had stripes in it and something like spots. Do you suppose it
was her petticoat?"

Mr. Gryce brought his hand down on his lame knee and did not seem to feel it. "Find out where
she's gone!" he cried. "No, I will do it myself." And before the other could recover from his
astonishment, he had started for the piazza where he had just seen the proprietor of the hotel
take his seat.

"This comes from an old man's folly in thinking he could manage an affair of this kind without
help," he mumbled to himself as he went stumping along. "Had I told Perry whom we were after
and how he was to recognize her, I should have spent my time talking with this woman instead
of staring at her. Two dresses! with the bright one under! Well, she's even more subtle than
I thought."

And by this time, having reached the man he sought, he put his question:

"Can you tell me anything about the woman who was sitting here? Who she is and where she has gone?"

"The woman who was sitting here? Why, I should say she was a factory hand and has gone to her
work on the other side of the river."

"Her name? Do you know her name? I'm a detective from New York--one of the regular police force.
I'm in search of a woman not unlike the one I saw here, though not, I am bound to state, a
factory worker except on compulsion."

"You are! A police detective, eh, and at your age! It must be a healthy employment. But about
this woman! I'm sorry, but I can't tell you anything except that she came on the same train
you did and wanted a boat right away to take her across the river. You see, we've no ferry
here, and I told her so, and the only way she could get across was to wait for Phil Jenkins,
who was going over at five. She said she would wait, and sat down here, refusing dinner, or
even to enter the house. Perhaps she wasn't hungry, and perhaps she didn't wish to register, eh?"

"Had her speech an accent? Did you take her for a foreign woman?"

"Yes, I did and I didn't. She spoke very well. She's not young, you know?"

"I'm not looking for a young woman."

"Well, she's gone and you can't reach her to-night. There they are now, see! about a quarter
of the way across. That small boat just slipping across the wake of the big one."

Mr. Gryce looked and saw that she was in the way of escape for to-night.

"When can I get over?" he asked.

"Not till Phil crosses again to-morrow noon."

"Meanwhile, she may go anywhere. I shall certainly lose her."

"Hardly. She's bound for the factory; you can just see the roof of it above the trees a little
to the right. She asked me all sorts of questions about the work over there, and whether there
were decent places to live in within walking distance of the factory."

"Then she isn't lame? My woman is a trifle lame."

"So may this woman be, for all I know. I didn't see her on her feet, but she carried no crutch--only
a bag and an umbrella."

"A brown bag, neat like herself in appearance?"

"No. It was light in color and old. She herself was neat enough."

Mr. Gryce's brows came together. He was in a quandary. He felt convinced, with a positiveness
which surprised him, that in watching the withdrawal of this small boat farther and farther
toward the opposite shore, he was watching the escape of Antoinette Duclos from his immediate
interference.

Yet, circumstantial as were the proofs which had led him to this conclusion, he felt that he
would gladly welcome some further corroboration of those proofs before risking the time and
opportunity he might lose in following the person of two skirts to her destination on the other
side of the Hudson. There were more reasons than one why he could not afford to lose one unnecessary
minute. An extra twinge or two of rheumatism warned him that he was approaching the point of
disablement.

Moreover, of Mr. Gryce's secret fears there was one which loomed larger than the others and
held an impulsive, unconsidered movement in check. He must have proof of her identity--which
nevertheless he did not question--before hazarding himself and the success of his undertaking
by a delay of so many additional hours. But what proof could he hope to obtain under the circumstances
in which he found himself placed? Any appeal to Mrs. Edouard Duclos, by telephone or telegram,
would certainly fail of its purpose. Even if the neat black dress in which her sister-in-law
now traveled was one from her own wardrobe, he would find it impossible to establish the fact
in time to make his own decision. The child--yes, he might worm that fact out of the child
if he were where he could reach her; but he was miles away; and besides, something within him
revolted from involving this child further in schemes honest enough from his standpoint, but
certainly not helpful to her. No, he would have to trust his intuition, or--

He had thrown himself into a chair at the side of his host, but he rose quickly as his musings
reached this point. The proof he had been looking for was his. In recalling the child to mind
there had flashed upon his inner vision an instantaneous picture of her appearance as she stooped
to pick up his stick in front of the drug-store. He saw again the bending figure, the flushed
cheeks and the flaxen locks surmounted by a little hat. Ah! it was that little hat! The impression
it had made upon him was greater than he thought. He found that he remembered not only its
ribbons, but the bunches of curiously tinted flowers hanging down in front. And these bunches,
or some precisely like them, had been the sole trimming of the hat he had been contemplating
so long from the other side of the window. The woman was Madame Duclos. These flowers had been
taken from the child's hat and pinned upon the aunt's; and it was their familiar look which
had given him, without any recognition of the reason, his surety as to the latter's identity.

Calmed immensely by this assurance, he turned back to have another word with the proprietor,
now busily engaged with his newspaper.

"Will you be obliging enough to see that I'm given an opportunity for a few words with this
Phil Jenkins on his return?" he asked. "And if you will be so good, respect my confidence till
I am sure I have made no mistake in thinking what I have of his passenger."

The proprietor nodded, and Mr. Gryce settled himself again inside to watch for the rowboat's
return.

What he learned that night from this man Jenkins calmed him still further. The woman had acknowledged,
on leaving him, that she was going to seek work at the factory. "A little old for the job,"
the man volunteered, "but spry. How she did clamber up that bank!"

It was enough; Mr. Gryce was satisfied, and engaged a seat in his small boat for the following day.

XXIII

GIRLS, GIRLS! NOTHING BUT GIRLS!

The superintendent was puzzled and showed it. He listened to Mr. Gryce with a shrug, saying
that so many women had been taken on that day, that he really couldn't remember whether any
one of them answered to the given description.

"There's the time-keeper's book. Look it over. All the names are there," he said.

Mr. Gryce did as he advised, but of course without finding there the name of Antoinette Duclos
or of anyone else of whom he had ever heard.

The next thing was for him to go through the factory itself and see if he could pick her out
from those already at work. This he was greatly averse to doing; it would be too long and painful
an effort for him, and he could not trust Perry with any such piece of nice discrimination.
How he missed Sweetwater! How tempted he was to send for him! It was finally decided that when
the hour came for the departure of the whole dayshift, he should take his stand where he could
mark each employee as she filed out.

A sorry attempt followed by as sorry a failure! He did not see one among them who was over
twenty-five years of age. But this did not mean the end of all hope. There was the nightshift.
Might she not be put on that? A different man had charge at night. He would wait for this man's
appearance, present his cause to him and see what could be done.

Not much, he found, when the night superintendent finally entered the office and he had the
chance of introducing himself. Newer to authority than the superintendent of the dayshift,
he was also of a more active temperament and much more self-assertive. He was not impressed
by the detective's years or even by his errand. It was a busy night, a very busy night--new
hands in every department. To take him through the building at present was quite out of the
question. Perhaps later it might be done; but not now, not now.

With that the night superintendent bustled out. This was not very encouraging, but Mr. Gryce
did not despair. He had seen with what ease he could look from the broad, rear window near
which he stood, into the rooms where rows upon rows of girls were already at work. Only a narrow
court divided him from these girls, and as the three stories of which the factory was composed
were all brilliantly lighted, he should have little difficulty in picking out from among them
the middle-aged woman who held in her closed and mysterious hand the key to that formidable
affair threatening the honor of one of New York's most prominent men.

Before doing this, Mr. Gryce stopped to locate himself and recall if possible the entire plan
of the building. He was in what was called the outer office. The inner one, used only by the
president of the concern, opened on his left. There was no one in the latter room at present,
the president seldom showing up at night. Another door led to the platform outside, and a third
one, located in the middle of the right-hand partition, to a large vestibule or locker-room
belonging exclusively to the girls, which in its turn communicated with the work-rooms of the
factory running in unbroken continuity around a narrow central court.

He had been through this locker-room in the late afternoon. It was here he had stood to watch
the girls file out at the close of their day's work. The exit for all employees was in one
of the corners and out of this Antoinette Duclos would have to pass when it came her turn to
leave the building--that is, if she were really in it, as he had every reason to believe.

However, certainty on this point would relieve him from much of his present impatience, and
with this end in view he prepared to enter the room again in the hope of spying among the various
hats with which the walls were hung the one with whose shape and trimming he was so well acquainted.

But promising as this attempt looked, it was destined to immediate failure. The room was not
empty. He could hear girls whispering not a dozen steps away, and anxious as he always was
not to attract any unnecessary attention to himself, he turned his back upon this door and
returned to the window from the broad view of which he anticipated so much.

A brilliant scene awaited him. This building, built originally for other purposes, had been
hastily reconstructed for its present use in a manner possibly open to criticism but which
certainly gave those who worked in it an abundance of light and air. The narrow columns supporting
its three stories were so inconspicuous at night when a blaze of electricity dominated the
whole, that it presented the appearance of being made entirely of windows. One break and one
only he observed in the double row of lights encircling the courtyard. This was in a spot diagonally
opposite, where a space of several feet showed a dimness he failed to understand. But as no
workers appeared to be there, he passed the matter over as one of no importance.

The task before him looked hopeless. In the first place there were the three floors, with no
faces visible above the first one. Then of the long rectangle stretching out before him he
could see but two sides, which fact was further complicated by there being as many of the workers'
faces turned toward the outside of the building as toward the court. Yet having determined
upon his course, he was bound to see it through.

His position near the corner of the huge rectangle precluded his seeing anyone working at his
own end. He was obliged to pass them over. But of those opposite, especially those directly
so, he could take easy count. They were all girls of fifteen or so, and could be passed over
also without more than a cursory glance. Further on he saw a row of older women, and student
as he was of human nature, there were faces among them at which he was tempted to look twice,
though once answered his purpose. There was no Madame there.

Continuing his examination, he next encountered the space so unaccountably darkened, and having
skipped this, came upon a stretch of benches displaying great activity. Only old hands seemed
to be at work in this section. Their method and despatch showed a training which made it useless
to look among them for one who had probably never worked before amid the hum of machinery.

In the corner beyond he saw nobody, but when he came to look along the end connecting the opposite
rooms with those on his side, a different scene awaited him. There every bench seemed occupied
both back and front, and mostly by newcomers, as was apparent from the anxious way the superintendent
moved about among them, explaining the work and directing them with a zeal which not only attested
his interest in the task but showed how completely he had forgotten the man he had left behind
him in his office. Well, well, such is the way of the world! The old man saw that he would
have to depend upon himself, and realizing this, bent all his energies to his present far-off
inspection of these women, hoping against hope that he would be able at least to tell the young
from the old.

Yes, he could do that, but the older women seemed to be in the majority; and this perplexed
him. It was all too distant for him to see clearly, but he took heart of grace as he observed
how the faces and figures he was studying so closely were resolving themselves into mere silhouettes
under his gaze. For as I have already said, he had a quick eye for outline, and felt sure that
he could sufficiently recall that of the woman whose head and shoulders had been so long under
his eye that day, to recognize it even among fifty others. But not one of them--not one of
them all--had the precise narrowness and rigidity of Madame Duclos'; and after many painful
minutes of renewed effort followed by renewed disappointment he moved back from the window
and sat down. There was one thing you could always count on in Mr. Gryce, and that was his
patience.

But it was a patience not without its breaks. Once he rose to look out front to make sure he
had not miscalculated the distance of this factory from the river. Then after another period
of waiting, he got thinking how much he might discover if he could get one glimpse into that
far corner contiguous to that end of the rectangle where he had seen so many raw workers receiving
the assistance of the night superintendent. There was a way of doing this of which he had not
thought before. He had but to step outside, walk the length of the platform where the loading
of shipments was going on, and look in at one of the great windows at the further end. But
when he came to make the attempt, he found himself plunged into such a turmoil and the way
so blocked by the loading of boxes and the backing up and driving off of horses that he retreated
precipitately. Rather than encounter all this, he would await events from the inside. So he
took his old seat again and for another half-hour listened to the thump of machinery and the
squeak of a rusty elevator-brake which almost robbed him of thought. He was even inclined to
doze, when he suddenly became aware of some change either in himself or in what lay about him.

Had the machinery stopped? No, it was not that.

The place seemed darker, yet it was still very light.

With a restless move, he rose heavily and peered again into the court. Immediately it was evident
what had occurred. The whole string of lights in the third story had been shut off, and now
those of the middle story were following suit. Only the ground floor remained active with all
its lights at the maximum, and every belt moving.

At this unexpected narrowing down of his field of operations he felt greatly relieved. He had
dreaded those long walks through innumerable rooms. He could manage circling the building once,
but three times would have been too much. In a mood of increased contentment, he started to
return to his seat, but found himself stayed by something he saw in what had been but a dimly
lighted space when he looked there last. It was now as bright as the rest and showed him the
figure of the superintendent stooping over a woman, explaining to her some intricate manipulation
of the work in hand which was evidently quite new to her. He could see him very plainly, but
her figure was more or less hidden. Not for long though. The superintendent passed on and she
came into full view. It was Antoinette Duclos. He was confident of this even before he noted
her dress. When his eyes fell on that, he was sure; there was no mistaking the stripes and
the dots. Antoinette Duclos! and she was where he could reach her in five minutes--in fact
as soon as the superintendent returned. As he stood and watched her working quite assiduously
but in something like isolation, he felt as though ten years had slipped from his age, and
trifled with his pleasure as the rest of us do when we behold a despaired-of goal loom suddenly
in sight. Was she the woman he had pictured in his mind's eye? Hardly. Yet there was an admirable
directness in her movements. From the way she went about things, he could plainly see that
she would master her duties in no time if Fate did not interpose to prevent. It certainly was
hard to interrupt her in her work just when she was on the way to safety and competence. But
there could be no question of his duty, or of the claims of Mr. Roberts to whatever help might
accrue from an understanding of the relation of this woman to events threatening his reputation
with such utter destruction. Her story might free him from all suspicion or it might actually
determine his guilt. Therefore her story must be had, and at once--if possible, this very night.

But he must wait--wait for the coming of the superintendent. He felt safe to do this. Meanwhile
he was determined not to let this woman out of his sight; so, drawing up a chair, he settled
down within view of her active figure, from which all rigidity had vanished in the interest
she was rapidly developing in her work. If he could have seen her countenance more clearly,
he would have been glad. There seemed to be a veil between him and it, a hazy indistinctness
which he found it difficult to understand; but remembering that he was looking through two
windows and on a long diagonal, he accepted this slight drawback with equanimity and was about
to indulge in the comfort of a cigar when he saw the scene he still held in view change, and
change vividly, to the excitation of a fresh interest and a still more careful watch.

A girl had approached Madame Duclos from some place quite out of sight, and in passing her
by, had slipped a note into her hand. The Frenchwoman had taken it, but in a way indicating
shock. The ease which had given suppleness to her form and surety to all her movements was
gone in an instant, and from the furtive way in which she sought to read the communication
thus handed her Mr. Gryce saw that his own powers would soon be taxed to keep him even with
a situation changing thus from moment to moment under his eye.

What did that note contain, and who could have taken advantage of the arrival of some late-comer
to slip it into her hand? Mr. Gryce found this a very formidable question, and watched with
ever-increasing anxiety to see what effect these unknown words would have upon their recipient
when her opportunity came for reading them.

A startling one--of that he was presently a witness; for no sooner had she taken in their import
than she cast a hurried look about her and left her place without fuss or flurry, but with
an air of quiet determination which Mr. Gryce felt confident covered a resolution which nothing
could balk.

She had not only left her bench but seemingly was in the act of leaving the building. This,
of course, it was for him to prevent, and he rose to do so. It might be interesting to wait
and watch her hurrying figure threading its way to the locker-room through the double row of
girls on the opposite side of the court; but there were reasons why he wished to reach that
last mentioned room before she did; reasons which seemed good enough to send him there without
any further delay. If he could but discover her hat among the many he had seen hanging on pegs
in one of the corners, how easy it would be for him to hold her back till he could make her
listen to the few words which must be said before he could allow her to leave the building.

Quick of eye, if not of step, he had run in review the varying headgear depending from those
isolated pegs, before he had half-circled the lockers. But hers he did not see. Could she have
been given a locker on this her first night? He did not think so; and approaching closer, he
looked again. The hat was there, but lying on the floor. Somebody had knocked it down; perhaps
the late-comer who had given her the letter.

Greatly gratified by the advantage he now indisputably held over her, he picked up the hat
and approached the door through which she must in another minute emerge.

She did not come.

He waited and waited, and still she did not come. At last, driven by impatience, he ventured
to open the door he had previously hesitated to touch and took a quick look in. Girls, girls!
nothing but girls! No Madame Duclos anywhere.

Something must have happened to interrupt her escape. Either she had been caught in the attempt
by the superintendent or by some one else of equal authority. This, if bad for her, was also
bad for him, as a quiet hold-up in the manner he had planned was certainly better than the
public one which must now follow.

Sorry for her and sorry for himself, Mr. Gryce returned to the office just as the superintendent
entered from the opposite door. He thought the latter looked a little queer, and in an instant
he learned why.

"Was the woman you wanted a staid, elderly person, apparently a foreigner?"

"Yes--of French birth, I am told."

"Well, I guess you were all right in distrusting her. She's gone--took a notion that night
work didn't agree with her and left without so much as a 'By your leave!' She must have smelt
you out in some uncanny way. Too bad! She bade fair to be just the woman we wanted for a very
nice part of the work."

"Do you mean she's really out of the building--that you didn't stop her----"

"I didn't know what she was up to, till she was gone. I----"

"But how did she get out? She didn't go by the employees' door for I stood there on the watch.
I had seen her receive a note----"

"A note? How? Who gave it to her?"

"Some girl."

"And you saw this? How could you? Been through the work-rooms?"

"No. I saw her from this window, as I was looking diagonally across the court. She was in one
of the opposite rooms over there----"

The superintendent broke into a hearty laugh.

"Fooled!" he cried. "You police detectives are a smart crowd, but our old factory with its
string of useless windows has led you astray for once. You weren't looking into any one of
the rooms over there. You were looking at a reflection in that useless old window behind which
the elevator runs. That happens when the elevator running on that side is down. I've seen it
often and laughed in my sleeve at the chance it gives me to observe on the sly how things are
going on at certain benches. Many a girl has got her discharge--But no matter about that. Come
here.

"The room you think you see over there--you will notice that nobody is at work in it now--is
on this side of the building, and the woman you have in chase escaped by the south delivery-door.
We are loading cars to-night from this side of the building, and she took a flying advantage
of it. Men give way to a woman. Though there's an order against any such use of that door,
you can't get one of them to hold onto a woman when she once gets it into her head to skip
the premises. But she can't have gone far. This is a place of few houses and no big buildings
besides the factory. If you take pains to head her off at the station, you'll be safe for to-night,
and in the morning you can easily find her. Now I must go; but first, what was her offense?
Theft, eh?"

"No. This woman whom we have let slip through our fingers is Madame Duclos, the mother of the
girl shot in a New York museum. There is a big reward out for her recovery and detention, and----"

The superintendent stood aghast.

"Why didn't you say so? Why didn't you say so at once? I'd have had the whole troop file out
before you. I'd have had----"

The detective caught at his hat.

"I wasn't aware that I had reached an age when I couldn't tell the difference between a reflection
and a reality," he growled, and hurried out.

The town was a small one; and Perry would see that she didn't escape from the station. Besides,
she had fled without her hat. Surely, with all this in his favor, he would soon be able to
lay his hand upon her, if not to-night, certainly before another day was at an end.

XXIV

FLIGHT

In leaving the building Mr. Gryce almost ran into the arms of Perry. In his anxiety to be within
call, the young detective had seated himself on the steps outside and now stood ready for any
emergency.

Mr. Gryce's spirits rose as he saw him there. The great door leading to the elevator opened
not twenty feet to the left of him. Perhaps Perry had seen the woman and could tell which way
she ran. Questions followed, rapid and to the purpose. Perry had seen a woman flash by. But
she seemed to be in company with a man. He had not been able to see either clearly.

"Which way were they heading?" asked Mr. Gryce.

Perry told him.

It would look as though they were making for the station. Alarmed at the idea, Mr. Gryce stepped
down into the road and endeavored to pierce the darkness in that direction. All he could see
were the station lights. Everything else was in shadow. The night hung over all, and had it
not been for the grinding of machinery in their rear, the silence would have been just as marked.

"Perry, is the way rough between here and the station--I mean, rough for me?"

"Not very, if you keep in the road."

"Run ahead, then, and learn how soon the next train is due--any train, going north or going
south--I don't care which. If it is soon, look for a middle-aged woman in a striped dress,
and if you can't prevent her getting on, without a fracas, follow her yourself and never quit
her--telegraphing me at the first opportunity. Run."

Perry gave a leap and was soon swallowed up in the darkness which was intense as soon as he
had passed beyond the glare from the factory. Mr. Gryce followed after, moving as quickly as
he dared. It was not far to the station platform, but in his anxiety it seemed a mile; nor
did he breathe with ease till he saw a flying shadow come between him and the station lights
and knew that Perry had reached the platform.

It was just at the hour when the fewest trains pass, and Mr. Gryce was himself across the tracks
and on the platform before a far-off whistle warned him that one was approaching. Looking hastily
around, he saw Perry hurrying up behind him.

"No one," said he. "No such person around."

They waited. The train came in, stopped, took on two unimportant passengers and rushed away north.

"I'm afraid I shall have to ask you to stay here, Perry. It would be so easy for her to board
one of these night trains and buy a ticket from the conductor."

But as he spoke he paused, and gripping Perry's arm, turned his ear to listen.

"A boat," said he. "A small boat leaving shore."

It was so. They could hear the dip of the oars distinctly in the quiet which had followed the
departure of the train. No other sound but that was in the air, and it struck cold upon one
old heart.

"It is she! I'm sure of it," muttered Gryce.

"The man across the river has warned her--sent a boat for her, perhaps. Run down to the point
and see if there is anyone there who saw her go."

Perry slid into the night, and Mr. Gryce stood listening. The quiet dip of the oars was growing
fainter every instant. The boat was rapidly withdrawing, carrying with it all hope of securing
off-hand this desirable witness.

To be sure, there was nothing very serious in this. He had only to telephone across the river
to have the woman detained till he could reach her himself in the early morning. Yet he felt
unaccountably disturbed and anxious. For all his many experiences and a record which should
have made him immune from the ordinary disappointments of life, he had never, or so it seemed
to him, felt more thoroughly depressed or weary of the work which had given him occupation
for more years than he liked to number, than in the few minutes of solitary waiting, with his
face toward the river and the sense of some impending doom settling slowly over his aged heart.

But he was still too much the successful detective to allow his disheartenment to be seen by
his admiring subordinate. As the latter approached, the old man's countenance brightened, and
nothing could have been more deceptive than the calmness he displayed when the fellow reported
that he had just been talking to a man who had recognized the boat and the oarsman. It was
the same boat and the same oarsman that had brought them over earlier in the day. He had made
an extra trip at this most unusual hour, for the express purpose of taking this woman back.

"I suppose there is no possibility of your drumming up anyone to row us over in time to catch
them?"

"None in the least. I have inquired."

"Then follow me into the station. I have a few messages to send."

Among these messages was a peremptory one to Sweetwater.

Morning! and an early crossing to the other side. Here a surprise awaited them. They found,
on inquiry, that the man responsible for Madame's flitting was not, as they had supposed, the
hotel proprietor, but Phil himself, the good-natured, easily-imposed-upon ferryman, on whose
sympathies she had worked during their first short passage from one shore to the other. Perhaps
a little money had helped to deepen this impression; one never knows.

But this was not all. The woman was gone. She had fled the town on foot before they were able
to locate Phil, who had not made shore at his usual place but at some point up the river about
which they knew nothing. When he finally showed up, it was almost daybreak.

"Where is he now?"

"At home, or ought to be."

"Show me the house."

In ten minutes the two were face to face.

The result was not altogether satisfactory to the detective. Though he used all his skill in
his manipulation of this kind-hearted ferryman, he got very little from him but the plain fact
that the woman insisted upon taking to the road when she heard that the train-service had stopped;
that he could not persuade her to wait till daylight or to listen for a moment to what he had
to say of the danger and terrors awaiting her in the darkness, and the awful loneliness of
the hills. She didn't fear nature even at its worst, and she knew these hills better than many
who had lived among them for years. She was bound to go, and she went.

This was six hours ago. Asked to explain the interest he had shown in her, it soon became evident
that he was in complete ignorance of her identity. He had simply, on their first trip over,
seen that she was middle-aged, suffering and much too good and kind to be followed up by enemies
and wicked police officials. True, he had rowed them over in her pursuit in the early part
of the day, but that was because he had not known their business. When on returning he had
learned it, he made up his mind to help her out with a warning even if it kept him up all night.
He had not expected to bring her back with him, but she had insisted upon his doing so, saying
that she had friends in the mountains who would look after her. He saw that she was dreadfully
in earnest, for she had not stopped to get her hat and would not have had so much as an extra
stitch with her if she had not taken the precaution to hide a bag of things somewhere in the
bushes near the factory, in anticipation of some such emergency. And he couldn't resist her.
She made him think of a sister of his who had had a dreadful time of it in the world and was
now well out of it, thank God!

When the ferryman heard that a reward of hundreds of dollars was waiting for the man who succeeded
in bringing her before the police officials in New York, he betrayed some chagrin, but even
this did not last. He was soon declaring with heartfelt earnestness that he didn't care anything
about that. It was peace of mind he wanted, and not money.

When Mr. Gryce left him, it was with an even slower step than usual. Peace of mind! How about
his own peace of mind? Was he trailing this poor unfortunate from pillar to post, for the reward
it would bring him? No. With his advancing years money had lost much of its attraction. Nor,
if he knew himself, was he particularly affected by the glory which attends success. Duty,
and duty only, drove him on--to elucidate his problem and merit the confidence put in him by
his superiors. If suffering followed, that was not his fault; his business was to go ahead.

It was in this frame of mind that he prepared himself for the automobile trip he saw before him.

There was no question in Mr. Gryce's mind now, as to this woman's destination or whither he
should be obliged to go in order to find her. As he now saw into her mind, she had left New
York with the intention of hiding herself in the remote village to which she had ordered her
mail sent under the name of Elvira Brown, whom she evidently knew; but hearing, either on the
car or in the hotel, where she was detained, the plea which was being made for workers in the
factory on the east side of the river, she had modified her plans to the extent already known,
only to return to her original intention as soon as the attempt to provide for herself in this
independent way had proved a failure.

He would proceed then in her wake, conscious of the fresh disappointment which awaited her
in the loss, through Miss Brown's sudden death, of the asylum she counted upon. Could he have
gone on foot like herself, he might have been tempted to do so, for a trail is best followed
slowly and with ear and eye very close to the ground. But as this was beyond his strength,
he must wait till an automobile could be procured, and possibly till Sweetwater should arrive--for
Perry was no man for this job. There were no automobiles in this small town, and it might be
necessary to send up or down the river some distance before one could be found capable of carrying
them over the precipitous road they would be obliged to take in order to avoid the washout
which had driven them to this extremity.

But all would come right in time; and with Sweetwater at his elbow, the journey would be made
and the woman caught, soon enough for him no doubt, hard as he felt it to wait. Why so hard,
he might have found it difficult to say, since hitherto he had found it easy enough when the
goal seemed sure and it was only with time he had to reckon!

XXV

TERROR

A woman fleeing from publicity as one flies from death--a refined woman, too, whose life had
hitherto been passed in the open!

When Antoinette Duclos, after a night and morning of unprecedented fatigue and extraordinary
fears, with little to upbear her in the way of food, stepped from the train which brought a
few local passengers into the quiet village of Rexam, she hardly would have been recognized
by her best friend, such marks may a few hours leave upon one battling with untoward Fate in
one supreme effort.

She seemed to realize this, for meeting more than one eye fixed inquiringly upon her she drew
down the veil wound about a sort of cap she wore till it concealed not only her features but
her throat which a restless pulse had tightened almost to the exclusion of her breath. Ready
to drop, she yet made use of the little energy left her, to approach with faltering steps a
lumbering old vehicle waiting in the dust and smoke for such passengers as might wish to be
taken up Long Hill.

There was no driver in sight, but she did not hesitate to take her seat inside. There was extra
business at the station, for this was the first train to come in for two days; and if anyone
noticed her in the shadowy recesses of the cumbrous old coach, nobody approached her; nor was
she in any way disturbed. When the driver did show himself, she was almost asleep, but she
woke up quickly enough when his good-natured face peered in at her and she heard him ask where
she wanted to go and whether she had any baggage.

"I want to go up Long Hill and be set down at the first cross-road," she said. "My baggage
is here." And she pointed to the space at her feet. But that space was empty; she had no baggage.
She had dropped both bag and umbrella at the side of the road after one of her long climbs
under a fitful moon and had not so much as thought of them since.

Now she remembered and flushed as she met the eyes of the man looking in at her with his hand
on his whiskers, smoothing them thoughtfully down but saying nothing, though his countenance
and expression showed him to be one of the loquacious sort. If any smiles remained to her from
the old days, now was the time for one; but before she could twist her dry lips into any such
attempt, he had uttered a cheerful "All right" and turned away to clamber up into his seat.

The relief was great, and she settled back, rejoicing in the fact that they would soon be moving
and that she was likely to be the sole passenger. But she soon came to rue this fact, for the
driver wanted to talk and even made many abortive attempts that way. But she could not fall
in with his mood, and seeing this, he soon withheld all remarks and bent his full energies
to the task of urging his horses up the interminable incline.

Houses, at which she scarcely looked, disappeared gradually from view, and groups of spreading
trees and patches of upland took their places, deepening into the forest as they advanced.
When halfway up, the farther mountains, which had hitherto been hidden by nearer hills, burst
into view. Behind them the sun was setting, and the scene was glorious. If she saw it at all,
she gave no sign of pleasure or even of admiration. Her head, which she had held straight up
for the first quarter of a mile, sank lower and lower as they clambered on; yet she gave no
signs of drowsiness--only of a mortal weariness which seemed to attack the very springs of
life. The pomp and pageantry of the heavens, burning with all the pigments of the rainbow,
failed to appeal to a soul shut within dungeon bars. Rocks and mighty gorges darkling to the
eye and stirring to the imagination held no story for her; she looked neither to the right
nor to the left while the beauty lasted, much less when the last gleam had faded from the mountain
tops and a troop of leaden clouds, coming up from the east, added their shadows to those of
premature night.

The driver, who had been eying these clouds for some little time, felt that he ought to speak
if she did not. Pulling up his horses as though to give them a breathing spell, he remarked
over his shoulder with a strain of anxiety in his voice:

"I hope your friends live near the top of the hill, missus. A storm is coming up, and it's
getting very dark. Will you have to walk far?"

"No, no," she assured him with a quick glance up and around her. "A little way, a very little
way!" Then she became quiet and absorbed again.

"I've got to go on," he broke in again as the top of the hill came in sight. "I've a passenger
for the eight-fifty train waiting for me more than a mile along the road. I shall have to leave
you after I set you down."

"That's right; I expect that. I can take care of myself--don't worry. Not but what you're very
kind," she added after a moment, in her cultured voice, with just enough trace of accent to
make it linger sweetly in the ear.

"Then here we are," he called back a moment later, jerking his horses to a standstill and jumping
down into the road. "Goin' east or goin' west?" he asked as he took another glance at her frail
and poorly protected figure.

"This way," she answered, pointing east.

He stopped and stared at her.

"Nobody lives that way," he said, "--that is, nobody near enough for you to reach shelter before
the storm bursts."

"You are mistaken," she said, cringing involuntarily as the first big clap of thunder rolled
in endless echoes among the mountains. And turning about, she started hurriedly into the shadows
of the narrow cross-road.

He gave one glance back at his horses, the twitching of whose ears showed nervousness, uttered
some familiar word and launched out after the woman. "Pardon me, missus," he cried, "but is
it Miss Brown's you mean?"

The widow stopped, glanced back at him over her shoulder, made a quick, protesting gesture
and dashed on.

With a shake of his head and a muttered, "Well, women do beat the devil!" he retraced his steps;
and she proceeded on alone.

As the last sound of his horses' hoof-beats died out on the road, a second clap of thunder
seemed to bring heaven and earth together. She scarcely looked up. She was approaching a little
weather-beaten house nestled among trees on the edge of a deep gorge. As her eyes fell on it,
her footsteps quickened, and lifting a hasty hand, she pulled off her veil. A change quite
indescribable, but real for all that, had taken place in her worn and waxen features. Not joy,
but a soft expectancy relieved them from their extreme tension. If a friend awaited her, that
friend would have no difficulty in recognizing her now. But alas!

A few steps more, and she stood before the door. It had a desolate look; the whole house had
a desolate look, possibly because every shade was drawn. But she did not notice this; she was
too sure of her welcome. Raising her hand to the knocker, she gave two sharp raps. Then she
waited. No answer from within--no sound of hurrying steps--only another rumble in the sky and
a quick rustling of the trees on either side of her as if the wind which made the horizon black
had sent an avant-courieur over the hilltops.

"Elvira is out--gone to some church meeting or social gathering down in the village. She will
be back. But I won't wait. I will try and get in in the old way. The storm may delay her indefinitely."

Leaving the door, which was raised only two steps above the road, she walked to the corner
of the house and stooping down, felt behind a projecting stone for what she had certainly expected
to find there--a key to the front door.

But her hand came away empty.

Surprised, for this was not her first visit to this house (she had once spent weeks there and
knew the habits of its mistress well), she felt again in the place where the key should be,
and where she had so often found it when her friend was out. But all to no avail. It was not
there, and presently she was in the road again staring at the closed-up front.

As she did so, these words left her lips:

"And she knew I might come at any minute!"

Tottering from fatigue, she caught at the trunk of a great tree which held roof and wall in
its embrace.

Why did it quiver? Why did the ground beneath her feet seem to rock and all nature darken as
with the falling of a pall. The storm was upon her. It had rolled up with incredible swiftness
and was about to break over her head. With a shock she realized her position. No shelter, and
the storm of the season upon her! What should she do? There was no way of getting into the
house at the rear, for the bushes were too thick. She must accept her fate, be drenched to
the skin, perhaps smitten by the next thunderbolt. But Antoinette Duclos was no coward, so
far as physical ills were concerned. She drew herself up straight against the trunk of the
tree, thinking that this, bad as it was, was better than shelter with the enemy at the door.
She would be calm, and she was fast growing so when she suddenly became aware of a man standing
very near and hunting her out through the dusk.

She never knew why the scream which rose in her throat did not pass her lips. Her terror was
unspeakable, for she had heard no advance; indeed, there was too much noise about her for that.
But it was the silent terror of despair, for she thought it was the man from whom she had made
this great effort at escape. But he soon proved to her he was not. It was just the driver of
the stagecoach, returned to see what had become of her. He had feared to find her stricken
down in the road, and when he saw her clinging alone and in a maddened way to this tree, he
made no bones of speaking to her with all necessary plainness.

"I asked you if it was Missus Brown you had come to see," he called to her through the din.
"And you wouldn't answer."

"Why should I?" she shouted back. "Why do you speak like that? Has anything happened to her?"

"Don't you know?"

"No, no--she was well when I heard from her last, and expecting me, or so she wrote. Is she--she--"

"Dead, missus. We buried her last Tuesday. I'm sorry, but--"

Why finish? She was lying out before him, straight and stark in the road. A bolt of lightning
which at that moment tore its way through the heavens brought into startling view her face,
white with distraction, framed in a mass of iron-gray locks released by her fall.

"Good heaven!" burst from the lips of the frightened man as he stooped to lift her. "What am
I going to do now?"

The thunder answered him, or rather it robbed him for the moment of all thought. Peal after
peal rattled over the neighboring peaks, rocking the air on the uplands and filling his soul
with dismay. But when quiet had come again, hope returned with it. She was not only standing
upright but was crying in his ear:

"Can I get into the house? If I could stay there to-night, I could go back to-morrow."

"I'll see that you get in, if I have to break in a window," he answered. "But you're sure that
you will not be afraid to stay out this terrible storm in a house with no neighbors within
half a mile?"

"I know the house. I have been here before, and if Elvira Brown could face the storms of forty
years from her solitary home, I can surely face a single one, without losing my courage."

He said no more, but approaching the house, began to test such windows as he could reach. He
finally broke in a pane and released the latch; after that, entrance was easy.

Yet after he had opened the way for her and she had stepped into the dim interior, he felt
loth to leave her. Duty called him away. The passenger awaiting him up the road was a man he
could not afford to disappoint; yet he stood there longer than the occasion warranted, with
the knob of the door in hand, watching her struggle with the lamp, which she at last succeeded
in lighting. As the walls of the hall and her anxiously bending figure burst into view, he
uttered a quick "Good-by!"

She turned, smiled and tried to thank him, but the words failed to leave her lips. A nearer
and fiercer bolt had shot to earth at that instant, striking a tree so near that the noise
of its fall mingled with the crash of the heavens. When it had ceased, he had gone. He could
not face the look with which she met this new catastrophe.

That look never again left her. When she saw herself in a glass, as she presently did, on entering
one of the rooms lamp in hand, she was startled and muttered:

"My own mother would pass me by if she saw me now. I could go anywhere I wished without fear
or dread. Why did I leave New York?" And setting the lamp down, she covered her face and wept.

The storm abated; a few minutes of fiercely pouring rain, and all was over. She was left in
ghastly quiet--a quiet which was almost worse than the turmoil which had preceded it--to face
her memories and accustom herself to the thought that the solitary woman with whose life everything
she looked upon was so intimately connected was gone, never to pass through these doors again
or touch with deft and careful fingers the infinite number of little belongings with which
the house was filled.

For as yet nothing had been changed, nothing had been moved. How fitting this was, Antoinette
knew better than anybody else, perhaps, for she was the only person whom Elvira Brown had ever
allowed to spend any length of time with her, and she could remember--alas! how vividly, in
spite of the one great fear forever gnawing at her heart--that an article, no matter how small,
when once given place in this house, held that place always till broken or in some other way
robbed of its usefulness. She looked at her friend's pet chair standing just in the one spot
where she had seen it eight years before, and her heart swelled, and a tear rose in her eye.
But there was not time for another. A sense of the straits in which she found herself placed
by the death of this dependable friend returned upon her in full force; the past retired into
its old place, and the present, with its maddening problems, seized upon her nerve and quelled
her once indomitable spirit.

The fate which had pursued her ever since she had left her happy home in France had not spared
her at this crisis. The storm, of so little consequence to her, had roused the driver's sympathy.
This had not only fixed her image in his mind but given away her destination. All hope of hiding
herself among the mountains was therefore gone. She would have to move on; but where? If she
were but able to leave now, she might before morning find some covert from which help might
be given her for further escape. But the condition of the roads, as well as her own weakness,
forbade that. She needed food: she needed sleep. Of food she would find plenty, she was sure;
but sleep! How could she sleep, with the promise of the morrow before her? Yet she must; everything
depended upon her strength. How could she win that rest which alone would secure it.

Pausing in the midst of the hall whither her restless thought had driven her, she stared in
a fruitless inquiry at the wall confronting her. Her mind, like her feet, was at a standstill.
She could neither think nor act. In fact, she was at the point of a nervous collapse, when
slowly from out the void there rose to her view and pierced its way into her mind the outline
of the door upon which she had been steadily looking but without seeing it till now. Why did
she start as it thus took on shape before her? There was nothing strange or mysterious about
it. It led nowhere; it hid nothing, unless it was the yard upon which it directly opened.

But that yard! She remembered it well. It was unlike any other she had ever seen in this country
or her own. It was small and semicircular; it was shut in by a high board fence except at the
extreme end, where it was met by a swinging bridge topping a forty-foot chasm. That bridge
led through a sparsely wooded forest to a road running in a quite different direction from
the one by which the house was approached. As she strove to recall her memories of it, she
became more and more assured that her one and only opportunity for a successful flight lay
that way. Moved to joy at the thought, she bowed her head for one wild moment in heartfelt
thankfulness and then quickly drew the bolts of the door which offered her this happy deliverance.

She did not mean to seek escape to-night, but an irresistible impulse, which quite robbed her
of her judgment, drove her to take a look into the yard and make sure for herself that the
bridge was still there and everything as she had last seen it.

But when with the help of the wind she pulled open the heavy door and stood, throbbing under
the force of the gale, on the shallow step outside, she found herself confronted by a darkness
so hollow and so absolute that she felt as though she had stumbled into a pit. But instead
of retreating, if only to procure a lantern, she took the one step down to the narrow walk
which led through grass and flowers to the edge of the plateau from which the bridge extended.
Would she be satisfied now? No, she must see the bridge, or if she could not see it, must feel
it with her foot or touch it with her hand. Once sure of its presence there, she would return,
take off her clothing and seek refreshment.

But how was she to find her way in such absolute darkness? Alone with the dying tempest, now
moaning in fitful gusts, now shrieking a last protest in her ear, she stood peering helplessly
before her. Already her arms had gone out like those of a blind person loosed upon an unknown
road. She was conscious of a great fear. All the solitude of her position had rushed upon her.
She felt herself lost, forsaken; yet she had no idea of turning back. If she could but find
some support--something upon which to lay her fingers. She thought of the fence, and her courage
revived. If she could but reach and follow that!

There were obstacles in her way. She was sure of this, for she remembered some of them, and
Elvira no more changed her garden than her house. But with care she succeeded in getting around
these, and soon she knew by the lessened force of the wind that she was near, if not directly
under, the high fence upon which she depended for guidance. A few bushes--another unexpected
obstacle, followed by a bad stumble--separated her from the contact for which she had reached;
then by a final effort her fingers found the boards and she went eagerly on, dragging herself
through the wet without knowing it, and only stopping with a sense of shock, when her hand,
sliding from the boards, fell groping about in midair with nothing to grasp at. She had come
to the end of the fence and was within a foot of the bridge--if the bridge was still there.

But her fears on this score were few, and she felt about with hand and foot till the former
struck the rail at her side, and the latter the narrow planking spanning the gorge.

She hesitated now. Who would not? But the impulse which had led her thus far continued to urge
her on. She stepped upon the bridge and proceeded to cross it, clinging to the rail with a
feverish clutch, and feeling every board with her foot before venturing to trust her full weight
upon it. She found them seemingly firm, and when about halfway across she stopped to listen
for the roar of the mountain stream which she knew to be rushing over its rocky bed some forty
awesome feet below her.

She heard it, but the swish of the trees lining the gorge was in her straining ears and half
drowned its sullen sound. With feelings impossible to describe, she tossed up her arms to the
skies, where a single brilliant star was looking through the mass of quickly flying, quickly
disintegrating clouds. Then she sought again the safety of the guiding rail, and clinging desperately
to it, took one more step and stopped with a smothered shriek. The rail had snapped under her
hand and had gone tumbling down into the abyss. She heard it as it struck, or thought she did,
and for a moment stood breathless and fearing to move, the world and all it held vanishing
in semi-unconsciousness from heart and mind. What was she but a trembling atom floating in
an unknown void on the fathomless sea of eternity! Then, as her mind steadied, she began to
feel once more the boards under her feet, and to hear the smiting together of the great limbs
wrestling in the depths of the forest. She even caught such a homely sound as the violent slamming
of the door she had left unlatched behind her; and summoning up all her courage, which was
not small when she was released from her first surprise, she stepped firmly backward till she
felt the rail strong again under her clutch. Then she turned resolutely and retraced her steps
along the bridge and so across the plateau to the house whose light had acted as a beacon to
her whenever the door blew wide enough to let the one inner beam be seen.

When she was inside again, she lingered for a long time in the darkening hall, her slight form
and whitened head leaning against the wall in a desolation such as few hearts know. Then something
within the woman flared up in a rekindled flame, and she passed quickly into the room where
she had left her lamp burning; and blowing it out, she threw herself down on a couch and tried
to sleep.

An hour later the moon shone in upon her pale features and wild, staring eyes upturned to meet
it. Then it vanished, and she and the whole house were given up again to darkness.

She had forgotten to eat, though the cupboards, in this well-stored house, were quite full.

XXVI

THE FACE IN THE WINDOW

"Is this the place?"

"According to our instructions, yes. The first house after the first turn to the right. We
took the first turn, and this is the first house. Romantic situation, eh? But a bit lonesome
for a city chap? Shall I help you down?"

While talking, Sweetwater, who was already in the road, held up his elbow to Mr. Gryce, who
slowly descended. It was early morning, and the glory of sunshine was everywhere misleading
the eye from the ravages of the night before; yet neither of these two men wore an air in keeping
with the freshness of renewed life and the joyous aspect of exultant nature. There seemed to
be an oppression upon them both--a hesitation not common to either, and to all appearance without
cause.

To end what he probably considered a weakness, Sweetwater approached the door staring somewhat
blankly from the flat front of the primitive old house whose privacy they were about to invade,
and rapped on its weather-beaten panels, first gently and then with quick insistence.

There was no response from within; no sound of movement; no token that he had been so much
as heard. Sweetwater turned and consulted his companion before making another attempt.

"It's early. Perhaps she's not up yet," rejoined the old detective as he painfully advanced.
The storm of the preceding night had got into his bones.

"I don't know. There's something uncanny about this silence. She ought to be here; but I'm
afraid she isn't." Sweetwater rapped again, this time with decided vehemence.

Suddenly in one of the uncurtained windows a face appeared. They saw it, and both drew a deep
breath. The eyes were looking their way, but they were like ghost's eyes. Without sight or
speculation in them, they simply looked; then the face slowly withdrew, growing ghastlier every
minute, and the window stared on, but the woman was gone. Yet the door did not open.

"I hate to use force," objected Sweetwater.

Before answering, Mr. Gryce stepped to one side and cast a glance around the corner of the
house in the direction of the gorge opening in the rear.

"There is something like a yard at the back," he announced, "but the fence which shut it in
is so high and so protected by means of prickly underbrush that you would have difficulty in
climbing it."

"Just so at this end," called out Sweetwater after a short run to the left. "If we get in at
all," he remarked on coming back, "it will have to be by the window you see there with one
pane knocked out."

"I don't like that; I don't like any of it. But we can't stay out here any longer. The looks
of the woman herself forbid it. We sha'n't forget that hollow stare."

"They said the woman who lived here was dead."

"Yes. It's a bad business, Sweetwater. Rap once more, and then if she doesn't come, throw up
the window and climb in."

Sweetwater did as he was bid, and meeting with no more response than before, thrust his hand
through the hole made by the broken pane; and finding the window had been left unlocked, he
pushed it up and entered. In another moment he appeared at the front door, where Mr. Gryce
joined him, and together they took their first look at the small but surprisingly well-furnished
interior.

The hall in which they stood was without staircase and had many of the appointments of a room.
Doors opened here and there along its length, and in the rear they saw a closed one evidently
leading into the yard. There was no one within sight. One would have said that with the death
and carrying out of the owner of this little dwelling, all life had departed from it. Yet these
two men knew that life was there; and raising his voice, Mr. Gryce called out in the least
alarming way possible:

"Madame Duclos!" following this utterance of her name with an apology for the intrusion and
a prayer for one minute's interview.

Silence was his answer--no stir anywhere.

Apprehensive of they knew not what, the two detectives started simultaneously, one for the
door on their right, the other for that on the left. When they met again in the ill-lighted
hall, Mr. Gryce was shaking his head, but Sweetwater had lifted a beckoning finger. Unconsciously
moderating his step, Mr. Gryce followed him through one room to the door of another which he
saw standing partly open.

Through the crack thus made between the hinges, they could get a very fair glimpse of what
was going on inside. They saw a bed, and a woman kneeling beside this bed, her eyes upraised
in prayer. The look which had awed them at the window was gone, and in its place was one so
high and so full of religious faith that for an instant they were conscious of the reversal
of all their ideas.

But only for an instant; for while they waited, hesitating to break in upon her evidently sincere
devotions, she started to her feet and with a half-insane look about her, disappeared from
their view in the direction of the hall.

Sweetwater was after her in a twinkling; but by the time he and Mr. Gryce, each going his separate
way, had themselves reached the hall, it was to see the end door--the one giving upon the plateau--closing
behind her.

"Madame!" called out Sweetwater, bounding briskly in her wake.

Mr. Gryce said nothing but approached with hastening steps the door which Sweetwater had left
open behind him, and took a quick survey of the fenced-in plateau, the bridge and the towering
trees beyond, toward which she seemed to be making.

"She cannot escape," was his ready conclusion; and he shouted to Sweetwater to go easy.

Sweetwater, who was in the act of setting foot upon the bridge down which she was running,
slacked up at this command and presently stopped, for she had stopped herself and was looking
back from a spot about halfway across, with the air of one willing, at last, to hear what they
had to say.

"Who are you?" she cried. "And what do you want of me?"

"Are you not Madame Duclos?"

"Yes, I am Antoinette Duclos."

"Then you must know why you are wanted by the police authorities of New York. Your daughter--"

Her hand went up.

"I've nothing to say--nothing. Will you take that for your answer and let me go?"

"Alas, madam, we cannot!" spoke up Mr. Gryce in his calm, benevolent way. "Miss Duclos' death
was of a nature demanding an inquest. Your testimony, hard as it may be for you to give it,
is necessary for a righteous verdict. That is all we want--"

"It is too much!" she cried. And with a quick glance upward she took another step or two along
the bridge till she had reached the broken rail; and before Sweetwater in his dismay could
more than give a horrified bound in her direction, she had made the fatal leap and was gone
from their sight into the gorge below.

BOOK IV

NEMESIS

XXVII

FROM LIPS LONG SILENT

"This finishes my usefulness as a detective. I have had my fill of horrors; all, in fact, that
my old age can stand."

Thus, Mr. Gryce, as hours afterward he and Sweetwater turned their faces back toward New York.

"I appreciate your feelings," responded the latter, who had been strangely silent all day,
speaking only when directly addressed. "I can assure you that in my way I'm as much cut up
as you are. I wish now that I had made an attempt from the rear to head off this distracted
woman, even if I had been obliged to scratch my hands to pieces tearing a board from the fence."

"It would have done no good. She was determined to die rather than give up her secret. I remember
the look with which her sister-in-law warned me that she would never survive a capture. But
I thought that mere exaggeration."

Then after a moment of conscious silence on the part of both, the weary old man added with
bitter emphasis, "Her testimony might--I do not say would--have cleared away our suspicions
of Director Roberts."

Sweetwater, who was acting as chauffeur, slowed down his machine till it came to a standstill
at the side of the road. Then wheeling quietly about till he faced his surprised companion,
he remarked very gravely:

"Mr. Gryce, I hadn't the heart to tell you this before, but the time has come for you to know
that Mr. Roberts' cause is not so favorably affected, as you seem to think, by this suicidal
death of one who without doubt would have proved to be a leading witness against him. I am
sure you will agree with me in this when I inform you that in pursuing the task you set me,
I came upon this."

Thrusting his hand into his pocket, he pulled out a large envelope from which he proceeded
to draw forth first the tattered square of what had once been a cabinet portrait, and then
a freshly printed proof of the same. Holding them both up, he waited for the word that was
sure to follow.

It came with all the emphasis he expected.

"Roberts! Director Roberts!"

"The same, sir"; and the eyes of the two detectives met in what was certainly one of the most
solemn moments of their lives.

They had paused for this short conference at a point where the road running for a few yards
on a level gave them a view of slope on slope of varying verdure, with glimpses of the Hudson
between. Glancing up, with a gesture of manifest shrinking from the portrait which Sweetwater
still held, Mr. Gryce allowed his glance to run over the wonderful landscape laid out to his
view, and said with breaks and halts bespeaking his deep emotion:

"If my death here and now, following fast upon that of this unhappy Frenchwoman, would avail
to wipe out the evidence I have so laboriously collected against this man, I should welcome
it with gratitude. I shrink from ending my career with the shattering of so fine an image,
in the public eye. What lies back of this crime--what past memories or present miseries have
led to an act which would be called dastardly in the most uninstructed and basest of our sex,
I lack the imagination to conceive. Would to God I had never tried to find out! But no man
standing where Roberts does to-day among the leaders of a great party can fall into such a
pit of shame without weakening the faith of the young and making a travesty of virtue and honor."

"Yet, if he is guilty----"

"It is our business to pursue him to the end. Only, I like the man, Sweetwater. I had a long
talk with him yesterday on indifferent matters and I came away liking him."

This was certainly something Sweetwater had not expected to hear, and it threw him again into
silence as he started up the machine and they pursued their course home.

Hard as the day had been for Mr. Gryce, its trials were not yet over. He had left it to Sweetwater
to report the case to the New York authorities and had gone home to rest from the shock of
the occurrence and to prepare for that interview with the Chief Inspector which he was satisfied
would now lead to an even more exacting one with the District Attorney.

He was met by a messenger from downtown who handed him a letter. He opened it abstractedly
and read the following:

"Mrs. Taylor is talking."

He had forgotten Mrs. Taylor. To have her thus brought forcibly back to mind was a shock heightened,
rather than diminished, by a perusal of the few connected words which the careful nurse had
transcribed as falling from her delirious patient's lips.

They were these:

        I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.

The exact lines, no more, no less, which Sweetwater had found written on the back of the Swiss
clock cherished by Mr. Roberts.

XXVIII

"ROMANTIC! TOO ROMANTIC!"

Next morning Mr. Gryce left his home an hour earlier than usual. He wished to have a talk with
Mrs. Taylor's nurse before encountering the Inspector.

It was an inconvenient time for a nurse to leave the sick-bed; but the matter being so important,
she was prevailed upon to give him a few moments, in the little reception room where he had
seated himself. The result was meagre--that is, from her standpoint. All she had to add to
what she had written him the day before was the fact that the two lines of verse quoted in
the note she had sent him were Mrs. Taylor's first coherent utterance, and that they had been
spoken not only once but many times, in every kind of tone, and with ever-varying emphasis.
That and a dreamy request for "The papers! the papers!" which had followed some action of her
own this very morning comprised all she had to give in fulfillment of the promise she had made
him at the beginning of this illness.

Mr. Gryce believed her and rose reluctantly to his feet.

"Then she is still very ill?"

"Very ill, but mending daily; or so the doctor says."

"If she talks again, as she is liable to do at any moment, do not check her, but remember every
word. The importance of this I cannot impress upon you too fully. But do not by any show of
curiosity endanger her recovery. She seems to be one of the very best sort; I would not have
her body or mind sacrificed on any account."

"You may trust me, sir."

He nodded, giving her his hand.

But as he was turning away, he looked back with the quiet remark: "I should like to ask a final
question. You have been in constant attendance on this lady for some time and must have seen
many of her friends, as well as taken charge of her mail and of any messages which may have
been left for her. Has there been anything in this experience to settle the doubt as to whether
her talk of a vision in which she saw her absent husband stricken simultaneously with the poor
child lying at that very moment dead at her feet simply delirium or a striking instance of
telepathy recording an accomplished fact? In other words, do you believe her husband to be
living or not living at the present time?"

"That is a subject upon which I have not been able to form any opinion. I have heard nothing,
seen nothing to influence my mind either way. Some other people have asked me this same question.
If her mail contains any news, it is still in the hands of the proprietor of the hotel. He
has refrained from sending it up. She has lived here, as you know, for a long while."

"Has she no relative to share your watch or take such things in charge?"

"I have seen none. Friends she has in plenty, but no one who claims relationship with her,
or who raises the least objection to anything I do."

He seemed about to ask another question, but refrained and allowed her to depart after some
final injunction as to what she should do in case of certain emergencies. Then he had a talk
with the proprietor, which added little or nothing to his present knowledge; and these duties
off his mind, he went downtown.

As he expected, he found the Chief Inspector awaiting him. The death of Madame Duclos had added
still another serious complication to the many with which this difficult affair was already
encumbered, and he was anxious to talk over the matter with one who had been on the spot and
upon whose impressions he consequently could rely.

But when he heard all that Mr. Gryce had to say on the subject, he grew as serious as the detective
himself could wish, even going so far as to propose an immediate ride over to the District
Attorney's office.

Fortunately, they found that gentleman in and ready to listen, though it was evident he expected
little from the conference. But his temper changed as Mr. Gryce opened up his theory and began
to substantiate it with facts. The looks which he exchanged with the Chief Inspector grew more
and more earnest and inquiring, and when Mr. Gryce reached that portion of his report which
connected Mr. Roberts so indisputably with the arrow, he called in his assistant and together
they listened to what Mr. Gryce had further to say.

With this addition to his audience, the old man's manner changed and became a trifle more formal.
He related the fact, not generally known, of Mr. Roberts' engagement to a young girl residing
on Long Island, and how this was broken off immediately after the occurrence at the museum,
seemingly from no other reason than the unhappy condition of mind in which he found himself,
a condition added to if not explained by the pertinacity with which he had haunted the morgue
and dwelt upon the image of the young girl who had perished under no random shot.

Here the old man paused, shrinking as much from what he had yet to say as they from the hearing
of it. It was not till the Chief Inspector had made him an encouraging gesture that he found
the requisite courage to proceed. He did so, in these words:

"I know that the evidence I have thus far advanced is of a purely circumstantial nature, capable,
perhaps, of a more or less satisfactory explanation. But what I have to add cannot be so easily
disposed of. Connections have developed between persons we thought strangers which have opened
up a field of inquiry which brings the doubts and surmises of an old detective within the scope
of this office. I do not know what to make of them; perhaps their full meaning can only be
found out here. Of this only I am assured. The gentleman whom it seems presumptuous on my part
to connect even in a casual way with crime has not gained but lost by what I have to tell of
Madame Duclos' suicidal death. To those who see no association between the two, it looks like
the opening of a new lead, but when I tell you that they knew each other, or at all events
that she knew him and in the way of actual hatred, it looks more like a deepening of the old
one. See here, gentlemen."

Opening a package he had hitherto held in hand, he showed them Fredericks' fifteen-year-old
photograph of Mr. Roberts, together with its mutilated counterpart, and explained how the latter
came to be in its present mutilated condition.

"But this is not all," he continued, as the remarks incident upon this proof of deadly hatred
on the part of the mother of the victim for the man whom circumstances seemed to point out
as her slayer subsided under the pressure of their interest in what he had further to impart.
"As you will see after a moment's consideration, this token of animosity does not explain Madame
Duclos' flight, and certainly not her death, which, as the unhappy witness of it, I am ready
to declare was not the death of one driven to extremity from personal fear, but by some exalted
feeling which we have yet to understand. All that I now wish to point out in its connection
is the proof offered by this shattered photograph, that Mr. Roberts was in some manner and
from some cause a party to this crime from which a superficial observation would completely
dissociate him.

"Where is the connecting link? How can we hope to establish it? That is what it has now become
my unfortunate duty to make plain to you. Carleton Roberts drawing a bow to shoot an innocent
schoolgirl is incredible. In spite of all I have said and shown you, I do not believe him guilty
of so inhuman an act. He drew the bow, he shot the arrow, but----Here allow me to pause a moment
to present another aspect of the case as surprising as any you have yet heard. You are aware--we
all are aware--that the inquest we await has been held back for the purpose of giving Mrs.
Taylor an opportunity to recover from the illness into which she has been thrown by what she
saw and suffered that day. Gentlemen, this Mrs. Taylor whom we all--I will not even exclude
myself from this category--regarded not only as a casual visitor to the museum, but a stranger
to all concerned, is, on the contrary, as I think you will soon see, more closely allied to
the seemingly dispassionate director than even Madame Duclos. The shock which laid her low
was not that usually ascribed to her, or even the one she so fantastically offered to our acceptance;
but the recognition of Carleton Roberts as the author of this tragedy,--Carleton Roberts whom
she not only knew well but had loved in days gone by, as sincerely as he had loved her. This
I now propose to prove to you by what I cannot but regard as incontestable evidence."

Taking from a small portfolio which he carried another photograph, unmounted this time and
evidently the work of an amateur, he laid it out before them. The silence with which his last
statement had been received, the kind of silence which covers emotions too deep for audible
expression, remained unbroken save for an involuntary murmur or so, as the District Attorney
and his assistant bent over this crude presentation of something--they hardly knew what--which
this old but long trusted detective was offering them in substantiation of the well-nigh unbelievable
statement he had just made.

"This, gentlemen," he went on, as he pointed to the following, "is the copy of a label pasted
on the back of a certain Swiss clock to be seen at this very moment on the wall of Mr. Roberts'
own bedroom in his home in Belport, Long Island. He prizes this clock. He has been heard to
say that it goes where he goes and stays where he stays, and as it is far from a valuable one
either from intrinsic worth or from any accuracy it displays in keeping time, the reason for
this partiality must lie in old associations and the memories they invoke. A love token. Can
you not see that it is such from the couplet scrawled across it? If not, just take a look at
the initials appended to that couplet. May I ask you to read them?"

The District Attorney stooped, adjusted his glasses and slowly read out:

"C. C. R."

"Carleton Clifton Roberts," explained Mr. Gryce. Then slowly, "The other two if you will be
so good."

"E. T."

"Ermentrude Taylor," declared the inexorable voice. "And written by herself. Here is her signature
which I have obtained; and here is his. Compare them at your leisure with their initials inscribed
according to the date there, sixteen years or more ago. Now where were these two--this man
and this woman--at the time just designated? Alone, or together? Let us see if we can find
out," pursued the detective with a quiet ignoring of the effect he had produced, which revealed
him as the master of a situation probably as difficult and disconcerting as the three officials
hanging in manifest anxiety upon his words had ever been called upon to face. "Mr. Roberts
was in Switzerland, as his housekeeper will be obliged to admit on oath, she being an honest
woman and a domestic in his mother's house at the time. And Ermentrude Taylor! I have a witness
to prove where she was also! A witness I should be glad to have you interrogate. Here is her
name and address." And he slipped a small scrap of paper into the District Attorney's hand.
"What she will say is this, for I think I have very thoroughly sounded her: First, that she
is Mrs. Taylor's most intimate friend. This is conceded by all who know her. Secondly, that
while her intimacy does not extend back to their girlhood days--Mrs. Taylor being an Englishwoman
by birth and remarkably reticent as to her former life and experiences--she has one story to
tell of that time which answers the question I have given you. She got it from Mrs. Taylor
herself, and in this manner. They were engaged in talking one day about our Western mountains
and the grandeur of scenery generally, when Mrs. Taylor let fall some remark about the Alps,
which led this friend of hers to ask if she had ever seen them. Mrs. Taylor answered in the
affirmative, but with such embarrassment and abrupt change of subject that it was plainly apparent
she had no wish to discuss it. Indeed, her abruptness was so marked and her show of trouble
so great, she was herself disturbed by what might very easily give offense, and being of a
kindly, even loving disposition, took occasion when next they met to explain that it was as
a girl she had visited Switzerland, and that her experiences there had been so unfortunate
that any allusion which recalled those days distressed her. This is all that ever passed between
these two on this subject, but is it not enough when we read this couplet, and mark the combined
initials, and recognize them as those of Carleton Roberts and Ermentrude Taylor? But lest you
should doubt even this evidence of an old-time friendship so intimate that it has almost the
look of a betrothal, I must add one more item of corroborative fact which came to me as late
as last night. In a moment of partial consciousness, while the nurse hung over her bed, Mrs.
Taylor spoke her first coherent sentence since she fell into a state demanding medical assistance.
And what was that sentence? A repetition of this couplet, gentlemen, spoken not once but over
and over again, till even the nurse grew tired of listening to it.

        'I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.'"

As the last word fell from Mr. Gryce's lips, the District Attorney muttered a quick exclamation,
and sat down heavily in his chair.

"No coincidence that," he cried, with forced vivacity. "The couplet is too little known."

"Exactly," came from Mr. Gryce in dry confirmation. "Mrs. Taylor, as well as her friends can
judge, is a woman of thirty-five or thirty-eight. If she went to Switzerland as a girl, this
would make her visit coincident, so far as we can calculate from our present knowledge, with
that of Carleton Roberts. For the surer advancement of our argument, let us say that it was.
What follows? Let the inscription of this label speak for us. They met; they loved--as was
natural when we remember the youth and good looks of both, and--they parted. This we must concede,
or how could the experience have been one she could not recall without a heart-break. They
parted, and he returned home, to marry within the year, while she--I do not think she married--though
I have no doubt she looks upon herself as a wife and forever bound to the man who deserted
her. Women of her kind think in this way of such matters, and act upon them too as is shown
by the fact that, on following him here, she passed herself off as a woman separated from her
husband. Changing the Miss before her name to Mrs., she lived under this assumption for twelve
years at her present hotel. In all that time, so far as I can learn, she has never been visited
by anyone of an appearance answering to that of her former lover; nor have I any reason to
think she ever intruded herself on him, or made herself in any way obnoxious. He was married
and settled, and contrary to the usual course of men who step with one stride into affluence,
was living a life of usefulness which was rapidly making him a marked man in public esteem.
Perhaps she had no right to meddle with what no longer concerned her. At all events, there
is no evidence of her having done so in all these fourteen years. Even after Mrs. Roberts'
death, all went on as usual; but--" Here Mr. Gryce became emphatic--"when he turned his attention
to a second marriage and that with a very young girl--(I can name her to you, gentlemen, if
you wish) her patient soul may have been roused; she may have troubled him with importunities;
may have threatened him with a scandal which would have interfered greatly with his political
hopes if it had not ended them at once. I can conceive such an end to her long patience, can't
you, gentlemen? And what is more, if this were so, and the gentleman found the situation intolerable,
it might account for the flight of that arrow as nothing else ever will."

Both men had started to their feet.

"How! It was not she----"

"It was not she who was struck, but it was she who was aimed at. The young girl merely got
in the way. But before I enlarge upon this point," he continued in lower tones as the two officials
slowly reseated themselves, "allow me to admit that any proof of correspondence between these
old-time lovers would have added much to my present argument. But while I have no doubt that
such an interchange of letters took place, and that in all probability some one or more of
them still exist, Mrs. Taylor's illness and Mr. Roberts' high position prevent any substantiation
of the same on our part. I must therefore ask you to assume that it was in obedience to some
definite agreement between them that she came to the museum on that fatal morning and made
her appearance in that especial section of the gallery marked II. If this strikes you as inconceivable
and too presumptuous for belief, you must at least concede that we have ample proof of his
entire readiness for her coming. The bow brought up so many days before from the cellar was
within reach; the arrow under his coat; and his place of concealment so chosen as to make his
escape feasible the moment that arrow flew from the bow. Had she entered that section alone--had
the arrow found lodgment in her breast instead of in that of another--nay, I will go even further
and say that had no cry followed his act, an expectation he had every right to count upon from
the lightning-like character of the attack,--he would have reached the Curator's office and
been out of the building before quick discovery of the deed made his completion of this attempt
impossible."

"But the girl did cry out," remarked the Assistant District Attorney. "How do you account for
that, since, as you say, it was not natural for one pierced to the heart without warning?"

"Ah, you see the big mistake we made,--Correy and all the rest of us. Had Miss Willetts, or
I should say, Mademoiselle Duclos, been the one to let out that dolorous cry, the man just
behind the partition would have been there almost in time to see her fall. Correy, who started
up the stairs at the first sound, would have been at the gallery entrance before the man of
the arrow could have dropped the hanging over his retreating figure. But it was not from her
lips, poor girl, that this gasping shriek went up, but from those of the woman who saw the
deed and knew from whom the arrow came and for whom it was meant. How do I know this? Because
of the time which elapsed, the few precious minutes which allowed Mr. Roberts to get as far
away as the court. For she did not voice her agony immediately. Even she, with her own unwounded
heart keeping up its functions, stood benumbed before this horror. Not till the full meaning
of it all had penetrated her reluctant brain did she move or cry out. How long this interval
was; whether three minutes were consumed by it, or five, we have no means of telling. She,
in her despair, would take no note of time, nor would Mr. Travis, reeling in the opposite gallery
under the shock of seeing all that he loved taken from him in one awful minute."

Here the detective turned with great earnestness toward the two officials.

"This question of time has been, as I have repeatedly said, the greatest stumbling-block we
have encountered in our consideration of this crime. How could the assassin, by any means possible,
have got so far away from the pedestal, in the infinitesimal lapse of time between the cry
that was heard and the quick alarm which followed. Now we know. Have you anything to say against
this conclusion? Any other explanation to give which will account for every fact as this does?"

His answer came in a dubious gesture from the District Attorney and a half-hearted "No" from
his Assistant. They were both either too awed by the circumstance or too fearful of mistake,
to accept without a struggle an accusation of this grave and momentous character against one
of Mr. Roberts' stamp and consequence.

This was no more than Mr. Gryce had expected, and while he realized that his reputation as
a detective of extraordinary insight in cases of an unusually baffling nature trembled in the
balance, he experienced a sudden distaste of his work which almost drove him into renouncing
the whole affair. But the habits of a lifetime are not parted with so easily; and when the
Chief Inspector observed--evidently with the idea of goading him on--"This seems to be mainly
a matter of conjecture, Gryce," his old self reasserted itself, and he answered boldly:

"I acknowledge that; but conjecture is what in nine cases out of ten smoothes out many of our
difficulties. I have here a short statement made by myself, after the most careful inquiries,
of all that Mrs. Taylor and the untrapped director did and said in the few difficult moments
when they met face to face over the body of his unfortunate victim. I will ask you to listen
to a portion of it.

"'She had not moved. After her one cry of horror which had brought a rush of witnesses upon
the scene, she remained fixed on her knees in the absorbed introspection common to those brought
suddenly face to face with a life and death crisis. He, finding that his own safety demanded
action suitable to his position as a director, had entered with the crowd and now stood in
her presence, in face of his own diabolical work, in an attitude of cold courage such as certain
strong natures are able to assume under the pressure of great emergencies.

"'So long as she was deaf to all appeal to rouse and explain the situation, he stood back,
watchful and silent; but when she finally roused and showed a disposition to speak, his desperation
drove him into questioning her in order to see how much she understood of an attack which had
killed a harmless stranger and let herself go free.

"'He asked her first if she could tell them from which direction came the arrow which ended
this young girl's life.

"'She made no reply in words; but glanced significantly at the opposite gallery.

"'This called from him the direct inquiry, "Did you see anyone over there at the moment this
young girl fell?"

"'She shook her head. Afterward she explained the denial by saying that she had been looking
down into the court.

"'But he did not cease his inquiries. Turning to the people crowding about him, he put the
like question to them; but receiving no answer, a silence followed, during which a woman suggested
in tones loud enough for all to hear, that there were no arrows on the other side of the court,
but that the gallery where they stood was full of them.

"'This seemed to alarm Mrs. Taylor. Turning to the director, she asked whether he was sure
that the opposite gallery held no arrows and no bows; and when he replied that nothing of the
kind was to be found along its entire length, she proceeded to inquire whether any such deed
could be committed in a place so open to view, without attracting the observation of some one
wandering in court or gallery.

"'This, undoubtedly, to ascertain the full extent of his danger, before bestowing a thought
upon herself. But at his answer, given with the cold precision of a thoroughly selfish man,
that if anyone in the whole building had seen so much as a movement in a spot so under suspicion,
that person would have been heard from by this time, she faltered and was heard to ask what
he had in mind and why the people about her looked at her so. He did not respond directly,
but made some remark about the police, which increased her alarm to the point of an attempted
justification. She said that it was true about the arrows, as anyone could see by looking up
at the walls. But where was the bow? No one could shoot an arrow without a bow, and when some
one shouted that if an arrow was used as a dagger, one wouldn't need a bow, a sort of frenzy
seized her and she acted quite insane, falling at the young girl's side and whispering sentence
after sentence in her ear.

"'What more was needed to stamp her as a mad woman in the eyes of the ordinary observer? Nothing.
But to you and me, with the cue just given, it has another look. She had just seen the man
whom she had herself spared from an accusation which would have been his ruin accept in the
coldest fashion an explanation which left her own innocence in doubt. What wonder she succumbed
to temporary aberration! As will be remembered, she soon became comparatively calm again, and
so remained until in an interview I had with her a half hour or so later I urged her, possibly
with too much insistence, for some explanation of the extreme agitation she had shown at the
time, when she broke forth with the remarkable statement that it was not the child, but her
husband, she was mourning, stricken to death, as she would have us believe, simultaneously
with the young and innocent victim then lying dead at her feet.

"'Of course, such a coincidence was much too startling not to be regarded by us all as the
ravings of delirium; nor has anything occurred since in the way of communication from, or in
regard to the absent one, to show that this so-called warning of death has been followed up
by fact. But, if you test her action by the theory I have just advanced, viz., that the man
she called husband was at that moment in the room with us and that these words were a plea
to him--the last appeal of a broken-hearted woman for the support she felt to be her due--how
the atmosphere of unreason and mystery clears itself. His suggestion that what was needed there
was an alienist, and the pitiful efforts she made to exonerate herself without implicating
him in the murderous event, fall naturally into place, as the action of a guilty man and the
self-denying conduct of a devoted woman.'"

"Romantic! too romantic!" objected the District Attorney. "I should think we were listening
to one of Dumas' tales."

"Dumas got his greatest effects from life, or so I have been told," remarked the Chief Inspector.

Mr. Gryce sat silent.

Suddenly, the District Attorney observed with the slightest tinge of irony edging his tone:

"I presume you would find a like explanation for the messages she professed to be sending to
her husband, when engaged in babbling fool words into the dead girl's ear."

"Certainly. He was there, mark you! He stood where he could both see and hear her. All she
said and all she did was by way of appeal to him for some token of regret, some sign that he
appreciated her reticence; and when she found that it was bringing her nothing, she fainted away."

"Ingenious, very ingenious, Gryce. Had you failed to give us proofs connecting this idol of
the Republican party with the actual shooting, it would have been simply ingenious and a quite
useless expenditure of talent. But we have these proofs, and while they are mainly circumstantial,
they undoubtedly call upon us for some recognition, and so we will hear you out whatever action
we may take afterward."

"But first I should like to ask Mr. Gryce one question," interposed his assistant. Then addressing
the detective: "Two mysteries are involved in this matter. You have given us a clever explanation
of one of them, but how about the other? Will you, before going further, tell us what connection
you find between the theory just advanced and the flight and ultimate suicide of Madame Duclos
under circumstances which point to a desire to suppress evidence even at the cost of her life?
It was not from consideration for Mr. Roberts, whom you have shown she hated. What was it then?
Have you an equally ingenious explanation for that too?"

"I have an explanation, but I cannot say that it is altogether satisfactory. She died but yesterday,
and my opportunities have been small for any work since. What I have learned was from her sister-in-law,
whom I saw this morning. Realizing that she will be obliged to give full testimony at the inevitable
inquest, she is at last ready to acknowledge that she has been aware for a long time of a secret
in Madame's life. That while she knew nothing of its nature, she had always thought that it
was in some manner connected with her prolonged residence abroad. Whether it would also explain
the meaning of her return at this time and the seemingly inexplicable change made in her daughter's
name while en route, must be left to our judgment. Madame had told her nothing. She had simply
made use of their home, coming and going, not once, but twice, without giving them the least
excuse for her inexplicable conduct. A hundred questions could not elicit more. But to one
who like myself has had the opportunity of observing this wretched woman at the moment of her
supreme distress an insight is given into her character, which suggests the only plausible
explanation of her action. Her sacrifice was one of devotion! She perished in an exaltation
of feeling. Love drove her to this desperate act. Not the love of woman for a man, but the
love which women of her profound nature sometimes feel for one of their own sex. Mrs. Taylor
was her friend--wait, I hope to prove it--and to save her from experiencing the extreme misery
of seeing the man who was the joy as well as bane of her life suffer from the consequences
of his own misdeeds, Antoinette Duclos felt willing to die and did. You smile, gentlemen. You
think the old man is approaching senility. Perhaps I am, but if the contention is raised that
no connection has been shown to exist between Mrs. Taylor and this foreign Madame, save such
as was made by the death of Madame's child, I must retort by asking who warned Madame Duclos
of the fatal occurrence at the museum in time for her to flee before even our telephone messages
reached her hotel? Gentlemen, there is but one person who could have done this--our chief witness,
Ermentrude Taylor. She alone had not only the incentive, but the necessary opportunity. Coroner
Price as well as myself made a great mistake when we allowed Mrs. Taylor to go home alone that
day."

"Very likely." This from the Chief Inspector. "But if the information I have received on this
point is correct, she seemed at that time to be so entirely dissociated with a deed whose origin
had just been located in the opposite gallery, that you have no real cause to blame yourselves
in this regard."

"True; our minds were diverted. But you are waiting for me to explain what I mean by opportunity.
Since my attention has been drawn to Mrs. Taylor again, I have been making inquiries. The chauffeur
who drove her to her hotel has been found, and he admits that she stopped once on her way home,
to buy some coffee. He watched her as she went into the store and he watched her as she came
out; and he smelled the coffee. Happily, the interest he took in her as a sick woman intrusted
to his care was strong enough for him to remember the store. It was one with two entrances,
front and back; and next door to it there is a public building with a long row of telephone
booths on the ground floor. If I read the incident aright, she bought her coffee, ordered it
ground, slipped out at the rear door and into the adjoining building, where, unnoticed and
unheard, she called up the Universal and got into communication with Madame Duclos. When she
returned it was by the same route. She did not forget her coffee nor give way under the great
strain to which she had subjected herself till she reached her own apartment."

"Clever."

"And true, gentlemen; I will stake my reputation on it, unable as I am to explain every circumstance,
and close up every gap. Have you any further questions to ask or shall I leave you to your
deliberations?"

XXIX

A STRONG MAN

An hour later when the Chief Inspector rose to depart, it was with the understanding that until
their way cleared and their duty in this matter had become inevitable, no word of this business
should reach the press, or even pass beyond the three officials interested.

Strange to say, they were able to keep this compact, and days elapsed without any public recognition
of the new factor which had entered into the consideration of this complicated crime.

Then a hint of what was seething in the official mind was allowed to carry its own shock to
the person most interested. But let us leave aside a pastime in which only two can share, and
speak of one that shall be common to all."

"Since my wife has understood the meaning of my words so well," said Hircan to all the ladies,
"and a private pastime is not to her liking, I think she will be better able than any one else
to name one that all may enjoy; and I herewith give in to her opinion, having no other of my
own."

To this all the company agreed.

Parlamente, perceiving that it had fallen to her to decide, spoke
as follows--

"Did I find myself as capable as the ancients who invented
the arts, I should devise some sport or pastime in fulfilment of the
charge you lay upon me.

But knowing as I do my knowledge and capacity, which are scarcely able to recall the worthy
performances of others, I shall think myself happy if I can follow
closely such as have already satisfied your request.

Among the rest, I think there is not one of you who has not read the Hundred Tales of Boccaccio,
(11) lately translated from the Italian into French. So highly were these thought of by King Francis,
first of that name, Monseigneur the Dauphin, (12) Madame the Dauphiness,
and Madame Margaret, that could Boccaccio have only heard them from
the place where he lay, the praise of such illustrious persons would
have raised him from the dead.

11 Margaret here alludes to the French translation of the Decameron made by her secretary, Anthony
le Maçon, and first issued in Paris in 1545.

Messrs. De Lincy and Montaiglon accordingly think that the prologue of the Heptameron was written
subsequently to that date; but M. Dillaye states that Le Maçon's translation was circulated
at Court in manuscript long before it was printed. This contention is in some measure borne out
by Le Maçon's dedication to Margaret, of which the more interesting passages are given in the
Appendix to this volume (A).--ED.

12 The Dauphin here mentioned is Francis I.'s second son, who subsequently
reigned as Henry II.

He became Dauphin by the death of his elder brother on August 10, 1536. The Dauphiness is Catherine
de' Medici, the wife of Henry, whom he married in 1533; whilst Madame Margaret, according to M.
de Montaiglon, is the Queen of Navarre herself, she being usually
called by that name at her brother's Court.

M. Dillaye, who is of a different opinion, maintains that the Queen
would not write so eulogistically of herself, and that she evidently
refers to her brother's daughter, Margaret de Berry, born in 1523,
and married to the Duke of Savoy.--Ed.

Now I heard not long since that the two ladies I have mentioned, together with several others
of the Court, determined to do like Boccaccio, with, however, one
exception--they would not write any story that was not a true one.

And the said ladies, and Monseigneur the Dauphin with them, undertook to tell ten stories each,
and to assemble in all ten persons, from among those whom they thought
the most capable of relating something.

Such as had studied and were people of letters were excepted, for
Monseigneur the Dauphin would not allow of their art being brought
in, fearing lest the flowers of rhetoric should in some wise prove
injurious to the truth of the tales.



"Yes; a Frenchwoman, both by birth and marriage. Her husband, a professor of languages, was
located some sixteen years ago, in New Orleans."

"I never knew him. Indeed, I find it hard to understand why I should be expected to show any
interest in him or his wife."

"Well, I will tell you. You may not have known the Madame; but it is very certain that she
knew you."

"She?" This certainly unexpected blow seemed to make some impression. "Will you give me your
reasons for such an assertion? Was the name Duclos a false one? Was her name like that of her
daughter, Willetts? If so, allow me to assure you that I never heard of a Willetts any more
than I have of a Duclos. That a woman of whatever name and nationality should desert her child
fills me with horror. I cannot speak of her, dead though she be, with any equanimity. A mother
and act as she did! She herself was to blame, and only she for what happened to that beautiful
girl--so young--so sweet--so innocent. I have a weakness for youth. To me a girl of that type
is sacred. Had I been blessed with such a child----But there, I am straying again from our
point. What makes you say Madame Duclos knew me?"

Before replying, the Coroner rose, and taking a small package from his desk, opened it, and
laid out before the astonished eyes of Mr. Roberts the freshly printed photograph of himself
with which we are so well acquainted, and then the half-demolished one which for all its imperfections
showed that it had been originally struck off from the same negative.

"Do you recognize this portrait of yourself as one taken by Fredericks some dozen years ago?"

"Certainly. But this other? This end and corner of what must have been my picture too, where
was it found?"

"Ah, that is what I have called you here to learn. This remnant of what you have just admitted
to have been your photograph also was found in the very condition in which you see it now,
in the wastebasket of the room where Madame Duclos lodged previous to her flight to the Catskills."

"This! with the face----"

"Just that! With the face riddled out of it by bullets! She shot six into it at intervals;
waiting for the passing of an elevated train by her windows, in the hope that the bigger noise
would drown the lesser."

"It is nothing," was Mr. Roberts' indignant comment, as he brushed the picture aside. "That
was never my picture, or she wanted a target for her skill and didn't care what she took. That
is all I have to say to you or to the Coroner of Greene County, on a matter in which I have
no concern. I am sorry to disappoint both of you, but it is so."

He rose, and the Coroner did not seek to detain him. He merely observed, as the director turned
to go:

"Have you heard the latest news about Mrs. Taylor?"

"No."

"She is improving rapidly. Soon she will be able to appear before the jury already chosen to
inquire into the cause and manner of Miss Willetts' death."

"A fine woman!" came in a burst from the director's lips as he faced about for a good-bye nod.
"I don't know when I have seen one I admired more."

And Coroner Price had nothing to say, he was stupefied.

But it was not so with Mr. Gryce, who entered immediately upon Mr. Roberts' departure. 

[Does so, giving an elaborate and confusing account of the construction, showing that, without
the greatest care, and strictest attention to a series of minute precautions on the part of
the soldier, the weapon is likely to get suddenly out of order, and
prove worse than useless in action.

This, however, he artfully glides over in his description, minimising all its possible defects,
and finally insisting that no power in Europe has turned out such
a handy, powerful, and serviceable rifle.



"I didn't notice it. Is the District Attorney prepared to make the next move? Mine has failed."

"Not yet. The game is too hazardous. We should only make ourselves ridiculous in the eyes of
the whole world if we should fail in an attack upon a man of such national importance. After
the two inquests and a letter I hope to receive from Switzerland, we may be in a position to
launch our first bomb. I don't anticipate the act with any pleasure; the explosion will be
something frightful."

"If half you think is true, the unexpected confronting of him with Mrs. Taylor should produce
some result. That's what I reckon on now, if the business falls first to me."

"I reckon on nothing. Chance is going to take this thing out of our hands."

"Chance! I don't understand you."

"I don't understand myself; but this is a case which will never come into court."

"I differ with you. I almost saw confession in his face when he turned upon me at last with
that extravagant expression of admiration for the woman you say he meant to kill."

"Why did his finger go so continuously to his vest pocket? When you answer that, I will give
a name to what I just called chance."

XXX

THE CREEPING SHADOW

Mrs. Taylor suffered a relapse, and the inquest which had been held back in anticipation of
her recovery was again delayed. This led to a like postponement of an inquiry into the death
of Madame Duclos; and a consequent let-up in public interest which thus found itself, for the
nonce, deprived of further food on which to batten.

Meanwhile, Mr. Gryce was not idle. Anxious to determine just how and where Madame Duclos' story
fitted into the deeper and broader one of the museum crime, he made use of his fast waning
strength to probe its mysteries and master such of its details as bore upon the serious investigation
to which he was so unhappily committed. When he had done this,--when he had penetrated, as
it were, into the very heart of the matter to the elimination of all doubt and the full establishment
of his own theory, it was felt that the time had come for some sort of positive action on the
part of those interested in the cause of justice.

This they decided should take the form of a personal interview between certain officials and
Mr. Roberts himself. A lesser man would have been asked to meet the District Attorney in his
office; but in a case of such moment where the honor of one so prominent in many ways was involved
it was thought best for them to visit him in his own home. To do this without exciting his
apprehension while still making sure of his presence required some management. Various plans
were discussed with the result that a political exigency was brought into play. The District
Attorney asked Mr. Roberts for an interview for the purpose of introducing to him a man whose
influence could not fail to play an important part in his future candidacy.

He did not name this man; but we will name him. It was the Chief Inspector.

The appointment was made and the day set. It was the following Monday. On Tuesday, Coroner
Price was to open his inquest.

Did Carleton Roberts see any connection between these two events?

Who can tell? The secrets of such a brain are not to be read lightly. If we possessed Sweetwater's
interest, and were to follow in secret fashion every action of the director on the evening
preceding this date, what conclusion should we draw in this regard? How would we characterize
his anticipations, or measure in our own mind the possibilities of the future as felt by him?

He was very quiet. He ate his meal with seeming appetite. Then he took a look over his whole
house. From the carefulness with which he noted everything, the changes which he had caused
to be made in it were not without their interest for him. Not a young man's interest, but yet
an interest as critical and acute as though he had expected it to be shared by one whose comfort
he sought and in whose happiness he would fain take part.

This, to Sweetwater, had he our vision, would have been incomprehensible from any point of
view; especially, had he seen what followed when the owner of all this luxury returned to his
library.

There was a picture there; a small framed photograph which occupied the post of honor on his desk.

It showed a young and pretty face, untouched, as yet, by the cares or troubles of this world.
He spent a minute or so in looking at it; then he slowly lifted it, and taking the picture
from the frame, gave it another look, during which a smile almost derisive gathered slowly
on his lips. Before this smile had altogether vanished, he had torn the picture in two and
thrown the fragments into the fire he had kindled early in the evening with his own hands.

If he stopped to watch these fragments burn, it was from abstraction rather than from interest;
for his step grew lighter as he left the fireplace. Whatever this young girl's face had meant
to him in days gone by was now as completely dissipated as the little puff of smoke which had
marked the end of her picture.

If he read the papers afterward it was mechanically. Night, and the one great planet sinking
in the West, appeared to appeal to him much more strongly than his books or the more than usually
stirring news of the day.

He must have stood an hour in his unlighted window, gazing out at the tumbling waves lapping
the shore.

But of his thoughts, God wot, he gave no sign.

Later, he slept.

Slept! with his hand under his pillow! Slept, though there were others in the house awake!--or
why this creeping shadow of a man outlined upon the wall wherever the moon shone in, and disappearing
from sight whenever the way led through darkness.

It came from above; no noise accompanied it. Where the great window opened upon the sea, lighting
up the main staircase, it halted,--halted for several minutes; then passed stealthily down,
a shadowy silhouette, descending now quickly, now slowly, as tread after tread is left behind
and the great hall is reached.

Here there is no darkness. Open doors admit the light from many windows. A semi-obscurity is
all, and through this the figure passes, but hesitatingly still, and with pause after pause,
till a certain door is reached--a closed door--the only door which is closed in this part of
the house.

Here it stands--stands with profile to the panels, one ear against the wood. One minute--two
minutes--five minutes pass. Then a hand goes out and touches the knob. It yields; yields without
a sound--and a small gap is seen between the door and its casing. This gap grows. Still no
sound to disturb the tragic silence. Stop! What was that? A moan? Yes, from within. Another?
Yes. Then all is quiet again. The dream has passed. Sleep has resumed its sway. The gap can
safely be made wider. This is done, and the figure halting without, passes in.

XXXI

CONFRONTED

Late in the afternoon of the following day, the expected car entered Mr. Roberts' spacious
grounds. It contained, besides the chauffeur, just two persons, the District Attorney and the
Chief Inspector. But it was followed by another in which could be seen Mr. Gryce and a stenographer
from the District Attorney's office.

The house was finished by this time, and to one approaching through the driveway presented
a very attractive appearance. As the last turn was made, the sea burst upon the view--a somewhat
tumultuous sea, for the wind was keen that day and whipped the waves into foam and froth from
the horizon to the immediate shore-line. To add to the scene, a low black cloud with coppery
edges hovered at the meeting of sea and sky, between which and themselves one taut sail could
be seen trailing its boom in the water.

To one of them--to Mr. Gryce, in fact, upon whose age Fancy had begun to work, this battling
craft presented an ominous appearance. It was doomed. The gale was too much for it. Did he
see in this obvious fact a prophecy of what lay before the man upon whose privacy they were
on the point of intruding?

The house was so arranged that to reach the main entrance it was necessary to pass a certain
window. As they did so, the figure of Mr. Roberts could be seen in the room beyond moving about
in an interested survey of its new furnishings and present comfortable arrangement. To these
men bent on an errand as far as possible removed from interests of this kind, this evidence
of Mr. Roberts' pleasure in the promise of future domesticity gave a painful shock, and raised
in the minds of more than one of them a doubt--perhaps the first in days--whether a man so
heavily weighted with a burden of unacknowledged guilt could show this pleasurable absorption
in his new surroundings.

However, when they came to see him nearer, and marked the stiffening of his body and the slight
toss-up of his head, as he noted the number and the exact character of his guests, their spirits
fell again, for he was certainly a broken man, however much he might seek to disguise it. Yet
there was something in this extraordinary man's personality--a force or a charm wholly dissociated
it may be from worth or the sterling qualities which insure respect--which appealed to them
in spite of their new-found prejudice, and prevented any dallying with his suspense or the
use of any of the common methods usually employed in an encounter of this kind.

The Chief Inspector to whom the first say had been given faced the director squarely, as he
saw how the hand which had just welcomed the District Attorney fell at his approach.

"You are surprised, Mr. Roberts, and rightly, to see me here not only in connection with the
Prosecuting Attorney of the City of New York, but with a member of my own force. This, you
will say, is no political delegation such as you have been led to expect. Nor is it, Mr. Roberts.
But let us hope you will pardon this subterfuge when you learn that it was resorted to for
the sole purpose of sparing you all unnecessary unpleasantness in an interview which can no
longer be avoided or delayed."

"Let us sit."

It was his only answer. 

He was killed at Pavia (February 24, 1525), and was largely responsible
for that disastrous defeat, having urged Francis I. to give battle,
contrary to the advice of the more experienced captains.

Bonnivet, as mentioned by Queen Margaret in this story, had the reputation of being one of
the handsomest men of his time.-- L.

He made this offer, but the answer that he received from her was contrary to his desires. However,
although her reply was such as beseemed a Princess and a woman of
true virtue, she readily pardoned his hardihood for the sake of his
comeliness and breeding, and let him know that she bore him no ill-will
for what he had said.

But she charged him never to speak to her after that fashion again; and this he promised, that he might
not lose the pleasure and honour of her conversation.

Nevertheless, as time went on, his love so increased that he forgot the promise he had made. He
did not, however, risk further trial of words, for he had learned
by experience, and much against his will, what virtuous replies she
was able to make.

But he reflected that if he could take her somewhere at a disadvantage, she, being a widow,
young, lusty, and of a lively humour, would perchance take pity on
him and on herself.

To compass his ends, he told his master that excellent hunting was
to be had in the neighbourhood of his house, and that if it pleased
him to repair thither and hunt three or four stags in the month of
May, he could have no finer sport.

The Lord granted the gentleman's request, as much for the affection he bore him as for the pleasure
of the chase, and repaired to his house, which was as handsome and as fairly ordered as that
of the richest gentleman in the land.
 It is he who is tabulated here as number 3."

It was said. Mr. Roberts was well acquainted with his own number. He did not have to follow
with his eye the point of the District Attorney's finger to know upon whose name it had settled;
and for a moment, surprise, shock,--the greatest which can befall a man,--struggled with countless
other emotions in his usually impassive countenance. Then he regained his poise, and with a
curiously sarcastic smile such as his lips had seldom shown, he coldly asked:

"And by what stretch of probability do you pick me out for this attack? There were other men
and women in this court, some very near me if I remember rightly. In what are their characters
superior, or their claims to respect greater, that you should thus single me out as the fool
or knave who could not only commit so wild and despicable an act, but go so far in folly--let
alone knavery--as to conceal it afterward?"

"No evidence has been found against the others you have named which could in any way connect
them with this folly--or shall we say knavery, since you yourself have made use of the word.
But hard as it is for me to say this, in a presence so highly esteemed, this is not true of
you, Mr. Roberts, however high are our hopes that you will have such explanations ready as
will relieve our minds from further doubts, and send us home rejoicing. Shall I be frank in
stating the precise reasons which seem to justify our present presumption?"

The director bowed, the same curious smile giving an unnatural expression to his mouth.

"Let me begin then," the other continued, "by reading to you a list of questions made out at
Headquarters, as a test by which suspicion might be conscientiously held or summarily dismissed.
They are few in number," he added, as he unfolded a slip of paper taken from his vest pocket.
"But they are very vital, Mr. Roberts. Here is the first:

"'Whose hand carried the bow from cellar to gallery?'"

The director remained silent; but the oppression of that silence was difficult for them all
to endure.

"This the second:

"'Was it the same that carried the arrow from one gallery to another?'"

Still no word; but Mr. Gryce, who was watching Mr. Roberts' every move without apparently looking
up from the knob of his own cane, turned resolutely aside; the strain was too great. How long
could such superhuman composure endure? And which word of all that were to come would break it?

Meanwhile, the District Attorney was reading the third question. It could not have been done
from the one behind which Mr. Travis crouched, but was entirely possible from the rear of the
other."

With a wave of his hand, Mr. Roberts dismissed this, and the District Attorney proceeded. You
may judge by our presence here to whose hand and to whose skill we have felt forced to ascribe
this wanton shooting of a young and lovely girl. We wish to be undeceived, and stand ready
to listen to anything you may have to say in contradiction of these conclusions. That is, if
you wish to speak. Beside the divines who sought an asylum at Nérac, there were various noted men
of letters, foremost among whom we may class the Queen's two secretaries, Clement Marot, the
poet, and Peter Le Maçon, the translator of Boccaccio's Decameron.

This translation was undertaken at the Queen's request, as Le Maçon states in his dedication
to her, and it has always been considered one of the most able literary
works of the period.

With Marot and Le Maçon, but in the more humble capacity of valet, at the yearly wages of one hundred
and ten livres, there came the gay Bonaventure Despériers, the author of Les Joyeux Devis; (1)
other writers, such as John Frotté, John de la Haye and Gabriel Chapuis, were also among Margaret's
retainers.

1 Livre de Dépenses de Marguerite d'Angoulême.

She herself had long practised the writing of verses. It was in 1531, and at Alençon, that she
issued her first volume of poems, the Miroir de l'Ame Pécheresse, (1) which created a great
stir at the time, for when it was re-issued in Paris by Augereau
in 1533 (2) the Sorbonne denounced it as unorthodox, and Margaret
would have been branded as a heretic if Francis had not intervened
and ordered the Rector of the Sorbonne to withdraw the decree censuring
his sister's work.

Nor did that content the King, for he caused Noël Béda, the syndic of the Faculty of Theology,
to be arrested and confined in a dungeon at Mont St. Michel, where he perished miserably.

1 Brunet's Manual, 4th ed., vol. iii. p. 275.

2 A second edition also appeared at Alençon in the same year.

Margaret thus gained the day, but the annoyance she had been subjected to doubtless taught
her to be prudent, for although she steadily went on writing, sixteen
years elapsed before any more of her poems were published.

In the meantime various manuscript copies, some of which are still in existence, were made of
them, notably one of the poem called "Débat d'Amour" by Margaret, and re-christened "La Coche"
by her secretary, John de la Haye, when he subsequently published it in the Marguerites de
la Marguerite.

This manuscript is enriched with eleven curious miniatures, the last of which represents the
Queen handing the volume bound in white velvet (1) to the Duchess of Etampes, her brother's
mistress, whose qualities the poem extols. The Queen of Navarre was on the best of terms with
this favourite, to whom in one of her letters she recommends certain servants.

Margaret was not only given to versifying, but was fond of' framing
devices, which she inscribed upon her books and furniture. At one
time she adopted as her device a marigold turning towards the sun's
rays, with the motto, "Non inferiora secutus," implying that she turned
"all her acts, thoughts, will, and affections towards the great Sun
of Justice, God Almighty."

It was of a sort which recalls that soul-harrowing legend of the man hung up in an iron cage
above a yawning precipice, from under whose madly shifting feet one plank after another is
withdrawn from the cage's bottom, till no spot is left for him to stand on; and he falls.

"I hear that you are an expert with the bow and arrow, Mr. Roberts, or rather were at an earlier
stage of your career. You have even taken a prize for the same from an Alpine Club."

Ah! that told. It was such an unexpected blow; and it showed so much knowledge. But the man
who thus beheld his own youth brought up in accusation against him quickly recovered; and with
an entire change of demeanor, faced them all and spoke up at last quickly and defiantly:

"Gentlemen, I have shown patience up till now, because I saw that you had something on your
minds which it might be better for you and possibly for me to be rid of. This affair of Miss
Willett's death is, as all must acknowledge, baffling enough to strain even to the point of
folly any effort made to explain it. I had sympathy with your difficulties, and have still
enough of that sympathy left, not to express too much indignation at what you are pleased to
call your suspicions. I will merely halt for the moment your attempts in my direction, by asking,
what have you or anybody else ever seen in me to think I would practise my old-time skill on
a young and beautiful stranger enjoying herself in a place so dear to my heart as the museum
of which I have been a director now these many years? Am I a madman, or a destroyer of youth?
I love the young. This inhuman death of one so fair and innocent has whitened my locks and
seared my very heart-strings. I shall never get over it; and whatever evidence you may have
or think you have, of my having handled bow and arrow in that museum gallery, it must fall
before the fact of my natural incapability to do the thing with which you have charged me.
No act possible to man is more in contradiction to my instincts, than the wanton or even casual
killing of a young girl."

"I believe you."

It was the Inspector who spoke, and the emphasis which he gave to his words lifted the director's
head again into its old self-reliant poise. But the silence which followed was so weighted
with possibilities of something yet to be said by this portentous holder of secrets, that it
caused the nobly lifted head slowly to droop again and the lips which had opened impulsively
to close.

Were the words coming--the words which might at a stroke pull down the whole fabric of his
life, past, present and to come?

In his excited state of mind he seemed already to hear them. Doom was in their sound, and the
world, once so bright, was growing dark about him--dark!

Yet how could these men know? And if they did why did they not speak? And they did not; they
did not. There was silence in the air, not words; and life for him was taking on once more
its ancient colors, when sharp and merry through the heavy quiet there rang out the five clear
calls of a cuckoo clock from some near-by room. One, two, three, four, five! Jolly reminder
of old days! But to the men who listened, the voice of doom spoke in its gladsome peal, whether
the ears which caught it were those of accuser or accused. Old days were not the days to be
rejoiced in at a moment so perilous to the one and so painful to the others.

With the cessation of the last shrill cry, the Inspector repeated the phrase:

"I believe you, Mr. Roberts. But how about the woman who was troubling you with demands you
had no wish to grant? Miss Willetts, as you choose to call her, though you must know that her
name is Duclos, was not the only person in the line of the arrow shot on that day from one
gallery to the other. Perhaps this weapon of destruction was meant for one it failed to reach.
Perhaps--but I have gone far enough. I should not have gone so far if it had not been my wish
to avoid any misunderstanding with one of such undoubted claims to consideration as yourself.
If you have explanations to offer--if you can in any way relieve our minds from the responsibilities
which are weighing upon us, pray believe in our honest desire to have you do so. There may
be something back of appearances which has escaped our penetration; but it will have to be
something startlingly clear, for we know facts in your life which are not open to the world
at large, I may even say to your most intimate friends."

"As, for instance?"

"That Mrs. Taylor is no stranger to you, even if Mademoiselle Duclos was. We have evidence
you will find it hard to dispute that you knew and--liked each other, fifteen years or so ago."

"Evidence?"

"Incontrovertible, Mr. Roberts."

"Attested to by her? I do not believe it. I never shall believe it, and I deny the charge.
The ravings of a sick woman,--if it is such you have listened to----"

"I advise you to stop there, Mr. Roberts," interjected the District Attorney. "Mrs. Taylor
has said nothing. Neither has Madame Duclos. What the former may say under oath I do not know.
We shall both have an opportunity to hear to-morrow, when Coroner Price opens his inquest.
She is in sufficiently good health now, I believe, to give her testimony. Pray, say nothing."
Mr. Roberts had started to his feet. "Do nothing. You will be one of the witnesses called----"

There he stopped, meeting with steady gaze the wild eyes of the man who was staring at him,
staring at them all in an effort to hold them back, while his finger crept stealthily and ever
more stealthily toward his right-hand vest-pocket.

"You would dare," he shouted, then suddenly dropped his hand and broke into a low, inarticulate
murmur, harrowing and dreadful to hear. To some it sounded like a presage to absolute confession,
but presently this murmur took on a distinctness, and they heard him say:

"I should be glad to have five minutes' talk with Mrs. Taylor before that time. In your presence,
gentlemen, or in anybody's presence, I do not care whose."

Did he know--had he felt whose step was in the hall, whose form was at the door? If he did,
then the agitation which in another moment shook his self-possession into ashes was that of
hope realized, not of fear surprised. Ermentrude Taylor entered the room and at the sight of
her he rose and his arms went out; then he sank back weak and stricken into his chair, gazing
as if he could never have his fill at her noble countenance luminous with a boundless pity
if not with the tenderness of an unforgotten love.

When she was near enough to speak without effort and had thanked the gentlemen who had made
way for her with every evidence of respect, she addressed him in quite a natural tone but with
strange depths of feeling in her voice:

"What is it you want to say to me? As I stood at the door, I heard you tell these gentlemen
that you would like to have a few minutes' talk with me. I was glad to hear that; and I am
ready to listen to--anything."

The pause she made before uttering the last word caused it to ring with double force when it
fell. All heads drooped at the sound and the lines came out on Mr. Gryce's face till he looked
his eighty-five years and more. But what Carleton Roberts had to say at this critical moment
of his double life was not at all what they expected to hear.

Rising, for her eyes seemed to draw him to his feet, he cried in the indescribable tone of
suppressed feeling:

"Shadows are falling upon me. My interview with these gentlemen may end in a way I cannot now
foresee. In my uncertainty as to how and when we may meet again, I should like to make you
such amends as opportunity allows me. Ermentrude, will you marry me--now--to-night, before
leaving this house?"

A low cry escaped her. She was no more prepared for this astounding offer than were these others.
"Carleton!" came in a groan from her lips. "Carleton! Carleton!" the word rising in intensity
as thought followed thought and her spirits ran the full gamut of what this proposal on his
part meant in past, present and future. Then she fell silent and they saw the great soul of
the woman illumine a countenance always noble, with the light of a purpose altogether lofty.
When she spoke it was to say:

"I recognize your kindness and the impulse which led to this offer. But I do not wish to add
so much as a feather's weight to your difficulties. Let matters remain as they are till after----"

He took a quick step toward her.

"Not if my heart is full of regret?" he cried. "Not if I recognize in you now the one influence
left in this world which can help me bear the burden of my own past and the threatening collapse
of my whole future?"

"No," she replied, with an access of emotion of so elevated a type it added to rather than
detracted from her dignity. "It is too much or it is not enough."

His head drooped and he fell back, throwing a glance to right and left at the two officials
who had drawn up on either side of him. It was an expressive glance; it was as if he said,
"You see! she knows as well as you for whom the arrow was intended--yet she is kind."

But in an instant later he was before her again, with an aspect so changed that they all marveled.

"I had hoped," he began, then stopped. Passion had supplanted duty in his disturbed mind; a
passion so great it swept everything before it and he stood bare to the soul before the woman
he had wronged and under the eyes of these men who knew it. "Life is over for us two," said
he, "whether your presence here is a trap in which I have been caught and from which it is
hopeless for me to extricate myself; or whether it is by chance or an act of Providence that
we should meet again with eager ears listening and eager eyes watching for such tokens of guilt
as will make their own course clear, true it is that they have got what they sought; and whatever
the result, nothing of real comfort or honor is left for either you or me. Our lives have gone
down in shipwreck; but before we yield utterly to our fate, will you not grant me my prayer
if I precede it by an appeal for forgiveness not only for old wrongs but for my latest and
gravest one? Ermentrude, I entreat."

Ah, then, they were witness to the fascination of the man, hidden heretofore, but now visible
even to the schooled spectators of this tragedy of human souls. The tone permeated with pathos
and charm, the look, the attitude from which all formality had fled and only the natural grace
remained, all were of the sort which sways without virtue and rouses in both weak and strong
an answering chord of sympathy.

The woman in whom it probably awakened a thousand memories trembled under it. She drew back,
but her whole countenance had softened, revealing whatever of native charm she also possessed.
Would she heed his prayer? If she did not, they could well be silent. If she did----

But the woman gave no sign of yielding.

"Cease, Carleton," came in stern reply--stern for all the approach to concession in her manner.
"If your life and my life are both over, let us talk of other things than marriage. When one
faces death, whether of body or spirit, one clings to higher hopes than those of earth or its
remaining interests. If my forgiveness will help you to this end, you have it. I have had but
one aim in life since we parted, and that was to see your higher self triumph over the material
one. If that hour has come or is coming, my life needs no other consolation. In having that,
I possess all."

The man who listened--the men who listened--stood for a moment in awe of the nobility with
which she thus expressed herself. Then the only person present whom she seemed to see burst
forth with a low cry, saying:

"You shall not be disappointed. I----"

But there she hushed him. "No," said she. And he seemed to understand and was silent.

What did this mean?

The District Attorney betrayed his doubt; the Chief his, each in a characteristic way. The
former frowned, the latter tapped his breast absently with his forefinger while looking askance
at Mr. Gryce, who in his turn took up some little object from the desk beside which he was
standing and to it confided whatever surprise he felt at this proof of some uncommunicated
secret shared by these two, of which he had not yet become possessed. Then he again looked
up and the glances of the three men met. Should they attempt to sound this new mystery of mutual
understanding to which as yet they had received no clue? No, the inquest would do that. Neither
this man nor this woman could stand a close examination. He would weaken from despair, she
from the candor of her soul. They would wait. But ah, the tragedy of it! Even these men hardened
by years of contact with every species of human suffering and crime were openly moved. If they
needed an excuse, surely they could find it in the superior abilities and attainment of the
man upon whom justice was about to wreak its vengeance. And yet, what more despicable crime
had they ever encountered in the long line of their duty. The youth and innocence of the real
victim and the worth of the intended one only added to its wickedness and shame. It was this
thought which again steeled their hearts.

Meantime the two upon whom they now redirected their attention had attempted no further speech
and made no further move. She had said No to something he was willing to concede, and he had
accepted that no as final. Had this brought him any relief? Possibly. And she? Had it had a
like effect on her? Hardly. Though her aspect was one of calm resignation, her physical powers
were perceptibly failing. This in itself was alarming, and determined them not to subject her
any longer to an interview which might rob her of all strength for the morrow. Accordingly,
the District Attorney, addressing Mr. Roberts, suggestively remarked:

"Mrs. Taylor is showing fatigue. Would it not be better for you to say at once while she is
yet in a condition to remain with us, whether you prefer to make a public statement of your
case or leave it to unfold itself in the ordinary manner through the two impending inquests
and the busy pen of the reporter?"

"First, am I under arrest? Am I to leave this house----?"

"Not to-night. An officer will remain here with you. To-morrow--after the inquest, perhaps."

"I will make a statement. I will make it now. I wish to be left in peace to-night, to think
and to regret." Then turning to her, "Ermentrude, a woman who has served me and my family for
twenty-five years is at this very moment in the rear of the house. Go to her and let her care
for you. I have business here,--business of which I am sure you approve."

"Yes, Carleton. And remember that I shall be put upon my oath to-morrow. The questions I am
asked I must answer--and truthfully," she added, with a look as full of anguish as inquiry.

"I shall be truthful myself," he assured her, and again their eyes met.

After a while she gave a stumble backward, which Mr. Gryce perceiving, held out his arm and
assisted her from the room.

But once in the hall he felt the clinch of her fingers digging into his arm.

"Is there no hope?" she whispered. "Must I live----"

"Yes," he interrupted kindly, but with the authority given him by his relations to this case.
"You have won his heart at last, and he speaks truly when he says that to you and to you alone
can he look for comfort, wherever the action of the law may leave him."

She shivered; then glowed again with renewed fire.

"Thank you," she said; and they passed on.

XXXII

"WHY IS THAT HERE?"

They waited while he wrote. A sinister calm quite unlike that which the victim of his ambition
had shown under the stress of equal suffering if not equal guilt had subdued his expression
to one of unmoved gloom, never to be broken again.

As word after word flowed from the point of his pen upon the paper spread out before him, the
two officials sitting aside in the shadow watched for the flicker of an eyelash, or a trembling
of the fingers so busy over their task. But no such sign of weakening did they see. Once only
did he pause to look away--was it into the past or into futurity?--with a steady, self-forgetful
gaze which seemed to make a man of him again. Then he went on with his task with the grimness
of one who takes his last step into ignominy.

We will follow his words as he writes, leaving them for the others to read on their completion.

  "I, Carleton Roberts, in face of an inquiry which is about to be held
  on the death of her who called herself Angeline Willetts, but whose
  real name is as I have since been told Angeline Duclos, wish to make
  this statement in connection with the same.

  "It was at my hand she died. I strung the bow and let fly the arrow
  which killed this unfortunate child. Not with the intention of finding
  my mark in her innocent bosom. She simply got in the way of the woman
  for whom it was intended--if I really was governed by intent, of which
  I here declare before God I am by no means sure.

  "The child was a stranger to me, but the woman in whose stead she
  inadvertently perished I had known long and well. My wrongs to her had
  been great, but she had kept silence during my whole married life and
  in my blind confidence in the exemption this seemed to afford me, I put
  no curb upon my ambition which had already carried me far beyond my
  deserts. Those who read these lines may know how majestic were my
  hopes, how imminent the honor, to attain which I have employed my best
  energies for years. Life was bright, the future dazzling. Though I had
  neither wife nor child, the promise of activity on the lines which
  appeal to every man of political instinct gave me all I seemed to need
  in the way of compensation. I was happy, arrogantly so, perhaps, when
  without warning the woman I had not seen in years, who,--if I thought
  of her at all, I honestly believed to be dead--wrote me a letter
  recalling her claims and proposing a speedy interview, with a view to
  their immediate settlement. Though couched in courteous terms, the
  whole letter was instinct with a confidence which staggered me. She
  meant to reënter my life, and if I knew her, openly. Nothing short of
  bearing my name and being introduced to the world as my wife would
  satisfy her; and this not only threatened a scandal destructive of my
  hopes, but involved the breaking of a fresh matrimonial engagement into
  which I had lately entered with more ardor I fear than judgment. What
  was I to do? Let her have her way--this woman I had not seen in fifteen
  years,--who if at the age of twenty had seemed to my enthusiastic youth
  little short of a poet's dream, must be far short of any such
  perfection now? I rebelled at the very thought. Yet to deny her meant
  the possible facing of consequences such as the strongest may well
  shrink from. And the time for choice was short. She had limited her
  patience to a fortnight, and one day of that fortnight had already
  passed.

  "I have in my arrogant manhood sometimes credited myself with the
  possession of a mind of more or less superiority; but I have never
  deceived myself as to the meretricious quality of the goodness with
  which many have thoughtlessly endowed me. I have always known it was
  not even up to that of men whose standards fall far short of the
  highest integrity. But never, till that hour came, had I realized
  to what depths of evil my nature could sink under a disappointment
  threatening the fulfillment of my ambitious projects. Had there been
  any prospect of escape from the impending scandal by means usually
  employed by men in my position, I might have given my thoughts less
  rein and been saved at least from crime. But these were not available
  in my case. She was not a woman who could be bought. She was not even
  one I could cajole. Death only would rid me of her; kindly death which
  does not come at call. This is as far as my thoughts went at first. I
  was a gentleman and had some of a gentleman's feelings. But when my
  sleep began to be disturbed by dreams, and this was very soon, I could
  not hide from myself toward what fatal goal my thoughts were tending.
  To be freed from her! To be freed from her! dinned itself in my ears,
  sleeping or waking, at home or abroad. But I saw no plain road to this
  freedom, for our paths never crossed and my honor as well as safety
  demanded that the coveted result should be without any possible danger
  to myself. Cold, heartless villain! you say. Well, so I was; no colder
  nor more heartless villain lives to-day than I was between the
  inception of my purpose and its diabolical fulfillment in the manner
  publicly known.

  "So true is this that, as time went on, my ideas cleared and the plan
  for which I was seeking unfolded itself before me from the day I came
  upon a discarded bow lying open to view in the museum cellar. The
  dreams of which I have spoken had prepared me for this sudden
  knowledge. The woman who blocked my way and against whom I meditated
  this crime was connected in my mind with Alpine scenery and Alpine
  events. It was at Lucerne I had first met her, young and fresh, but
  giving no promise of the woman she has since become; and in the visions
  which came and went before my eyes, it was not herself I saw so much as
  the surroundings of those days, and the feats of prowess by which I had
  hoped to win her approbation. Among these was the shooting at a small
  target with a bow and arrow. I became very proficient in this line. I
  shot as by instinct. I could never tell whether I really took aim or
  not, but the arrow infallibly hit the mark. In my dreams I always saw
  it flying, and when this bow came to hand a thought of what the two
  might accomplish came with it. Yet even then I had no real idea of
  putting into practice this fancy of a distempered brain. I brought the
  bow up from the cellar and hid it unstrung in the Curator's closet,
  more from idle impulse I fondly thought, than from any definite
  purpose. Another day I saw the Curator's keys lying on his desk and
  took them to open a passage to the upper floor. But for all that, I
  felt sure that I would never use the bow even after I had thrust it
  near to hand behind the tapestry masking the secret entrance to this
  passage. One dreams of such things but they do not perpetrate them. I
  might approach the deed, I might even make every preparation for its
  accomplishment, but that did not mean that the day would ever come
  when I should actually loose an arrow from this bow against a human
  breast. More than once I laughed at the mere idea.

  "But the devil knew me better than I knew myself. Impelled by these
  same instincts, I answered the letter sent me with the assurance that I
  would surely see her, but I did not name any day, intuitively knowing
  that what I dreamed of doing but certainly should not do required a
  certain set of circumstances not easily to be met with. Instead, I bade
  her show herself in the second section of the southern gallery, every
  Tuesday and Friday at the exact hour of noon. If at the moment the two
  hands of the clock came together, she saw me on the lower step of the
  main staircase, she was to know that I was free to talk and would soon
  join her. If she did not see me there, she was to return home and come
  another day. She answered that she would come but once, and set the
  day. This was startling to my pride, but in a way it brought me a sense
  of relief. To wait till all was propitious might mean continual delays.
  The very fact of my uncertainty as to whether or not I should have the
  courage of my wishes at the critical moment made an indefinite
  prolongation of my present condition undesirable. Better one straight
  risk and be done with it.

  "I was to wait two weeks. Why she exacted so long and seemingly
  unnecessary a delay, I do not know. Before I saw her, I thought it was
  from a sheer desire to make me suffer; now I know it was not for that.
  However, it did make me suffer, from the alternate weakening and
  strengthening of my resolve. When the day came, the most trivial of
  circumstances would have deterred me from what still had the nature of
  a dream to me. Unhappily, everything worked for its fulfillment. There
  had never been fewer persons in the building at the noon hour; nor had
  there been a time during the past two weeks when the Curator was more
  completely occupied in a spot quite remote from his office. As I tried
  the door leading up the little winding staircase to the one back of the
  tapestry where the bow lay, and found it, just as I had left it,
  unlocked, I had a sense for the first time that the courage concerning
  which I had had so many doubts would hold. At that moment I was a
  murderer in heart and purpose, whatever I was after or have been since.
  As I recognized this fact, I felt my face go pale and my limbs shake
  from sheer horror of myself. But this weakness was short-lived and I
  felt my blood flowing evenly again when having slipped into my place
  behind the upper pedestal I peered through my peep-hole in a search for
  her figure in the spot where I had bidden her await me.

  "She was not there, but then it was not quite twelve, though the noon
  hour was so near she must be somewhere in the gallery and liable at any
  minute to cross my line of vision.

  "It was fifteen years, as I have already said, since I had seen her;
  and I had no other picture of her in my mind than the appearance she
  had made as a girl, coarsened by time and disappointment. Why I should
  have looked for just this sort of change in her, God knows, but I did
  expect it and probably would not have recognized her if I had passed
  her in the court. But I was not worrying about any mistake I might make
  of this kind. All I seemed to fear was that at the critical moment some
  one would pass between us on my side of the gallery. I never thought of
  anyone passing in front of her.

  "I had picked out Section II as the place where she was to show
  herself, because it was in a direct line with the course an arrow would
  take from a sight behind the vase. I had bade her to look for me in the
  court, and that would bring her forward to the balustrade in front. A
  knot of scarlet ribbon at her breast was to distinguish her. But the
  spot I had thus chosen for her, and the spot I had chosen for myself
  had this disadvantage; that while I could see straight to my mark from
  the peep-hole I have mentioned, I could see nothing to right or left of
  that one line of vision. Why I did not realize the hazard involved in
  this fact I do not know. Enough that my whole thought was centered on
  the lookout I was keeping and it was with a shock of surprise I
  suddenly saw the whole scene blotted from my view by the passing by of
  some one on my own side of the gallery. This must have been the
  Englishman who found his vantage-point from behind the other pedestal.
  He went by quickly, and as the opening cleared once more, I beheld the
  woman for whom I was waiting appear in the spot selected. For an
  instant I was dazzled. I had not expected to see so noble a figure; and
  in that instant a cloud came before my eyes, my resolution failed,--I
  was almost saved--she was almost saved--when instinct got the better of
  my judgment, and the arrow flew just as that young creature bounded
  forward in her delight at seeing her steamer admirer watching her from
  my side of the court.

  "The shock of thus beholding a perfect stranger fall under my hand
  benumbed me, but only for an instant. In the two weeks of intolerable
  waiting through which I had just passed, I had so forcibly impressed
  upon my consciousness the exact course I was to pursue from the instant
  the arrow left the bow that I went about the same automatically.
  Pulling out the edge of the tapestry, I slipped behind it, dropping my
  bow in the doorway left open for my passage. This caused me no thought
  and awakened no fears. But what took all the nerve I possessed, and
  gave me in one awful moment a foretaste of the terror and despair
  awaiting me in days to come, was the opening of the second door--the
  one leading into the Curator's office.

  "What might I not be forced to encounter when the knob to this was
  turned! Some strolling guest--Correy the attendant--or even the guard
  who was never where he was needed and always where he was not! For
  anyone to be there of sufficient intelligence to note my face and the
  place from which I came meant the end of all things to me. It was not
  necessary for this imaginary person to be in the room. To be within
  sight of it was enough. But this fear--this horror of impending
  retribution--did not make me hesitate or delay my advance a single
  instant. Everything depended upon my being one of the crowd when the
  first alarm was raised. So with the daring of one who in escaping a
  present danger hurls himself knowingly into another equally perilous,
  I pushed open the door and entered the office.

  "It was empty! Fortune had favored me thus far. Nor was there anyone in
  the court beyond, near enough or interested enough to note my presence
  or observe any effort I might make at immediate departure. With the
  hope riding high within my breast that I should yet reach the street
  before my crime was discovered, I made for the nearest exit. But I was
  not destined to reach it. When I was only some half a dozen paces from
  the great door, Correy's cry rang loudly through the building, with the
  result that all egress was shut off, and I was left, with no other aid
  than my own assurance, to face my hideous deed with all its appalling
  consequences.

  "How it served me, you have seen. Steeled by a sense of my own danger,
  I was able to confront the woman whom I had so deeply wronged,--whom
  I had even endeavored to kill,--and ply her with those questions upon
  whose answers depended not only my honor, but my very life.

  "My cold-blooded absorption in my own security, and her almost
  superhuman devotedness, must have given the Powers cognizant of mortal
  lives a new lesson in human nature. Never has a greater contrast been
  shown between self-seeking man and self-forgetful woman. But deeply as
  I was impressed by the steadfastness and magnanimity of her spirit, nay
  by the woman herself, I have been less oppressed by the great debt I
  owed her than by the thought, growing more intolerable every day, that
  in my frenzied struggle against fate I had cut short the existence of a
  young and lovely girl whose right to live was beyond all comparison
  superior to my own.

  "But now, as the shadows fall thickly about me and the last page of my
  dishonorable existence awaits to be turned, my mortal wound is this:
  that I must leave to loneliness and unspeakable grief the great-souled
  woman who has seen into the heart of my crime and yet has forgiven me.
  All else of anguish or dread is swallowed up in this one over-mastering
  sorrow. To her my heart's thanks are here given; to her my last word is
  due. May she find in it all that her soul calls for in this hour of
  supreme disaster: repentance equal to my sin, and a recognition of her
  worth, which, late as it is for her comfort, may lead to her acceptance
  of the consolation yet to be meted out to her from eternal sources."

That was all. The pen dropped from his hand and he sat inert, almost pulseless, in the desolation
of a despair known only to those who, at a blow, have sunk from the height of public applause
into the depths of irretrievable ignominy.

The District Attorney, who was a man of more feeling than was usually supposed, contemplated
him in compassionate silence for a moment, then gently--very gently for him--leaned forward
and drew from under the unresisting hands the scattered sheets which lay in disorder before
him, and passed them on to his stenographer.

"Read," said he; but immediately changed his mind and took them back. "I will read them myself.
Mr. Roberts, I must ask you to listen. It is right for you to know exactly what you have written
before you affix your signature to it."

Mr. Roberts bowed mechanically, but he looked very weary.

The District Attorney began to read. It is a matter of doubt whether Mr. Roberts so much as
heard him. Yet the reading went on, and when the last word was reached, the District Attorney,
after a pause during which his eye had consulted that of the Chief Inspector, remarked in a
kindly tone and yet with an emphasis impossible to disregard:

"I see that you have made no mention of Madame Duclos in this relation of the cause and manner
of her young daughter's death. Is it possible that you are ignorant of the part she played
in your affairs or the reasons she had for the suicide with which she terminated her life?"

"I know nothing of the woman but that she was the mother of the girl who----" he hesitated,
then added with a gesture of despair, "fell under my hand."

The District Attorney said nothing in reply, he simply waited. But no denial or further admission
came.

"She was a friend of Mrs. Taylor," suggested the Chief Inspector as the silence grew somewhat
oppressive. "An old friend; a friend of her early days; do you not remember?"

"I do not."

His tormentors went no further. Why harass him for an item of knowledge which the morrow would
certainly bring to light. Instead, they hurried through the remaining formalities, adding to
the reading already made a capitulation of such answers as he had given to their questions,
and witnessing, while he signed both papers.

This done, he was left for a moment in peace, while the two officials drew aside into the embrasure
of the window for a momentary conference.

He seemed to notice the hush, for he roused from the torpor into which he was again about to
sink, and glanced cautiously about him. The stenographer was busy with his papers, and the
other two stood with their backs to him. If help was to come it must come now. This he realized,
with a sudden graying of his face which took from it the last vestige of that youthfulness
which had been its distinguishing feature; and the finger which had fumbled from time to time
in his vest-pocket stole thither once more, bringing forth a little vial which in another moment
he raised to his lips.

Was there no one to see? No one to stop him?

No, the stenographer was closing up his bag; and the two officials deep in conversation. He
could drain the last drop unseen.

But the sound of the little vial crashing upon the hearthstone whither he had flung it broke
the quiet and startled the District Attorney forward in a doubt bordering upon terror.

"What is that?" he asked, pointing to the fragments that had just missed the ash heap.

"It contained oblivion," was the answer given him in steady tones. "Do you wonder that I sought
it? Nothing can save me. I have two minutes before me. I would dedicate them to her."

His head fell forward on his hands. The clock on the mantel struck. Could it be that when the
second hand had circled its small disc twice--

This was the thought of the District Attorney, but not of the Chief Inspector. He had advanced
to the desk where Mr. Roberts was still sitting, and remarked with a gravity exceeding any
he had hitherto shown:

"Mr. Roberts, I have a great disappointment for you. This little vial of yours which held poison
yesterday contained nothing but a few drops of harmless liquid to-day. The change was made
in the night, by one suspicious of your intention. You will have to face the full consequences
of your crime."

Carleton Roberts' arms collapsed and his face fell forward upon them, and they heard a groan.
Then in the short silence which followed, another and a very different sound broke upon their
ears. Seven clear calls from the cuckoo-clock rang out from the room beyond, followed by a
woman's smothered cry.

It was the one ironic touch the situation had lacked. It pierced the heart of Carleton Roberts
and started him in anguish to his feet.

"O God!" he cried, "that I should have let that thing of evil shriek out the wicked hours from
day to day, only to torment her now with old remembrances! I darted like a red-shank round the
next corner out of sight of both policemen, and looked for a method
of escape.

The scaffolding of the new house towered above me, and a ladder led upwards on to it. Up this
I went like a lamplighter, keeping one eye on the corner of the building lest I should be followed.

I
was half-way up when round the corner came one of the policemen. I at once "froze." I was about
fifteen feet above sea level and not twenty yards from him. He stood undecided with his legs
well apart, peering from side to side in every direction to see where I had gone, very anxious
and shifty. I was equally anxious but immovable.

Presently he drew nearer to the ladder and, strangely enough, I felt safer when he came below
me, and he passed almost under me, looking in at the doorways of the unfinished building.
Then he doubtfully turned and looked back at a shed behind him, thinking I might have gone
in there, and finally started off, and ran on round the next corner
of the building.

The moment he disappeared I finished the rest of my run up the ladder and safely reached the platform
of the scaffolding.

The workmen were not yet upon the building, so I had the whole place to myself. My first act
was to look for another ladder as a line of escape in case of being
chased.

It is always well to have a back door to your hiding place; that
is one of the essentials in scouting.

Presently I found a short ladder leading from my platform to the stage below, but it did not
go to the ground. Peering quietly over the scaffolding, I saw my friend the policeman below,
still at fault. I blessed my stars that he was no tracker, and therefore had not seen my footmarks
leading to the foot of the ladder.

Then I proceeded to take note of my surroundings and to gather information.

Judging from the design of the building, its great chimneys, etc., I was actually on the new
power-house.

From my post I had an excellent view over the dockyard, and within
100 feet of me were the excavation works of the new dock, whose dimensions
I could easily estimate.

I whipped out my prismatic compass and quickly took the bearings of
two conspicuous points on the neighbouring hills, and so fixed the
position which could be marked on a large scale map for purposes of
shelling the place, if desired.

Meantime my pursuer had called the other policeman to him, and they were in close confabulation
immediately below me, where I could watch them through a crack between two of the foot-boards.
They had evidently come to the conclusion that I was not in the power-house
as the interior was fully open to view, and they had had a good look
into it.

Their next step was to examine the goods shed close by, which was evidently full of building lumber,
etc.

One man went into it while the other remained outside on the line
that I should probably take for escaping, that is, between it and
the boundary wall leading to the gateway.

By accident rather than by design he stood close to the foot of my
ladder, and thus cut off my retreat in that direction.

While they were thus busy they were leaving the gate unguarded, and I thought it was too good
a chance to be missed, so, returning along the scaffolding until
I reached the small ladder, I climbed down this on to the lower story,
and, seeing no one about, I quickly swarmed down one of the scaffolding
poles and landed safely on the ground close behind the big chimney
of the building.

Here I was out of sight, although not far from the policeman guarding the ladder; and, taking
care to keep the corner of the building between us, I made my way
round to the back of the lodge, and then slipped out of the gate without
being seen.

SPYING ON MOUNTAIN TROOPS.

I was once in a country where the mountain troops on their frontier
were said to be of a wonderfully efficient kind, but nobody knew much
about their organisation or equipment or their methods of working,
so I was sent to see if I could find out anything about them, I got
in amongst the mountains at the time when their annual manoeuvres
were going on, and I found numbers of troops quartered in the valleys
and billeted in all the villages.

But these all appeared to be the ordinary type of troops, infantry,
artillery of the line, etc. The artillery were provided with sledges
by which the men could pull the guns up the mountain sides with ropes,
and the infantry were supplied with alpenstocks to help them in getting
over the bad ground.

For some days I watched the manoeuvres, but saw nothing very striking to report.

Then one evening in passing through a village where they were billeted
I saw a new kind of soldier coming along with three pack mules.

He evidently belonged to those mountain forces of which, so far, I had seen nothing.
 "Can you
tear off the back? That would be the quickest way. But no, I know a quicker," and lifting the
clock again she turned it upside down and shook it.

They heard--what did they hear? No one could say, but when she again reversed it, there fell
out upon the table and rolled to the floor a small gold circlet. Lifting it, Mr. Gryce held
it out to her. Taking it, she carried it over to the District Attorney and placed it in his hand.

"Read the inscription inside."

He did so, and looking quickly up, said:

"This is a wedding ring! Yours! You believe yourself to have been married to him."

"I was married to him in Switzerland. The marriage was legal; he knows it, he acknowledges
it, or why should he keep this ring. I have endured seeing him put another woman in my place.
I have kept silence for years; but when he asks the right name of the child shot down in the
museum, and asks it in a way which compels answer, then I must make known my rightful claims.
For that child was not only mine, but his; born after he left me, and reared without his knowledge,
first in this country and then in France."

And breaking down now utterly, she fell on her knees sobbing out her soul at the feet of him
from whose honor she had torn the last poor, pitiful shred.

As for him, he said nothing; even his lips refused the smallest cry. Only his hand which had
hung at his side went to his heart; and thus he stood swaying--swaying, till he finally fell
forward into the arms she suddenly threw out to receive him.

"Carleton! Carleton!" she wailed, searching for consciousness in his fast glazing eye. "It
was to show you your child that I made the appointment at the museum. Not for myself. Oh, not
for myself, but for your sake, that you might have----"

Useless; all useless.

He was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Would she have had it otherwise? Would any of them? When they were quite sure of the fact,
she placed the ring in his still warm hand; then she solemnly put it on her finger, and turning,
faced them all.

"Do not blame me too much for this final blow I gave him. He had already seen the truth in
that mirror over there. His face--look at it and then at this picture of her taken after death,
and see the resemblance! It is showing plainer every minute. It was the something which had
worried and eluded him. Nothing could have kept back the truth from him after that one glimpse
he caught of himself and her in the mirror. I loved him. Mine is the grief; you will let me
stay here with him to-night. To-morrow I will answer all questions."

XXXIV

THE BUD--THEN THE DEADLY FLOWER

You who have read thus far will care little for the legalities which followed the events just
related, but you may wish to know to a fuller extent some of the facts in Ermentrude Taylor's
life which led to this tragic end of all her hopes.

Her story is twofold, the portion connecting her with Carleton Roberts being entirely dissociated
from that which made her the debtor of Antoinette Duclos. Let me tell the latter first, as
it preceded the other, and tell it in episodes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two girls stood at one end of a long walk of immemorial yews. At the other could be seen the
advancing figure of a man, young, alert, English-clad but unmistakably foreign. They were school
girls and bosom friends; he their instructor in French; the walk one attached to a well-known
seminary. When they had entered this walk, it had been empty. Now it held for one of them--and
possibly for the other, too--a world of joy and promise;--the world of seventeen. Innocent
and unthinking, neither of them had known her own heart, much less that of her fellow. But
when in face of that approach, eye met eye with an askance look of eager question, revelation
came, crimsoning the cheeks of both, and marking an epoch in either life.

Noble of heart and tender each toward the other, they were yet human. Arm fell from arm, and
with an equally spontaneous movement, they turned to search each the other's countenance, not
for betrayal,--for that had already been made--but for those physical charms or marks of mental
superiority which might attract the eye or win the heart of a man of the ideality of this one.

Alas! these gifts, for gifts they are, were much too unequally distributed between these two
to render the balance at all even.

Ermentrude was handsome; Antoinette was not.

Ermentrude had besides, what even without beauty would have made her conspicuous to the eye,
the figure of a goddess and the air of a queen. But Antoinette was small and had to feel secure
and in a happy mood to show the excellence of her mind and the airy quality of her wit. 

The work is otherwise significant. From chapter to chapter there appear various documents giving
unconsciously convincing evidence as to the part the Negro troops played in the war. While the authors
make no pretense to scientific treatment, they have certainly facilitated
the task of the historian who must undertake the writing of a definitive
history of the Negroes' participation in the World War.

The book, moreover, is well illustrated and well printed. It will be read with interest and profit
by all persons who seek the truth and endeavor to record impartially the achievements of the various
elements constituting the population of this country.

The greatest value of this work, however, lies not so much in the
interesting facts set forth and the beautiful story told, as in the
example set by these women of achievement.

They are writing not only to convince the present generation as to the important service rendered
by the Negro troops in France, but they would hand down these facts in printed form that coming
generations may not be so biased as the present in estimating the character of the Negro and
his worth to the nation. It is to be hoped that every Negro who, during his service at the front,
received such impressions and had such experiences as to throw light upon the many phases of
that world cataclysm will in the near future follow the example of
these worthy women.

The public will welcome history of divisions and regiments and will
certainly be interested in the mere personal narrative presenting
the experiences peculiar to those individuals placed in strategic
positions to see at close range what was actually happening and had
the time and availed themselves of the opportunity to record it.

 Now she knew.

But why had not Ermentrude smiled?

       *       *       *       *       *

A dormitory lighted only by the moon! Two beds close together; in one a form of noble proportions,
and in the other the meagre figure of a girl almost buried from sight among pillows and huddled-up
blankets. Both are quiet save for an occasional shudder which shakes the bed of the latter.
Ermentrude lies like the dead, though the moonlight falls full upon her face blanching it to
the aspect of marble. Even her lashes rest moveless on her cheek.

But she is not sleeping; she is listening--listening to the sobs, almost inaudible, which now
and then escape from the beloved one at her side. As they grow fainter and fainter and gradually
die away altogether till stillness reigns through the whole dormitory, she rouses and bending
forward on her elbow, looks long and lovingly at the wet brow of her sleeping mate. She then
sinks back again into rigidity, with a low moan, ending in the whispered words:

"He does not love,--not yet. A slight thing will turn him. Did I not see him glance back twice,
and both times at her? The look with which she greeted him was so wonderful."

       *       *       *       *       *

A village street in Britanny; a parish church in the distance; two women bidding each other
farewell amid a group of wedding-guests, gay as the heavens are blue.

"Au revoir!" was the whisper breathed by the bride into the ear of the other. "Au revoir, my
Ermentrude. May you have a happy year in Switzerland!"

"Au revoir! little Madame. You will be happy I know in those United States to which you are going."

And the tears stood in the eyes of both.

"You will write?"

"I will write."

But the bride did not seem quite satisfied. Glancing about and finding her young husband busy
with his adieux, she drew her friend apart and softly murmured:

"There is something I must say,--something I must know, before the sea divides us. You remember
the day we all left school and you went home and I came to Britanny? Ermentrude, Achille tells
me that on that day he sought the whole house over for you till he came upon you in one of
the classrooms; and that you whom I had sometimes seen so sad were very gay and told him between
laughing and crying that you were bidding a solemn farewell to all the nooks and corners of
the old seminary, because your fiancé awaited you at home, and there would be no coming back."

"I meant my music."

"He did not know that, Ermentrude," and here she laid her hands upon the other's shoulders,
drawing back as she did so to look earnestly up into her face. "Was that done for me?"

They were too near for anything but the truth to pass from eye to eye. Ermentrude tried to
laugh and utter a quick No, no! but the little bride was not deceived. Again upon her face
there appeared that wonderful look of hers, which made her face for the moment verily beautiful,
and unclasping her hands, she threw them about the other's neck, whispering in awed tones:

"Yet you loved him! loved him too!"

Then after a moment of silence dear to both their hearts, she drew back to give her friend
one other look, and quietly said:

"His heart is mine now, Ermentrude, wholly and truly mine. And so you would have it be, I am
sure. Life looks fair to me and very sweet; but however fair, however sweet, that life is yours
if ever you want it and when you want it. The time may come--one never knows--when I can pay
you back this debt. Till then, let there be perfect trust and perfect love between us. Give
me your hand upon it--not just your lips--for I speak as men speak when they mean to keep their
word."

Their eyes met, their hands clasped; then the bridegroom drew away his bride, and Ermentrude
turned with bowed head and glistening eyes, to enter upon the new life awaiting her in ways
she had yet to tread.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second series of episodes opens with the meeting of a man and woman on a rustic bridge
spanning a Swiss chasm. They are strangers to each other, yet both instinctively pause and
a flush of intuitive feeling dyes the cheek of each.

The eternal, ever-recurring miracle has happened. He sees Woman for the first time, though
he had thought himself in love before and had wandered thus far in an effort to forget. So,
likewise, with her. She had had her fancies, or rather her one fancy; but when in strolling
along this road ahead of her party she saw rising between her and the glorious landscape which
had hitherto filled her eye the fine masculine head and perfect figure of Carleton Roberts,
this fancy floated from her mind like the veriest thistledown, leaving it free to expand in
fuller hopes and deeper joys than visit many women even when they think they love.

Alas! why in that instant of mutual revelation had not the further grace been given them of
quick catastrophe shutting the door upon a future of which neither could then dream or sense
the coming doom.

It was not to be.

He passed, she passed, and for the time the look they gave each other was all; but the world
had been glorified for them both--and Destiny waited.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good looks? Yes; but nothing else; very ordinary connections, very. A little money, true.
Her uncle, whom by the way I judge you have not seen, will leave her a few thousands; but meanwhile
he is a fixture--will not leave her or let her leave him, which is a misfortune since in a
social way he is simply impossible. No sort of match for you, Roberts. Cut and run while there
is time; that's my advice to you, given in the most friendly spirit."

"Thank you. As I have but just met Miss Taylor, don't you think such advice is a little premature?"

"No, I don't. She is a woman who must be loved or left; that's all. You've heard me."

Did Carleton Roberts heed these words? No. What man in the thrall of his first romance ever did.

"You love me, Ermentrude?"

"I love you, Carleton."

"For a day, for a month or for a year?" he smiled.

"Forever," she answered.

"That's a long time," he murmured, with his eyes on a little clock hanging in the shop window
before which they had stopped in one of their infrequent walks together. "A long time! That
foolish little clock will beat out the hours of its short life and go the way of all things,
before we shall hardly have entered upon the soul's 'forever.'"

"That clock will last our lifetime, Carleton. Afterward, love will not be counted by hours."

As she said this she turned her face his way and he saw it in its full flower with the light
of heaven upon it. In later years he may have forgotten the emotions of that moment, but they
were the purest, the freest from earthly stain that he was ever destined to know.

"I will love you forever," he whispered. "That little clock shall be my witness." And he drew
her into the shop.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Cuckoo!"

Ermentrude glanced up; the clock hung on her wall. 

In regard to myself, I will set forth more amply in the notice which I will give to the reader
the motive that induced me to put my hand to the work of the present
author, who has no need of trumpet and herald to exalt and magnify
her(1) greatness, inasmuch as there is no human eloquence that could
portray her more forcibly than she has portrayed herself by the celestial
strokes of her own brush; I mean by her other writings, in which she
has so well expressed the sincerity of her doctrines, the vivacity
of her faith, and the uprightness of her morals, that the most learned
men who reigned in her time were not ashamed to call her a prodigy
and miracle of nature.

        And albeit that Heaven,
   jealous of our welfare, has snatched her from this mortal habitation,
yet her virtues rendered her so admirable and so engraved her in the
memory of every one, that the injury and lapse of time cannot efface
her from it; for we shall ceaselessly mourn and lament for her, like
Antimachus the Greek poet wept for Lysidichea, his wife, with sad
verses and delicate elegies which describe and reveal, her virtues
and merits.

1 In the French text Boaistuau invariably refers to the author as a personage of the masculine
sex, with the evident object of concealing the real authorship of the work. Feminine pronouns
have, however, been substituted in the translation, as it is Queen Margaret who is referred
to. --Ed.
 Or was there, deep down in his own undeveloped nature, a secret
nerve alive to ambitions yet unnamed, to hopes not yet formulated, which warned him to think
well before he spoke the irrevocable word linking a chain which, though twined with roses,
was nevertheless a chain which nothing on earth should have power to break.

He never sounded his soul for an answer to this question; but when he rose, the paper was still
blank. The letter had not been written.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I do not like secrecy."

"Only for a little while, Ermentrude. My mother is difficult. I would prepare her."

"And Uncle!"

"What of Uncle?"

"He made me take an oath to-day."

"An oath?"

"That I would not leave him while he lived."

"And you could do that?"

"I could do nothing else. He's a sick man, Carleton. The doctors shake their heads when they
leave him. He will not live a year."

"A year? But that's an eternity! Can you wait, can I wait a year?"

"He loves me and I owe everything to him. Next week we go to Nice. These are days of parting
for you and me, Carleton."

Parting! What word more cruel. She saw that it shook him, and held her breath for his promise
that she should not be long alone. But it did not come. He was taking time to think. She hardly
understood his doing this. Surely, his mother must be very difficult and he a most considerate
son. She knew he loved her; perhaps never with a more controlling passion than at this moment
of palpitating silence.

As she smiled, he caught her to his breast.

"We have yet a week," he cried, and left her hurriedly, precipitately.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was their last ride and they had gone far--too far, Ermentrude thought, for a day so chilly
and a sky so threatening. They had entered gorges; they had skirted mountain streams, had passed
a village, left a ruined tower behind, and were still facing eastward, as if Lucerne had no
further claims upon them and the world was all their own.

As the snows of the higher peaks burst upon their view, she made an attempt to stop this seeming
flight.

"My uncle," she said. "He will be counting the hours. Let us go back."

Then Carleton Roberts spoke.

"Another mile," he whispered, not because he feared being overheard by their driver, but because
Love's note is instinctively low. "You are cold; we shall find there a fire, and dinner--and--Listen,
Ermentrude,--a minister ready to unite us. We are going back, man and wife."

"Carleton!"

"Yes, dear, it is quite understood. Letters are urging my return to New York. Your uncle is
holding you here. I cannot face an uncertain separation. I must feel that you are mine beyond
all peradventure--must be able to think of you as my wife, and that will hold us both and make
it proper for you to come to me if I cannot come to you, the moment you are free to go where
you will."

"But why this long ride, this far-away spot? Why couldn't a minister be found in Lucerne? Is
our marriage to be as secret as our engagement? Is that what you wish, Carleton?"

"Yes, dear; for a little while, just for a little while, till I have seen my mother, and rid
our way of every obstacle to complete happiness. It will be better. When one has promised to
love forever, what are a few weeks or months. Make me happy, dear. You have it in your power
to do so. Happy! When once I can whisper 'wife,' the world will not hold a happier man than I."

Did she yield because of her own great longing? No, it was by that phrase he caught her: The
world will not hold a happier man than I.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mountains! Icy peaks, with sides heavy with snow! And so near! Almost they seemed to meet across
the narrow valley. She gave them one quick glance, then her eyes and her heart became absorbed
in what she could see of this Alpine village, holding up its head in the eternal snows like
an edelweiss on the edge of a glacier.

It was to be the scene of her one great act in life; the spot she was entering as a maiden
and would leave as a wife. What other spot would ever be so interesting! To note its every
detail of house and church would not take long--it was such a little village, and the streets
were so few; and the people--why she could count them.

Afterward, she found that the exact number and the difference in color of the short line of
timbered houses stretching between them and the church were imprinted on her brain; but she
did not know it at the time for her attention was mainly fixed upon the people when once she
had seen them, for there was a strangeness in their looks and actions she did not understand,
all the more that it seemed to have nothing to do either with Carleton or herself.

It was not fear they showed, not exactly, though consternation was not lacking in their aspect,
so strangely similar in all, whether they were men or women, or whether they stood in groups
in the street or came out singly on the doorstep to glance about and listen, though there seemed
to be nothing to listen to, for the air was preternaturally still.

"Carleton, Carleton," she asked as he came to lift her to the ground, "see those people how
oddly they act. The whole town is in the street. What is the matter?"

"Nothing, except that if we do not hasten we shall have to return unmarried. The minister is
waiting for us."

"What, in the church?"

"Yes, dear. We are a little late."

She took his arm, and though they were a fine couple and the event was almost an unprecedented
one in that remote village, only a few followed them; the rest hung round their homes or gazed
with indecision at the mountains or up and down along the empty roads.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wilt thou have this woman...."

The ceremony had proceeded thus far and all seemed well, when with a rush and a cry a dozen
people burst into the building.

"The snows are moving!" rang up the aisles in accents of mad terror. "Save yourselves!"

Then came the silence of emptiness. Every soul had left the church save the three before the
pulpit.

An avalanche! and the ceremony was as yet incomplete! Ermentrude never forgot Carleton Roberts'
look. Doubtless he never forgot hers. Meanwhile the minister spoke.

"There is a chance for escape. Take it; the good God will pardon you."

But the bridegroom stood firm and the bride shook her head.

"Not till the words are said which make us man and wife," declared Carleton Roberts. "Unless"--and
here his perfect courtesy manifested itself even in this crisis of life and death--"you feel
it your duty to carry what assistance you can to the saving of your frightened flock."

"God must save my flock," said the minister with a solemn glance upward. "I am where my duty
places me." And calmly as though the pews were filled with guests and joy attended the ceremony
instead of apprehended doom, he proceeded with the rite.

"Wilt thou have this man...."

The glad "I will" leaped bravely from Ermentrude's lips; but it was lost in loud calls and
shrieks from without, mingled with that sound--terrible to all who hear--impossible to describe--of
the might of the hills made audible in this down-rushing mass, now halting, now gathering fresh
momentum, but coming--always coming, till its voice, but now a threat, swells into thunder
in which all human cries are lost, and only from the movement of the minister's lips can this
couple see that the words which make them one are being spoken.

Then comes the benediction, and with the falling of those holy hands, a headlong rush into
the open air--a vision of flying forms here, there, and everywhere--men staggering under foolish
burdens--women on their knees with arms lifted to heaven or flung around their babes--hope
lost under the bowing mountain; and in the midst of it all, plain to the view of all, the stranger's
horse and carriage which, standing there, stamped with undying honor these terrified villagers,
who had seen and not touched them though Death had them by the hair.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Quick! quick! You mother there with the child, get in, get in; there is room here for one more."

But another got the place. The driver, reeling as he ran, sprang for the empty seat and hung
there between the wheels as the horses plunged and tore away to safety just as the great mass
with its weight of gathered boulders and uprooted forests crashed in final doom upon that devoted
village, burying it from sight as though it had never been.

To safety? Yes, for two of them; the other, struck by a flying stone, fell in the road and
was covered in a trice. So close were they to destruction's edge at this moment of headlong flight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not till the painted towers encircling Lucerne had come again into sight did the newly wedded
pair find words or make the least attempt to speak. Then Carleton kissed his bride and for
a moment love was triumphant. Was it triumphant enough to lead him to acknowledge their marriage?
She looked anxiously in his face to see and finally she asked:

"How much of this are we to tell, Carleton?"

"All about the catastrophe; but nothing more," he answered.

And while her heart retained its homage, the light in her eyes was veiled.

Married but not acknowledged! Would it not have been better if the avalanche had overwhelmed
them? She almost thought so, till bending, he murmured in her ear:

"I shall follow you soon. Did you think I could go on living without you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why so thoughtful, Ermentrude? You are not quite yourself to-day?"

"Uncle is very ill. The doctors say that he may not live a month."

"And does that grieve you?"

A yes was on her lips, but she did not utter it. Instead, she drew a little ribbon from her
breast, on which hung a plain gold ring, and gazing earnestly at this token she remarked very
quietly:

"Carleton, have you ever thought that but for this ring no proof remains in all this world
of our ever having been married?"

"But our hearts know it. Is that not enough?" he asked.

"For to-day, yes. But when uncle goes...."

His kisses finished the sentence for her, and love resumed its sway; but when alone and wakeful
on her pillow, she recalled his look, the sting of her first doubt darted through her uneasy
heart, and feeling eagerly after the ring she tore it from its ribbon and put it on her finger.

"It is my right," she whispered. "Henceforth I shall wear it. He loves me too well to quarrel
with my decision. Now am I really his wife."

       *       *       *       *       *

Did she see a change in him? Did he come less frequently? Did he stay less long? Was there
uneasiness in his eye--coolness--languor? No, no. It was her exacting heart which thus interpreted
his look--which counted the days--forgot his many engagements--saw impatience in the quickness
with which he corrected her faults in manner or language instead of the old indulgence which
met each error with a smile. Love cannot always keep at fever-heat. He, the cynosure of the
whole foreign element, had the world at his feet here as in Lucerne. It needed no jealous eye
to see this; while she--well, she had her attractions too, as had been often proved, and with
God's help she would yet be a fit mate for him. What she now lacked, she would acquire. She
would watch these fine ladies who blushed with pleasure at his approach, and when her time
of mourning was over she would astonish him with her graces and her appearance. For she knew
how to dress, yes, with the best of them, and hold her head and walk like the queen she would
feel herself to be when once she bore his name. Patience then, till she had stored her mind
and learned the ways he was accustomed to in others. She had money enough now that her uncle
was dead, and she could do things....

Yes, but something had gone out of her face, and the ring hung loose on her finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

And he? Had her fears read him aright? Had he grown indifferent or was he simply perplexed?
Let us watch him as he paces his hotel room one glorious afternoon, now stopping to re-read
a letter he held in his hand, and now to gaze out with unseeing eyes to where the blue of the
sea melts into the blue of the sky on the far horizon.

Love had been sweet; but man has other passions, and he is in the grip of the one mightiest
in men of his stamp--the all-engrossing, all-demanding one of personal ambition.

Without solicitation, without expectation even, a hand had been held out to him whose least
grasp meant success in the one field most to his mind,--a political career under auspices which
had never been known to fail. But there were conditions attached--conditions which a year before
would have filled him with joy, but which now stood like a barrier between him and his goal,
unless.... But he was not yet ready to disavow his wife, trample upon her heart, nay on his
own as well;--that is, without a struggle.

For the third time he read the letter which you will see was from his mother.

  My Son:--I have an apology to make and a bit of news to give you. When
  I urged you to give up Lucie and to seek distraction abroad, I felt
  that I was doing justice to your immaturity and saving you from ties
  which might very easily jeopardize your future happiness.

  But I have lately changed my mind. In seeing more of her I have not
  only learned her worth but the advantage such a woman would be to one
  of your tastes and promise. And she loves you more devotedly, perhaps,
  than you have loved her. How do I know this? Let me tell you of an
  interview I had with a certain relative of hers last night. I allude to
  her brother, and for a recognized boss buried out of sight in politics,
  he has more heart in his breast than I have ever given him credit for.
  Not having children of his own, he has centered his affections on this
  choice little sister of his, and finding her far from happy, came to
  see me yesterday evening with this proposition: If I would consent to
  your union with Lucie, and withdraw my opposition to your immediate
  marriage, he would take your future in charge and put you in the way of
  political advancement only to be limited, as he says, by your talents,
  which he is good enough to rate very high.

  After this, how can I do otherwise than bid you follow your impulses
  and marry Lucie in spite of the disparity of years to which I have
  hitherto taken exception. Were she as poor as she is accounted rich,
  I should say the same, now that I have sounded the depths of her lovely
  disposition and the rare culture of a mind which those seven years have
  enriched beyond what is usual even in women of intellect. Her money
  does not influence me in her favor, nor does it weigh with me in my
  present opinion of her complete fitness for the position you are so
  eager to give her. That this will make you happy I know. Let it hasten
  your return which cannot be too speedy.

This was the bombshell which had disturbed Carleton Roberts' complacency, bared his own soul
to his horrified view, and revealed to him the weakness of his moral nature which he had hitherto
considered strong. For his first impulse was one of recoil, not only from the secret marriage
which shut him off from these new hopes, but from his youthful bride as well. He found himself
weary of his flowery bonds and eager for a man's life in his native city. Oh, why had he urged
this immature girl to take the ride which had led him into slavery to one who could not advance
him in life, however queen-like she moved and talked and smiled upon the world from the heights
of her physical perfections. It was brain that was needed--an understanding like Lucie's, tempered,
like hers, by years, not months, of culture and refined association.

It was at this point he paused in his restless walk and looked for inspiration to the far-off
waters of the bluest of all seas.

Suddenly he resumed his walk; then quickly stopping again sat down at his desk and with an
air of desperate haste began a letter to his mother with the announcement:

  It is too late. Unfortunately for your scheme, I am already....

He never got any further. A fresh impulse drove him into the street. He could not thus summarily
settle his future fate. It meant too much to him. He must take time to think. His heart clamors
loudly for its rights; he is only twenty-six--and in a rush of feeling which should have been
his salvation, he turned toward that nest among the flowers where help was to be had if help
was to come at all in this crisis of conflicting passions.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hour was noon, one which he had never chosen before for a visit to Ermentrude. Would he
find her in? Would she be in spirits to meet him? Would she look beautiful--worthy of his name,
worthy of the greatest sacrifice a man can make for a woman? He half hoped that she would;
that he would find his chains riveted and secure beyond the power of any force to break.

As his musings faltered, he turned the knob of the little side door and went in. As he did
so a shower of rose-leaves fell upon him from the vines enveloping the balcony.

He shuddered slightly and passed down the hall. Everything was very still.

She was asleep. Lying on a couch in utter weariness or pain, she had drifted off into the land
of dreams, and he felt that he had a moment of respite. He could look and weigh the question:
Love or a quick success? A weakling's paradise or the goal of the strong man?

Meanwhile, she was not as beautiful as he thought. But she was more touching--less robust,
less bounteous of aspect, more child-like, more appealing,--a woman who, if he were no more
of a man than he appeared to be in this hurly-burly of pleasure and fashion, might in time
do him credit and hold him back from follies.

But he was not just the man these casual friends and admirers considered him. There was much
more to him than that. He knew this better than Lucie did or her powerful brother, or even
his adoring mother. Great opportunities awaited him and a large space in the affairs of men
if not of nations. Such confidence did he feel in himself at this fevered moment that he never
doubted that eventually he would gain all this, even with the handicap of a good-looking but
unsophisticated wife.

But not quickly;... step by step perhaps ... and he was longing to take it all at a bound.

Poor girl! and she lay there under his eyes all unmindful of his conflict or of the fact that
her fate as well as his was trembling in the balance; unmindful, though her dreams were far
from joyous--or why the tear welling from between her lashes as he gazed.

She was alone in the house; he knew it by the complete silence. He could look and look and
study her every feature, without fear of interruption; wait for her waking and be ready to
meet her first glance of tender astonishment which might restore him to his better self.

Drawing up a chair, he sat down; then started upright again with dilating eyes and a strange
shadow on his brow. One of her arms lay uppermost and on the hand--almost as fine as Lucie's,
but not quite,--he saw the ring--his ring, and it hung loosely. The poor child was growing
thin, very thin. "If she were to hold her hand downward," he muttered to himself, "I believe
that ring would fall off." Did some stray glimpse of his own features, wearing a look never
seen on them before, confront him from some near-by mirror that he started so guiltily as this
heart murmur rose to his lips? Or was it at a thought, hideous but tempting, which held him,
gained upon him and soon absolutely possessed him, till his own hand went out stealthily and
with hesitations toward those helpless fingers of hers, now approaching, now withdrawing, and
now approaching them again but not touching them, great as his impulse was to do so, for fear
she should wake, while yet the devil gripped his arm and lit up baleful fires in his eyes.

He had remembered those words of hers: "Have you ever thought that with the exception of this
ring no proof exists in all the world of our ever having been married?" Remember them? He had
not remembered them; he had heard them, sounding and resounding in his ears till the whole
room seemed to palpitate with them. Then the devil made his final move. Ermentrude shuddered,
and her position changing, the hand which had been uppermost fell down at her side and the
ring slipped--left her finger--paused on the edge of the couch--then came to rest in his palm
held out to receive it.

He had not drawn it from her hand. When a reader in quest of the truth has read this text-book
of American History, however, he will be compelled to ask the question as to why there appears
throughout this volume references to the achievements of all groups influencing the history of this
country, and there is no mention whatever of what the Negroes, constituting a tenth of the
population of the United States, have thought and felt and done. It is unreasonable to think that
such a large element of the nation could be so closely connected with it without having decidedly
influenced the shaping of its destiny, and history shows that the record of the Negro race in the
western hemisphere is so creditable and far-reaching that it is impossible
to write the history of the United States and omit the achievements
of this group.

Professor Muzzey's American History, therefore, is not a balanced and unprejudiced account of the
rise and progress of the United States, but such a treatise as he
believes that the American mind will absorb, and such a story as conforms
with the biased minds of pseudo-American historians who do not desire
to publish to posterity the achievements of all the people of this
country.

       

* * * * *

The Annual Report of the American Historical Association for the Year 1918, Volume II. The Autobiography
of Martin Van Buren. By JOHN C. FITZPATRICK. Washington, 1920. Pp. 808.

This autobiography of Martin Van Buren was presented to the Library of Congress by Mrs. Smith
Thompson Van Buren in 1905, at the same time when the Van Buren papers
were presented to the Library.

It is a manuscript copy in seven folio volumes, made by Smith Thompson Van Buren, the son and
literary executor of the President, from Van Buren's original draft. The editor reports that
portions of Volumes VI and VII are in another hand and the last fifteen pages of the manuscript
have many changes and corrections by Van Buren himself. A portion of the book was edited by Mr.
Worthington C. Ford. The notes of Van Buren himself are distinguished by letters from the
numbered notes of the editor of the work.

A study of this manuscript leads the editor of this work to the conclusion that it is written
"with engaging frankness, and the insight it afforded to the mental processes of a master politician
is deeply interesting." Van Buren's desire to be scrupulously fair in his estimates is evident,
and if he did not always succeed, his failures are not discreditable. Mr. Fitzpatrick does not believe
that the autobiography compels a revision of established historical judgments, although it "presents
authority for much in our political history hitherto somewhat conjectural
and records political motives and activities of the period in an illuminating
and suggestive manner."

On reading this work one must agree with its editor that, "in analyzing men and measures,
Van Buren all unconsciously paints a picture of himself."

For students of Negro history certain parts of this work are both interesting and valuable.
This is especially true of Chapter XI, in which Van Buren sets forth his own views on the slavery
question and discusses the men and their measures proposed for dealing with it. This chapter
not only gives a review of the history of slavery in the United States
up to the time of the crisis of thirties, but brings out additional
facts throwing light upon the situation at that time.

In the beginning of Chapter XVIII, and on pages 528-529, Van Buren takes up the question of the
concession of Great Britain by treaty stipulation of the right of search to prevent the prosecution
of the slave trade under our flag, which he considered merely a pretense on the part of Great
Britain for the impressment of our seamen.
 What were a few wild oats sown by a man of his promise?

And was this the end? Did Ermentrude accept her doom without a struggle?

Let us see.

       *       *       *       *       *

One afternoon in June, there entered the parlor of the old-fashioned mansion of the Roberts
family a lady who had asked to see Mrs. Roberts on business of an important nature. Though
plainly clad, her appearance possessed an elegance which insured respect; but when alone and
seated in the darkest corner of the great drawing room she put up a trembling hand to thrust
back her veil, the countenance thus revealed betrayed an emotion hardly in keeping with the
quiet bearing with which she had advanced under the servant's eye.

His home! and these the surroundings amid which he had grown to manhood! Why should the sight
of all this rouse emotions she believed eliminated by a treachery most cruel in face of promises
most sacred? Why, as she looked about, and noted object after object which must have been there
previous to his birth, did she see him as a child and boy and not as the man who had first
won and then deserted her? She would not have had it so at this hour when strength was needed
rather than tenderness. But she could not help her nature, or still the wild surging of her
rebellious heart, as his portrait seen upon the wall challenged her constancy and whispered
of the hour when his "forever" echoed her "forever" and the compact for eternity was sealed.

He had broken this compact--broken it soon--broken it before the honeymoon had passed. But
she! Was she to show no firmer spirit whose love was of the soul and took no note of time?
She was his wife, and acknowledged or unacknowledged, must yet prove to be his blessing though
he--he----

But this would not do. The interview before her called for calmness. She would not add to the
turbulence of her spirits by another glance at what brought back too much of the past to fortify
her for the impending struggle. She had to do credit to his choice, to impress a difficult
woman with her dignity as a wife. She must not shake nor weep.

Yet when she heard a step at the door, instinct told her to pull down her veil till the first
greetings were over--a precaution for which she was deeply grateful when in another moment
a young woman entered instead of her husband's mother for whom she had asked and whom she naturally
expected to see.

In the humiliation of the moment, her disappointment took words and she muttered within herself:

"A companion or possibly a relative. I am to be put off with kindly excuses; begged to state
my errand--rehearse my claims and my hopes to some gentle go-between! I have not strength for
that. I must see the mother--the mother. God give me wisdom and keep me calm--calm."

Meanwhile the young woman she had instinctively called gentle advanced into the center of the
room. Mechanically, Ermentrude rose to meet her, and thus stepped into a better light. Tragedy
came with her. This it was impossible not to see--not to feel. But the warning which her aspect
gave passed as she spoke and said in tones a little tremulous, perhaps, but with an air of
perfect courtesy:

"I had hoped to see Mrs. Roberts herself."

The smile with which this was greeted, the flush of pride and the joy of possession which lit
the other's pleasing features as she replied, "I am Mrs. Roberts," should have carried the
truth to Ermentrude.

But they did not. She looked surprised--baffled, and after the briefest hesitation, observed:

"I am a stranger in this city and have doubtless made some mistake. The Mrs. Roberts I have
called to see--and I was told she lived here--is the mother of a gentleman of the name of----"

She could not speak it.

But the other could.

"Carleton?" she asked; and at Ermentrude's agitated nod, added with friendly interest: "This
is her home; but she has left it for a while to us. I am Mr. Carleton Roberts' wife."

       *       *       *       *       *

There are blows which prostrate; there are others which sear but leave the body intact--feet
still supporting it--eyes still gazing ahead unmoved--lips moving with mechanical exactness
and sometimes still retaining their smile. Only the soul which gave life to all of this is
dead. The image is there but the spirit is gone; and if sufficiently preoccupied, the one who
struck the blow sees no change. So was it with Ermentrude and Lucie.

"We are looking for mother to return next week," added the latter as Ermentrude stood stark
and silent before her. "Would you like to leave a message for her?"

At these words uttered with the sweetness of a rich and sympathetic nature, the soul returned
to Ermentrude's body. With a long and earnest look which took in the full measure of the other's
personality, radiant with happiness and the consciousness of an assured wifedom, she answered
softly:

"No, I will leave no message," and turned as if to go.

"Nor any name?" queried Lucie, eying with admiration the noble lines of a figure with whose
perfect proportions her own could never hope to compete.

"Nor any name," came back in indescribable accents from the doorway.

Lucie paused, and gazing in vague trouble after her rapidly disappearing visitor, murmured
to herself, "Who is she?"

But the one who could have answered her was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Carleton, you seldom see such a woman. Younger than I, she had the poise of a woman of thirty.
Who could she have been?"

"Describe her."

"I wish I could; I hardly saw her face; it was her figure, her voice, her way of moving and
holding herself. I felt as small and quiet as a little mouse beside her. Only I was happy and
she was not. That much I feel now that I recall her look in leaving."

"Was she American or--or foreign?" he asked, hiding his trouble, for a great fear had seized him.

"She had an English accent which added very much to her charm."

"Forget her." For a moment his accent was almost fierce, then he laughed the matter off, assuring
this bride of a month that she made him cross with her self-depreciation, that there was no
one of finer mien and manner than herself, the chosen of his heart upon whom he always looked
with pride. Which subtle tribute to what was her greatest charm accomplished its end; she did
forget the stranger.

But he did not; he knew what was before him and prepared himself for the inevitable meeting
which would be followed by--what?

Not by what he had every right to expect and evidently did. Ermentrude had learned all she
would both of this marriage and of the woman who had supplanted her, and had made her resolve.
This he saw as they came together in the isolation of a quiet corner of the Park, and so was
not greatly surprised, though a little moved, as after the first few words, and with an earnest
look, she said:

"I am your wife, I, Ermentrude Roberts, married to you in the sight of God and man. I cannot
prove it, but as you once said, our hearts know it and will continue to know it as long as
either of us lives. But I am not going to obtrude my claims upon you, Carleton, or stand like
a specter in your path. Had this woman you have deceived been weak or foolish or unloving,
or indeed anything but what she is, I might have held to my rights and insisted upon a recognition
which would have profited you in the end. But I cannot shame that woman--I can neither shame
her nor bring her to grief. You have broken one heart, but you shall be saved the remorse of
breaking two. I had rather suffer myself. I am alone in the world. I have means. I can ultimately
be useful and face good men and women without fear. Head of Department (in a tone of quiet and
self-satisfied triumph). It is, Madam.

Mrs. Britannia. And I may take your word for it, that it is a weapon I can with confidence
place in the hands of my soldiers.

Head of Department. You may, Madam. Excellent as has been all the work turned out by the Department
I have the honour to represent, I think I may fairly claim this as our greatest achievement.
No less than nine firms have been employed in its construction, and I am proud to say that in
one of the principal portions of its intricate mechanism, fully seven-and-thirty
different parts, united by microscopic screws, are employed in the
adjustment. But allow me to explain. What I have is mine, and that
is the undying memory of two months of perfect happiness."

She would have said more, but she saw that he had been greatly shaken. She feared the renewal
of a flame not yet altogether extinct in a heart which once beat for her alone, and so contenting
herself with a low farewell, she was turning swiftly away, when one last thought made her pause
and say:

"I cannot return you your ring. It is lost. I was careless with it and it fell unnoticed from
my hand. But to-night I will send you back the little clock which unites our initials. Destroy
it if you will, but if some sentiment bids you keep it, let it be this one and no other: 'I
recall Ermentrude only that I may be faithful to Lucie.'"

With a low cry his head fell upon his breast in extreme self-abasement, then he slowly lifted
his eyes and seeing in her face a full knowledge of his sin, murmured in overwhelming shame
and contrition:

"You know me for the wretch I am. I have the ring; it fell from your hand into mine one day
while you lay asleep. I do not ask for forgiveness, but this I promise you, Ermentrude:--if
the little clock comes back, I will make a place in it for this ring, and neither clock nor
ring shall leave me again while I live."

Instinctively her hands went out to him, then they fell back on her breast.

"God will hold you to that promise," she said; and melted away from his sight in the mist which
had been gradually enveloping them without being seen by either.

Thus the struggle ended for him, which for her had simply begun.

Not till she found herself in the South with her girl friend, Antoinette Duclos, did she discover
that the closest bond which can unite man and woman held her in spite of her late compact with
Carleton Roberts. Should she reassert her rights and demand that the father should recognize
his child? Her generous heart said No. The old arguments held good. She appealed to Antoinette
for advice.

The result we know. When Antoinette's own child died at birth, she took Ermentrude's to her
heart and brought it up as her own. There was little difficulty in this, as the Professor had
already yielded to a Southern fever and lay at rest in a New Orleans cemetery.

And this brings us to another episode.

       *       *       *       *       *

The widow in fact and the widow in heart stood face to face above a sleeping infant. They were
both dressed for traveling and so was the babe. The dismantled rooms showed why. Young still,
for the years of either's romance had been few, each face, as the other contemplated it, told
the story of sorrow which Time, for all its kindliness, would never efface. But the charm of
either remained--perceptible at this hour as perhaps it would never be again to the same extent.
Antoinette basked in the light of Ermentrude's beauty ennobled by renunciation, and Ermentrude
in that wonderful look in her friend's plain face which came at great crises and made her for
the moment the equal of the best. 

But dead or living, statue or woman, shadow or body, her beauty was still the same, only that
the green light of her eyes was less brilliant, and her mouth, once
so warmly crimson, was only tinted with a faint tender rosiness, like
that of her cheeks.

 To insure its welfare and raise
no doubt in its own mind as it grew in knowledge and feeling, the two women must separate.
No paltering with this duty, and no delay. (1) Perhaps these words should not be taken literally;
still they furnish cause for reflection when it is remembered that
they were written by a woman just turned forty concerning her husband
who was not yet thirty years old.

 And you, Ermentrude?"

"To New York. I shall never go far from him. But he and I will never meet. My world will not
be his world. I shall make my own place."

"As Ermentrude Taylor?"

"As Mrs. Ermentrude Taylor. I am a wife. I shall never forget that fact."

"And the child? Will you never come to see it?"

Ermentrude's head fell and she stood a long time without answering. Then with a steady look
she calmly said:

"I can think of but one contingency which might shake my resolution to leave her yours without
the least interruption from me. If he--Antoinette, if he were left alone and childless, I might
see my duty differently from now. You must be prepared for that."

"Ermentrude, when you send me this little shoe--See, I will leave one on and give you the other,
I shall know that you are coming, or that you want the child. My life is yours as I once promised,
and do you think I would hold back the child?"

And again their hands met as once before, in that strong clasp, which means:

"Trust me to the death and beyond it."

       *       *       *       *       *

With Antoinette it was to the death, as we have seen. Warned by Ermentrude of the appalling
results of their plan to bring father and child together, and entreated to fly lest her story
should imperil the secret upon the preservation of which his very life now hung, she answered
to the call as she had promised, and thus acquitted her debt though she failed to save him.

Of her previous act in disfiguring his photograph in her temporary lodging-place, we shall
never know the full story. The picture had been hers for years, given her by Ermentrude on
their parting, so that the child should not be without some semblance of her father even if
she should not know him as such, and it was to secure this clue to their now doubly dangerous
secret that Madame Duclos ransacked her baggage previous to her flight from the New York hotel. These
are the ties of family, friendly associations, customs and habits of the community, politics, religion,
business, property, and superstitious reverence for graves. His life is, therefore, closely
bound up with his surroundings, and the changing of it for that of another locality is a matter
of serious concern. Thus, "there is a marked inertia, a resistance to pressure among human beings,
and the presumption is that people will stay where they are unless
some positive force causes them to move."

       *       *       *       *       *

And Ermentrude? What of her? Alone, robbed of husband and child and friend--where shall we
look for her in this world of extreme tribulation? Search the hospitals of France where they
press closest to the trenches. There will you find the woman who losing all has found much.
Blessing and blest! the angel of the battlefield whom the bullets spare since her work on earth
is not yet accomplished!

