An excursion into Taku Bay, that miniature of Glacier Bay, with its then three living glaciers;
a visit to two villages of the Taku Indians; past Ft. Snettisham, up whose arms we pushed,
mapping them; then to Sumdum. In searching the monuments of the ancients, which have furnished
the foundation for our present culture, that is, of the littoral inhabitants of the Mediterranean,
and of the people of Mesopotamia, we find in Egypt the first traces of the horse. But even
here it appears late, on the monuments of the first ruling patricians of human origin.[2] Especially
during the period of Memphis (I-X Dynasty), then under the rules
of Thebes (XI-XVI Dynasty), there is no trace of the horse. Muir would not give up his quest
of the mother glacier until the Indians frankly refused to go any further; and old Tow-a-att
called our interpreter, Johnny, as for a counsel of state, and carefully set forth to Muir
that if he persisted in his purpose of pushing forward up the bay he would have the blood of
the whole party on his hands.

Said the old chief: "My life is of no account, and it does not matter whether I live or die;
but you shall not sacrifice the life of my minister."

I laughed at Muir's discomfiture and gave the word to retreat. This one defeat of a victorious
expedition so weighed upon Muir's mind that it brought him back from the California coast next
year and from the arms of his bride to discover and climb upon that glacier.

On down now through Prince Frederick Sound, past the beautiful Norris Glacier, then into Le
Conte Bay with its living glacier and icebergs, across the Stickeen flats, and so joyfully
home again, Muir to take the November steamboat back to his sunland.

I have made many voyages in that great Alexandrian Archipelago since, traveling by canoe over
fifteen thousand miles--not one of them a dull one--through its intricate passages; but none
compared, in the number and intensity of its thrills, in the variety and excitement of its
incidents and in its lasting impressions of beauty and grandeur, with this first voyage when
we groped our way northward with only Vancouver's old chart as our guide.

 THE LOST GLACIER

NIGHT IN A CANOE

 A dreary world! The constant rain
     Beats back to earth blithe fancy's wings;
     And life--a sodden garment--clings
 About a body numb with pain.

 Imagination ceased with light;
     Of Nature's psalm no echo lingers.
     The death-cold mist, with ghostly fingers,
 Shrouds world and soul in rayless night.

 An inky sea, a sullen crew,
     A frail canoe's uncertain motion;
     A whispered talk of wind and ocean,
 As plotting secret crimes to do!

 The vampire-night sucks all my blood;
     Warm home and love seem lost for aye;
     From cloud to cloud I steal away,
 Like guilty soul o'er Stygian flood.

 Peace, morbid heart! From paddle blade
     See the black water flash in light;
     And bars of moonbeams streaming white,
 Have pearls of ebon raindrops made. 

 Montlanc. Antiq. Explic. T. 4, pag.
     79). This statement proves itself erroneous,
     because he was not aware that the foot of the
 horse was repaired by an inexperienced sculptor.

How then did out
of this Roman cure shoe develop the horseshoeing of southern Europe?

V

THE LOST GLACIER

John Muir was married in the spring of 1880 to Miss Strentzel, the daughter of a Polish physician
who had come out in the great stampede of 1849 to California, but had found his gold in oranges,
lemons and apricots on a great fruit ranch at Martinez, California. A brief letter from Muir
told of his marriage, with just one note in it, the depth of joy and peace of which I could
fathom, knowing him so well. Then no word of him until the monthly mailboat came in September.
As I stood on the wharf with the rest of the Wrangell population, as was the custom of our
isolation, watching the boat come in, I was overjoyed to see John Muir on deck, in that same
old, long, gray ulster and Scotch cap. He waved and shouted at me before the boat touched the
wharf.

Springing ashore he said, "When can you be ready?"

"Aren't you a little fast?" I replied. "What does this mean? Where's your wife?"

"Man," he exclaimed, "have you forgotten? Don't you know we lost a glacier last fall? Do you
think I could sleep soundly in my bed this winter with that hanging on my conscience? My wife
could not come, so I have come alone and you've got to go with me to find the lost. Get your
canoe and crew and let us be off."

The ten months since Muir had left me had not been spent in idleness at Wrangell. I had made
two long voyages of discovery and missionary work on my own account,--one in the spring, of
four hundred fifty miles around Prince of Wales Island, visiting the five towns of Hydah Indians
and the three villages of the Hanega tribe of Thlingets. Another in the summer down the coast
to the Cape Fox and Tongass tribes of Thlingets, and across Dixon entrance to Ft. Simpson,
where there was a mission among the Tsimpheans, and on fifteen miles further to the famous
mission of Father Duncan at Metlakahtla. I had written accounts of these trips to Muir; but
for him the greatest interest was in the glaciers and mountains of the mainland.

Our preparations were soon made. Alas! we could not have our noble old captain, Tow-a-att,
this time. On the tenth of January, 1880,--the darkest day of my life,--this "noblest Roman
of them all" fell dead at my feet with a bullet through his forehead, shot by a member of that
same Hootz-noo tribe where he had preached the gospel of peace so simply and eloquently a few
months before. The Hootz-noos, maddened by the fiery liquor that bore their name, came to Wrangell,
and a preliminary skirmish led to an attack at daylight of that winter day upon the Stickeen
village. Old Tow-a-att had stood for peace, and rather than have any bloodshed had offered
all his blankets as a peace offering, although in no physical fear himself; but when the Hootz-noos,
encouraged by the seeming cowardice of the Stickeens, broke into their houses, and the Christianized
tribe, provoked beyond endurance, came out with their guns, Tow-a-att came forth armed only
with his old carved spear, the emblem of his position as chief, to see if he could not call
his tribe back again. At my instance, as I stood with my hand on his shoulder, he lifted up
his voice to recall his people to their houses, when, in an instant, the volley commenced on
both sides, and this Christian man, one of the simplest and grandest souls I ever knew, fell
dead at my feet, and the tribe was tumbled back into barbarism; and the white man, who had
taught the Indians the art of making rum, and the white man's government, which had afforded
no safeguard against such scenes, were responsible.

Muir mourned with me the fate of this old chief; but another of my men, Lot Tyeen, was ready
with a swift canoe. Joe, his son-in-law, and Billy Dickinson, a half-breed boy of seventeen
who acted as interpreter, formed the crew. When we were about to embark I suddenly thought
of my little dog Stickeen and made the resolve to take him along. My wife and Muir both protested
and I almost yielded to their persuasion. I shudder now to think what the world would have
lost had their arguments prevailed! That little, long-haired, brisk, beautiful, but very independent
dog, in co-ordination with Muir's genius, was to give to the world one of its greatest dog-classics.
Muir's story of "Stickeen" ranks with "Rab and His Friends," "Bob, Son of Battle," and far
above "The Call of the Wild." Indeed, in subtle analysis of dog character, as well as beauty
of description, I think it outranks all of them. All over the world men, women and children
are reading with laughter, thrills and tears this exquisite little story.

I have told Muir that in his book he did not do justice to my puppy's beauty. I think that
he was the handsomest dog I have ever known. His markings were very much like those of an American
Shepherd dog--black, white and tan; although he was not half the size of one; but his hair
was so silky and so long, his tail so heavily fringed and beautifully curved, his eyes so deep
and expressive and his shape so perfect in its graceful contours, that I have never seen another
dog quite like him; otherwise Muir's description of him is perfect.

When Stickeen was only a round ball of silky fur as big as one's fist, he was given as a wedding
present to my bride, two years before this voyage. I carried him in my overcoat pocket to and
from the steamer as we sailed from Sitka to Wrangell. Soon after we arrived a solemn delegation
of Stickeen Indians came to call on the bride; but as soon as they saw the puppy they were
solemn no longer. His gravely humorous antics were irresistible. It was Moses who named him
Stickeen after their tribe--an exceptional honor. Thereafter the whole tribe adopted and protected
him, and woe to the Indian dog which molested him. Once when I was passing the house of this
same Lot Tyeen, one of his large hunting dogs dashed out at Stickeen and began to worry him.
Lot rescued the little fellow, delivered him to me and walked into his house. Soon he came
out with his gun, and before I knew what he was about he had shot the offending Indian dog--a
valuable hunting animal.

Stickeen lacked the obtrusively affectionate manner of many of his species, did not like to
be fussed over, would even growl when our babies enmeshed their hands in his long hair; and
yet, to a degree I have never known in another dog, he attracted the attention of everybody
and won all hearts.

As instances: Dr. Kendall, "The Grand Old Man" of our Church, during his visit of 1879 used
to break away from solemn counsels with the other D.D.s and the carpenters to run after and
shout at Stickeen. And Mrs. McFarland, the Mother of Protestant missions in Alaska, often begged
us to give her the dog; and, when later he was stolen from her care by an unscrupulous tourist
and so forever lost to us, she could hardly afterwards speak of him without tears.

Stickeen was a born aristocrat, dainty and scrupulously clean. From puppyhood he never cared
to play with the Indian dogs, and I was often amused to see the dignified but decided way in
which he repulsed all attempts at familiarity on the part of the Indian children. He admitted
to his friendship only a few of the natives, choosing those who had adopted the white man's
dress and mode of living, and were devoid of the rank native odors. His likes and dislikes
were very strong and always evident from the moment of his meeting with a stranger. There was
something almost uncanny about the accuracy of his judgment when "sizing up" a man.

It was Stickeen himself who really decided the question whether we should take him with us
on this trip. He listened to the discussion, pro and con, as he stood with me on the wharf,
turning his sharp, expressive eyes and sensitive ears up to me or down to Muir in the canoe.
When the argument seemed to be going against the dog he suddenly turned, deliberately walked
down the gang-plank to the canoe, picked his steps carefully to the bow, where my seat with
Muir was arranged, and curled himself down on my coat. The discussion ended abruptly in a general
laugh, and Stickeen went along.

Then the acute little fellow set about, in the wisest possible way, to conquer Muir. He was
not obtrusive, never "butted in"; never offended by a too affectionate tongue. He listened
silently to discussions on his merits, those first days; but when Muir's comparisons of the
brilliant dogs of his acquaintance with Stickeen grew too "odious" Stickeen would rise, yawn
openly and retire to a distance, not slinkingly, but with tail up, and lie down again out of
earshot of such calumnies. When we landed after a day's journey Stickeen was always the first
ashore, exploring for field mice and squirrels; but when we would start to the woods, the mountains
or the glaciers the dog would join us, coming mysteriously from the forest. Now, the nearer
together the electrodes are, the more it is necessary to lower the partition. The extension of
the electrodes and the bringing of them together is the knotty part
of the question.

This will be shown by a very simple calculation.

The visible electrolysis of water begins at an E.M.F. of about 1.7 V. Below this there is no disengagement
of bubbles. If the E.M.F. be increased at the terminals of the voltameter, the current (and
consequently the production of gas) will become proportional to the
excess of the value over 1.7 V; but, at the same time, the current
will heat the circuit--that is to say, will produce a superfluous
work, and there will be waste.

At 1.7 V the rendering is at its maximum, but the useful effect is nil.
 It was principally
a voyage of discovery; we were in search of the glacier that we had lost. Perched in the high
stern sat our captain, Lot Tyeen, massive and capable, handling his broad steering paddle with
power and skill. In front of him Joe and Billy pulled oars, Joe, a strong young man, our cook,
hunter and best oarsman; Billy, a lad of seventeen, our interpreter and Joe's assistant. Towards
the bow, just behind the mast, sat Muir and I, each with a paddle in his hands. Stickeen slumbered
at our feet or gazed into our faces when our conversation interested him. When we began to
discuss a landing place he would climb the high bow and brace himself on the top of the beak,
an animated figure-head, ready to jump into the water when we were about to camp.

Our route was different from that of '79. Now we struck through Wrangell Narrows, that tortuous
and narrow passage between Mitkof and Kupreanof Islands, past Norris Glacier with its far-flung
shaft of ice appearing above the forests as if suspended in air; past the bold Pt. Windham
with its bluff of three thousand feet frowning upon the waters of Prince Frederick Sound; across
Port Houghton, whose deep fiord had no ice in it and, therefore, was not worthy of an extended
visit. We made all haste, for Muir was, as the Indians said, "always hungry for ice," and this
was more especially his expedition. He was the commander now, as I had been the year before.
He had set for himself the limit of a month and must return by the October boat. Often we ran
until late at night against the protests of our Indians, whose life of infinite leisure was
not accustomed to such rude interruption. They could not understand Muir at all, nor in the
least comprehend his object in visiting icy bays where there was no chance of finding gold
and nothing to hunt.

