When the White House was burned in Virginia City, I lost my home, my happiness, my constitution,
and my trunk.  The loss of the two first named articles was a matter of no great consequence,
since a home without a mother, or a sister, or a distant young female relative in it, to remind
you, by putting your soiled linen out of sight and taking your boots down off the mantelpiece,
that there are those who think about you and care for you, is easily obtained.  And I cared
nothing for the loss of my happiness, because, not being a poet, it could not be possible that
melancholy would abide with me long.  But to lose a good constitution and a better trunk were
serious misfortunes.  On the day of the fire my constitution succumbed to a severe cold, caused
by undue exertion in getting ready to do something.  I suffered to no purpose, too, because
the plan I was figuring at for the extinguishing of the fire was so elaborate that I never
got it completed until the middle of the following week.

The first time I began to sneeze, a friend told me to go and bathe my feet in hot water and
go to bed.  I did so.  Shortly afterward, another friend advised me to get up and take a cold
shower-bath.  I did that also.  Within the hour, another friend assured me that it was policy
to "feed a cold and starve a fever."  I had both.  So I thought it best to fill myself up for
the cold, and then keep dark and let the fever starve awhile.

In a case of, this kind, I seldom do things by halves; I ate pretty heartily; I conferred my
custom upon a stranger who had just opened his restaurant that morning; he waited near me in
respectful silence until I had finished feeding my cold, when he inquired if the people about
Virginia City were much afflicted with colds?  I told him I thought they were.  He then went
out and took in his sign.

I started down toward the office, and on the way encountered another bosom friend, who told
me that a quart of salt-water, taken warm, would come as near curing a cold as anything in
the world.  I hardly thought I had room for it, but I tried it anyhow.  The result was surprising.
I believed I had thrown up my immortal soul.

Now, as I am giving my experience only for the benefit of those who are troubled with the distemper
I am writing about, I feel that they will see the propriety of my cautioning them against following
such portions of it as proved inefficient with me, and acting upon this conviction, I warn
them against warm salt-water.  It may be a good enough remedy, but I think it is too severe.
If I had another cold in the head, and there were no course left me but to take either an earthquake
or a quart of warm saltwater, I would take my chances on the earthquake.

After the storm which had been raging in my stomach had subsided, and no more good Samaritans
happening along, I went on borrowing handkerchiefs again and blowing them to atoms, as had
been my custom in the early stages of my cold, until I came across a lady who had just arrived
from over the plains, and who said she had lived in a part of the country where doctors were
scarce, and had from necessity acquired considerable skill in the treatment of simple "family
complaints."  I knew she must have had much experience, for she appeared to be a hundred and
fifty years old.

She mixed a decoction composed of molasses, aquafortis, turpentine, and various other drugs,
and instructed me to take a wine-glass full of it every fifteen minutes.  I never took but
one dose; that was enough; it robbed me of all moral principle, and awoke every unworthy impulse
of my nature.  Under its malign influence my brain conceived miracles of meanness, but my hands
were too feeble to execute them; at that time, had it not been that my strength had surrendered
to a succession of assaults from infallible remedies for my cold, I am satisfied that I would
have tried to rob the graveyard.  Like most other people, I often feel mean, and act accordingly;
but until I took that medicine I had never reveled in such supernatural depravity, and felt
proud of it.  At the end of two days I was ready to go to doctoring again.  I took a few more
unfailing remedies, and finally drove my cold from my head to my lungs.

I got to coughing incessantly, and my voice fell below zero; I conversed in a thundering bass,
two octaves below my natural tone; I could only compass my regular nightly repose by coughing
myself down to a state of utter exhaustion, and then the moment I began to talk in my sleep,
my discordant voice woke me up again.

My case grew more and more serious every day.  A Plain gin was recommended; I took it.  Then
gin and molasses; I took that also.  Then gin and onions; I added the onions, and took all
three.  I detected no particular result, however, except that I had acquired a breath like
a buzzard's.

I found I had to travel for my health.  I went to Lake Bigler with my reportorial comrade,
Wilson.  It is gratifying to me to reflect that we traveled in considerable style; we went
in the Pioneer coach, and my friend took all his baggage with him, consisting of two excellent
silk handkerchiefs and a daguerreotype of his grandmother.  We sailed and hunted and fished
and danced all day, and I doctored my cough all night. By managing in this way, I made out
to improve every hour in the twenty-four.  But my disease continued to grow worse.

A sheet-bath was recommended.  I had never refused a remedy yet, and it seemed poor policy
to commence then; therefore I determined to take a sheet-bath, notwithstanding I had no idea
what sort of arrangement it was.  It was administered at midnight, and the weather was very
frosty. My breast and back were bared, and a sheet (there appeared to be a thousand yards of
it) soaked in ice-water, was wound around me until I resembled a swab for a Columbiad.

It is a cruel expedient.  When the chilly rag touches one's warm flesh, it makes him start
with sudden violence, and gasp for breath just as men do in the death-agony.  It froze the
marrow in my bones and stopped the beating of my heart.  I thought my time had come.

Young Wilson said the circumstance reminded him of an anecdote about a negro who was being
baptized, and who slipped from the parson's grasp, and came near being drowned.  He floundered
around, though, and finally rose up out of the water considerably strangled and furiously angry,
and started ashore at once, spouting water like a whale, and remarking, with great asperity,
that "one o' dese days some gen'l'man's nigger gwyne to get killed wid jis' such damn foolishness
as dis!"

Never take a sheet-bath-never.  Next to meeting a lady acquaintance who, for reasons best known
to herself, don't see you when she looks at you, and don't know you when she does see you,
it is the most uncomfortable thing in the world.

But, as I was saying, when the sheet-bath failed to cure my cough, a lady friend recommended
the application of a mustard plaster to my breast.  I believe that would have cured me effectually,
if it had not been for young Wilson.  When I went to bed, I put my mustard plaster --which
was a very gorgeous one, eighteen inches square--where I could reach it when I was ready for
it.  But young Wilson got hungry in the night, and here is food for the imagination.

After sojourning a week at Lake Bigler, I went to Steamboat Springs, and, besides the steam-baths,
I took a lot of the vilest medicines that were ever concocted.  They would have cured me, but
I had to go back to Virginia City, where, notwithstanding the variety of new remedies I absorbed
every day, I managed to aggravate my disease by carelessness and undue exposure.

I finally concluded to visit San Francisco, and the, first day I got there a lady at the hotel
told me to drink a quart of whisky every twenty-four hours, and a friend up-town recommended
precisely the same course.  Each advised me to take a quart; that made half a gallon.  I did
it, and still live.

Now, with the kindest motives in the world, I offer for the consideration of consumptive patients
the variegated course of treatment I have lately gone through.  Let them try it; if it don't
cure, it can't more than kill them.

A CURIOUS PLEASURE EXCURSION

--[Published at the time of the "Comet Scare" in the summer of 1874]

[We have received the following advertisement, but, inasmuch as it concerns a matter of deep
and general interest, we feel fully justified in inserting it in our reading-columns.  We are
confident that our conduct in this regard needs only explanation, not apology.--Ed., N. Y. Herald.]

ADVERTISEMENT

This is to inform the public that in connection with Mr. Barnum I have leased the comet for
a term, of years; and I desire also to solicit the public patronage in favor of a beneficial
enterprise which we have in view.

We propose to fit up comfortable, and even luxurious, accommodations in the comet for as many
persons as will honor us with their patronage, and make an extended excursion among the heavenly
bodies. The State, which a hundred years ago was utterly careless of children, is now every year
becoming more and more their Guardian, their Over-Parent.

To-day the power of the parents is limited in ways that would have seemed incredible a hundred
years ago. In the first place they must no longer unrestrictedly use their very young children
to earn money for them in toil and suffering.

                          A great mass of labour legislation forbids them.

In the next place their right to inflict punishment or to hurt wantonly has been limited in many
ways. The private enterprises of charitable organizations for the prevention of cruelty and
neglect has led to a growing system of law in this direction also. Nor may a parent now prevent
a child getting some rudiments of an education.

Between the parent and Heaven now, in addition to the more or less legalized voluntary interference
of well-disposed private people, there do appear certain rare functionaries who--while they
interfere not at all between good and competent parents and their children, do, in certain
instances, save a parental default from its complete fruition.

                            There are the school attendance officer and the sanitary inspector.

Then there are--in the London County Council area--the "Ringworm" nurses, who examine the children
systematically and by means of certain white and red cards of remonstrance and warning intimidate
the parent into good behaviour or pave the way for a prosecution.
Everywhere there is the factory inspector--and in certain cases the
police.  Night messages
will be half-rate.  The whole of this vast postal system will be under the personal superintendence
of Mr. Hale of Maine.  Meals served at all hours.  Meals served in staterooms charged extra.

Hostility is not apprehended from any great planet, but we have thought it best to err on the
safe side, and therefore have provided a proper number of mortars, siege-guns, and boarding-pikes.
History shows that small, isolated communities, such as the people of remote islands, are prone
to be hostile to strangers, and so the same may be the case with

                         THE INHABITANTS OF STARS

of the tenth or twentieth magnitude.  We shall in no case wantonly offend the people of any
star, but shall treat all alike with urbanity and kindliness, never conducting ourselves toward
an asteroid after a fashion which we could not venture to assume toward Jupiter or Saturn.
I repeat that we shall not wantonly offend any star; but at the same time we shall promptly
resent any injury that may be done us, or any insolence offered us, by parties or governments
residing in any star in the firmament. Although averse to the shedding of blood, we shall still
hold this course rigidly and fearlessly, not only toward single stars, but toward constellations.
We shall hope to leave a good impression of America behind us in every nation we visit, from
Venus to Uranus.  And, at all events, if we cannot inspire love we shall at least compel respect
for our country wherever we go.  We shall take with us, free of charge,

                      A GREAT FORCE OF MISSIONARIES,

and shed the true light upon all the celestial orbs which, physically aglow, are yet morally
in darkness.  Sunday-schools will be established wherever practicable.  Compulsory education
will also be introduced.

The comet will visit Mars first, and proceed to Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn.  Parties
connected with the government of the District of Columbia and with the former city government
of New York, who may desire to inspect the rings, will be allowed time and every facility.
Every star of prominent magnitude will be visited, and time allowed for excursions to points
of interest inland.

                               THE DOG STAR

has been stricken from the program.  Much time will be spent in the Great Bear, and, indeed,
in every constellation of importance.  So, also, with the Sun and Moon and the Milky Pay, otherwise
the Gulf Stream of the Skies.  Clothing suitable for wear in the sun should be provided.  Our
program has been so arranged that we shall seldom go more than 100,000,000 of miles at a time
without stopping at some star.  This will necessarily make the stoppages frequent and preserve
the interest of the tourist.  Baggage checked through to any point on the route. The characters were
always the same, the pageant alone shifted from palace to château, and from one château of
the Loire to another. Now the court is at Amboise, again at Chenonceaux,
and again at the stately palace of Chambord.

After visiting all the most celebrated stars and constellations in our system and personally,
inspecting the remotest sparks that even the most powerful telescope can now detect in the
firmament, we shall proceed with good heart upon

                           A STUPENDOUS VOYAGE

of discovery among the countless whirling worlds that make turmoil in the mighty wastes of
space that stretch their solemn solitudes, their unimaginable vastness billions upon billions
of miles away beyond the farthest verge of telescopic vision, till by comparison the little
sparkling vault we used to gaze at on Earth shall seem like a remembered phosphorescent flash
of spangles which some tropical voyager's prow stirred into life for a single instant, and
which ten thousand miles of phosphorescent seas and tedious lapse of time had since diminished
to an incident utterly trivial in his recollection.  Children occupying seats at the first
table will be charged full fare.

                             FIRST-CLASS FARE

from the Earth to Uranus, including visits to the Sun and Moon and all the principal planets
on the route, will be charged at the low rate of $2 for every 50,000,000 miles of actual travel.
A great reduction will be made where parties wish to make the round trip.  This comet is new
and in thorough repair and is now on her first voyage.  She is confessedly the fastest on the
line.  She makes 20,000,000 miles a day, with her present facilities; but, with a picked American
crew and good weather, we are confident we can get 40,000,000 out of her.  Still, we shall
never push her to a dangerous speed, and we shall rigidly prohibit racing with other comets.
Passengers desiring to diverge at any point or return will be transferred to other comets.
We make close connections at all principal points with all reliable lines.  Safety can be depended
upon.