"I've been waiting for you to pipe up about----"

"Well, I haven't piped, have I?"

"Not yet."

"I am not going to either."

"I almost believe you.  A girl you could trust would be a funny thing to see."

"Tell me what you know about Laddie, and see if I'm funny."

"You'd telltale sure as life!"

"Well, if you know it, he knows it anyway."

"He doesn't know WHAT I know."

"Well, be careful and don't worry mother.  You know how she is since the fever, and father
says all of us must think of her.  If it's anything that would bother her, don't tell before her."

"Say, looky here," said Leon, turning on me sharply, "is all this sudden consideration for
mother or are you legging for Laddie?"

"For both," I answered stoutly.

"Mostly for Laddie, just the same.  You can't fool me, missy.  I won't tell you one word."

"You needn't!" I answered, "I don't care!"

"Yes you do," he said.  "You'd give anything to find out what I know, and then run to Laddie
with it, but you can't fool me.  I'm too smart for you."

"All right," I said.  "You go and tell anything on Laddie, and I'll watch you, and first trick
I catch you at, I'll do some telling myself, Smarty."

"That's a game more than one can play at," said Leon.  "Go ahead!"

CHAPTER V

The First Day of School

  "Birds in their little nests agree.
  And why can't we?"

"B-i-r-d-s, birds, i-n, in, t-h-e-i-r, their, l-i-t-t-l-e, little, n-e-s-t-s, nests, a-g-r-e-e,
agree."

My feet burned in my new shoes, but most of my body was chilling as I stood beside Miss Amelia
on the platform, before the whole school, and followed the point of her pencil, while, a letter
at a time, I spelled aloud my first sentence.  Nothing ever had happened to me as bad as that.
I was not used to so much clothing.  It was like taking a colt from the woods pasture and putting
it into harness for the first time. That lovely September morning I followed Leon and May down
the dusty road, my heart sick with dread.

May was so much smaller that I could have picked her up and carried her.  She was a gentle,
loving little thing, until some one went too far, and then they got what they deserved, all
at once and right away.

Many of the pupils were waiting before the church.  Leon climbed the steps, made a deep bow,
waved toward the school building across the way, and what he intended to say was, "Still sits
the schoolhouse by the road," but he was a little excited and the s's doubled his tongue, so
that we heard:  "Shill stits the schoolhouse by the road."  We just yelled and I forgot a little
about myself.

When Miss Amelia came to the door and rang the bell, May must have remembered something of
how her first day felt, for as we reached the steps she waited for me, took me in with her,
and found me a seat.  If she had not, I'm quite sure I'd have run away and fought until they
left me in freedom, as I had two years before.  All forenoon I had shivered in my seat, while
classes were arranged, and the elder pupils were started on their work; then Miss Amelia called
me to her on the platform and tried to find out how much schooling I had.  I was ashamed that
I knew so little, but there was no sense in her making me spell after a pencil, like a baby.
I'd never seen the book she picked up.  I could read the line she pointed to, and I told her
so, but she said to spell the words; so I thought she had to be obeyed, for one poetry piece
I know says:

  "Quickly speed your steps to school
   And there mind your teacher's rule."

I can see Miss Amelia to-day.  Her pale face was lined deeper than ever, her drab hair was
dragged back tighter.  She wore a black calico dress with white huckleberries, and a white
calico apron figured in large black apples, each having a stem and two leaves.  In dress she
was a fruitful person.  She had been a surprise to all of us.  Chipper as a sparrow, she had
hopped, and chattered, and darted here and there, until the hour of opening.  Then in the stress
of arranging classes and getting started, all her birdlike ways slipped from her.  Stern and
bony she stood before us, and with a cold light in her pale eyes, she began business in a manner
that made Johnny Hood forget all about his paper wads, and Leon commenced studying like a good
boy, and never even tried to have fun with her.  Every one was so surprised you could notice
it, except May, and she looked, "I told you so!" even in the back.  She had a way of doing
that very thing as I never saw any one else.  From the set of her head, how she carried her
shoulders, the stiffness of her spine, and her manner of walking, if you knew her well, you
could tell what she thought, the same as if you saw her face.

I followed that pencil point and in a husky voice repeated the letters. I could see Tillie
Baher laughing at me from behind her geography, and every one else had stopped what they were
doing to watch and listen, so I forgot to be thankful that I even knew my a b c's.  I spelled
through the sentence, pronounced the words and repeated them without much thought as to the
meaning; at that moment it didn't occur to me that she had chosen the lesson because father
had told her how I made friends with the birds.  The night before he had been putting me through
memory tests, and I had recited poem after poem, even long ones in the Sixth Reader, and never
made one mistake when the piece was about birds.  At our house, we heard next day's lessons
for all ages gone over every night so often, that we couldn't help knowing them by heart, if
we had any brains at all, and I just loved to get the big folk's readers and learn the bird
pieces.  Father had been telling her about it, so for that reason she thought she would start
me on the birds, but I'm sure she made me spell after a pencil point, like a baby, on purpose
to shame me, because I was two years behind the others who were near my age.  As I repeated
the line Miss Amelia thought she saw her chance.  She sprang to her feet, tripped a few steps
toward the centre of the platform, and cried:  "Classes, attention!  Our Youngest Pupil has
just completed her first sentence.  This sentence contains a Thought.  It is a wonderfully
beautiful Thought.  A Thought that suggests a great moral lesson for each of us.  'Birrrds--in
their little nests--agreeee.'"

Never have I heard cooing sweetness to equal the melting tones in which Miss Amelia drawled
those words.  Then she continued, after a good long pause in order to give us time to allow
the "Thought" to sink in: "There is a lesson in this for all of us.  We are here in our schoolroom,
like little birds in their nest.  Now how charming it would be if all of us would follow the
example of the birds, and at our work, and in our play, agreeee--be kind, loving, and considerate
of each other.  Let us all remember always this wonderful truth:  'Birrrrds--in their little
nests--agreeeee!'"

In three steps I laid hold of her apron.  Only last night Leon had said it would come, yet
whoever would have thought that I'd get a chance like this, so soon.

"Ho but they don't!" I cried.  "They fight like anything!  Every day they make the feathers fly!"

In a backward stroke Miss Amelia's fingers, big and bony, struck my cheek a blow that nearly
upset me.  A red wave crossed her face, and her eyes snapped.  I never had been so surprised
in all my life.  I was only going to tell her the truth.  What she had said was altogether
false.  Ever since I could remember I had watched courting male birds fight all over the farm.
After a couple had paired, and were nest building, the father always drove every other bird
from his location. In building I had seen him pecked for trying to place a twig.  I had seen
that happen again for merely offering food to the mother, if she didn't happen to be hungry,
or for trying to make love to her when she was brooding.  If a young bird failed to get the
bite it wanted, it sometimes grabbed one of its nestmates by the bill, or the eye even, and
tried to swallow it whole.  Always the oldest and strongest climbed on top of the youngest
and fooled his mammy into feeding him most by having his head highest, his mouth widest, and
begging loudest.  There could be no mistake.  I was so amazed I forgot the blow, as I stared
at the fool woman.

"I don't see why you slap me!" I cried.  "It's the truth!  Lots of times old birds pull out
bunches of feathers fighting, and young ones in the nests bite each other until they squeal."

Miss Amelia caught my shoulders and shook me as hard as she could; and she proved to be stronger
than you ever would have thought to look at her.

"Take your seat!" she cried.  "You are a rude, untrained child!"

"They do fight!" I insisted, as I held my head high and walked to my desk.

Leon laughed out loud, and that made everyone else.  Miss Amelia had so much to do for a few
minutes that she forgot me, and I know now why Leon started it, at least partly.  He said afterward
it was the funniest sight he ever saw.  My cheek smarted and burned.  I could scarcely keep
from feeling to learn whether it were swelling, but I wouldn't have shed a tear or raised my
hand for anything you could offer.

Recess was coming and I didn't know what to do.  If I went to the playground, all of them would
tease me; and if I sat at my desk Miss Amelia would have another chance at me.  That was too
much to risk, so I followed the others outdoors, and oh joy! there came Laddie down the road.
He set me on one of the posts of the hitching rack before the church, and with my arms around
his neck, I sobbed out the whole story.

"She didn't understand," said Laddie quietly.  "You stay here until I come back.  I'll go explain
to her about the birds.  Perhaps she hasn't watched them as closely as you have."

Recess was over before he returned.  He had wet his handkerchief at the water bucket, and now
he bathed my face and eyes, straightened my hair with his pocket comb, and began unlacing my shoes.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.  "I must wear them.  All the girls do.  Only the boys
are barefoot."

"You are excused," answered Laddie.  "Three-fourths of the day is enough to begin on.  Miss
Amelia says you may come with me."

"Where are you going?"

Laddie was stripping off my stockings as he looked into my eyes, and smiled a peculiar little
smile.

"Oh Laddie!" I cried.  "Will you take me?  Honest!"

He laughed again and then he rubbed my feet.

"Poor abused feet," he said.  "Sometimes I wish shoes had never been invented."

"They feel pretty good when there's ice."

"So they do!" said Laddie.

He swung me to the ground, and we crossed the road, climbed the fence, and in a minute our
redbird swamp shut the schoolhouse and cross old Miss Amelia from sight.  Then we turned and
started straight toward our Big Woods.  I could scarcely keep on the ground.

"How are the others getting along?" asked Laddie.

"She's cross as two sticks," I told him.  "Johnny Hood hasn't shot one paper wad, and Leon
hadn't done a thing until he laughed about the birds, and I guess he did that to make her forget
me."

"Good!" cried Laddie.  "I didn't suppose the boy thought that far."

"Oh, you never can tell by looking at him, how far Leon is thinking," I said.

"That's so, too," said Laddie.  "Are your feet comfortable now?"

"Yes, but Laddie, isn't my face marked?"

"I'm afraid it is a little," said Laddie.  "We'll bathe it again at the creek.  We must get
it fixed so mother won't notice."

"What will the Princess think?"

"That you fell, perhaps," said Laddie.

"Do the tears show?"

"Not at all.  We washed them all away."

"Did I do wrong, Laddie?"

"Yes, I think you did."

"But it wasn't true, what she said."

"That's not the point."

We had reached the fence of the Big Woods.  He lifted me to the top rail and explained, while
I combed his waving hair with my fingers.

"She didn't strike you because what you said was not so, for it was. She knew instantly you
were right, if she knows anything at all about outdoors.  This is what made her angry: it is
her first day.  She wanted to make a good impression on her pupils, to arouse their interest,
and awaken their respect.  When you spoke, all of them knew you were right, and she was wrong;
that made her ridiculous.  Can't you see how it made her look and feel?"

"I didn't notice how she looked, but from the way she hit me, you could tell she felt bad enough."

"She surely did," said Laddie, kissing my cheek softly.  "Poor little woman!  What a world
of things you have to learn!"

"Shouldn't I have told her how mistaken she was?"

"If you had gone to her alone, at recess or noon, or to-night, probably she would have thanked
you.  Then she could have corrected herself at some convenient time and kept her dignity."

"Must I ask her pardon?"

"What you should do, is to put yourself in Miss Amelia's place and try to understand how she
felt.  Then if you think you wouldn't have liked any one to do to you what you did to her,
you'll know."

I hugged Laddie tight and thought fast--there was no need to think long to see how it was.

"I got to tell her I was wrong," I said.  "Now let's go to the Enchanted Wood and see if we
can find the Queen's daughter."

"All right!" said Laddie.

He leaped the fence, swung me over, and started toward the pawpaw thicket.  He didn't do much
going around.  He crashed through and over; and soon he began whistling the loveliest little
dancy tune.  It made your head whirl, and your toes tingle, and you knew it was singing that
way in his heart, and he was just letting out the music.  That was why it made you want to
dance and whirl; it was so alive.  But that wasn't the way in an Enchanted Wood.  I pulled
his hand.

"Laddie!" I cautioned, "keep in the path!  You'll step on the Fairies and crush a whole band
with one foot.  No wonder the Queen makes her daughter grow big when she sends her to you.
If you make so much noise, some one will hear you, then this won't be a secret any more."

Laddie laughed, but he stepped carefully in the path after that, and he said:  "There are times,
Little Sister, when I don't care whether this secret is secret another minute or not.  Secrets
don't agree with me. I'm too big, and broad, and too much of a man, to go creeping through
the woods with a secret.  I prefer to print it on a banner and ride up the road waving it." I said.

"That would be 'a banner with a strange device,'" laughest Laddie. "But, yes--something like!"

"Have you told the Princess?"

"I have!" Laddie fairly shouted it.

"Docs SHE like secrets?"

"No more than I do!"

"Then why----?"

"There you go!" said Laddie.  "Zeus, but the woman is beginning to measle out all over you!
You know as well as any one that there's something wrong at her house.  I don't know what it
is; I can't even make a sensible guess as yet, but it's worse than the neighbours think. It's
a thing that has driven a family from their home country, under a name that I have doubts about
being theirs, and sent them across an ocean, 'strangers in a strange land,' as it says in the
Bible.  It's something that keeps a cultured gentleman and scholar raging up and down the roads
and over the country like a madman.  It shuts a white-faced, lovely, little woman from her
neighbours, but I have passed her walking the road at night with both hands pressed against
her heart.  Sometimes it tries the Princess past endurance and control; and it has her so worn
and tired struggling with it that she is willing to carry another secret, rather than try to
find strength to do anything that would make more trouble for her father and mother."

"Would it trouble them for her to know you, Laddie?"

"So long as they don't and won't become acquainted with me, or any one, of course it would."

"Can't you force them to know you?"

"That I can!" said Laddie.  "But you see, I only met the Princess a short time ago, and there
would be no use in raising trouble, unless she will make me her Knight!"

"But hasn't she, Laddie?"

"Not in the very littlest least," said Laddie.  "For all I know, she is merely using me to
help pass a lonely hour.  You see, people reared in England have ideas of class, that two or
three generations spent here wash out.  The Princess and her family are of the unwashed British.
Father's people have been here long enough to judge a man on his own merits."

"You mean the Princess' family would think you're not good enough to be her Knight?"

"Exactly!"

"And we know that our family thinks they are infidels, and wicked people; and that if she would
have you, mother would be sick in bed over it.  Oh Laddie!"

"Precisely!"

"What are you going to do?"

"That I must find out."

"When it will make so much trouble, why not forget her, and go on like you did before she came?
Then, all of us were happy.  Now, it makes me shiver to think what will happen."

"Me too," said Laddie.  "But look here, Little Sister, right in my face.  Will you ever forget
the Princess?"

"Never!"

"Then how can you ask me to?"

"I didn't mean forget her, exactly.  I meant not come here and do things that will make every
one unhappy."

"One minute, Chick-a-Biddy," said Laddie.  Sometimes he called me that, when he loved me the
very most of all.  I don't believe any one except me ever heard him do it.  "Let me ask you
this: does our father love our mother?"

"Love her?" I cried.  "Why he just loves her to death!  He turns so white, and he suffers so,
when her pain is the worst.  Love her?  And she him?  Why, don't you remember the other day
when he tipped her head against him and kissed her throat as he left the table; that he asked
her if she 'loved him yet,' and she said right before all of us, 'Why Paul, I love you, until
I scarcely can keep my fingers off you!' Laddie, is it like that with you and the Princess?"

"It is with me," said Laddie.  "Not with the Princess!  Now, can I forget her?  Can I keep
away from even the chance to pass her on the road?"

"No," I said.  "No, you can't, Laddie.  But can you ever make her love you?"

"It takes time to find that out," said Laddie.  "I have got to try; so you be a woman and keep
my secret a little while longer, until I find a way out, but don't bother your head about it!"

"I can't help bothering my head, Laddie.  Can't you make her understand that God is not a myth?"

"I'm none too sure what I believe myself," said Laddie.  "Not that there is no God--I don't
mean that--but I surely don't believe all father's teachings."

"If you believe God, do other little things matter, Laddie?"

"I think not," said Laddie, "else Heaven would be all Methodists.  As for the Princess, all
she has heard in her life has been against there being a God.  Now, she is learning something
on the other side.  After a while she can judge for herself.  It is for us, who profess to
be a Christian family, to prove to her why we believe in God, and what He does for us."

"Well, she would think He could do a good deal, if she knew how mother hated asking her to
come to our house; and yet she did it, beautifully too, just to give her a chance to see that
very thing.  But I almost made her do it.  I don't believe she ever would alone, Laddie, or
at least not for a long time yet."

"I saw that, and understood it perfectly," said Laddie.  "Thank you, Little Sister."  He picked
me up and hugged me tight.  "If I could only make you see!"

"But Laddie, I do!  I'm not a baby!  I know how people love and make homes for themselves,
like Sally and Peter are going to.  If it is with you about the Princess as it is with father
and mother, why I do know."

"All right!  Here we are!" said Laddie.

He parted the willows and we stepped on the Magic Carpet, and that minute the Magic worked.
I forgot every awful, solemn, troublous thing we had been talking about, and looked around
while Laddie knelt and hunted for a letter, and there was none.  That meant the Princess was
coming, so we sat on the throne to wait.  We hadn't remembered to bathe my cheek, we had been
so busy when we passed the water, and I doubt if we were thinking much then.  We just waited.
The willow walls waved gently, the moss carpet was spotted with little gold patches of sunlight,
in the shade a few of the red flowers still bloomed, and big, lazy bumblebees hummed around
them, or a hummingbird stood on air before them.  A sort of golden throbbing filled the woods,
and my heart began to leap, why, I don't know; but I'm sure Laddie's did too, for I looked
at him and his eyes were shining as I never had seen them before, while his cheeks were a little
red, and he was breathing like when you've been running; then suddenly his body grew tense
against mine, and that meant she was coming.

Like that first day, she came slowly through the woods, stopping here and there to touch the
trunk of a tree, put back a branch, or bend over a flower face.  Brown as the wood floor was
her dress, and cardinal flowers blazed on her breast, and the same colour showed on her cheeks
and lips.  Her eyes were like Laddie's for brightness, and she was breathing the same way.
I thought sure there was going to be something to remember a lifetime--I was so excited I couldn't
stand still. Before it could happen Laddie went and said it was a "beautiful day," and she
said "it didn't show in the woods, but the pastures needed rain."  Then she kissed me.  Well
if I ever!  I sank on the throne and sat there.  They went on talking like that, until it was
too dull to bear, so I slipped out and wandered away to see what I could find. When I grew
tired and went back, Laddie was sitting on the Magic Carpet with his back against the beech,
and the Princess was on the throne reading from a little book, reading such interesting things
that I decided to listen.  After a while she came to this:

  "Thou are mated with a clown,
  And the grossness of his nature, will have weight to bear thee
      down."

Laddie threw back his head, and how he laughed!  The Princess put down the book and looked
at him so surprised.

"Are you reading that to me because you think it appropriate?" asked Laddie.

"I am reading it because it is conceded to be one of the most beautiful poems ever written,"
said the Princess.

"You knew when you began that you would come to those lines."

"I never even thought of such a thing."

"But you knew that is how your father would regard any relationship, friendly or deeper, with me!"

"I cannot possibly be held responsible for what my father thinks."

"It is natural that you should think alike."

"Not necessarily!  You told me recently that you didn't agree with your father on many subjects."

"Kindly answer me this," said Laddie:  "Do you feel that I'm a 'clown' because I'm not schooled
to the point on all questions of good manners? Do you find me gross because I plow and sow?"

"You surprise me," said the Princess.  "My consenting to know and to spend a friendly hour
with you here is sufficient answer.  I have not found the slightest fault with your manners.
I have seen no suspicion of 'grossness' about you."

"Will you tell me, frankly, exactly what you do think of me?"

"Surely!  I think you are a clean, decent man, who occasionally kindly consents to put a touch
of human interest into an hour, for a very lonely girl.  What has happened, Laddie?  This is
not like you."

Laddie sat straight and studied the beech branches.  Father said beech trees didn't amount
to much; but I first learned all about them from that one, and what it taught me made me almost
worship them always. There were the big trunk with great rough spreading roots, the bark in
little ridges in places, smooth purple gray between, big lichens for ornament, the low flat
branches, the waxy, wavy-edged leaves, with clear veins, and the delicious nuts in their little
brown burrs.  The Princess and I both stared at the branches and waited while a little breath
of air stirred the leaves, the sunshine flickered, and a cricket sang a sort of lonesome song.

Only he was studying so deeply you could almost feel what was in his mind, and it was not about
the brook at all, even if one ran close. Soon he began talking.

"Not so bad!" he said.  "You might think worse.  I admit the cleanliness, I strive for decency,
I delight in being humanely interesting, even for an hour; you might think worse, much worse!
You might consider me a 'clown.'  'A country clod.'  Rather a lowdown, common thing, a 'clod,'
don't you think?  And a 'clown'!  And 'gross' on top of that!"

"What can you mean?" asked the Princess.

"Since you don't seem to share the estimate of me, I believe I'll tell you," said Laddie. 
"The other day I was driving from the gravel pit with a very heavy load.  The road was wide
and level on either side.  A man came toward me on horseback.  Now the law of the road is to
give half to a vehicle similar to the one you are driving, but to keep all of it when you are
heavily loaded, if you are passing people afoot or horseback.  The man took half the road,
and kept it until the nose of his horse touched one of the team I was driving.  I stopped and
said: 'Good morning, sir!  Do you wish to speak with me?'  He called angrily: 'Get out of my
way, you clod!'  'Sorry sir, but I can't,' I said.  'The law gives me this road when I am heavily
loaded, and you are on foot or horseback.'"

"What did he do?" asked the Princess.

And from the way she looked I just knew she guessed the man was the same one I thought of.

"He raised his whip to strike my horse," said Laddie.

"Ah, surely!" said the Princess.  "Always an arm raised to strike.  And you, Man?  What did
you do?" she cried eagerly.

"I stood on my load, suddenly," said Laddie, "and I called: 'Hold one minute!'"

"And he?" breathed the Princess.

"Something made him pause with his arm still raised.  I said to him: 'You must not strike my
horse.  It never has been struck, and it can't defend itself.  If you want to come a few steps
farther and tackle me, come ahead!  I can take it or return it, as I choose.'"

"Go on!" said the Princess.

"That's all," said Laddie, "or at least almost all."

"Did he strike?"

"He did not.  He stared at me a second, and then he rode around me; but he was making forceful
remarks as he passed about 'country clods,' and there was an interesting one about a 'gross
clown.'  What you read made me think of it, that is all."

The Princess stared into the beech branches for a time and then she said:  "I will ask your
pardon for him.  He always had a domineering temper, and trouble he had lately has almost driven
him mad; he is scarcely responsible at times.  I hesitate about making him angry."

"I think perhaps," said Laddie, "I would have done myself credit if I had recognized that,
and given him the road, when he made a point of claiming it."

"Indeed no!" cried the Princess.  "To be beaten at the game he started was exactly what he
needed.  If you had turned from his way, he would have considered you a clod all his life.
Since you made him go around, it may possibly dawn on him that you are a man.  You did the
very best thing."

Then she began to laugh, and how she did laugh.

"I would give my allowance for a quarter to have seen it," she cried. "I must hurry home and
tell mother."

"Does your mother know about me?" he demanded.  "Does she know that you come here?"

The Princess arose and stood very tall and straight.

"You may beg my pardon or cease to know me," she said.  "Whatever led you to suppose that I
would know or meet you without my mother's knowledge?"

Then she started toward the entrance.

"One minute!" cried Laddie.

A leap carried him to her side.  He caught her hands and held them tight, and looked straight
into her eyes.  Then he kissed her hands over and over.  I thought from the look on her face
he might have kissed her cheek if he had dared risk it; but he didn't seem to notice. Then
she stooped and kissed me, and turned toward home, while Laddie and I crossed the woods to
the west road, and went back past the schoolhouse.  I was so tired Laddie tied the strings
together and hung my shoes across his shoulders and took me by the arm the last mile.

All of them were at home when we got there, and Miss Amelia came to the gate to meet us.  She
was mealy-mouthed and good as pie, not at all as I had supposed she would be.  I wonder what
Laddie said to her.  But then he always could manage things for every one.  That set me to
wondering if by any possible means he could fix them for himself.  I climbed to the catalpa
to think, and the more I thought, the more I feared he couldn't; but still mother always says
one never can tell until they try, and I knew he would try with every ounce of brain and muscle
in him.  I sat there until the supper bell rang, and then I washed and reached the table last.
The very first thing, mother asked how I bruised my face, and before I could think what to
tell her, Leon said just as careless like:  "Oh she must have run against something hard, playing
tag at recess."  Laddie began talking about Peter coming that night, and every one forgot me,
but pretty soon I slipped a glance at Miss Amelia, and saw that her face was redder than mine.

The next morning Miss Amelia finished the chapter--that made two for our family.  Father always
read one before breakfast--no wonder I knew the Bible quite well--then we sang a song, and
she made a stiff, little prayer.  I had my doubts about her prayers; she was on no such terms
with the Lord as my father.  He got right at Him and talked like a doctor, and you felt he
had some influence, and there was at least a possibility that he might get what he asked for;
but Miss Amelia prayed as if the Lord were ten million miles away, and she would be surprised
to pieces if she got anything she wanted.  When she asked the Almighty to make us good, obedient
children, there was not a word she said that showed she trusted either the Lord or us, or thought
there was anything between us and heaven that might make us good because we wanted to be. You
couldn't keep your eyes from the big gad and ruler on her desk; she often fingered them as
she prayed, and you knew from her stiff, little, sawed-out petition that her faith was in implements,
and she'd hit you a crack the minute she was the least angry, same as she had me the day before.
I didn't feel any too good toward her, but when the blood of the Crusaders was in the veins,
right must be done even if it took a struggle.  I had to live up to those little gold shells
on the trinket. Father said they knew I was coming down the line, so they put on a bird for
me; but I told him I would be worthy of the shells too.  This took about as hard a fight for
me as any Crusade would for a big, trained soldier.  I had been wrong, Laddie had made me see
that.  So I held up my hand, and Miss Amelia saw me as she picked up Ray's arithmetic.

"What is it?"

I held to the desk to brace myself, and tried twice before I could raise my voice so that she
heard.

"Please, Miss Amelia," I said, "I was wrong about the birds yesterday. Not that they don't
fight--they do!  But I was wrong to contradict you before every one, and on your first day,
and if you'll only excuse me, the next time you make a mistake, I'll tell you after school
or at recess."

The room was so still you could hear the others breathing.  Miss Amelia picked up the ruler
and started toward me.  Possibly I raised my hands. That would be no Crusader way, but you
might do it before you had time to think, when the ruler was big and your head was the only
place that would be hit.  The last glimpse I had of her in the midst of all my trouble made
me think of Sabethany Perkins.

Sabethany died, and they buried her at the foot of the hill in our graveyard before I could
remember.  But her people thought heaps of her, and spent much money on the biggest tombstone
in the cemetery, and planted pinies and purple phlox on her, and went every Sunday to visit
her.  When they moved away, they missed her so, they decided to come back and take her along.
The men were at work, and Leon and I went to see what was going on.  They told us, and said
we had better go away, because possibly things might happen that children would sleep better
not to see.  Strange how a thing like that makes you bound you will see.  We went and sat on
the fence and waited.  Soon they reached Sabethany, but they could not seem to get her out.
They tried, and tried, and at last they sent for more men.  It took nine of them to bring her
to the surface.  What little wood was left, they laid back to see what made her so fearfully
heavy, and there she was turned to solid stone.  They couldn't chip a piece off her with the
shovel.  Mother always said, "For goodness sake, don't let your mouth hang open," and as a
rule we kept ours shut; but you should have seen Leon's when he saw Sabethany wouldn't chip
off, and no doubt mine was as bad.

"When Gabriel blows his trumpet, and the dead arise and come forth, what on earth will they
do with Sabethany?" I gasped.  "Why, she couldn't fly to Heaven with wings a mile wide, and
what use could they make of her if she got there?"

"I can't see a thing she'd be good for except a hitching post," said Leon, "and I guess they
don't let horses in.  Let's go home."

He acted sick and I felt that way; so we went, but the last glimpse of Sabethany remained with me.

As my head went down that day, I saw that Miss Amelia looked exactly like her.  You would have
needed a pick-ax or a crowbar to flake off even a tiny speck of her.  When I had waited for
my head to be cracked, until I had time to remember that a Crusader didn't dodge and hide,
I looked up, and there she stood with the ruler lifted; but now she had turned just the shade
of the wattles on our fightingest turkey gobbler.

"Won't you please forgive me?"

I never knew I had said it until I heard it, and then the only way to be sure was because no
one else would have been likely to speak at that time.

Miss Amelia's arm dropped and she glared at me.  I wondered whether I ever would understand
grown people; I doubted if they understood themselves, for after turning to stone in a second--father
said it had taken Sabethany seven years--and changing to gobbler red, Miss Amelia suddenly
began to laugh.  To laugh, of all things!  And then, of course, every one else just yelled.
I was so mortified I dropped my head again and began to cry as I never would if she'd hit me.

"Don't feel badly!" said Miss Amelia.  "Certainly, I'll forgive you.  I see you had no intention
of giving offense, so none is taken.  Get out your book and study hard on another lesson."

That was surprising.  I supposed I'd have to do the same one over, but I might take a new one.
I was either getting along fast, or Miss Amelia had her fill of birds.  I wiped my eyes as
straight in front of me as I could slip up my handkerchief, and began studying the first lesson
in my reader:  "Pretty bee, pray tell me why, thus from flower to flower you fly, culling sweets
the livelong day, never leaving off to play?"  That was a poetry piece, and it was quite cheery,
although it was all strung together like prose, but you couldn't fool me on poetry; I knew
it every time.  As I studied I felt better, and when Miss Amelia came to hear me she was good
as gold.  She asked if I liked honey, and I started to tell her about the queen bee, but she
had no time to listen, so she said I should wait until after school.  Then we both forgot it,
for when we reached home, the Princess' horse was hitched to our rack, and I fairly ran in,
I was so anxious to know what was happening.

I was just perfectly amazed at grown people!  After all the things our folks had said!  You'd
have supposed that Laddie would have been locked in the barn; father reading the thirty second
Psalm to the Princess, and mother on her knees asking God to open her eyes like Saul's when
he tried to kick against the pricks, and make her to see, as he did, that God was not a myth,
Well, there was no one in the sitting-room or the parlour, but there were voices farther on;
so I slipped in.  I really had to slip, for there was no other place they could be except the
parlour bedroom, and Sally's wedding things were locked up there, and we were not to see until
everything was finished, like I told you.

Well, this was what I saw: our bedroom had been a porch once, and when we had been crowded
on account of all of us coming, father enclosed it and made a room.  But he never had taken
out the window in the wall. So all I had to do when I wanted to know how fast the dresses were
being made, was to shove up the window above my bed, push back the blind, and look in.  I didn't
care what she had.  I just wanted to get ahead of her and see before she was ready, to pay
her for beating me. I knew what she had, and I meant to tell her, and walk away with my nose
in the air when she offered to show me; but this was different.  I was wild to see what was
going on because the Princess was there.  The room was small, and the big cherry four-poster
was very large, and all of them were talking, so no one paid the slightest attention to me.

Mother sat in the big rocking chair, with Sally on one of its arms, leaning against her shoulder.
Shelley and May and the sewing woman were crowded between the wall and the footboard, and the
others lined against the wall.  The bed was heaped in a tumble of everything a woman ever wore.
Seemed to me there was more stuff there than all the rest of us had, put together.  The working
dresses and aprons had been made on the machine, but there were heaps and stacks of hand-made
underclothes.  I could see the lovely chemise mother embroidered lying on top of a pile of
bedding, and over and over Sally had said that every stitch in the wedding gown must be taken
by hand.  The Princess stood beside the bed.  A funny little tight hat like a man's and a riding
whip lay on a chair close by.  I couldn't see what she wore--her usual riding clothes probably--for
she had a nip in each shoulder of a dress she was holding to her chin and looking down at.
After all, I hadn't seen everything!  Never before or since have I seen a lovelier dress than
that.  It was what always had been wrapped in the sheet on the foot of the bed and I hadn't
got a peep at it.  The pale green silk with tiny pink moss roses in it, that I had been thinking
was the wedding dress, looked about right to wash the dishes in, compared with this.

This was a wedding dress.  You didn't need any one to tell you.  The Princess had as much red
as I ever had seen in her cheeks, her eyes were bright, and she was half-laughing and half-crying.

"Oh you lucky, lucky girl!" she was saying.  "What a perfectly beautiful bride you will be!
Never have I seen a more wonderful dress! Where did you get the material?"

Now we had been trained always to wait for mother to answer a visitor as she thought suitable,
or at least to speak one at a time and not interrupt; but about six of those grown people told
the Princess all at the same time how our oldest sister Elizabeth was married to a merchant
who had a store at Westchester and how he got the dress in New York, and gave it to Sally for
her wedding present, or she never could have had it.

The Princess lifted it and set it down softly.  "Oh look!" she cried. "Look!  It will stand alone!"

There it stood!  Silk stiff enough to stand by itself, made into a little round waist, cut
with a round neck and sleeves elbow length and flowing almost to where Sally's knees would
come.  It was a pale pearl-gray silk crossed in bars four inches square, made up of a dim yellow
line almost as wide as a wheat straw, with a thread of black on each side of it, and all over,
very wide apart, were little faint splashes of black as if they had been lightly painted on.
The skirt was so wide it almost filled the room.  Every inch of that dress was lined with soft,
white silk.  There was exquisite lace made into a flat collar around the neck, and ruffled
from sight up the inside of the wide sleeves.  That was the beginning.  The finish was something
you never saw anything like before.  It was a trimming made of white and yellow beads.  There
was a little heading of white beads sewed into a pattern, then a lacy fringe that was pale
yellow beads, white inside, each an inch long, that dangled, and every bead ended with three
tiny white ones.  That went around the neck, the outside of the sleeves, and in a pattern like
a big letter V all the way around the skirt.  And there it stood--alone!

The Princess, graceful as a bird and glowing like fire, danced around it, and touched it, and
lifted the sleeves, and made the bead fringe swing, and laughed, and talked every second. 
Sally, and mother, and all of them had smiled such wide smiles for so long, their faces looked
almost as set as Sabethany's, but of course far different.  Being dead was one thing, getting
ready for a wedding another.

And it looked too as if God might be a myth, for all they cared, so long as the Princess could
make the wedding dress stand alone, and talk a blue streak of things that pleased them.  It
was not put on either, for there stood the dress, shimmering like the inside of a pearl-lined
shell, white as a lily, and the tinkly gold fringe.  No one COULD have said enough about it,
so no matter what the Princess said, it had to be all right.  She kept straight on showing
all of them how lovely it was, exactly as if they hadn't seen it before, and she had to make
them understand about it, as if she felt afraid they might have missed some elegant touch she
had seen.

"Do look how the lace falls when I raise this sleeve!  Oh how will you wear this and think
of a man enough to say the right words in the right place?"

Mother laughed, and so did all of them.

"Do please show me the rest," begged the Princess.  "I know there are slippers and a bonnet!"

Sally just oozed pride.  She untied the strings and pushed the prettiest striped bag from a
lovely pink bandbox and took out a dear little gray bonnet with white ribbons, and the yellow
bead fringe, and a bunch of white roses with a few green leaves.  These she touched softly,
"I'm not quite sure about the leaves," she said.

The Princess had the bonnet, turning and tilting it.

"Perfect!" she cried.  "Quite perfect!  You need that touch of colour, and it blends with everything.
How I envy you!  Oh why doesn't some one ask me, so I can have things like these?  I think
your brother is a genius.  I'm going to ride to Westchester tomorrow and give him an order
to fill for me the next time he goes to the city.  No one shows me such fabrics when I go,
and Aunt Beatrice sends nothing from London I like nearly so well.  Oh!  Oh!"

She was on her knees now, lifting the skirt to set under little white satin slippers with gold
buckles, and white bead buttons.  When she had them arranged to suit her, she sat on the floor
and kept straight on saying the things my mother and sisters seemed crazy to hear.  When Sally
showed her the long white silk mitts that went with the bonnet, the Princess cried:  "Oh do
ride home with me and let me give you a handkerchief Aunt Beatrice sent me, to carry in your hand!"

Then her face flushed and she added without giving Sally time to say what she would do:  "Or
I can bring it the next time I come past.  It belongs with these things and I have no use for
it.  May I?"

"Please do!  I'll use it for the thing I borrow."

"But I mean it to be a gift," said the Princess.  "It was made to go with these lace mitts
and satin slippers.  You must take it!"

"Thank you very much," said Sally.  "If you really want me to have it, of course I'd love to."

"I'll bring it to-morrow," promised the Princess.  "And I wish you'd let me try a way I know
to dress hair for a wedding.  Yours is so beautiful."

"You're kind, I'm sure," said Sally.  "I had intended to wear it as I always do, so I would
appear perfectly natural to the folks; but if you know a more becoming way, I could begin it
now, and they would be familiar with it by that time."

"I shan't touch it," said the Princess, studying Sally's face.  "Your idea is right.  You don't
want to commence any new, unfamiliar style that would make you seem different, just at a time
when every one should see how lovely you are, as you always have been.  But don't forget to
wear something blue, and something borrowed for luck, and oh do please put on one of my garters!"

"Well for mercy sake!" cried my mother.  "Why?"

"So some one will propose to me before the year is out," laughed the Princess.  "I think it
must be the most fun of all, to make beautiful things for your very own home, and lovely dresses,
and be surrounded by friends all eager to help you, and to arrange a house and live with a
man you love well enough to marry, and fix for little people who might come----"

"You know perfectly there isn't a single man in the county who wouldn't propose to you, if
you'd let him come within a mile of you," said Shelley.

"When the right man comes I'll go half the mile to meet him? you may be sure of that; won't
I, Mrs. Stanton?" the Princess turned to mother.

"I have known girls who went even farther," said my mother rather dryly.

"I draw the line at half," laughed the Princess.  "Now I must go; I have been so long my people
will be wondering what I'm doing."

Standing in the middle of the room she put on her hat, picked up her whip and gloves, and led
the way to the hitching rack, while all of us followed.  At the gate stood Laddie as he had
come from the field.  His old hat was on the back of his head, his face flushed, his collar
loosened so that his strong white neck showed, and his sleeves were rolled to the elbow, as
they had been all summer, and his arms were burned almost to blisters.  When he heard us coming
he opened the gate, went to the rack, untied the Princess' horse and led it beside the mounting
block.  As she came toward him, he took off his hat and pitched it over the fence on the grass.

"Miss Pryor, allow me to make you acquainted with my son," said mother.

I felt as if I would blow up.  I couldn't keep my eyes from turning toward the Princess.  Gee!
I could have saved my feelings.  She made mother the prettiest little courtsey I ever set eyes
on, and then turned and made a deeper one to Laddie.

"I met your son in one of the village stores some time ago," she said. "Back her one step farther,
please!"

Laddie backed the horse, and quicker than you could see how it was done, she flashed up the
steps and sat the saddle; but as she leaned over the horse's neck to take the rein from Laddie,
he got one level look straight in the eyes that I was sure none of the others saw, because
they were not watching for it, and I was.  Laddie bowed from the waist, and put the reins in
her fingers all in one movement.  He caught the glance she gave him too; I could almost feel
it like a band passing between them.  Then she called a laughing good-bye to all of us at once,
and showed us how to ride right, as she flashed toward the Little Hill.  That was riding, you
may believe, and mother sighed as she watched her.

"If I were a girl again," she said, "I would ride as well as that, or I'd never mount a horse."

"She's been trained from her cradle, and her father deals in horses. Half the battle in riding
is a thoroughbred," said Laddie.  "No such horse as that ever stepped these roads before."

"And no such girl ever travelled them," said my mother, folding her hands one over the other
on top of a post of the hitching rack.  "I must say I don't know how this is coming out, and
it troubles me."

"Why, what's up?" asked Laddie, covering her hands with his and looking her in the eyes.

"Just this," said my mother.  "She's more beautiful of face and form than God ought to allow
any woman to be, in mercy to the men who will be forced to meet her.  Her speech is highly
cultured.  Her manners are perfect, and that is a big and unusual thing in a girl of her age.
Every word she said, every move she made to-day, was exactly as I would have been proud to
hear, and to see a daughter of mine speak and move. If I had only myself to consider, I would
make her my friend, because I'm seasoned in the ways of the world, and she could influence
me only as I chose to allow her.  With you youngsters it is different.  You'll find her captivating,
and you may let her ways sway you without even knowing it.  All these outward things are not
essential; they are pleasing, I grant, but they have nothing to do with the one big, elemental
fact that a Godless life is not even half a life.  I never yet have known any man or woman
who attempted it who did not waste life's grandest opportunities, and then come crawling and
defeated to the foot of the cross in the end, asking God's mercy where none was deserved or
earned.  It seems to me a craven way.  I know all about the forgiveness on the cross!  I know
God is big enough and merciful enough to accept even death-bed repentance, but what is that
to compare with laying out your course and running it a lifetime without swerving?  I detest
and distrust this infidel business.  I want no child of mine under its influence, or in contact
with it."

"But when your time comes, if you said just those things to hers and won her, what a triumph,
little mother!"

"'If!'" answered mother.  "That's always the trouble!  One can't be sure!  'If' I knew I could
accomplish that, I would get on my knees and wrestle with the Lord for the salvation of the
soul of a girl like that, not to mention her poor, housebound mother, and that man with the
unhappiest face I ever have seen, her father.  It's worth trying, but suppose I try and fail,
and at the same time find that in bringing her among us she has influenced some of mine to
the loss of their immortal souls then, what will I have done?"

"Mother," said Laddie; "mother, have you such a poor opinion of the things you and father have
taught us, and the lives you've lived before us, that you're really afraid of a slip of a girl,
almost a stranger?"

"The most attractive girl I ever have seen, and mighty willing to be no longer a stranger, Lad."

"Well, I can't promise for the others," said Laddie, "but for myself I will give you my word
of honour that I won't be influenced the breadth of one hair by her, in a doctrinal way."

"Humph!" said my mother.  "And it is for you I fear.  If a young man is given the slightest
encouragement by a girl like that, even his God can't always hold him; and you never have made
a confession of faith, Laddie.  It is you she will be most likely to captivate."

"If you think I have any chance, I'll go straight over and ask her father for her this very
evening," said Laddie, and even mother laughed; then all of us started to the house, for it
was almost supper time.  I got ready and thought I'd take one more peep at the dress before
Sally pinned it in the sheet again, and when I went back, there all huddled in a bunch before
it stood Miss Amelia, the tears running down her cheeks.

"Did Sally say you might come here?" I asked.

"No," said Miss Amelia, "but I've been so crazy to see I just slipped in to take a peep when
I noticed the open door.  I'll go this minute. Please don't tell her."

I didn't say what I would do, but I didn't intend to.

"What are you crying about?" I inquired.

"Ah, I too have known love," sobbed Miss Amelia.  "Once I made a wedding dress, and expected
to be a happy bride."

"Well, wasn't you?" I asked, and knew at once it was a silly question, for of course she would
not be a miss, if she had not missed marrying.

"He died!" sobbed Miss Amelia.

If he could have seen her then, I believe he'd have been glad of it; but maybe he looked as
bony and dejected as she did before he went; and he may have turned to stone afterward, as
sometimes happens.  Right then I heard Sally coming, so I grabbed Miss Amelia and dragged her
under the fourposter, where I always hid when caught doing something I shouldn't.  But Sally
had so much stuff she couldn't keep all of it on the bed, and when she stooped and lifted the
ruffle to shove a box under, she pushed it right against us, and knelt to look, and there we were.

"Well upon my soul!" she cried, and sat flat on the floor, holding the ruffle, peering in.
"Miss Amelia!  And in tears!  Whatever is the trouble?"

Miss Amelia's face was redder than any crying ever made it, and I saw she wanted to kill me
for getting her into such a fix, and if she became too angry probably she'd take it out on
me in school the next day, so I thought I'd better keep her at work shedding tears.

"'HE DIED!'"  I told Sally as pathetically as ever I could.

Sally dropped the ruffle instantly, but I saw her knees shake against the floor.  After a while
she lifted the curtain and offered Miss Amelia her hand.

"I was leaving my dress to show you before putting it away," she said.

I didn't believe it; but that was what she said.  Maybe it was an impulse.  Mother always said
Sally was a creature of impulse.  When she took off her flannel petticoat and gave it to poor
little half-frozen Annie Hasty, that was a good impulse, but it sent Sally to bed for a week.
And when she threw a shovel of coals on Bill Ramsdell's dog, because Bill was a shiftless lout,
and the dog was so starved it all the time came over and sucked our eggs, that was a bad impulse,
because it didn't do Bill a particle of good, and it hurt the dog, which would have been glad
to suck eggs at home, no doubt, if Bill hadn't been too worthless to keep hens.

That was a good impulse she had then, for she asked Miss Amelia to help her straighten the
room, and of course that meant to fold and put away wedding things.  Any woman would have been
wild to do that.  Then she told Miss Amelia that she was going to ask father to dismiss school
for half a day, and allow her to see the wedding, and she asked her if she would help serve
the breakfast.

Miss Amelia wiped her eyes, and soon laughed and was just beaming.  I would have been willing
to bet my three cents for lead pencils the next time the huckster came, that Sally never thought
of wanting her until that minute; and then she arranged for her to wait on table to keep her
from trying to eat with the wedding party, because Miss Amelia had no pretty clothes for one
thing, and for another, you shouldn't act as if you were hungry out in company, and she ate
every meal as if she were breaking a forty days' fast.  I wondered what her folks cooked at home.

After supper Peter came, and the instant I saw him I thought of something, and it was such
a teasing thought I followed around and watched him harder every minute.  At last he noticed
me, and put his arms around me.

"Well, what is it, Little Sister?" he asked.

I did wish he would quit that.  No one really had a right to call me that, except Laddie. 
Maybe I had to put up with Peter doing it when I was his sister by law, but before, the old
name the preacher baptized on me was good enough for Peter.  I was thinking about that so hard,
I didn't answer, and he asked again.

"I have seen Sally's wedding dress," I told him.

"But that's no reason why you should stare at me."

"That's just exactly the reason," I answered.  "I was trying to see what in the world there
is about you to be worth a dress like that."

Peter laughed and laughed.  At last he said that he was not really worth even a calico dress;
and he was so little worthy of Sally that he would button her shoes, if she would let him.
He got that mixed.  The buttons were on her slippers: her shoes laced.  But it showed a humble
spirit in Peter.  Not that I care for humble spirits.  I am sure the Crusaders didn't have
them.  I don't believe Laddie would lace even the Princess' shoes, at least not to make a steady
business of it.  But maybe Peter and Sally had an agreement to help each other.  She was always
fixing his tie, and straightening his hair.  Maybe that was an impulse, though, and mother
said Sally would get over being so impulsive when she cut her eye teeth.

When they began arranging the house for the wedding, it could be seen that they had been expecting
it, and getting ready for a long time. From all the closets, shelves and chests poured heaps
of new things. First, the walls were cleaned and some of them freshly papered, then the windows
were all washed long before regular housecleaning time, the floors were scrubbed and new carpet
put down.  Mother had some window blinds that Winfield had brought her from New York in the
spring, and she had laid them away; no one knew why, then.  We all knew now.  When mother was
ready to put them up, father had a busy day and couldn't help her, and she was really provoked.
She almost cried about it, when Leon rode in bringing the mail, and said Hannah Dover had some
exactly like ours at her windows, that her son had sent from Illinois.  Father felt badly enough
then, for he always did everything he could to help mother to be first with everything; but
so she wouldn't blame him, he said crosslike that if she had let him put them up when they
came, as he wanted to, she'd have been six months ahead.

When they finally got ready to hang the blinds no one knew how they went.  They were a beautiful
shiny green, plain on one side, and on the other there was a silver border across the bottom
and one pink rose as big as a pie plate.  Mother had neglected to ask Winfield on which side
the rose belonged.  Father said from the way the roll ran, it went inside.  Mother said they
were rolled that way to protect the roses, and that didn't prove anything.  Laddie said he
would jump on a horse and ride round the section, and see how Hannah Dover had hers, and exactly
opposite would be right.  Everyone laughed, but no one thought he meant it.  Mother had father
hold one against the window, and she stepped outside to see if she could tell from there. 
When she came in she said the flower looked mighty pretty, and she guessed that was the way,
so father started hanging them.  He had only two up when Laddie came racing down the Big Hill
bareback, calling for him to stop.

"I tell you that's not right, mother!" he said as he hurried in.

"But I went outside and father held one, and it looked real pretty," said mother.

"One!  Yes!" said Laddie.  "But have you stopped to consider how two rows across the house
are going to look?  Nine big pink roses, with the sun shining on them!  Anything funnier than
Dovers' front I never saw. And look here!"

Laddie picked up a blind.  "See this plain back?  It's double coated like a glaze.  That is
so the sun shining through glass won't fade it. The flowers would be gone in a week.  They
belong inside, mother, sure as you live."

"Then when the blinds are rolled to the middle sash in the daytime no one can see them," wailed
mother, who was wild about pink roses.

"But at night, when they are down, you can put the curtains back enough to let the roses show,
and think how pretty they will look then."

"Laddie is right!" said father, climbing on the barrel to take down the ones he had fixed.

"What do you think, girls?" asked mother.

"I think the Princess is coming down the Little Hill," said Shelley. "Hurry, father!  Take
them down before she sees!  I'm sure they're wrong."

Father got one all right, but tore the corner of the other.  Mother scolded him dreadfully
cross, and he was so flustered he forgot about being on the barrel, so he stepped back the
same as on the floor, and fell crashing.  He might have broken some of his bones, if Laddie
hadn't seen and caught him.

"If you are SURE the flowers go inside, fix one before she comes!" cried mother.

Father stepped too close the edge of the chair, and by that time he didn't know how to hang
anything, so Laddie climbed up and had one nailed before the Princess stopped.  She came to
bring Sally the handkerchief, and it was the loveliest one any of us ever had seen. There was
a little patch in the middle about four inches square, and around it a wide ruffle of dainty
lace.  It was made to carry in a hand covered with white lace mitts, when you were wearing
a wedding gown of silver silk, lined with white.  Of course it wouldn't have been the slightest
use for a funeral or with a cold in your head.  And it had come from across the sea!  From
the minute she took it by a pinch in the middle, Sally carried her head so much higher than
she ever had before, that you could notice the difference.

Laddie went straight on nailing up the blinds, and every one he fixed he let down full length
so the Princess could see the roses were inside; he was so sure he was right.  After she had
talked a few minutes she noticed the blinds going up.  Laddie, in a front window, waved to
her from the barrel.  She laughed and answered with her whip, and then she laughed again.

"Do you know," she said, "there is the funniest thing at Dovers'.  I rode past on the way to
Groveville this morning and they have some blinds like those you are putting up."

"Indeed?" inquired my mother.  "Winfield sent us these from New York in the spring, but I thought
the hot summer sun would fade them, so I saved them until the fall cleaning.  The wedding coming
on makes us a little early but----"

"Well, they may not be exactly the same," said the Princess.  "I only saw from the highway."
She meant road; there were many things she said differently.  "Have yours big pink roses and
silver scrolls inside?"

"Yes," said mother.

The Princess bubbled until it made you think one of those yellow oriole birds had perched on
her saddle.  "That poor woman has gone and put hers up wrong side out.  The effect of all those
big pink roses on her white house front is most amusing.  It looks as if the house were covered
with a particularly gaudy piece of comfort calico.  Only fancy!"

She laughed again and rode away.  Mother came in just gasping.

"Well, for all His mercies, large and small, the Lord be praised!" she cried piously, as she
dropped into the big rocking chair.  "THAT is what I consider escaping by the skin of your teeth!"

Then father and Laddie laughed, and said they thought so too.  When the blinds were up, the
outside looked well, and you should have seen the inside!  The woodwork was enamelled white,
and the wall paper was striped in white and silver.  Every so far on the silver there was a
little pink moss rose having green leaves.  The carpet was plum red and green in wide stripes,
and the lace curtains were freshly washed, snowy, and touched the floor.  The big rocker, the
straight-backed chairs, and the sofa were beautiful red mahogany wood, and the seats shining
haircloth.  If no one happened to be looking, you could sit on a sofa arm, stick your feet
out and shoot off like riding down a haystack; the landing was much better.  On the sofa you
bounced two feet high the first time; one, the second; and a little way the third. On the haystack,
maybe you hit a soft spot, and maybe you struck a rock.  Sometimes if you got smart, and tried
a new place, and your feet caught in a tangle of weeds and stuck, you came up straight, pitched
over, and landed on your head.  THEN if you struck a rock, you were still, quite a while. 
I was once.  But you never dared let mother see you--on the sofa, I mean; she didn't care about
the haystack.

There were pictures in oval black frames having fancy edges, and a whatnot where all our Christmas
and birthday gifts, almost too dainty to handle, were kept.  You fairly held your breath when
you looked at the nest of spun green glass, with the white dove in it, that George Washington
Mitchell gave to Shelley.  Of course a dove's nest was never deep, and round, and green, and
the bird didn't have red eyes and a black bill.  I thought whoever could blow glass as beautifully
as that, might just as easy have made it right while he was at it; but anyway, it was pretty.
There were pitchers, mugs, and vases, almost too delicate to touch, and the cloth-covered box
with braids of hair coiled in wreaths from the heads of the little fever and whooping cough
sisters.

Laddie asked Sally if she and Peter were going to have the ceremony performed while they sat
on the sofa.  Seemed the right place.  They had done all their courting there, even on hot
summer days; but I supposed that was because Sally didn't want to be seen fixing Peter's tie
until she was ready.  She made no bones about it then.  She fixed it whenever she pleased;
likewise he held her hand.  Shelley said that was disgusting, and you wouldn't catch her. 
Leon said he bet a dollar he would; and I said if he knew he'd get beaten as I did, I bet two
dollars he wouldn't tell what he saw.  The mantel was white, with vases of the lovely grasses
that grew beside the stream at the foot of the Big Hill.  Mother gathered the fanciest every
fall, dried them, and dipped them in melted alum coloured with copperas, aniline, and indigo.
Then she took bunches of the colours that went together best and made bouquets for the big
vases.  They were pretty in the daytime, but at night you could watch them sparkle and shimmer
forever.

I always thought the sitting-room was nicer than the parlour.  The woodwork was white enamel
there too, but the bureau and chairs were just cherry and not too precious to use.  They were
every bit as pretty.  The mantel was much larger.  I could stand up in the fireplace, and it
took two men to put on an everyday log, four the Christmas one.  On each side were the book
shelves above, and the linen closets below.  The mantel set between these, and mother always
used the biggest, most gorgeous bouquets there, because she had so much room.  The hearth was
a slab of stone that came far into the room.  We could sit on it and crack nuts, roast apples,
chestnuts, and warm our cider, then sweep all the muss we made into the fire.  The wall paper
was white and pale pink in stripes, and on the pink were little handled baskets filled with
tiny flowers of different colours.  We sewed the rags for the carpet ourselves, and it was
the prettiest thing.  One stripe was wide, all gray, brown, and dull colours, and the other
was pink.  There were green blinds and lace curtains here also, and nice braided rugs that
all of us worked on of winter evenings.  Everything got spicker and spanner each day.

Mother said there was no use in putting down a carpet in a dining-room where you constantly
fed a host, and the boys didn't clean their feet as carefully as they should in winter; but
there were useful rags where they belonged, and in our bedroom opening from it also.  The dining-room
wall paper had a broad stripe of rich cream with pink cabbage roses scattered over it and a
narrow pink stripe, while the woodwork was something perfectly marvellous.  I didn't know what
kind of wood it was, but a man who could turn his hand to anything, painted it.  First, he
put on a pale yellow coat and let it dry.  Then he added wood brown, and while it was wet,
with a coarse toothed comb, a rag, and his fingers, he imitated the grain, the even wood, and
knotholes of dressed lumber, until many a time I found myself staring steadily at a knot to
see if a worm wouldn't really come working out.  You have to see a thing like that to understand
how wonderful it is.  You couldn't see why they washed the bedding, and took the feathers from
the pillows and steamed them in mosquito netting bags and dried them in the shade, when Sally's
was to be a morning wedding, but they did.  I even had to take a bucket and gather from around
the walls all the little heaps of rocks and shells that Uncle Abraham had sent mother from
California, take them out and wash and wipe them, and stack them back, with the fanciest ones
on top.  He sent her a ring made of gold he dug himself. She always kept the ring in a bottle
in her bureau, and she meant to wear it at the wedding, with her new silk dress.  I had a new
dress too.  I don't know how they got everything done.  All of them worked, until the last
few days they were perfect cross patches.

When they couldn't find another thing indoors to scour, they began on the yard, orchard, barn
and road.  Mother even had Leon stack the wood pile straighter.  She said when corded wood
leaned at an angle, it made people seem shiftless; and she never passed a place where it looked
that way that her fingers didn't just itch to get at it.  He had to pull every ragweed on each
side of the road as far as our land reached, and lay every rail straight in the fences.  Father
had to take spikes and our biggest maul and go to the bridges at the foot of the Big and the
Little Hill, and see that every plank was fast, so none of them would rattle when important
guests drove across.  She said she just simply wouldn't have them in such a condition that
Judge Pettis couldn't hear himself think when he crossed; for you could tell from his looks
that it was very important that none of the things he thought should be lost.  There wasn't
a single spot about the place inside or out that wasn't gone over; and to lots of it you never
would have known anything had been done if you hadn't seen, because the place was always in
proper shape anyway; but father said mother acted just like that, even when her sons were married
at other people's houses; and if she kept on getting worse, every girl she married off, by
the time she reached me, we'd all be scoured threadbare and she'd be on the verge of the grave.
May and I weeded the flowerbeds, picked all the ripe seed, and pulled up and burned all the
stalks that were done blooming. Father and Laddie went over the garden carefully; they scraped
the walks and even shook the palings to see if one were going to come loose right at the last
minute, when every one would be so flustrated there would be no time to fix it.

Then they began to talk about arrangements for the ceremony, whether we should have our regular
minister, or Presiding Elder Lemon, and what people they were going to invite.  Just when we
had planned to ask every one, have the wedding in the church, and the breakfast at the house,
and all drive in a joyous procession to Groveville to give them a good send-off in walked Sally.
She had been visiting Peter's people, and we planned a lot while she was away.

"What's going on here?" she asked, standing in the doorway, dangling her bonnet by the ties.

She never looked prettier.  Her hair had blown out in little curls around her face from riding,
her cheeks were so pink, and her eyes so bright.

"We were talking about having the ceremony in the church, so every one can be comfortably seated,
and see and hear well," answered mother.

Sally straightened up and began jerking the roses on her bonnet far too roughly for artificial
flowers.  Perhaps I surprised you with that artificial word, but I can spell and define it;
it's easy divided into syllables.  Goodness knows, I have seen enough flowers made from the
hair of the dead, wax, and paper, where you get the shape, but the colour never is right. 
These of Sally's were much too bright, but they were better than the ones made at our house.
Hers were of cloth and bought at a store.  You couldn't tell why, but Sally jerked her roses;
I wished she wouldn't, because I very well knew they would be used to trim my hat the next
summer, and she said:  "Well, people don't have to be comfortable during a wedding ceremony;
they can stand up if I can, and as for seeing and hearing, I'm asking a good many that I don't
intend to have see or hear either one!"

"My soul!" cried mother, and she dropped her hands and her mouth fell open, like she always
told us we never should let ours, while she stared at Sally.

"I don't care!" said Sally, straightening taller yet; her eyes began to shine and her lips
to quiver, as if she would cry in a minute; "I don't care----!"

"Which means, my child, that you DO care, very much," said father. "Suppose you cease such
reckless talk, and explain to us exactly what it is that you do want."

Sally gave her bonnet an awful jerk.  Those roses would look like sin before my turn to wear
them came, and she said:  "Well then, I do care! I care with all my might!  The church is all
right, of course; but I want to be married in my very own home!  Every one can think whatever
they please about their home, and so can I, and what I think is, that this is the nicest and
the prettiest place in all the world, and I belong here----"

Father lifted his head, his face began to shine, and his eyes to grow teary; while mother started
toward Sally.  She put out her hand and held mother from her at arm's length, and she turned
and looked behind her through the sitting-room and parlour, and then at us, and she talked
so fast you never could have understood what she said if you hadn't known all of it anyway,
and thought exactly the same thing yourself.

"I have just loved this house ever since it was built," she said, "and I've had as good times
here as any girl ever had.  If any one thinks I'm so very anxious to leave it, and you, and
mother, and all the others, why it's a big mistake.  Seems as if a girl is expected to marry
and go to a home of her own; it's drummed into her and things fixed for her from the day of
her birth; and of course I do like Peter, but no home in the world, not even the one he provides
for me, will ever be any dearer to me than my own home; and as I've always lived in it, I want
to be married in it, and I want to stay here until the very last second----"

"You shall, my child, you shall!" sobbed mother.

"And as for having a crowd of men that father is planning to ask, staring at me, because he
changes harvest help and wood chopping with them, or being criticised and clawed over by some
women simply because they'll be angry if they don't get the chance, I just won't--so there!
Not if I have to stand the minister against the wall, and turn our backs to every one.  I think----"

"That will do!" said father, wiping his eyes.  "That will do, Sally! Your mother and I have
got a pretty clear understanding of how you feel, now.  Don't excite yourself!  Your wedding
shan't be used to pay off our scores.  You may ask exactly whom you please, want, and feel
quite comfortable to have around you----"

Then Sally fell on mother's neck and every one cried a while; then we wiped up, Leon gave Sally
his slate, and she came and sat beside the table and began to make out a list of those she
really wanted to invite.  First she put down all of our family, even many away in Ohio, and
all of Peter's, and then his friends, and hers.  Once in the list of girls she stopped and
said:  "If I take that beautiful imported handkerchief from Pamela Pryor, I have just got to
invite her."

"And she will outdress and outshine you at your own wedding," put in Shelley.

"Let her, if she can!" said Sally calmly.  "She'll have to hump herself if she beats that dress
of mine; and as for looks, I know lots of people who think gray eyes, pink cheeks, and brown
curls far daintier and prettier than red cheeks and black eyes and curls.  If she really is
better looking than I am, it isn't her fault; God made her that way, and He wouldn't like us
to punish her for it; and it would, because any one can see she wants to be friends; don't
you think, mother?"--mother nodded--"and besides, I think she's better looking than I am, myself!"

Sally said that, and wrote down the Princess' name in big letters, and no one cheeped.

Then she began on our neighbourhood, thinking out loud and writing what she thought.  So all
of us were as still, and held our breath in softly and waited, and Sally said slow and musing
like, "Of course we couldn't have anything at THIS house without Sarah Hood.  She dressed most
of us when we were born, nursed us when we were sick, helped with threshing, company, and parties,
and she's just splendid anyway; we better ask all the Hoods"; so she wrote them down.  "And
it will be lonely for Widow Willis and the girls to see every one else here--we must have them;
and of course Deams--Amanda is always such splendid help; and the Widow Fall is so perfectly
lovely, we want her for decorative purposes; and we could scarcely leave out Shaws; they always
have all of us everything they do; and Dr. Fenner of course; and we'll want Flo and Agnes Kuntz
to wait on table, so their folks might as well come too----"

So she went on taking up each family we knew, and telling what they had done for us, or what
we had done for them; and she found some good reason for inviting them, and pretty soon father
settled back in his chair and never took his eyes from Sally's shining head as she bent over
the slate, and then he began pulling his lower lip, like when it won't behave, and his eyes
danced exactly as I've seen Leon's.  I never had noticed that before.

Sally went straight on and at last she came to Freshetts.  "I am going to have all of them,
too," she said.  "The children are good children, and it will help them along to see how things
are done when they are right; and I don't care what any one says, I LIKE Mrs. Freshett.  I'll
ask her to help work, and that will keep her from talking, and give the other women a chance
to see that she's clean, and human, and would be a good neighbour if they'd be friendly.  If
we ask her, then the others will."

When she finished--as you live--there wasn't a soul she had left out except Bill Ramsdell,
who starved his dog until it sucked our eggs, and Isaac Thomas, who was so lazy he wouldn't
work enough to keep his wife and children dressed so they ever could go anywhere, but he always
went, even with rags flying, and got his stomach full just by talking about how he loved the
Lord.  To save me I couldn't see Isaac Thomas without beginning to myself:

  "'Tis the voice of the sluggard; I hear him complain,
  You have waked me too soon, I must slumber again.

That described Isaac to the last tatter, only he couldn't waste money; he never had any.  Once
I asked father what he thought Isaac would do with it, if by some unforeseen working of Divine
Providence, he got ten dollars.  Father said he could tell me exactly, because Isaac once sold
some timber and had a hundred all at once.  He went straight to town and bought Mandy a red
silk dress and a brass breastpin, when she had no shoes.  He got the children an organ, when
they were hungry; and himself a plug hat.  Mandy and the children cried because he forgot candy
and oranges until the last cent was gone.  Father said the only time Isaac ever worked since
he knew him was when he saw how the hat looked with his rags.  He actually helped the men fell
the trees until he got enough to buy a suit, the remains of which he still wore on Sunday.
I asked father why he didn't wear the hat too, and father said the loss of that hat was a blow,
from which Isaac never had recovered. Once at camp-meeting he laid it aside to pray his longest,
most impressive prayer, and an affectionate cow strayed up and licked the nap all off before
Isaac finished, so he never could wear it again.

Sally said:  "I'll be switched if I'll have that disgusting creature around stuffing himself
on my wedding day; but if you're not in bed, when it's all over, mother, I do wish you'd send
Mandy and the children a basket."

Mother promised, and father sat and looked on and pulled his lower lip until his ears almost
wiggled.  Then Sally said she wanted Laddie and Shelley to stand at the parlour door and keep
it tight shut, and seat every one in the sitting-room except a special list she had made out
to send in there.  She wanted all our family and Peter's, and only a few very close friends,
but it was enough to fill the room.  She said when she and Peter came downstairs every one
could see how they looked when they crossed the sitting-room, and for all the difference the
door would make, it could be left open then; she would be walled in by people she wanted around
her, and the others could have the fun of being there, seeing what they could, and getting
all they wanted to eat.  Father and mother said that was all right, only to say nothing about
the plan to shut the door; but when the time came just to close it and everything would be
satisfactory.

Then Sally took the slate upstairs to copy the list with ink, so every one went about something,
while mother crossed to father and he took her on his lap, and they looked at each other the
longest and the hardest, and neither of them said a word.  After a while they cried and laughed,
and cried some more, and it was about as sensible as what a flock of geese say when they are
let out of the barn and start for the meadow in the morning.  Then father, all laughy and criey,
said: "Thank God!  Oh, thank God, the girl loves the home we have made for her!"

Just said it over and over, and mother kept putting in:  "It pays, Paul!  It pays!"

Next day Sally put on her riding habit and fixed herself as pretty as ever she could, and went
around to have a last little visit with every one, and invited them herself, and then she wrote
letters to people away.  Elizabeth and Lucy came home, and every one began to work. Father
and mother went to the village in the carriage and brought home the bed full of things to eat,
and all we had was added, and mother began to pack butter, and save eggs for cakes, and the
day before, I thought there wouldn't be a chicken left on the place.  They killed and killed,
and Sarah Hood, Amanda Deam, and Mrs. Freshett picked and picked.

"I'll bet a dollar we get something this time besides ribs and neck," said Leon.  "How do you
suppose thigh and breast would taste?"

"I was always crazy to try the tail," I said.

"Much chance you got," sniggered Leon.  "'Member the time that father asked the Presiding Elder,
'Brother Lemon, what piece of the fowl do you prefer?' and he up and said: 'I'm partial to
the rump, Brother Stanton.'  There sat father bound he wouldn't give him mother's piece, so
he pretended he couldn't find it, and forked all over the platter and then gave him the ribs
and the thigh.  Gee, how mother scolded him after the preacher had gone!  You notice father
hasn't asked that since.  Now, he always says: 'Do you prefer light or dark meat?'  Much chance
you have of ever tasting a tail, if father won't even give one to the Presiding Elder!"

"But as many as they are killing----"

"Oh THIS time," said Leon with a flourish, "this time we are going to have livers, and breast,
and thighs, AND tails, if you are beholden to tail."

"I'd like to know how we are?"

"Well, since you have proved that you can keep your mouth shut, for a little while, anyway,
I'm going to take you in on this," said Leon. "You keep your eyes on me.  When the wedding
gets going good, you watch me, and slip out.  That's all!  I'll be fixed to do the rest.  But
mind this, get out when I do."

"All right," I promised.

They must have wakened about four o'clock on the wedding day; it wasn't really light when I
got up.  I had some breakfast in my night dress, and then I was all fixed up in my new clothes,
and made to sit on a chair, and never move for fear I would soil my dress, for no one had time
to do me over, and there was only one dress anyway.  There was so much to see you could keep
interested just watching, and I was as anxious to look nice before the boys and girls, and
the big people, as any one.

Every mantel and table and bureau was covered with flowers, and you could have smelled the
kitchen a mile away, I know.  The dining table was set for the wedding party, our father and
mother, and Peter's, and the others had to wait.  You couldn't have laid the flat of your hand
on that table anywhere, it was so covered with things to eat.  Miss Amelia, in a dress none
of us ever had seen before, a real nice white dress, pranced around it and smirked at every
one, and waved the peacock feather brush to keep the flies from the jelly, preserves, jam,
butter, and things that were not cooked.

For hours Mrs. Freshett had stood in the kitchen on one side of the stove frying chicken and
heaping it in baking pans in the oven, and Amanda Deam on the other, frying ham, while Sarah
Hood cooked other things, and made a wash boiler of coffee.  Everything was ready by the time
it should have been.  I had watched them until I was tired, when Sally came through the room
where I was, and she said I might come along upstairs and see her dressed.  When we reached
the door I wondered where she would put me, but she pushed clothing together on a bed, and
helped me up, and that was great fun.

She had been bathed and had on her beautiful new linen underclothing that mother punched full
of holes and embroidered in flowers and vines, and Shelley was brushing her hair when some
one called out:  "The Princess is coming!"

I jumped for the window, and all of them, even Sally, crowded behind. Well, talk about carriages!
No one ever had seen THAT one before.  It WAS a carriage.  And such horses!  The funny "'orse,
'ouse" man who made the Pryor garden was driving.  He stopped at the gate, got out and opened
a door, and the Princess' father stepped down, tall and straight, all in shiny black.  He turned
around and held out his hand, bowing double, and the Princess laid her hand in his and stepped
out too.  He walked with her to the gate, made another bow, kissed her hand, and stepped back,
and she came down the walk alone.  He got in the carriage, the man closed the door, and they
drove away.

Sally must have arranged before that the Princess was to come early, for she came straight
upstairs.  She wore a soft white silk dress with big faded pink roses in it, and her hair was
fastened at each ear with a bunch of little pink roses.  She was lovely, but she didn't "outdress
or outshine" Sally one bit, and she never even glanced at the mirror to see how she looked;
she began helping with Sally's hair, and to dress her.  When Bess Kuntz prinked so long she
made every one disgusted, the Princess said:  "Oh save your trouble.  No one will look at you
when there's a bride in the house."

There was a roll almost as thick as your arm of garters that all the other girls wanted Sally
to wear for them so they would get a chance to marry that year, and Agnes Kuntz's was so large
it went twice around, and they just laughed about it.  They put a blue ribbon on Sally's stays
for luck, and she borrowed Peter's sister Mary's comb to hold her back hair.  They had the
most fun, and when she was all ready except her dress they went away, and Sally stood in the
middle of the room trembling a little.  Outside you could hear carriage wheels rolling, the
beat of horses' hoofs, and voices crying greetings.  "There was a sound of revelry," by day.
Mother came in hurriedly.  She wore her new brown silk, with a lace collar pinned at the throat
with the pin that had a brown goldstone setting in it, and her precious ring was on her finger.
She was dainty and pretty enough to have been a bride herself. She turned Sally around slowly,
touching her hair a little and her skirts; then she went to the closet, took out the wedding
dress, put the skirt over Sally's head, and she came up through the whiteness, pink and glowing.
She slipped her arms into the sleeves, and mother fastened it, shook out the skirt, saw that
the bead fringe hung right, and the lace collar lay flat, then she took Sally in her arms,
held her tight and said: "God bless you, dear, and keep you always.  Amen."

Then she stepped to the door, and Peter, all shining and new, came in. He hugged Sally and
kissed her like it didn't make the least difference whether she had on calico or a wedding
dress, and he just stared, and stared at her, and never said a word, so at last she asked:
"Well Peter, do you like my dress?"

And the idiot said:  "Why Sally, I hadn't even seen it!"

Then both of them laughed, and the Presiding Elder came.

I never liked to look at him very well because something had happened, and he had only one
eye.  I always wondered if he had "plucked it out" because it had "offended" him; but if you
could forget his eye, and just listen to his voice, it was like the sweetest music.  He married
those two people right there in the bedroom, all but about three words at the end.  I heard
and saw every bit of it.  Then Sally said it was time for me to go to mother, but she followed
me into the boys' room and shut the door.  Then she knelt in her beautiful silver dress, and
put her arms around me and said:  "Honest, Little Sister, aren't you going to kiss me goodbye?"

"Oh I can if you want me to," I said, but I didn't look at her; I looked out of the window.

She laughed a breathless little catchy sort of laugh and said: "That's exactly what I do want."

"You didn't even want me, to begin with," I reminded her.

"There isn't a doubt but whoever told you that, could have been in better business," said Sally,
angry-like.  "I was much younger then, and there were many things I didn't understand, and
it wasn't you I didn't want; it was just no baby at all.  I wouldn't have wanted a boy, or
any other girl a bit more.  I foolishly thought we had children enough in this house.  I see
now very plainly that we didn't, for this family never could get along without you, and I'm
sorry I ever thought so, and I'd give anything if I hadn't struck you and----"

"Oh be still, and go on and get married!" I said.  I could just feel a regular beller coming
in my throat.  "I was only fooling to pay you up. I meant all the time to kiss you good-bye
when the others did.  I'll nearly die being lonesome when you're gone----"

Then I ran for downstairs, and when I reached the door, where the steps went into the sitting-room,
I stopped, scared at all the people.  It was like camp-meeting.  You could see the yard full
through the windows.  Just as I was thinking I'd go back to the boys' room, and from there
into the garret, and down the back stairway, Laddie went and saw me.  He came over, led me
to the parlour door, put me inside, and there mother took my hand and held me tight, and I
couldn't see Leon anywhere.

I was caught, but they didn't have him.  Mother never hung on as she did that day.  I tried
and tried to pull away, and she held tight.  It was only a minute until the door opened, people
crowded back, and the Presiding Elder, followed by Sally and Peter, came into the room, and
they began being married all over again.

If it hadn't grown so solemn my mother sprung a tear, I never would have made it.  She just
had to let me go to sop her face, because tears are salty, and they would turn her new brown
silk front yellow.  The minute my hand was free, I slipped between the people and looked at
the parlour door.  It was wedged full and more standing on chairs behind them.  No one could
get out there.

I thought I would fail Leon sure, and then I remembered the parlour bedroom.  I got through
that door easy as anything, and it was no trick at all to slip behind the blind, raise the
window, and drop into mother's room from the sill.  From there I reached the back dining-room
door easy enough, went around to the kitchen, and called Leon softly. He opened the door at
once and I slipped in.  He had just got there. We looked all around and couldn't see where
to begin at first.  There was enough cooked food there to load two wagons.

An old pillow-case that had dried sage in it was lying across a chair and Leon picked it up
and poured the sage into the wood-box, and handed the case to me.  He went over and knelt before
the oven, while I followed and held open the case.  Leon rolled his eyes to the ceiling and
said so exactly like father when he is serving company that not one of us could have told the
difference:  "Which part of the fowl do you prefer, Brother Lemon?"

It was so funny it made me snigger, but I straightened up and answered as well as I could:
"I'm especially fond of the rump, Brother Stanton."

Leon stirred the heap and piled four or five tails in the case.  I thought that was all I could
manage before they would spoil, so I said: "Do you prefer light or dark meat, Sister Abigail?"

"I wish to choose breast," said Leon, simpering just like that silly Abigail Webster.  He put
in six breasts.  Then we found them hidden away back in the oven in a pie pan, for the bride's
table, I bet, and we took two livers apiece; we didn't dare take more for fear they had been
counted.  Then he threw in whatever he came to that was a first choice big piece, until I was
really scared, and begged him to stop; but he repeated what the fox said in the story of the
"Quarrelsome Cocks"--"Poco was very good, but I have not had enough yet," so he piled in pieces
until I ran away with the pillow-case; then he slid in a whole plateful of bread, another of
cake, and put the plates in a tub of dishes under the table.  Then we took some of everything
that wasn't too runny.  Just then the silence broke in the front part of the house, and we
scooted from the back door, closing it behind us, ran to the wood house and climbed the ladder
to the loft over the front part. There we were safe as could be, we could see to the road,
hear almost everything said in the kitchen, and "eat our bites in peace," like Peter Justice
told the Presiding Elder at the church trial that he wanted his wife to, the time he slapped
her.  Before very long, they began calling us, and called, and called.  We hadn't an idea what
they wanted, so we ate away.  We heard them first while I was holding over a back to let Leon
taste kidney, and it made him blink when he got it good.

"Well my soul!" he said.  "No wonder father didn't want to feed that to another man when mother
isn't very well, and likes it!  No wonder!"

Then he gave me a big bite of breast.  It was sort of dry and tasteless; I didn't like it.

"Why, I think neck or back beats that all to pieces!" I said in surprise.

"Fact is, they do!" said Leon.  "I guess the people who 'wish to choose breast,' do it to get
the biggest piece."

I never had thought of it before, but of course that would be the reason.

"Allow me, Sister Stanton," said Leon, holding out a piece of thigh.

That was really chicken!  Then we went over the backs and picked out all the kidneys, and ate
the little crusty places, and all the cake we could swallow; then Leon fixed up the bag the
best he could, and set it inside an old cracked churn and put on the lid.

He said that would do almost as well as the cellar, and the food would keep until to-morrow.
I wanted to slip down and put it in the Underground Station; but Leon said father must be spending
a lot of money right now, and he might go there to get some, so that wouldn't be safe.  Then
he cleaned my face, and I told him when he got his right, and we slipped from the back door,
crossed the Lawton blackberry patch, and went to the house from the orchard.  Leon took an
apple and broke it in two, and we went in eating as if we were starving.  When father asked
us where in this world we had been, Leon told him we thought it would be so awful long before
the fourth or fifth table, and we hadn't had much breakfast, and we were so hungry we went
and hunted something to eat.

"If you'd only held your horses a minute," said father; "they were calling you to take places
at the bride's table."

Well for land's sake!  Our mouths dropped open until it's a wonder the cake and chicken didn't
show, and we never said a word.  There didn't seem to be anything to say, for Leon loved to
be with grown folks, and to have eaten at the bride's table would have been the biggest thing
that ever happened to me.  At last, when I could speak, I asked who had taken our places, and
bless your heart if it wasn't that mealy-faced little sister of Peter's, and one of the aunts
from Ohio.  They had finished, and Sally was upstairs putting on her travelling dress, while
the guests were eating, when I heard Laddie ask the Princess to ride with him and Sally's other
friends, who were going to escort her to the depot.

"You'll want all your horses.  What could I ride?"

"If I find you a good horse and saddle will you go?"

"I will.  I think it would be fine sport."

Laddie turned and went from sight that minute.  The Princess laughed and kept on making friends
with every one, helping wait on people, thinking of nice things to do, and just as the carriage
was at the gate for father and mother, and Sally and Peter, and every one else was untying
their horses to ride in the procession to the village, from where I was standing on the mounting
block I saw something coming down the Little Hill.  I took one look, ran to the Princess, and
almost dragged her.

Up raced Laddie, his face bright, his eyes snapping with fun.  He rode Flos, was leading the
Princess' horse Maud, and carrying a big bundle under his arm.  He leaped from the saddle and
fastened both horses.

"Gracious Heaven!  What have you done?" gasped the Princess.

"Brought your mount," said Laddie, quite as if he were used to going to Pryors' after the sausage
grinder or the grain sacks.  But the Princess was pale and trembling.  She stepped so close
she touched him, and he immediately got a little closer.  You couldn't get ahead of Laddie,
and he didn't seem to care who saw, and neither did she.

"Tell me exactly what occurred," she said, just as father does when he means to whale us completely.

"I rapped at the front door," said Laddie.

"And who opened it?" cried the Princess.

"Your father!"

"My father?"

"Yes, your father!" said Laddie.  "And because I was in such a hurry, I didn't wait for him
to speak.  I said:  'Good morning, Mr. Pryor.  I'm one of the Stanton boys, and I came for
Miss Pryor's mount and habit. All the young people who are on horseback are going to ride an
escort to the village, around my sister's bridal carriage, and Miss Pryor thinks she would
enjoy going.  Please excuse such haste, but we only this minute made the plan, and the train
won't wait.'"

"And he?"

"He said:  'Surely!  Hold one minute.'  I stood on the step and waited, and I could hear him
give the order to some one to get your riding habit quickly, and then he blew a shrill whistle,
and your horse was at the gate the fastest of anything I ever saw."

"Did he do or say----"

"Nothing about 'clods, and clowns, and grossness!'  Every other word he spoke was when I said,
'Thank you, and good morning,' and was turning away.  He asked:  'Did Miss Pryor say whether
she preferred to ride home, or shall I escort her in the carriage?'"

"'She did not,' I answered.  'The plan was so sudden she had no time to think that far.  But
since she will have her horse and habit, why not allow my father to escort her?'  So you see,
I'm going to take you home," exulted Laddie.

"But you told him your FATHER," said the Princess.

"And thereby created the urgent necessity," said Laddie with a flourish, "for speaking to him
again, and telling him that my father had visitors from Ohio, and couldn't leave them.  We
will get all the fun from the day that we can; but before dusk, too early for them to have
any cause for cavil, 'the gross country clod' is going to take you home!"

One at a time, Laddie pounded those last words into the hitching post, with his doubled fist.

"Suppose he sets the dogs on you!  You know he keeps two dreadful ones."

Laddie just roared.  He leaned closer.

"Beaucheous Lady," he said, "I have fed those same dogs and rubbed their ears so many nights
lately, he'll get the surprise of his life if he tries that."

The Princess drew away and stared at Laddie the funniest.

"On my life!" she said at last.  "Well for a country clod----!"

Then she turned with the habit bundle, and ran into the house.  Father and mother came from
the front door arm in arm and walked to the carriage, and Sally and Peter followed.  My, but
they looked fine!  The Princess had gone to the garden and gathered flowers and lined all the
children in rows down each side of the walk.  They were loaded with blooms to throw at Sally;
but when she came out, in her beautiful gray poplin travelling dress, trimmed in brown ribbon,
the same shade as her curls, her face all pink, her eyes shining, and the ties of her little
brown bonnet waving to her waist, she was so perfectly beautiful, every single child watched
her open mouthed, gripped its flowers, and forgot to throw them at all.

And this you scarcely will believe after what she had said the day she made her list, and when
all of us knew her heart was all torn up, Sally just swept along smiling at every one and calling
"good-bye" to those who had no way to ride to the village, as if leaving didn't amount to much.
At the carriage, a little white, but still smiling, she turned and took one long look at everything,
and then she got in and called for me, right out loud before every one, so I got to hold up
my head as high as it would go, and step in too, and ride all the way to Groveville between
her and Peter, and instead of holding his hand, she held mine, just gripped it tight.  She
gripped so hard she squeezed all the soreness at her from my heart, and when she kissed me
good-bye the very last of all, I whispered in her ear that I wouldn't ever be angry any more,
and I wasn't, because after she had explained I saw how it had been.  It wasn't ME she didn't
want; it was just no baby.

After our carriage came Peter's people, then one father borrowed for the Ohio relatives, then
the other children, and all the neighbours followed, and when we reached the high hill where
you turn beside the woods, I saw father gather up the lines and brace himself, for Ned and
Jo were what he called "mettlesome."  "Then came a burst of thunder sound," as it says in "Casablanca,"
and the horseback riders came sweeping around us, Laddie and the Princess leading.  These two
rode ahead of us, and the others lined three deep on either side, and the next carriage dropped
back and let them close in behind, so Sally and Peter were "in the midst thereof."  Instead
of throwing old shoes, as always had been done, the Princess coaxed them to throw rice and
roses, and every other flower pulled from the bouquets at home, and from the gardens we had
passed.  Every one was out watching us go by, and when William Justus rode beside the fences
crying, "Flowers for the bride! Give us flowers for the bride!" some of the women were so excited
they pulled things up by the roots and gave him armloads, and he rode ahead and supplied Laddie
and the Princess, and they kept scattering them in the road until every foot of the way to
Groveville was covered with flowers, "the fair young flowers that lately sprang and stood."
He even made side-cuts into swampy places and gathered armloads of those perfectly lovely,
fringy blue gentians, caught up, and filled the carriage and scattered them in a wicked way,
because you should only take a few of those rare, late flowers that only grow from seed.

Sally looked just as if she had come into her own and was made for it; I never did see her
look so pretty, but Peter sweated and acted awful silly.  Father had a time with the team.
Ned and Jo became excited and just ranted.  They simply danced.  Laddie had braided their manes
and tails, and they waved like silken floss in the sunshine, and the carriage was freshly washed
and the patent leather and brass shone, and we rode flower-covered.  Ahead, Laddie and the
Princess fairly tried themselves.  She hadn't put on her hat or habit after all.  When Laddie
told her they were going to lead, she said:  "Very well!  Then I shall go as I am.  The dress
makes no difference.  It's the first time I've had a chance to spoil one since I left England."

When the other girls saw what she was going to do, nearly every one of them left off their
hats and riding skirts.  Every family had saddle horses those days, and when the riders came
racing up they looked like flying flowers, they were all laughing, bloom ladened, singing and
calling jokes.  Ahead, Laddie and the Princess just plain showed off. Her horse came from England
with them, and Laddie said it had Arab blood in it, like the one in the Fourth Reader poem,
"Fret not to roam the desert now, With all thy winged speed," and the Princess loved her horse
more than that man did his.  She said she'd starve before she'd sell it, and if her family
were starving, she'd go to work and earn food for them, and keep her horse.  Laddie's was a
Kentucky thoroughbred he'd saved money for years to buy; and he took a young one and trained
it himself, almost like a circus horse.  Both of them COULD ride; so that day they did.  They
ran those horses neck and neck, right up the hill approaching Groveville, until they were almost
from sight, then they whirled and came sweeping back fast as the wind.  The Princess' eyes
were like dead coals, and her black curls streamed, the thin silk dress wrapped tight around
her and waved back like a gossamer web such as spiders spin in October.  Laddie's hair was
blowing, his cheeks and eyes were bright, and with one eye on the Princess--she didn't need
it--and one on the road, he cut curves, turned, wheeled, and raced, and as he rode, so did she.

"Will they break their foolish necks?" wailed mother.

"They are the handsomest couple I ever have seen in my life!" said father.

"Yes, and you two watch out, or you'll strike trouble right there," said Sally, leaning forward.

I gave her an awful nudge.  It made me so happy I could have screamed to see them flying away
together like that.

"Well, if that girl represents trouble," said father, "God knows it never before came in such
charming guise."

"You can trust a man to forget his God and his immortal soul if a sufficiently beautiful woman
comes along," said my mother dryly, and all of them laughed.

She didn't mean that to be funny, though.  You could always tell by the set of her lips and
the light in her eyes.

Just this side of Groveville we passed a man on horseback.  He took off his hat and drew his
horse to one side when Laddie and the Princess rode toward him.  He had a big roll of papers
under his arm, to show that he had been for his mail.  But I knew, so did Laddie and the Princess,
that he had been compelled to saddle and ride like mad, to reach town and come that far back
in time to watch us pass; for it was the Princess' father, and WATCH was exactly what he was
doing; he wanted to see for himself.  Laddie and the Princess rode straight at him, neck and
neck, and then both of them made their horses drop on their knees and they waved a salute,
and then they were up and away. Of course father and mother saw, so mother bowed, and father
waved his whip as we passed.  He sat there like he'd turned the same on horseback as Sabethany
had in her coffin; but he had to see almost a mile of us driving our best horses and carriages,
wearing our wedding garments and fine raiment, and all that "cavalcade," father called it,
of young, reckless riders.  You'd have thought if there were a hint of a smile in his whole
being it would have shown when Sally leaned from the carriage to let him see that her face
and clothes were as good as need be and smiled a lovely smile on him, and threw him a rose.
He did leave his hat off and bow low, and then Shelley, always the very dickens for daring,
rode right up to him and laughed in his face, and she leaned and thrust a flower into his bony
hands; you would have thought he would have been simply forced to smile then, but he looked
far more as if he would tumble over and roll from the saddle.  My heart ached for a man in
trouble like that.  I asked the Lord to preserve us from secrets we couldn't tell the neighbours!

At the station there wasn't a thing those young people didn't do.

They tied flowers and ribbons all over Sally's satchel and trunk.

They sowed rice as if it were seeding time in a wheatfield.  They formed a circle around Sally
and Peter and as mushy as ever they could they sang, "As sure as the grass grows around the
stump, You are my darling sugar lump," while they danced.  They just smiled all the time no
matter what was done to them.  Some of it made me angry, but I suppose to be pleasant was the
right way.  Sally was strong on always doing the right thing, so she just laughed, and so did
all of us. Going home it was wilder yet, for all of them raced and showed how they could ride.

At the house people were hungry again, so the table was set and they ate up every scrap in
sight, and Leon and I ate with them that time and saved ours.  Then one by one the carriages,
spring wagons, and horseback riders went away, all the people saying Sally was the loveliest
bride, and hers had been the prettiest wedding they'd ever seen, and the most good things to
eat, and Laddie and the Princess went with them.  When the last one was gone, and only the
relatives from Ohio were left, mother pitched on the bed, gripped her hands and cried as if
she'd go to pieces, and father cried too, and all of us, even Mrs. Freshett, who stayed to
wash up the dishes.  She was so tickled to be there, and see, and help, that mother had hard
work to keep her from washing the linen that same night.  She did finish the last dish, scrub
the kitchen floor, black the stove, and pack all the borrowed china in tubs, ready to be taken
home, and things like that.  Mother said it was a burning shame for any neighbourhood to let
a woman get so starved out and lonesome she'd act that way.  She said enough was enough, and
when Mrs. Freshett had cooked all day, and washed dishes until the last skillet was in place,
she had done as much as any neighbour ought to do, and the other things she went on and did
were a rebuke to us.

I felt sore, weepy, and tired out.  It made me sick to think of the sage bag in the cracked
churn, so I climbed my very own catalpa tree in the corner, watched up the road for Laddie,
and thought things over. If I ever get married I want a dress, and a wedding exactly like that,
but I would like a man quite different from Peter; like Laddie would suit me better.  When
he rode under the tree, I dropped from a limb into his arms, and went with him to the barn.
He asked me what was going on at the house, and I told him about Mrs. Freshett being a rebuke
to us; and Laddie said she was, and he didn't believe one word against her.  When I told him
mother was in bed crying like anything, he said:  "I knew that had to come when she kept up
so bravely at the station.  Thank the Lord, she showed her breeding by holding in until she
got where she had a right to cry if she pleased."

Then I whispered for fear Leon might be around:  "Did he set the dogs on you?"

"He did not," said Laddie, laughing softly.

"Did he call you names again?"

"He did!" said Laddie, "but I started it.  You see, when we got there, Thomas was raking the
grass and he came to take the Princess' horse. Her father was reading on a bench under a tree.
I helped her down, and walked with her to the door and said good-bye, and thanked her for the
pleasure she had added to the day for us, loudly enough that he could hear; then I went over
to him and said:  'Good evening, Mr. Pryor.  If my father knew anything about it, he would
very much regret that company from Ohio detained him and compelled me to escort your daughter
home.  He would greatly have enjoyed the privilege, but I honestly believe that I appreciated
it far more than he could.'"

"Oh Laddie, what did he say?"

"He arose and glared at me, and choked on it, and he tried several times, until I thought the
clods were going to fly again, but at last he just spluttered:  'You blathering rascal, you!'
That was such a compliment compared with what I thought he was going to say that I had to laugh.
He tried, but he couldn't keep from smiling himself, and then I said:  'Please think it over,
Mr. Pryor, and if you find that Miss Pryor has had an agreeable, entertaining day, won't you
give your consent for her to come among us again?  Won't you allow me to come here, if it can
be arranged in such a way that I intrude on no one?'"

"Oh Laddie!"

"He exploded in a kind of a snarl that meant, I'll see you in the Bad Place first.  So I said
to him:  'Thank you very much for to-day, anyway.  I'm sure Miss Pryor has enjoyed this day,
and it has been the happiest of my life--one to be remembered always.  Of course I won't come
here if I am unwelcome, but I am in honour bound to tell you that I intend to meet your daughter
elsewhere, whenever I possibly can.  I thought it would be a better way for you to know and
have us where you could see what was going on, if you chose, than for us to meet without your
knowledge."

"Oh Laddie," I wailed, "now you've gone and ruined everything!"

"Not so bad as that, Little Sister," laughed Laddie.  "Not half so bad! He exploded in another
growl, and he shook his walking stick at me, and he said--guess what he said."

"That he would kill you," I panted, clinging to him.

"Right!" said Laddie.  "You have it exactly.  He said:  'Young man, I'll brain you with my
walking stick if ever I meet you anywhere with my daughter, when you have not come to her home
and taken her with my permission.'"

"What!" I stammered.  "What!  Oh Laddie, say it over!  Does it mean----?"

"It means," said Laddie, squeezing me until I was near losing my breath, "it means, Little
Sister, that I shall march to his door and ask him squarely, and if it is anywhere the Princess
wants to go, I shall take her."

"Like, 'See the conquering hero comes?'"

"Exactly!" laughed Laddie.

"What will mother say?"

"She hasn't made up her mind yet," answered Laddie.

"Do you mean----?" I gasped again.

"Of course!" said Laddie.  "I wasn't going to let a girl get far ahead of me.  The minute I
knew she had told her mother, I told mine the very first chance."

"Mother knows that you feel about the Princess as father does about her?"

"Mother knows," answered Laddie, "and so does father.  I told both of them."

Both of them knew!  And it hadn't made enough difference that any one living right with them
every day could have told it.  Time and work will be needed to understand grown people.

CHAPTER VIII

The Shropshire and the Crusader

  "For, among the rich and gay,
    Fine, and grand, and decked in laces,
  None appear more glad then they,
    With happier hearts, or happier faces."

Every one told mother for a week before the wedding that she would be sick when it was over,
and sure enough she was.  She had been on her feet too much, and had so many things to think
about, and there had been such a dreadful amount of work for her and Candace, even after all
the neighbours helped, that she was sick in bed and we couldn't find a thing she could eat,
until she was almost wild with hunger and father seemed as if he couldn't possibly bear it
a day longer.

After Candace had tried everything she could think of, I went up and talked it over with Sarah
Hood, and she came down, pretending she happened in, and she tried thickened milk, toast and
mulled buttermilk; she kept trying for two days before she gave up.  Candace thought of new
things, and Mrs. Freshett came and made all the sick dishes she knew, but mother couldn't even
taste them; so we were pretty blue, and we nearly starved ourselves, for how could we sit and
eat everything you could mention, and mother lying there, almost crying with hunger?

Saturday morning I was hanging around her room hoping maybe she could think of some least little
thing I could do for her, even if no more than to bring a glass of water, or a late rose to
lay on her pillow; it would be better than not being able to do anything at all.  After a while
she opened her eyes and looked at me, and I scarcely knew her. She smiled the bravest she could
and said:  "Sorry for mother, dear?"

I nodded.  I couldn't say much, and she tried harder than ever to be cheerful and asked:  "What
are you planning to do to-day?"

"If you can't think of one thing I can do for you, guess I'll go fishing," I said.

Her eyes grew brighter and she seemed half interested.

"Why, Little Sister," she said, "if you can catch some of those fish like you do sometimes,
I believe I could eat one of them."

I never had such a be-hanged time getting started.  I slipped from the room, and never told
a soul even where I was going.  I fell over the shovel and couldn't find anything quick enough
but my pocket to put the worms in, and I forgot my stringer.  At last, when I raced down the
hill to the creek and climbed over the water of the deep place, on the roots of the Pete Billings
yowling tree, I had only six worms, my apple sucker pole, my cotton cord line, and bent pin
hook.  I put the first worm on carefully, and if ever I prayed!  Sometimes it was hard to understand
about this praying business.  My mother was the best and most beautiful woman who ever lived.
She was clean, and good, and always helped "the poor and needy who cluster round your door,"
like it says in the poetry piece, and there never could have been a reason why God would want
a woman to suffer herself, when she went flying on horseback even dark nights through rain
or snow, to doctor other people's pain, and when she gave away things like she did--why, I've
seen her take a big piece of meat from the barrel, and a sack of meal, and heaps of apples
and potatoes to carry to Mandy Thomas--when she gave away food by the wagonload at a time,
God couldn't have WANTED her to be hungry, and yet she WAS that very minute almost crying for
food; and I prayed, oh how I did pray! and a sneaking old back-ended crayfish took my very
first worm.  I just looked at the sky and said:  "Well, when it's for a sick woman, can't You
do any better than that?"

I suppose I shouldn't have said it, but if it had been your mother, how would you have felt?
I pinched the next worm in two, so if a crayfish took that, it wouldn't get but half.  I lay
down across the roots and pulled my bonnet far over my face and tried to see to the bottom.
I read in school the other day:

  "And by those little rings on the water I know
   The fishes are merrily swimming below."

There were no rings on the water, but after a while I saw some fish darting around, only they
didn't seem to be hungry; for they would come right up and nibble a tiny bit at my worm, but
they wouldn't swallow it.  Then one did, so I jerked with all my might, jerked so hard the
fish and worm both flew off, and I had only the hook left.  I put on the other half and tried
again.  I prayed straight along, but the tears would come that time, and the prayer was no
powerful effort like Brother Hastings would have made; it was little torn up pieces mostly:
"O Lord, please do make only one fish bite!"  At last one did bite good, so I swung carefully
that time, and landed it on the grass, but it was so little and it hit a stone and was killed.
I had no stringer to put it back in the water to keep cool, and the sun was hot that day, like
times in the fall.  Stretched on the roots, with it shining on my back, and striking the water
and coming up from below, I dripped with heat and excitement.

I threw that one away, put on another worm, and a big turtle took it, the hook, and broke my
line, and almost pulled me in.  I wouldn't have let go if it had, for I just had to have a
fish.  There was no help from the Lord in that, so I quit praying, only what I said when I
didn't know it.  Father said man was born a praying animal, and no matter how wicked he was,
if he had an accident, or saw he had just got to die, he cried aloud to the Lord for help and
mercy before he knew what he was doing.

I could hear the roosters in the barnyard, the turkey gobbler, and the old ganders screamed
once in a while, and sometimes a bird sang a skimpy little fall song; nothing like spring,
except the killdeers and larks; they were always good to hear--and then the dinner bell rang.
I wished I had been where I couldn't have heard that, because I didn't intend going home until
I had a fish that would do for mother if I stayed until night.  If the best one in the family
had to starve, we might as well all go together; but I wouldn't have known how hungry I was,
if the bell hadn't rung and told me the others were eating.  So I bent another pin and tried
again.  I lost the next worm without knowing how, and then I turned baby and cried right out
loud.  I was so thirsty, the salty tears running down my cheeks tasted good, and doing something
besides fishing sort of rested me; so I looked around and up at the sky, wiped my face on the
skirt of my sunbonnet, and put on another worm.  I had only one more left, and I began to wonder
if I could wade in and catch a fish by hand; I did teeny ones sometimes, but I knew the water
there was far above my head, for I had measured it often with the pole; it wouldn't do to try
that; instead of helping mother any, a funeral would kill her, too, so I fell back on the Crusaders,
and tried again.

Strange how thinking about them helped.  I pretended I was fighting my way to the Holy City,
and this was the Jordan just where it met the sea, and I had to catch enough fish to last me
during the pilgrimage west or I'd never reach Jerusalem to bring home a shell for the Stanton
crest.  I pretended so hard, that I got braver and stronger, and asked the Lord more like there
was some chance of being heard.  All at once there was a jerk that almost pulled me in, so
I jerked too, and a big fish flew over my head and hit the bank behind me with a thump.  Of
course by a big fish I don't mean a red horse so long as my arm, like the boys bring from the
river; I mean the biggest fish I ever caught with a pin in our creek.  It looked like the whale
that swallowed Jonah, as it went over my head.  I laid the pole across the roots, jumped up
and turned, and I had to grab the stump to keep from falling in the water and dying.  There
lay the fish, the biggest one I ever had seen, but it was flopping wildly, and it wasn't a
foot from a hole in the grass where a muskrat had burrowed through.  If it gave one flop that
way, it would slide down the hole straight back into the water; and between me and the fish
stood our cross old Shropshire ram.  I always looked to see if the sheep were in the meadow
before I went to the creek, but that morning I had been so crazy to get something for mother
to eat, I never once thought of them--and there it stood!

That ram hadn't been cross at first, and father said it never would be if treated right, and
not teased, and if it were, there would be trouble for all of us.  I was having more than my
share that minute, and it bothered me a lot almost every day.  I never dared enter a field
any more if it were there, and now it was stamping up and down the bank, shaking its head,
and trying to get me; with one flop the fish went ALMOST in the hole, and the next a little
away from it. Everything put together, I thought I couldn't stand it.  I never wanted anything
as I wanted that fish, and I never hated anything as I hated that sheep.  It wasn't the sheep's
fault either; Leon teased it on purpose, just to see it chase Polly Martin; but that was more
her doings than his.

She was a widow and she crossed our front meadow going to her sister's. She had two boys big
as Laddie, and three girls, and father said they lived like "the lilies of the field; they
toiled not, neither did they spin."  They never looked really hungry or freezing, but they
never plowed, or planted, they had no cattle or pigs or chickens, only a little corn for meal,
and some cabbage, and wild things they shot for meat, and coons to trade the skins for more
powder and lead--bet they ate the coons--never any new clothes, never clean, they or their
house. Once when father and mother were driving past, they saw Polly at the well and they stopped
for politeness sake to ask how she was, like they always did with every one.  Polly had a tin
cup of water and was sopping at her neck with a carpet rag, and when mother asked, "How are
you, Mrs. Martin?" she answered:  "Oh I ain't very well this spring; I gest I got the go-backs!"

Mother said Polly looked as if she'd been born with the "go-backs," and had given them to all
her children, her home, garden, fields, and even the FENCES.  We hadn't a particle of patience
with such people.  When you are lazy like that it is very probable that you'll live to see
the day when your children will peep through the fence cracks and cry for bread.  I have seen
those Martin children come mighty near doing it when the rest of us opened our dinner baskets
at school; and if mother hadn't always put in enough so that we could divide, I bet they would.
If Polly Martin had walked up as if she were alive, and had been washed and neat, and going
somewhere to do some one good, Leon never would have dreamed of such a thing as training the
Shropshire to bunt her. She was so long and skinny, always wore a ragged shawl over her head,
a floppy old dress that the wind whipped out behind, and when she came to the creek, she sat
astride the foot log, and hunched along with her hands; that tickled the boys so, Leon began
teasing the sheep on purpose to make it get her.  But inasmuch as she saw fit to go abroad
looking so funny, that any one could see she'd be a perfect circus if she were chased, I didn't
feel that it was Leon's fault.  If, like the little busy bee, she had "improved each shining
hour," he never would have done it.  Seems to me, she brought the trouble on her own head.

First, Leon ran at the Shropshire and then jumped aside; but soon it grew so strong and quick
he couldn't manage that, so he put his hat on a stick and poked it back and forth through a
fence crack, and that made the ram raving mad.  At last it would butt the fence until it would
knock itself down, and if he dangled the hat again, get right up and do it over.  Father never
caught Leon, so he couldn't understand what made the sheep so dreadfully cross, because he
had thought it was quite peaceable when he bought it.  The first time it got after Polly, she
threw her shawl over its head, pulled up her skirts, and Leon said she hit just eleven high
places crossing an eighty-acre field; she came to the house crying, and father had to go after
her shawl, and mother gave her a roll of butter and a cherry pie to comfort her.

The Shropshire never really got Polly, but any one could easily see what it would do to me
if I dared step around that stump, and it was dancing and panting to begin.  If whoever wrote
that "Gentle Sheep, pray tell me why," piece ever had seen a sheep acting like that, it wouldn't
have been in the books; at least I think it wouldn't, but one can't be sure.  He proved that
he didn't know much about anything outdoors or he wouldn't have said that sheep were "eating
grass and daisies white, from the morning till the night," when daisies are bitter as gall.

Flop! went the fish, and its tail touched the edge of the hole.  Then I turned around and picked
up the pole.  I put my sunbonnet over the big end of it, and poked it at the ram, and drew
it back as Leon did his hat.  One more jump and mother's fish would be gone.  I stood on the
roots and waved my bonnet.  The sheep lowered its head and came at it with a rush.  I drew
back the pole, and the sheep's forefeet slid over the edge, and it braced and began to work
to keep from going in.  The fish gave a big flop and went down the hole.  Then I turned Crusader
and began to fight, and I didn't care if I were whipped black and blue, I meant to finish that
old black-faced Shropshire.  I set the pole on the back of its neck and pushed with all my
might, and I got it in, too.  My, but it made a splash!  It wasn't much good at swimming either,
and it had no chance, for I stood on the roots and pushed it down, and hit it over the nose
with all my might, and I didn't care how far it came on the cars, or how much money it cost,
it never would chase me, and make me lose my fish again.

I didn't hear him until he splashed under the roots and then I was so mad I didn't see that
it was Laddie; I only knew that it was someone who was going to help out that miserable ram,
so I struck with all my might, the sheep when I could hit it, if not, the man.

"You little demon, stop!" cried Laddie.

I got in a good one right on the ram's nose.  Then Laddie dropped the sheep and twisted the
fish pole from my fingers, and I pushed him as hard as I could, but he was too strong.  He
lifted the sheep, pulled it to the bank, and rolled it, worked its jaws, and squeezed water
from it, and worked and worked.

"I guess you've killed it!" he said at last.

"Goody!" I shouted.  "Goody!  Oh but I am glad it's dead!"

"What on earth has turned you to a fiend?" asked Laddie, beginning work on the sheep again.

"That ram!" I said.  "Ever since Leon made it cross so it would chase Polly Martin, it's got
me oftener than her.  I can't go anywhere for it, and to-day it made me lose a big fish, and
mother is waiting.  She thought maybe she could eat some."

Then I roared; bet I sounded like Bashan's bull.

"Dear Lord!" said Laddie dropping the sheep and taking me in his wet arms.  "Tell me, Biddy!
Tell me how it is."

Then I forgot I was a Crusader, and told him all about it as well as I could for choking, and
when I finished he bathed my hot face, and helped me from the roots.  Then he went and looked
down the hole I showed him and he cried out quicklike, and threw himself on the grass, and
in a second up came the fish.  Some one had rolled a big stone in the hole, so the fish was
all right, not even dead yet, and Laddie said it was the biggest one he ever had seen taken
from the creek.  Then he said if I'd forgive him and all our family, for spoiling the kind
of a life I had a perfect right to lead, and if I'd run to the house and get a big bottle from
the medicine case quick, he would see to it that some place was fixed for that sheep where
it would never bother me again. So I took the fish and ran as fast as I could, but I sent May
back with the bottle, and did the scaling myself.  No one at our house could do it better,
for Laddie taught me the right way long ago, when I was small, and I'd done it hundreds of times.

Then I went to Candace and she put a little bit of butter and a speck of lard in a skillet,
and cooked the fish brown.  She made a slice of toast and boiled a cup of water and carried
it to the door; then she went in and set the table beside the bed, and I took in the tray,
and didn't spill a drop.  Mother never said a word; she just reached out and broke off a tiny
speck and nibbled it, and it stayed; she tried a little bigger piece, and another, and she
said:  "Take out the bones, Candace!"  She ate every scrap of that fish like the hungriest
traveller who ever came to our door, and the toast, and drank the hot water.  Then she went
into a long sleep and all of us walked tiptoe, and when she waked up she was better, and in
a few days she could sit in her chair again, and she began getting Shelley ready to go to music
school.

I have to tell you the rest, too.  Laddie made the ram come alive, and father sold it the next
day for more than he paid for it.  He said he hoped I'd forgive him for not having seen how
it had been bothering me, and that he never would have had it on the place a day if he'd known.
The next time he went to town he bought me a truly little cane rod, a real fishing line, several
hooks, and a red bobber too lovely to put into the water.  I thought I was a great person from
the fuss all of them made over me, until I noticed Laddie shrug his shoulders, and reach back
and rub one, and then I remembered.

I went flying, and thank goodness! he held out his arms.

"Oh Laddie!  I never did it!" I cried.  "I never, never did!  I couldn't!  Laddie, I love you
best of any one; you know I do!"

"Of course you didn't!" said Laddie.  "My Little Sister wasn't anywhere around when that happened.
That was a poor little girl I never saw before, and she was in such trouble she didn't know
WHAT she was doing. And I hope I'll never see her again," he ended, twisting his shoulder.
But he kissed me and made it all right, and really I didn't do that; I just simply couldn't
have struck Laddie.

Marrying off Sally was little worse than getting Shelley ready for school.  She had to have
three suits of everything, and a new dress of each kind, and three hats; her trunk wouldn't
hold all there was to put in it; and father said he never could pay the bills.  He had promised
her to go, and he didn't know what in this world to do; because he never had borrowed money
in his life, and he couldn't begin; for if he died suddenly, that would leave mother in debt,
and they might take the land from her.  That meant he'd spent what he had in the bank on Sally's
wedding, and all that was in the Underground Station, or maybe the Station money wasn't his.

Just when he was awfully bothered, mother said to never mind, she believed she could fix it.
She sent all of us into the orchard to pick the fine apples that didn't keep well, and father
made three trips to town to sell them.  She had big jars of lard she wouldn't need before butchering
time came again, and she sold dried apples, peaches, and raspberries from last year.  She got
lots of money for barrels of feathers she'd saved to improve her feather beds and pillows;
she said she would see to that later.  Father was so tickled to get the money to help him out
that he said he'd get her a pair of those wonderful new blue geese like Pryors had, that every
one stopped to look at.  When there was not quite enough yet, from somewhere mother brought
out money that she'd saved for a long time, from butter and eggs, and chickens, and turkeys,
and fruit and lard, and things that belonged to her. Father hated to use it the worst way,
but she said she'd saved it for an emergency, and now seemed to be the time.

She said if the child really had talent, she should be about developing it, and while there
would be many who would have far finer things than Shelley, still she meant her to have enough
that she wouldn't be the worst looking one, and so ashamed she couldn't keep her mind on her
work.  Father said, with her face it didn't make any difference what she wore, and mother said
that was just like a man; it made all the difference in the world what a girl wore.  Father
said maybe it did to the girl, and other women; what he meant was that it made none to a man.
Mother said the chief aim and end of a girl's life was not wrapped up in a man; and father
said maybe not with some girls, but it would be with Shelley: she was too pretty to escape.
I do wonder if I'm going to be too pretty to escape, when I put on long dresses. Sometimes
I look in the glass to see if it's coming, but I don't suppose it's any use.  Mother says you
can't tell a thing at the growing age about how a girl is going to look at eighteen.

When everything was almost ready, Leon came in one day and said: "Shelley, what about improving
your hair?  Have you tried your wild grape sap yet?"

Shelley said:  "Why, goodness me!  We've been so busy getting Sally married, and my clothes
made, I forgot all about that.  Have you noticed the crock in passing?  Is there anything in it?"

"It was about half full, once when I went by," said Leon. "I haven't seen it lately."

"Do please be a dear and look, when you go after the cows this evening," said Shelley.  "If
there's anything in it, bring it up."

  "Do it yourself for want of me,
   The boy replied quite manfully,"

quoted Leon from "The Little Lord and the Farmer."  He was always teasing.

"I think you're mean as dirt if you don t bring it," said Shelley.

Leon grinned and you should have heard the nasty, teasing way he said more of that same piece:

  "Anger and pride are both unwise,
   Vinegar never catches flies----"

I wondered she didn't slap him.  You could see she wanted to.  "I can get it myself," she said
angrily.

"What will you give me to bring it?" asked Leon, who never missed a chance to make a bargain.

"My grateful thanks.  Are they not a proper reward?" asked Shelley.

"Thanks your foot!" said Leon.  "Will you bring something pretty from Chicago for Susie Fall's
Christmas present?"

Every one laughed, but Leon never cared.  He liked Susie best of any of the girls, and he wanted
every one to know it.  He went straight to her whenever he had a chance, and he'd already told
her mother to keep all the other boys away, because he meant to marry her when he grew up,
and Widow Fall said that was fair enough, and she'd save her for him.  So Shelley said she
would get him something for Susie, and Leon brought the crock.  Shelley looked at it sort of
dubious-like, tipped it, and stared at the dirt settled in the bottom, and then stuck in her
finger and tasted it.  She looked at Leon with a queer grin and said: "Smarty, smarty, think
you're smart!"  She threw the creek water into the swill bucket.  No one said a word, but Leon
looked much sillier than she did. After he was gone I asked her if she would bring him a Christmas
present for Susie NOW, and she said she ought to bring him a pretty glass bottle labelled perfume,
with hartshorn in it, and she would, if she thought he'd smell it first.

Shelley felt badly about leaving mother when she wasn't very well; but mother said it was all
right, she had Candace to keep house and May and me, and father, and all of us to take care
of her, and it would be best for Shelley to go now and work hard as she could, while she had
the chance.  So one afternoon father took her trunk to the depot and bought the tickets and
got the checks, and the next day Laddie drove to Groveville with father and Shelley, and she
was gone.  Right at the last, she didn't seem to want to leave so badly, but all of them said
she must.  Peter's cousin, who had gone last year, was to meet her, and have a room ready where
she boarded if she could, and if she couldn't right away, then the first one who left, Shelley
was to have the place, so they'd be together.

There were eight of us left, counting Candace and Miss Amelia, and you wouldn't think a house
with eight people living in it would be empty, but ours was.  Everything seemed to wilt.  The
roses on the window blinds didn't look so bright as they had; mother said the only way she
could get along was to keep right on working.  She helped Candace all she could, but she couldn't
be on her feet very much, so she sat all day long and peeled peaches to dry, showed Candace
how to jelly, preserve, and spice them, and peeled apples for butter and to dry, quantities
more than we could use, but she said she always could sell such things, and with the bunch
of us to educate yet, we'd need the money.

When it grew cold enough to shut the doors, and have fire at night, first thing after supper
all of us helped clear the table, then we took our slates and books and learned our lessons
for the next day, and then father lined us against the wall, all in a row from Laddie down,
and he pronounced words--easy ones that divided into syllables nicely, for me, harder for May,
and so up until I might sit down.  For Laddie, May and Leon he used the geography, the Bible,
Roland's history, the Christian Advocate, and the Agriculturist.  My, but he had them so they
could spell!  After that, as memory tests, all of us recited our reading lesson for the next
day, especially the poetry pieces.  I knew most of them, from hearing the big folks repeat
them so often and practise the proper way to read them.  I could do "Rienzi's Address to the
Romans," "Casablanca," "Gray's Elegy," or "Mark Antony's Speech," but best of all, I liked
"Lines to a Water-fowl."  When he was tired, if it were not bedtime yet, all of us, boys too,
sewed rags for carpet and rugs. Laddie braided corn husks for the kitchen and outside door
mats, and they were pretty, and "very useful too," like the dog that got his head patted in
McGuffey's Second.

Then they picked the apples.  These had to be picked by hand, wrapped in soft paper, packed
in barrels, and shipped to Fort Wayne.  Where they couldn't reach by hand, they stood on barrels
or ladders, and used a long handled picker, so as not to bruise the fruit.  Laddie helped with
everything through the day, worked at his books at night, and whenever he stepped outside he
looked in the direction of Pryors'.  He climbed to the topmost limbs of the trees with a big
basket, picked it full and let it down with a long piece of clothesline.  I loved to be in
the orchard when they were working; there were plenty of summer apples to eat yet; it was fun
to watch the men, and sometimes I could be useful by handing baskets or heaping up apples to
be buried for us.

One night father read about a man who had been hanged for killing another man, and they cut
him down too soon, so he came alive, and they had to hang him over; and father got all worked
up about it.  He said the man had suffered death the first time to "all intents and purposes,"
so that fulfilled the requirements of the law, and they were wrong when they hanged him again.
Laddie said it was a piece of bungling sure enough, but the law said a man must be "hanged
by his neck until he was dead," and if he weren't dead, why, it was plain he hadn't fulfilled
the requirements of the law, so they were forced to hang him again.  Father said that law was
wrong; the man never should have been hanged in the first place.  They talked and argued until
we were all excited about it, and the next evening after school Leon and I were helping pick
apples, and when father and Laddie went to the barn with a load we sat down to rest and we
thought about what they said.

"Gee, that was tough on the man!" said Leon, "but I guess the law is all right.  Of course
he wouldn't want to die, and twice over at that, but I don't suppose the man he killed liked
to die either.  I think if you take a life, it's all right to give your own to pay for it."

"Leon," I said, "some time when you are fighting Absalom Saunders or Lou Wicks, just awful,
if you hit them too hard on some tender spot and kill them, would you want to die to pay for it?"

"I wouldn't want to, but I guess I'd have to," said Leon.  "That's the law, and it's as good
a way to make it as any.  But I'm not going to kill any one.  I've studied my physiology hard
to find all the spots that will kill.  I never hit them behind the ear, or in the pit of the
stomach; I just black their eyes, bloody their snoots, and swat them on the chin to finish
off with."

"Well, suppose they don't study their physiologies like you do, and hit YOU in the wrong place,
and kill you, would you want THEM hanged by the neck until they were dead, to pay for it?"

"I don't think I'd want anything if I were dead," he said.  "I wonder how it feels to die.
Now THAT man knew.  I'd like to be hanged enough to find out how it goes, and then come back,
and brag about it.  I don't think it hurts much; I believe I'll try it."

So Leon took the rope Laddie lowered the baskets with, and threw it over a big limb.  Then
he rolled up a barrel and stood on it and put my sunbonnet on with the crown over his face,
for a black cap, and made the rope into a slip noose over his head, and told me to stand back
by the apple tree and hold the rope tight, until he said he was hanged enough.  Then he stepped
from the barrel.  It jerked me toward him about a yard, as he came down smash! on his feet.
I held with all my might, but he was too heavy--and falling that way.  So he went to trying
to fix some other plan, and I told him the sensible thing to do would be for him to hang me,
because he'd be strong enough to hold me and I could tell him how it felt just as well.  So
we fixed me up like we had him, and when Leon got the rope stretched, he wrapped it twice around
the apple tree so it wouldn't jerk him as it had me, and when he said "Ready," I stepped from
the barrel.  The last thing I heard was Leon telling me to say when I was hanged enough.  I
was so heavy, the rope stretched, and I went down until it almost tore off my head, and I couldn't
get a single breath, so of course I didn't tell him, and I couldn't get on the barrel, and
my tongue went out, and my chest swelled up, and my ears roared, and I kicked and struggled,
and all the time I could hear Leon laughing, and shouting to keep it up, that I was dying fine;
only he didn't know that I really was, and at last I didn't feel or know anything more.

When I came to, I was lying on the grass, while father was pumping my arms, and Laddie was
pouring creek water on my face from his hat, and Leon was running around in circles, clear
crazy.  I heard father tell him he'd give him a scutching he'd remember to the day of his death;
but inasmuch as I had told Leon to do it, I had to grab father and hold to him tight as I could,
until I got breath enough to explain how it happened.  Even then I wasn't sure what he was
going to do.

After all that, when I tried to tell Leon how it felt, he just cried like a baby, and he wouldn't
listen to a word, even when he'd wanted to know so badly.  He said if I hadn't come back, he'd
have gone to the barn and used the swing rope on himself, so it was a good thing I did, for
one funeral would have cost enough, when we needed money so badly, not to mention how mother
would have felt to have two of us go at once, like she had before.  And anyway, it didn't amount
to so awful much. It was pretty bad at first, but it didn't last long, and the next day my
neck was only a little blue and stiff, and in three days it was all over, only a rough place
where the rope grained the skin as I went down; but I never got to tell Leon how it felt; I
just couldn't talk him into hearing, and it was quite interesting too; but still I easily saw
why the man in the paper would object to dying twice, to pay for killing another man once.

When the apples were picked and the cabbage, beets, turnips, and potatoes were buried, some
corn dried in the garret for new meal, pumpkins put in the cellar, the field corn all husked,
and the butchering done, father said the work was in such fine shape, with Laddie to help,
and there was so much more corn than he needed for us, and the price was so high, and the turkeys
did so well, and everything, that he could pay back what mother helped him, and have quite
a sum over.

It was Thanksgiving by that time, and all of Winfield's, Lucy's, Sally and Peter, and our boys
came home.  We had a big time, all but Shelley; it was too expensive for her to come so far
for one day, but mother sent her a box with a whole turkey for herself and her friends; and
cake, popcorn, nuts, and just everything that wasn't too drippy. Shelley wrote such lovely
letters that mother saved them and after we had eaten as much dinner as we could, she read
them before we left the table.

I had heard most of them, but I liked to listen again, because they sounded so happy.  You
could hear Shelley laugh on every page.  She told about how Peter's cousin was waiting when
the train stopped.  They couldn't room together right away, but they were going to the first
chance they had.  Shelley felt badly because they were so far apart, but she was in a nice
place, where she could go with other girls of the school until she learned the way.  She told
about her room and the woman she boarded with and what she had to eat; she wrote mother not
to worry about clothes, because most of the others were from the country, or small towns, and
getting ready to teach, and lots of them didn't have NEARLY as many or as pretty dresses as
she did.  She told about the big building, the classes, the professors, and of going to public
recitals where some of the pupils who knew enough played; and she was working her fingers almost
to the bone, so she could next year.  She told of people she met, and how one of the teachers
took a number of girls in his class to see a great picture gallery.  She wrote pages about
a young Chicago lawyer she met there, and only a few lines about the pictures, so father said
as that was the best collection of art work in Chicago, it was easy enough to see that Shelley
had been far more impressed with the man than she had been with the pictures. Mother said she
didn't see how he could say a thing like that about the child.  Of course she couldn't tell
in a letter about hundreds of pictures, but it was easy enough to tell all about a man.

Father got sort of spunky at that, and he said it was mighty little that mattered most, that
could be told about a Chicago lawyer; and mother had better caution Shelley to think more about
her work, and write less of the man.  Mother said that would stop the child's confidences completely
and she'd think all the time about the man, and never mention him again, so she wouldn't know
what WAS going on.  She said she was glad Shelley had found pleasing, refined friends, and
she'd encourage her all she could in cultivating them; but of course she'd caution her to be
careful, and she'd tell her what the danger was, and after that Shelley wrote and wrote.  Mother
didn't always read the letters to us, but she answered every one she got that same night. Sometimes
she pushed the pen so she jabbed the paper, and often she smiled or laughed softly.

I liked Thanksgiving.  We always had a house full of company, and they didn't stay until we
were tired of them, as they did at Christmas, and there was as much to eat; the only difference
was that there were no presents.  It wasn't nearly so much work to fix for one day as it was
for a week; so it wasn't so hard on mother and Candace, and father didn't have to spend much
money.  We were wearing all our clothes from last fall that we could, and our coats from last
winter to help out, but we didn't care.  We had a lot of fun, and we wanted Sally and Shelley
to have fine dresses, because they were in big cities where they needed them, and in due season,
no doubt, we would have much more than they, because, as May figured it, there would be only
a few of us by that time, so we could have more to spend.  That looked sensible, and I thought
it would be that way, too.  We were talking it over coming from school one evening, and when
we had settled it, we began to play "Dip and Fade."  That was a game we made up from being
at church, and fall and spring were the only times we could play it, because then the rains
filled all the ditches beside the road where the dirt was plowed up to make the bed higher,
and we had to have the water to dip in and fade over.

We played it like that, because it was as near as we could come to working out a song Isaac
Thomas sang every time he got happy.  He had a lot of children at home, and more who had died,
from being half-fed and frozen, mother thought; and he was always talking about meeting the
"pore innocents" in Heaven, and singing that one song.  Every time he made exactly the same
speech in meeting.  It began like reciting poetry, only it didn't rhyme, but it sort of cut
off in lines, and Isaac waved back and forth on his feet, and half sung it, and the rags waved
too, but you just couldn't feel any thrills of earnestness about what he said, because he needed
washing, and to go to work and get him some clothes and food to fill out his frame.  He only
looked funny, and made you want to laugh.  It took Emanuel Ripley to raise your hair.  I don't
know why men like my father, and the minister, and John Dover stood it; they talked over asking
Isaac to keep quiet numbers of times, but the minister said there were people like that in
every church, they always came among the Lord's anointed, and it was better to pluck out your
right eye than to offend one of them, and he was doubtful about doing it.  So we children all
knew that the grown people scarcely could stand Isaac's speech, and prayer, and song, and that
they were afraid to tell him plain out that he did more harm than good.  Every meeting about
the third man up was Isaac, and we had to watch him wave, and rant, and go sing-songy:

  "Oh brethering and sistering--ah,
  It delights my heart--ah to gather with you,
  In this holy house of worship--ah.
  In his sacred word--ah,
  The Lord--ah tells us,
  That we are all his childring--ah.
  And now, lemme exhort you to-night--ah,
  As one that loves you--ah,
  To choose that good part, that Mary chose--ah,
  That the worrrr-uld kin neither give ner take away--ah."

That went on until he was hoarse, then he prayed, and arose and sang his song.  Other men spoke
where they stood.  Isaac always walked to the altar, faced the people, and he was tired out
when he finished, but so proud of himself, so happy, and he felt so sure that his efforts were
worth a warm bed, sausage, pancakes, maple syrup, and coffee for breakfast, that it was mighty
seldom he failed to fool some one else into thinking so too, and if he could, he wouldn't have
to walk four miles home on cold nights, with no overcoat.  In summer, mostly, they let him
go.  Isaac always was fattest in winter, especially during revivals, but at any time mother
said he looked like a sheep's carcass after the buzzards had picked it.  It could be seen that
he was perfectly strong, and could have fed and clothed himself, and Mandy and the children,
quite as well as our father did us, if he had wanted to work, for we had the biggest family
of the neighbourhood.  So we children made fun of him and we had to hold our mouths shut when
he got up all tired and teary-like, and began to quaver:

    "Many dear childurn we know dew stan'
    Un toon ther harps in the better lan',
    Ther little hans frum each soundin' string,
    Bring music sweet, wile the Anguls sing,
    Bring music sweet, wile the Anguls sing,--

      We shell meet them agin on that shore,
      We shell meet them agin on that shore,
      With fairer face, un angel grace,
      Each loved un ull welcome us ther.

    "They uster mourn when the childurn died,
    Un said goo-bye at the river side,
    They dipped ther feet in the glidin' stream,
    Un faded away, like a loveli dream,
    Un faded away like a loveli dream."

Then the chorus again, and then Isaac dropped on the front seat exhausted, and stayed there
until some good-hearted woman, mostly my mother, felt so sorry about his shiftlessness she
asked him to go home with us and warmed and fed him, and put him in the traveller's bed to
sleep.  The way we played it was this: we stood together at the edge of a roadside puddle and
sang the first verse and the chorus exactly as Isaac did.  Then I sang the second verse, and
May was one of the "many dear childurn," and as I came to the lines she dipped her feet in
the "glidin' stream," and for "fading away," she jumped across.

Now May was a careful little soul, and always watched what she was doing, so she walked up
a short way, chose a good place, and when I sang the line, she was almost birdlike, she dipped
and faded so gracefully.  Then we laughed like dunces, and then May began to sway and swing,
and drone through her nose for me, and I was so excited I never looked.  I just dipped and
faded on the spot.  I faded all right too, for I couldn't jump nearly across, and when I landed
in pure clay that had been covered with water for three weeks, I went down to my knees in mud,
to my waist in water, and lost my balance and fell backward.

A man passing on horseback pried me out with a rail and helped me home. Of course he didn't
know how I happened to fall in, and I was too chilled to talk.  I noticed May only said I fell,
so I went to bed scorched inside with red pepper tea, and never told a word about dipping and
fading.  Leon whispered and said he bet it was the last time I would play that, so as soon
as my coat and dress were washed and dried, and I could go back to school, I did it again,
just to show him I was no cowardy-calf; but I had learned from May to choose a puddle I could
manage before I faded.

CHAPTER IX

"Even So"

  "All things whatsoever ye would
  That men should do to you,
  Do ye even so to them."

Our big girls and boys always made a dreadful fuss and said we would catch every disease you
could mention, but mother and father were set about it, just like the big rocks in the hills.
They said they, themselves, once had been at the mercy of the people, and they knew how it
felt.  Mother said when they were coming here in a wagon, and she had ridden until she had
to walk to rest her feet, and held a big baby until her arms became so tired she drove while
father took it, and when at last they saw a house and stopped, she said if the woman hadn't
invited her in, and let her cook on the stove, given her milk and eggs, and furnished her a
bed to sleep in once in a while, she couldn't have reached here at all; and she never had been
refused once.  Then she always quoted:  "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye EVEN SO to them."

Father said there were men who made a business of splitting hairs, and of finding different
meanings in almost everything in the Bible.  I would like to have seen any one split hairs
about that, or it made to mean something else.  Of all the things in the Bible that you had
to do because it said to, whether you liked it or not, that was the one you struck oftenest
in life and it took the hardest pull to obey.  It was just the hatefulest text of any, and
made you squirm most.  There was no possible way to get around it.  It meant, that if you liked
a splinter new slate, and a sharp pencil all covered with gold paper, to make pictures and
write your lessons, when Clarissa Polk sat next you and sang so low the teacher couldn't hear
until she put herself to sleep on it, "I WISHT I had a slate!  I wisht I HAD a slate!  I wisht
I had a SLATE!  Oh I WISHT I HAD A SLATE!"--it meant that you just had to wash up yours and
stop making pictures yourself, and pass it over; you even had to smile when you offered it,
if you did it right.  I seldom got through it as the Lord would, for any one who loaned Clarissa
a slate knew that it would come back with greasy, sweaty finger marks on it you almost had
to dig a hole to wash off, and your pencil would be wet.  And if there were the least flaw
of crystal in the pencil, she found it, and bore down so hard that what she wrote never would
come off.

The Lord always seemed bigger and more majestic to me, than at any other time, when I remembered
that He could have known all that, and yet smiled as He loaned Clarissa His slate.  And that
old Bible thing meant, too, that if you would like it if you were travelling a long way, say
to California to hunt gold, or even just to Indiana, to find a farm fit to live on--it meant
that if you were tired, hungry, and sore, and would want to be taken in and fed and rested,
you had to let in other people when they reached your house.  Father and mother had been through
it themselves, and they must have been tired as could be, before they reached Sarah Hood's
and she took them in, and rested and fed them, even when they were only a short way from the
top of the Little Hill, where next morning they looked down and stopped the wagon, until they
chose the place to build their house.  Sarah Hood came along, and helped mother all day, so
by night she was settled in the old cabin that was on the land, and ready to go to work making
money to build a new one, and then a big house, and fix the farm all beautiful like it was
then.  They knew so well how it felt, that they kept one bed in the boys' room, and any man
who came at dusk got his supper, to sleep there, and his breakfast, and there never was anything
to pay. The girls always scolded dreadfully about the extra washing, but mother said she slept
on sheets when she came out, and some one washed them.

One time Sally said:  "Mother, have you ever figured out how many hundred sheets you've washed
since, to pay for that?"

Mother said:  "No, but I just hope it will make a stack high enough for me to climb from into
Heaven."

Sally said:  "The talk at the church always led me to think that you flew to Heaven."

Mother answered:  "So I get there, I don't mind if I creep."

Then Sally knew it was time to stop.  We always knew.  And we stopped, too!

We had heard that "All things" quotation, until the first two words were as much as mother
ever needed repeat of it any more, and we had cooked, washed for, and waited on people travelling,
until Leon got so when he saw any one coming--of course we knew all the neighbours, and their
horses and wagons and carriages--he always said:  "Here comes another 'Even So!'"  He said
we had done "even so" to people until it was about our share, but mother said our share was
going to last until the Lord said, "Well done, good and faithful servant," and took us home.
She had much more about the stranger at the gate and entertaining angels unawares; why, she
knew every single thing in the Bible that meant it was her duty to feed and give a bed to any
one, no matter how dirty or miserable looking he was!  So when Leon came in one evening at
dusk and said, "There's another 'Even So' coming down the Little Hill!" all of us knew that
we'd have company for the night, and we had.

I didn't like that man, but some of the others seemed to find him amusing.  Maybe it was because
I had nothing to do but sit and watch him, and so I saw more of him than the ones who came
and went all the time.  As long as there was any one in the room, he complained dreadfully
about his sore foot, and then cheered up and talked, and he could tell interesting things.
He was young, but he must have been most everywhere and seen everything.  He was very brave
and could stand off three men who were going to take from him the money he was carrying to
buy a piece of land in Illinois.  The minute the grown folks left the room to milk, do the
night feeding, and begin supper, he twisted in his chair and looked at every door, and went
and stood at the back dining-room window, where he could see the barn and what was out there,
and coming back he took a peep into father's and mother's room, and although he limped dreadfully
when he came, he walked like any one when he went over and picked up father's gun and looked
to see if it were loaded, and seemed mighty glad when he found it wasn't.  Father said he could
load in a flash when it was necessary, but he was dubious about a loaded gun in a house full
of children.  Not one of us ever touched it, until the boys were big enough to have permission,
like Laddie and Leon had.  He said a gun was such a great "moral persuader," that the sight
of one was mostly all that was needed, and nobody could tell by looking at it whether it was
loaded or not.  This man could, for he examined the lock and smiled in a pleased way over it,
and he never limped a step going back to his chair.  He kept on complaining, until father told
him before bedtime that he had better rest a day or two, and mother said that would be a good idea.

He talked so much we couldn't do our lessons or spell very well, but it was Friday and we'd
have another chance Saturday, so it didn't make so much difference.  Father said the traveller
must be tired and sleepy and Leon should take a light and show him to bed.  He stayed so long
father went to the foot of the stairway, and asked him why he didn't come down and he said
he was in bed too.  The next morning he was sleepy at breakfast and Laddie said it was no wonder,
because Leon and the traveller were talking when he went upstairs.  The man turned to father
and said: "That's a mighty smart boy, Mr. Stanton."  Father frowned and said:  "Praise to the
face is open disgrace.  I hope he will be smart enough not to disgrace us, anyway."

The traveller said he was sure he would be, and we could see that he had taken a liking to
Leon, for he went with him to the barn to help do the morning feeding.  They stayed so long
mother sent me to call them, and when I got there, the man was telling Leon how foolish it
was for boys to live on a farm; how they never would amount to anything unless they went to
cities, and about all the fun there was there, and how nice it was to travel, even along the
roads, because every one fed you, and gave you a good bed.  He forgot that walking had made
his foot lame, and I couldn't see, to save me, why he was going to spend his money to buy a
farm, if he thought a town the only place where it was fit to live.

He stayed all Saturday, and father said Sunday was no suitable time to start on a journey again,
and the man's foot was bad when father was around, so it would be better to wait until Monday.
The traveller tagged Leon and told him what a fine fellow he was, how smart he was, and to
prove it, Leon boasted about everything he knew, and showed the man all over the farm.

I even saw them pass the Station in the orchard, and heard Leon brag how father had been an
agent for the Governor; but of course he didn't really show him the place, and probably it
would have made no difference if he had, for all the money must have been spent on Sally's
wedding.  Of course father might have put some there he had got since, or that money might
never have been his at all, but it seemed as if it would be, because it was on his land.

Sunday evening all of us attended church, but the traveller was too tired, so when Leon said
he'd stay with him, father thought it was all right.  I could see no one wanted to leave the
man alone in the house. He said they'd go to bed early, and we came in quite late.  The lamp
was turned low, the door unlocked, and everything in place.  Laddie went to bed without a candle,
and said he'd undress and slip in easy so as not to waken them.

In the morning when he got up the traveller's bed hadn't been slept in, and neither had Leon's.
The gun was gone, and father stared at mother, and mother stared at Laddie, and he turned and
ran straight toward the Station, and in a minute he was back, whiter than a plate.  He just
said:  "All gone!"  Father and mother both sat down suddenly and hard. Then Laddie ran to the
barn and came back and said none of the horses had been taken.  Soon they went into the parlour
and shut the door, and when they came out father staggered and mother looked exactly like Sabethany.
Laddie ran to the barn, saddled Flos and rode away.  Father wanted to ring an alarm on the
dinner bell, like he had a call arranged to get all the neighbours there quickly if we had
sickness or trouble, and mother said:  "Paul, you shall not!  He's so young!  We've got to
keep this as long as we can, and maybe the Lord will help us find him, and we can give him
another chance."

Father started to say something, and mother held up her hand and just said, "Paul!" and he
sank back in the chair and kept still.  Mother always had spoken of him as "the Head of the
Family," and here he wasn't at all!  He minded her quickly as I would.

When Miss Amelia came downstairs they let her start to school and never told her a word, but
mother said May and I were not to go.  So I slipped out and ran through the orchard to look
at the Station, and sure enough! the stone was rolled back, the door open and the can lying
on the floor.  I slid down and picked it up, and there was one sheet of paper money left in
it stuck to the sides.  It was all plain as a pikestaff.  Leon must have thought the money
had been spent, and showed the traveller the Station, just to brag, and he guessed there might
be something there, and had gone while we were at church and taken it.  He had all night the
start of us, and he might have a horse waiting somewhere, and be almost to Illinois by this
time, and if the money belonged to father, there would be no Christmas; and if it happened
to be the money the county gave him to pay the men who worked the roads every fall, and Miss
Amelia, or collections from the church, he'd have to pay it back, even if it put him in debt;
and if he died, they might take the land, like he said; and where on earth was Leon?  Knew
what he'd done and hiding, I bet!  He needed the thrashing he would get that time, and I started
out to hunt him and have it over with, so mother wouldn't be uneasy about him yet; and then
I remembered Laddie had said Leon hadn't been in bed all night.  He was gone too!

Maybe he wanted to try life in a city, where the traveller had said everything was so grand;
but he must have known that he'd kill his mother if he went, and while he didn't kiss her so
often, and talk so much as some of us, I never could see that he didn't run quite as fast to
get her a chair or save her a step.  He was so slim and light he could race for the doctor
faster than Laddie or father, either one.  Of course he loved his mother, just as all of us
did; he never, never could go away and not let her know about it.  If he had gone, that watchful-eyed
man, who was lame only part of the time, had taken the gun and made him go.  I thought I might
as well save the money he'd overlooked, so I gripped it tight in my hand, and put it in my
apron pocket, the same as I had Laddie's note to the Princess, and started to the barn, on
the chance that Leon might be hiding.  I knew precious well I would, if I were in his place.
So I hunted the granaries, the haymow, the stalls, then I stood on the threshing floor and
cried: "Leon!  If you're hiding come quick!  Mother will be sick with worrying and father will
be so glad to see you, he won't do anything much.  Do please hurry!"

Then I listened, and all I could hear was a rat gnawing at a corner of the granary under the
hay.  Might as well have saved its teeth, it would strike a strip of tin when it got through,
but of course it couldn't know that.  Then I went to every hole around the haystack, where
the cattle had eaten; none were deep yet, like they would be later in the season, and all the
way I begged of Leon to come out. Once a rooster screamed, flew in my face and scared me good,
but no Leon; so I tried the corn crib, the implement shed, and the wood house, climbing the
ladder with the money still gripped in one hand.  Then I slipped in the front door, up the
stairs, and searched the garret, even away back where I didn't like to very well.  At last
I went to the dining-room, and I don't think either father or mother had moved, while Sabethany
turned to stone looked good compared with them.  Seemed as if it would have been better if
they'd cried, or scolded, or anything but just sit there as they did, when you could see by
their moving once in a while that they were alive.  In the kitchen Candace and May finished
the morning work, and both of them cried steadily.  I slipped to May, "Whose money was it?"
I whispered.  "Father's, or the county's, or the church's?"

"All three," said May.

"The traveller took it."

"How would he find it?  None of us knew there was such a place before."

"Laddie seemed to know!"

"Oh Laddie!  Father trusts him about everything."

"They don't think HE told?"

"Of course not, silly.  It's Leon who is gone!"

"Leon may have told about the Station!" I cried.  "He didn't touch the money.  He never touched
it!"

Then I went straight to father.  Keeping a secret was one thing; seeing the only father you
had look like that, was another.  I held out the money.

"There's one piece old Even So didn't get, anyway," I said.  "Found it on the floor of the
Station, where it was stuck to the can.  And I thought Leon must be hiding for fear he'd be
whipped for telling, but I've hunted where we usually hide, and promised him everything under
the sun if he'd come out; but he didn't, so I guess that traveller man must have used the gun
to make him go along."

Father sat and stared at me.  He never offered to touch the money, not even when I held it
against his hand.  So I saw that money wasn't the trouble, else he'd have looked quick enough
to see how much I had. They were thinking about Leon being gone, at least father was.  Mother
called me to her and asked:  "You knew about the Station?"

I nodded.

"When?"

"On the way back from taking Amanda Deam her ducks this summer."

"Leon was with you?"

"He found it."

"What were you doing?"

"Sitting on the fence eating apples.  We were wondering why that ravine place wasn't cleaned
up, when everywhere else was, and then Leon said there might be a reason.  He told about having
seen a black man, and that he was hidden some place, and we hunted there and found it.  We
rolled back the stone, and opened the door, and Leon went in, and both of us saw a can full
of money."

"Go on."

"We didn't touch it, mother!  Truly we didn't!  Leon said we'd found something not intended
for children, and we'd be whipped sick if we ever went near or told, and we never did, not
even once, unless Leon wanted to boast to the traveller man, but if he showed him the place,
he thought sure the money had all been spent on the wedding and sending Shelley away."

Father's arms shot out, and his head pitched on the table.  Mother got up and began to walk
the floor, and never went near or even touched him.  I couldn't bear it.  I went and pulled
his arm and put the bill under his hand.

"Leon didn't take your money!  He didn't!  He didn't!  I just know he didn't!  He does tricks
because they are so funny, or he thinks they'll be, but he doesn't steal!  He doesn't touch
a single thing that is not his, only melons, or chicken out of the skillet, or bread from the
cellar; but not money and things.  I take gizzards and bread myself, but I don't steal, and
Leon or none of us do!  Oh father, we don't! Not one of us do!  Don't you remember about 'Thou
shalt not,' and the Crusaders?  Leon's the best fighter of any of us.  I'm not sure that he
couldn't even whip Laddie, if he got mad enough!  Maybe he can't whip the traveller if he has
the gun, but, father, Leon simply couldn't take the money.  Laddie will stay home and work,
and all of us.  We can help get it back.  We can sell a lot of things.  Laddie will sell Flos
before he'll see you suffer so; and all of us will give up Christmas, and we'll work!  We'll
work as hard as ever we can, and maybe you could spare the little piece Joe Risdell wants to
build his cabin on.  We can manage about the money, father, indeed we can.  But you don't dare
think Leon took it!  He never did!  Why, he's yours!  Yours and mother's!"

Father lifted his head and reached out his arms.

"You blessing!" he said.  "You blessing from the Lord!"

Then he gave me a cold, stiff kiss on the forehead, went to mother, took her arm, and said:
"Come, mommy, let's go and tell the Lord about it, and then we'll try to make some plan.  Perhaps
Laddie will be back with word soon."

But he almost had to carry her.  Then we could hear him praying, and he was so anxious, and
he made it so earnest it sounded exactly like the Lord was in our room and father was talking
right to His face.  I tried to think, and this is what I thought: as father left the room,
he looked exactly as I had seen Mr. Pryor more than once, and my mother had both hands gripped
over her heart, and she said we must not let any one know.  Now if something could happen to
us to make my father look like the Princess' and my mother hold her heart with both hands,
and if no one were to know about it like they had said, how were we any different from Pryors?
We might be of the Lord's anointed, but we could get into the same kind of trouble the infidels
could, and have secrets ourselves, or at least it seemed as if it might be very nearly the
same, when it made father and mother look and act the way they did. I wondered if we'd have
to leave our lovely, lovely home, cross a sea and be strangers in a strange land, as Laddie
said; and if people would talk about us, and make us feel that being a stranger was the loneliest,
hardest thing in all the world.  Well, if mysteries are like this, and we have to live with
one days and years, the Lord have mercy on us!  Then I saw the money lying on the table, so
I took it and put it in the Bible.  Then I went out and climbed the catalpa tree to watch for
Laddie.

Soon I saw a funny thing, such as I never before had seen.  Coming across the fields, straight
toward our house, sailing over the fences like a bird, came the Princess on one of her horses.
Its legs stretched out so far its body almost touched the ground, and it lifted up and swept
over the rails.  She took our meadow fence lengthwiselike, and at the hitching rack she threw
the bridle over the post, dismounted, and then I saw she had been riding astride, like a man.
I ran before her and opened the sitting-room door, but no one was there, so I went on to the
dining-room.  Father had come in, and mother was sitting in her chair.  Both of them looked
at the Princess and never said a word.

She stopped inside the dining-room door and spoke breathlessly, as if she as well as the horse
had raced.

"I hope I'm not intruding," she said, "but a man north of us told our Thomas in the village
that robbers had taken quite a large sum of hidden money you held for the county, and church,
and of your own, and your gun, and got away while you were at church last night.  Is it true?"

"Practically," said my father.

Then my mother motioned toward a chair.

"You are kind to come," she said.  "Won't you be seated?"

The Princess stepped to the chair, but she gripped the back in both hands and stood straight,
breathing fast, her eyes shining with excitement, her lips and cheeks red, so lovely you just
had to look, and look.

"No," she said.  "I'll tell you why I came, and then if there is nothing I can do here, and
no errand I can ride for you, I'll go. Mother has heart trouble, the worst in all the world,
the kind no doctor can ever hope to cure, and sometimes, mostly at night, she is driven to
have outside air.  Last night she was unusually ill, and I heard her leave the house, after
I'd gone to my room.  I watched from my window and saw her take a seat on a bench under the
nearest tree.  I was moving around and often I looked to see if she were still there. Then
the dogs began to rave, and I hurried down.  They used to run free, but lately, on account
of her going out, father has been forced to tie them at night.  They were straining at their
chains, and barking dreadfully.  I met her at the door, but she would only say some one passed
and gave her a fright.  When Thomas came in and told what he had heard, she said instantly
that she had seen the man.

"She said he was about the size of Thomas, that he came from your direction, that he ran when
our dogs barked, but he kept beside the fences, and climbed over where there were trees.  He
crossed our barnyard and went toward the northwest.  Mother saw him distinctly as he reached
the road, and she said he was not a large man, he stooped when he ran, and she thought he moved
like a slinking, city thief.  She is sure he's the man who took your money; she says he acted
exactly as if he were trying to escape pursuit; but I was to be SURE to tell you that he didn't
carry a gun.  If your gun is gone, there must have been two, and the other man took that and
went a different way.  Did two men stop here?"

"No," said father.  "Only one."

The Princess looked at him thoughtfully.

"Do you think, Mr. Stanton," she said, "that the man who took the money would burden himself
with a gun?  Isn't a rifle heavy for one in flight to carry?"

"It is," said father.  "Your mother saw nothing of two men?"

"Only one, and she knows he didn't carry a gun.  Except the man you took in, no stranger has
been noticed around here lately?"

"No one.  We are quite careful.  Even the gun was not loaded as it stood; whoever took it carried
the ammunition also, but he couldn't fire until he loaded."

Father turned to the corner where the gun always stood and then he stooped and picked up two
little white squares from the floor.

They were bits of unbleached muslin in which he wrapped the bullets he made.

"The rifle was loaded before starting, and in a hurry," he said, as he held up the squares
of muslin.  Then he scratched a match, bent, and ran it back and forth over the floor, and
at one place there was a flash, and the flame went around in funny little fizzes as it caught
a grain of powder here and there.  "You see the measure was overrun."

"Wouldn't the man naturally think the gun was loaded, and take it as it stood?"

"That would be a reasonable conclusion," said father.

"But he looked!" I cried.  "That first night when you and the boys went to the barn, and the
girls were getting supper, he looked at the gun, and he LIKED it when he saw it wasn't loaded.
He smiled.  And he didn't limp a mite when I was the only one in the room.  He and Leon knew
it wasn't loaded, and I guess he didn't load it, for he liked having it empty so well."

"Ummmm!" said father.  "What it would save in this world if a child only knew when to talk
and when to keep still.  Little Sister, the next time you see a stranger examine my gun when
I'm not in the room, suppose you take father out alone and whisper to him about it."

"Yes, sir," I said.

The way I wished I had told that at the right time made me dizzy, but then there were several
good switchings I'd had for telling things, besides what Sally did to me about her and Peter.
I would have enjoyed knowing how one could be sure.  Hereafter, it will be all right about
the gun, anyway.

"Could I take my horse and carry a message anywhere for you?  Are both your sons riding to
tell the neighbours?"

Father hesitated, but it seemed as if he stopped to think, so I just told her:  "Laddie is
riding.  Leon didn't take a horse."

Father said there was nothing she could do, so she took my hand and we started for the gate.

"I do hope they will find him, and get back the money, and give him what he deserves!" she cried.

"Yes, father and mother are praying that they'll find him," I said. "It doesn't seem to make
the least difference to them about the money. Father didn't even look at a big paper piece
I found where it was hidden.  But they are anxious about the man.  Mother says he is so young,
we just must find him, and keep this a secret, and give him another chance.  You won't tell,
will you?"

The Princess stood still on our walk, and then of all things!  if she didn't begin to go Sabethany-like.
The colour left her cheeks and lips and she shivered and shook and never said one word.  I
caught her arm. "Say, what ails you?" I cried.  "You haven't gone and got heart trouble too,
have you?"

She stood there trembling, and then, wheeling suddenly, ran back into the house, and went to
my mother.  On her knees, the Princess buried her face in mother's breast and said:  "Oh Mrs.
Stanton!  Oh, if I only could help you!"

She began to cry as if something inside her had broken, and she'd shake to pieces.

Mother stared above her head at father, with her eyebrows raised high, and he waved his hand
toward me.  Mother turned to me, but already she had put her arms around the Princess, and
was trying to hold her together.

"What did you tell her that made her come back?" she asked sternlike.

"You forgot to explain that the man was so young, and you wanted to keep it a secret and give
him another chance," I said.  "I just asked her not to tell."

Mother looked at father and all the colour went from her face, and she began to shake.  He
stared at her, then he opened her door and lifted the Princess with one arm, and mother with
the other, and helped them into mother's room, stepped back and closed the door.  After a while
it opened and they came out together, with both mother's arms around the Princess, and she
had cried until she staggered.  Mother lifted her face and kissed her, when they reached the
door and said:  "Tell your mother I understand enough to sympathize.  Carry her my love.  I
do wish she would give herself the comfort of asking God to help her."

"She does!  Oh, I'm sure she does!" said the Princess.  "It's father who has lost all judgment
and reason."

Father went with her to the gate, and this time she needed help to mount her horse, and she
left it to choose its way and go where it pleased on the road.  When father came in he looked
at mother, and she said:  "I haven't the details, but she understands too well.  The Pryor
mystery isn't much of a mystery any more.  God help their poor souls, and save us from suffering
like that!"

She said so little and meant so much, I couldn't figure out exactly what she did mean, but
father seemed to understand.

"I've often wondered," he said, but he didn't say what he wondered, and he hurried to the barn
and saddled our best horse and came in and began getting ready to ride, and we knew he would
go northwest.  I went back to the catalpa tree and wondered myself; but it was too much for
me to straighten out: just why my mother wanting to give the traveller man another chance would
make the Princess feel like that.  If she had known my mother as I did, she'd have known that
she ALWAYS wanted to give every man a second chance, no matter whether he was young or old.

Then I saw Laddie coming down the Big Hill beside the church, but he was riding so fast I thought
he wouldn't want to bother with me, so I slid from the tree, and ran to tell mother.  She went
to the door and watched as he rode up, but you could see by his face he had not heard of them.

"Nothing, but I have some men out.  I am going east now," he said.  "I wish, father, you would
rub Flos down, blanket her, and if you can, walk her slowly an hour while she cools off.  I
am afraid I've ruined her.  How much had you there?"

"I haven't stopped to figure," said father.  "I think I'd better take the horse I have ready
and go on one of the northwest roads.  The Pryor girl was here a few moments ago, and her mother
saw a man cross their place about the right time last evening.  He ran and acted suspiciously
when the dogs barked.  But he was alone and he didn't have a gun."

"Was she sure?"

"Positive."

"Then it couldn't have been our man, but I'll ride in that direction and start a search.  They
would keep to the woods, I think!  You'd better stay with mother.  I'll ask Jacob Hood to take
your place."

So Laddie rode away again without even going into the house, and mother said to father:  "What
can he be saying to people, that the neighbours don't come?"

Father answered:  "I don't know, but if any one can save the situation, Laddie will."

Mother went to bed, while father sat beside her reading aloud little scraps from the Bible,
and they took turns praying.  From the way they talked to the Lord, you could plainly see that
they were reminding Him of all the promises He had made to take care of people, comfort those
in trouble, and heal the broken-hearted.

One thing was so curious, I asked May if she noticed, and she had. When they had made such
a fuss about money only a short while before, and worked so hard to get our share together,
and when they would have to pay back all that belonged to the county and church, neither of
them ever even mentioned money then.  Every minute I expected father to ask where I'd put the
piece I found, and when he opened right at it, in the Bible, he turned on past, exactly as
if it were an obituary, or a piece of Sally's wedding dress, or baby hair from some of our
heads.  He went on hunting places where the Lord said sure and strong that He'd help people
who loved Him.  When either of them prayed, they asked the Lord to help those near them who
were in trouble, as often and earnestly as they begged Him to help them.  There were no people
near us who were in trouble that we knew of, excepting Pryors.  Hard as father and mother worked,
you'd have thought the Lord wouldn't have minded if they asked only once to get the money back,
or if they forgot the neighbours, but they did neither one.

May said because they were big like that was why all of us loved them so.

I would almost freeze in the catalpa, but as I could see far in all directions there, I went
back, and watched the roads, and when I remembered what Laddie had said, I kept an eye on the
fields too.  At almost dusk, and frozen so stiff I could scarcely hang to the limb, I heard
the bulldogs at Pryors' begin to rave.  They kept on steadily, and I thought Gypsies must be
passing.  Then from the woods came a queer party that started across the cornfield toward the
Big Meadow in front of the house, and I thought they were hunters.  I stood in the tree and
watched until they climbed the meadow fence, and by that time I could see plainly.

The traveller man got over first, then Leon and the dogs, and then Mr. Pryor handed Leon the
gun, leaped over, and took it.  I looked again, and then fell from the tree and almost bursted.
As soon as I could get up, and breathe, I ran to the front door, screaming:  "Father!  Father!
Come open the Big Gate.  Leon's got him, but he's so tired Mr. Pryor is carrying the gun, and
helping him walk!"

Just like one, all of us ran; father crossed the road, and opened the gate.  The traveller
man wouldn't look up, he just slouched along.  But Leon's chin was up and his head high.  He
was scratched, torn, and dirty.  He was wheezing every breath most from his knees, and Mr.
Pryor half carried him and the gun.  When they met us, Leon reached in his trousers pocket
and drew out a big roll of money that he held toward father.  "My fault!" he gasped.  "But
I got it back for you."

Then he fell over and father caught him in his arms and carried him into the house, and laid
him on the couch in the dining-room.

Mr. Pryor got down and gathered up the money from the road.  He followed into the house and
set the gun in the corner.

"Don't be frightened," he said to mother.  "The boy has walked all night, and all day, with
no sleep or food, and the gun was a heavy load for him.  I gathered from what he said, when
the dogs let us know they were coming, that this hound took your money.  Your dog barked and
awakened the boy and he loaded the gun and followed.  The fellow had a good start and he didn't
get him until near daybreak.  It's been a stiff pull for the youngster and he seems to feel
it was his fault that this cowardly cur you sheltered learned where you kept your money.  If
that is true, I hope you won't be hard on him!"

Father was unfastening Leon's neckband, mother was rubbing his hands, Candace was taking off
his shoes, and May was spilling water father had called for, all over the carpet, she shook
so.  When Leon drew a deep breath and his head rolled on the pillow, father looked at Mr. Pryor.
I don't think he heard all of it, but he caught the last words.

"'Hard on him!  Hard on him!'" he said, the tears rolling down his cheeks.  "'This my son,
who was lost, is found!'"

"Oh!" shouted Mr. Pryor, slamming the money on the table.  "Poor drivel to fit the circumstances.
If I stood in your boots, sir, I would rise up in the mighty strength of my pride and pull
out foundation stones until I shook the nation!  I never envied mortal man as I envy you to-day!"

Candace cried out:  "Oh look, his poor feet!  They are blistered and bleeding!"

Mother moved down a little, gathered them in her arms, and began kissing them.  Father wet
Leon's lips and arose.  He held out his hand, and Mr. Pryor took it.

"I will pray God," he said, "that it may happen 'even so' to you."

Leon opened his eyes and caught only the last words.

"You had better look out for the 'Even So's,' father," he said.

And father had to laugh, but Mr. Pryor went out, and slammed the door, until I looked to see
if it had cracked from top to bottom; but we didn't care if it had, we were so happy over having
Leon back.

I went and picked up the money and carried it to father to put away, and that time he took
it.  But even then he didn't stop to see if he had all of it.

"You see!" I said, "I told you----"

"You did indeed!" said father.  "And you almost saved our reason. There are times when things
we have come to feel we can't live without, so press us, that money seems of the greatest importance.
This is our lesson.  Hereafter, I and all my family, who have been through this, will know
that money is not even worth thinking about when the life and honour of one you love hangs
in the balance.  When he can understand, your brother shall know of the wondrous faith his
Little Sister had in him."

"Maybe he won't like what you and mother thought.  Maybe we better not tell him.  I can keep
secrets real well.  I have several big ones I've never told, and I didn't say a word about
the Station when Leon said I shouldn't."

"After this there will be no money kept on the place," said father. "It's saving time at too
great cost.  All we have goes into the bank, and some of us will cheerfully ride for what we
want, when we need it. As for not telling Leon, that is as your mother decides.  For myself,
I believe I'd feel better to make a clean breast of it."

Mother heard, for she sobbed as she bathed Leon's feet, and when his eyes came open so they'd
stay a little while, he kept looking at her so funny, between sips of hot milk.

"Don't CRY, mammy!" he said.  "I'M all right.  Sorry such a rumpus! Let him fool me.  Be smart
as the next fellow, after this!  Know how glad you are to get the money!"

Mother sat back on her heels and roared as I do when I step in a bumblebee's nest, and they
get me.  Leon was growing better every minute, and he stared at her, and then his dealish,
funny old grin began to twist his lips and he cried:  "Oh golly!  You thought I helped take
it and went with him, didn't you?"

"Oh my son, my son!" wailed mother until she made me think of Absalom under the oak.

"Well, I be ding-busted!" said Leon, sort of slow and wondering-like, and father never opened
his head to tell him that was no way to talk.

Mother cried more than ever, and between sobs she tried to explain that I heard what the traveller
man had said about how bad it was to live in the country; and how Leon was now at an age where
she'd known boys to get wrong ideas, and how things looked, and in the middle of it he raised
on his elbow and took her in his arms and said:  "Well of all the geese!  And I 'spose father
was in it too!  But since it's the first time, and since it is you----!  Go to bed now, and
let me sleep----  But see that you don't ever let this happen again."

Then he kissed her over and over and clung to her tight and at last dropped back and groaned:

  "My reputation, O my reputation!
   I've lost my reputation!"

She had to laugh while the tears were still running, and father and Laddie looked at each other
and shouted.  I guess they thought Leon was about right after that.  Laddie went and bent over
him and took his hand.

"Don't be in quite such a hurry, old man," he said.  "Before you wink out I have got to tell
you how proud I am of having a brother who is a real Crusader.  The Lord knows this took nerve!
You're great, boy, simply great!"

Leon grabbed Laddie's hand with both of his and held tight and laughed. You could see the big
tears squeeze out, although he fought to wink them back.  He held to Laddie and said low-like,
only for him to hear: "It's all right if you stay by a while, old man."

He began to talk slowly.

"It was a long time before I caught up, and then I had to hide, and follow until day, and he
wasn't so very easy to handle.  Once I thought he had me sure!  It was an awful load, but if
it hadn't been for the good old gun, I'd never have got him.  When we mixed up, I had fine
luck getting that chin punch on him; good thing I worked it out so slick on Absalom Saunders,
and while old Even So was groggy I got the money away from him, took the gun, and stood back
some distance, before he came out of it.  Once we had it settled who walked ahead, and who
carried the money and gun, we got along better, but I had to keep an eye on him every minute.
To come through the woods was the shortest, but I'm tired out, and so is he.  Getting close
I most felt sorry for him, he was so forlorn, and so scared about what would be done to him.
He stopped and pulled out another roll, and offered me all of it, if I'd let him go.  I didn't
know whether it was really his, or part of father's, so I told him he could just drop it until
I found out.  Made him sweat blood, but I had the gun, and he had to mind.  I was master then.
So there may be more in the roll I gave father than Even So took.  Father can figure up and
keep what belongs to him.  Even So had gone away past Flannigans' before I tackled him, and
I was sleepy, cold, and hungry; you'd have thought there'd have been a man out hunting, or
passing on the road, but not a soul did we see 'til Pryors'!  Say, the old man was bully! 
He helped me so, I almost thought I belonged to him!  My! he's fine, when you know him!  After
he came on the job, you bet old Even So walked up.  Say, where is he? Have you fed him?"

Laddie looked at father, who was listening, and we all rushed to the door, but it must have
been an hour, and Even So hadn't waited.  Father said it was a great pity, because a man like
that shouldn't be left to prey on the community; but mother said she didn't want to be mixed
up with a trial, or to be responsible for taking the liberty of a fellow creature, and father
said that was exactly like a woman.  Leon went to sleep, but none of us thought of going to
bed; we just stood around and looked at him, and smiled over him, and cried about him, until
you would have thought he had been shipped to us in a glass case, and cost, maybe, a hundred
dollars.

Father got out his books and figured up his own and the road money, and Miss Amelia's, and
the church's.  Laddie didn't want her around, so he stopped at the schoolhouse and told her
to stay at Justices' that night, we'd need all our rooms; but she didn't like being sent away
when there was such excitement, but every one minded Laddie when he said so for sure.

When father had everything counted there was more than his, quite a lot of it, stolen from
other people who sheltered the traveller no doubt, father said.  We thought he wouldn't be
likely to come back for it, and father said he was at loss what to do with it, but Laddie said
he wasn't--it was Leon's--he had earned it; so father said he would try to find out if anything
else had been stolen, and he'd keep it a year, and then if no one claimed it, he would put
it on interest until Leon decided what he wanted to do with it.

When you watched Leon sleep you could tell a lot more about what had happened to him than he
could.  He moaned, and muttered constantly, and panted, and felt around for the gun, and breathed
like he was running again, and fought until Laddie had to hold him on the couch, and finally
awakened him.  But it did no good; he went right off to sleep again, and it happened all over.
Then father began getting his Crusader blood up, although he always said he was a man of peace.
But it was a lucky thing Even So got away; for after father had watched Leon a while, he said
if that man had been on the premises, his fingers itched so to get at him, he was positive
he'd have vented a little righteous indignation on him that would have cost him within an inch
of his life.  And he'd have done it too!  He was like that.  It took a lot, and it was slow
coming, but when he became angry enough, and felt justified in it, why you'd be much safer
to be some one else than the man who provoked him.

After ten o'clock the dog barked, some one tapped, and father went; he always would open the
door; you couldn't make him pretend he was asleep, or not at home when he was, and there stood
Mr. Pryor.  He said they could see the lights and they were afraid the boy was ill, and could
any of them help.  Father said there was nothing they could do; Leon was asleep.  Then Mr.
Pryor said:  "If he is off sound, so it won't disturb him, I would like to see him again."

Father told him Leon was restless, but so exhausted a railroad train wouldn't waken him, so
Mr. Pryor came in and went to the couch.  He took off his hat, like you do beside a grave,
while his face slowly grew whiter than his hair, and that would be snow-white; then he turned
at last and stumbled toward the door.  Laddie held it for him, but he didn't seem to remember
he was there.  He muttered over and over: "Why?  Why?  In the name of God, why?"  Laddie followed
to the gate to help him on his horse, because he thought he was almost out of his head, but
he had walked across the fields, so Laddie kept far behind and watched until he saw him go
safely inside his own door.

I think father and Laddie sat beside Leon all night.  The others went to sleep.  A little after
daybreak, just as Laddie was starting to feed, there was an awful clamour, and here came a
lot of neighbours with Even So.  Mr. Freshett had found him asleep in a cattle hole in the
straw stack, and searched him, and he had more money, and that made Mr. Freshett sure; and
as he was very strong, and had been for years a soldier, and really loved to fight, he marched
poor Even So back to our house.  Every few rods they met more men out searching who came with
them, until there were so many, our front yard and the road were crowded.  Of all the sights
you ever saw, Even So looked the worst. You could see that he'd drop over at much more.  Those
men kept crying they were going to hang him; but mother went out and talked to them, and said
they mustn't kill a man for taking only money.  She told them how little it was worth compared
with other things; she had Candace bring Even So a cup of hot coffee, lots of bread, and sausage
from the skillet, and she said it was our money, and our lad, and we wanted nothing done about
it.  The men didn't like it, but the traveller did. He grabbed and gobbled like a beast at
the hot food and cried, and mother said she forgave him, and to let him go.

Then Mr. Freshett looked awful disappointed, and he came up to father, with his back toward
mother, and asked:  "That's your say too, Mr. Stanton?"  Father grinned sort of rueful-like,
but he said to give Even So his money and let him go.  He told all about getting ours back,
and having had him at the house once before.  He brought the money Leon took from him, but
the men said no doubt he had stolen that, and Leon had earned it bringing him back, so the
traveller shouldn't have it. They took him away on a horse and said they'd let him go, but
that they'd escort him from the county.  Father told Mr. Freshett that he was a little suspicious
of them, and he would hold him responsible for the man's life.  Mr. Freshett said that he'd
give his word that the man would be safe; they only wanted to make sure he wouldn't come back,
and that he'd be careful in the future how he abused hospitality, so they went, and all of
us were glad of it.

I don't know what Mr. Freshett calls safe, for they took Even So to Groveville and locked him
up until night.  Then they led him to the railroad, and made him crawl back and forth through
an old engine beside the track, until he was blacker than any negro ever born; and then they
had him swallow a big dose of croton oil for his health. That was the only KIND thing they
did, for afterward they started him down the track and told him to run, and all of them shot
at his feet as he went.  Hannah Freshett told me at school the next day.  Her father said Even
So just howled, and flew up in the air, and ducked, and dodged and ran like he'd never walked
a step, or was a bit tired.  We made a game of it, and after that one of the boys was Even
So, and the others were the mob, and the one who could howl nicest, jump highest, and go fastest,
could be "It" oftenest.

Leon grew all right faster than you would think.  He went to school day after next, and the
boys were sick with envy.  They asked and asked, but Leon wouldn't tell much.  He didn't seem
to like to talk about it, and he wouldn't play the game or even watch us.  He talked a blue
streak about the money.  Father was going to write to every sheriff of the counties along the
way the man said he had come, and if he could find no one before spring who had been robbed,
he said Leon might do what he liked with the money.  I used to pretend it was coming to me,
and each day I thought of a new way to spend it.  Leon was so sure he'd get it he marched right
over and asked Mr. Pryor about a nice young thoroughbred horse, from his stables, and when
he came back he could get a coltlike one so very cheap that father and Laddie looked at each
other and gasped, and never said a word.  They figured up, and if Leon got the money, he could
have the horse, and save some for college, and from the start he never changed a mite about
those two things he wanted to do with it.  He had the horse picked out and went to the field
to feed and pet it and make it gentle, so he could ride bareback, and mother said he would
be almost sick if the owner of the money turned up.

Pulling his boots one night, father said so too, and that the thoughts of it worried him. 
He said Mr. Pryor had shaded his price so that if the money had to go, he would be tempted
to see if we couldn't manage it ourselves.  I don't know how shading the price of a horse would
make her feel better, but it did, and maybe Leon is going to get it.

"Watch me take the plunge!" said Laddie.

"'Mad frenzy fires him now,'" quoted Leon.

It was Sunday after dinner.  We had been to church and Sunday-school in the forenoon, and we
had a houseful of company for dinner.  All of them remained to spend the afternoon, because
in our home it was perfectly lovely.  We had a big dinner with everything good to start on,
and then we talked and visited and told all the news.  The women exchanged new recipes for
cooking, advised each other about how to get more work done with less worry, to doctor their
sick folks, and to make their dresses. At last, when every thing was talked over, and there
began to be a quiet time, father would reach across the table, pick up a paper and read all
the interesting things that had happened in the country during the past week; the jokes too,
and they made people think of funny stories to tell, and we just laughed.  In the Agriculturist
there were new ways to farm easier, to make land bear more crops; so he divided that with the
neighbours, also how to make gardens, and prune trees. Before he finished, he always managed
to work in a lot about being honest, kind, and loving God.

He and mother felt so good over Leon, and by this time they were beginning to see that they
were mighty glad about the money too.  It wouldn't have been so easy to work, and earn, and
pay back all that for our school, roads, and the church; and every day you could see plainer
how happy they felt that they didn't have to do it.  Because they were so glad about these
things, they invited every one they met that day; but we knew Saturday mother felt that probably
she would ask a crowd, from the chickens, pie, and cake she got ready.  When the reading part
was over, and the women were beginning to look at the clock, and you knew they felt they should
go home, and didn't want to, Laddie arose and said that, and Leon piped up like he always does
and made every one laugh.  Of course they looked at Laddie, and no one knew what he meant,
so all the women and a few of the men asked him.

"Watch me, I said," laughed Laddie as he left the room.

Soon Mrs. Dover, sitting beside the front window, cried:  "Here he is at the gate!"

He was on his horse, but he hitched it and went around the house and up the back way.  Before
long the stair door of the sitting-room opened, and there he stood.  We stared at him.  Of
course he was bathed, and in clean clothing to start with, but he had washed and brushed some
more, until he shone.  His cheeks were as smooth and as clear pink as any girl's, his eyes
blue-gray and big, with long lashes and heavy brows. His hair was bright brown and wavy, and
he was so big and broad.  He never had been sick a day in his life, and he didn't look as if
he ever would be.

And clothes DO make a difference.  He would have had exactly the same hair, face, and body,
wearing a hickory shirt and denim trousers; but he wouldn't have looked as he did in the clothes
he wore at college, when it was Sunday there, or he was invited to a party at the President's.
I don't see how any man could possibly be handsomer or look finer.  His shirt, collar, and
cuffs were snow-white, like everything had to be before mother got through with it; his big
loose tie almost reached his shoulders; and our men could do a thing no other man in the neighbourhood
did: they could appear easier in the finest suit they could put on than in their working clothes.

Mother used to say one thing she dreaded about Sunday was the evident tortures of the poor
men squirming in boots she knew pinched them, coats too tight, and collars too high.  She said
they acted like half-broken colts fretting over restriction.  Always she said to father and
the boys when they went to buy their new clothes:  "Now, DON'T join the harness fighters! 
Get your clothing big enough to set your bodies with comfort and ease."

I suppose those other men would have looked like ours if their mothers had told them.  You
can always see that a man needs a woman to help him out awful bad.

Of course Laddie knew he was handsome; he had to know all of them were looking at him curiously,
but he stood there buttoning his glove and laughing to himself until Sarah Hood asked:  "Now
what are you up to?"

He took a step toward her, ran one hand under her lanternjawed chin, pulled her head against
his side and turned up her face.

"Sarah," he said, "'member the day we spoiled the washing?"

Every one laughed.  They had made jokes about it until our friends knew what they meant.

"What are you going to spoil now?" asked Sarah.

"The Egyptians!  The 'furriners.' I'm going right after them!"

"Well, you could be in better business," said Sarah Hood sharply.

Laddie laughed and squeezed her chin, and hugged her head against him.

"Listen to that, now!" he cried.  "My best friend going back on me. Sarah, I thought you, of
all people, would wish me luck."

"I do!" she said instantly.  "And that's the very reason I don't want you mixed up with that
mysterious, offish, stuck-up mess."

"Bless your dear heart!" said Laddie, giving her a harder squeeze than ever.  "You got that
all wrong, Sarah.  You'll live to see the day, very shortly, when you'll change every word of it."

"I haven't done anything but get surer about it every day for two years, anyway," said Sarah Hood.

"Exactly!" said Laddie, "but wait until I have taken the plunge!  Let me tell you how the Pryor
family strikes me.  I think he is a high-tempered, domineering man, proud as Lucifer!  For
some cause, just or not, he is ruining his life and that of his family because he so firmly
believes it just; he is hiding here from his home country, his relatives, and friends.  I think
she is, barring you and mother, the handsomest woman of her age I ever saw----"

All of them laughed, because Sarah Hood was nearly as homely as a woman could grow, and maybe
other people didn't find our mother so lovely as we thought her.  I once heard one of her best
friends say she was "distinctly plain."  I didn't see how she could; but she said that.

"--and the most pitiful," Laddie went on.  "Sarah, what do you suppose sends a frail little
woman pacing the yard, and up and down the road, sometimes in storm and rain, gripping both
hands over her heart?"

"I suppose it's some shameful thing I don't want you mixed up with!" said Sarah Hood promptly,
and people just shouted.

"Sarah," said Laddie, "I've seen her closely, watched her move, and studied her expression.
There's not one grain of possibility that you, or mother, or Mrs. Fall, or any woman here,
could be any closer connected with SHAME.  Shame there is," said Laddie, "and what a word!
How it stings, burns, withers, and causes heart trouble and hiding; but shame in connection
with that woman, more than shame thrust upon her, which might come to any of us, at any time,
shame that is her error, in the life of a woman having a face like hers, Sarah, I am ashamed
of you!  Your only excuse is that you haven't persisted as I have until you got to see for
yourself."

"I am not much on persistence in the face of a locked door, a cast-iron man with a big cane,
and two raving bulldogs," said Mrs. Hood.  "Wait, young man!  Just wait until he sets them on you."

Laddie's head went back and how he laughed.

"Hist!  A word with you, Sarah!" he said.  "'Member I have a sort of knack with animals.  I
never yet have failed with one I undertook to win.  Now those bulldogs of Pryors' are as mild
as kittens with a man who knows the right word.  Reason I know, Sarah, I've said the word to
them, separately and collectively, and it worked.  There is a contrast, Sarah, between what
I say and do to those dogs, and the kicks and curses they get from their owner.  I'll wager
you two to one that if you can get Mr. Pryor to go into a 'sic-ing' contest with me, I can
have his own dogs at his throat, when he can't make them do more than to lick my hands."

They laughed as if that were funny.

"Well, I didn't know about this," said Sarah.  "How long have you lived at Pryors'?"

You couldn't have heard what Laddie said if he'd spoken; so he waited until he could be heard,
and it never worried him a speck.

He only stood and laughed too; then, "Long enough," he said, "to know that all of us are making
a big and cruel mistake in taking them at their word, and leaving them penned up there weltering
in misery.  What we should do, is to go over there, one at a time, or in a body, and batter
at the door of their hearts, until we break down the wall of pride they have built around them,
ease their pain, and bring them with us socially, if they are going to live among us.  You
people who talk loudly and often about loving God, and 'doing unto others,' should have gone
long ago, for Jesus' sake; I'm going for the sake of a girl, with a face as sweet, and a heart
as pure, as any accepted angel at the foot of the throne.  Mother, I want a cup of peach jelly,
and some of that exceptionally fine cake you served at dinner, to take to our sick neighbour."

Mother left the room.

"Father, I want permission to cut and carry a generous chestnut branch, burred, and full fruited,
to the young woman.  There is none save ours in this part of the country, and she may never
have seen any, and be interested.  And I want that article about foot disease in horses, for
Mr. Pryor.  I'll bring it back when he finishes."

Father folded the paper and handed it to Laddie, who slipped it in his pocket.

"Take the finest branch you can select," father said, and I almost fell over.

He had carried those trees from Ohio, before I had been born, and mother said for years he
wrapped them in her shawl in winter and held an umbrella over them in summer, and father always
went red and grinned when she told it.  He was wild about trees, and bushes, so he made up
his mind he'd have chestnuts.  He planted them one place, and if they didn't like it, he dug
them up and set them another where he thought they could have what they needed and hadn't got
the last place. Finally, he put them, on the fourth move, on a little sandy ridge across the
road from the wood yard, and that was the spot.  They shot up, branched, spread, and one was
a male and two were females, so the pollen flew, the burrs filled right, and we had a bag of
chestnuts to send each child away from home, every Christmas.  The brown leaves and burrs were
so lovely, mother cut one of the finest branches she could select and hung it above the steel
engraving of "Lincoln Freeing the Slaves," in the boys' room, and nothing in the house was
looked at oftener, or thought prettier.  That must have been what was in the back of Laddie's
head when he wanted a branch for the Princess.

Mother came in with the cake and jelly in a little fancy basket, and Laddie said:  "Thank you!
Now every one wish me luck!  I'm going to ride to Pryors', knock at the door, and present these
offerings with my compliments.  If I'm invited in, I'm going to make the effort of my life
at driving the entering wedge toward social intercourse between Pryors and their neighbours.
If I'm not, I'll be back in thirty minutes and tell you what happened to me.  If they refuse
my gifts, you shall have the jelly, Sarah; I'll give Mrs. Fall the olive branch, bring back
the paper, and eat the cake to console my wounded spirits."

Of course every one laughed; they couldn't help it.  I watched father and he laughed hardest
of the men, but mother was more stiff-lipped about it; she couldn't help a little, though.
And I noticed some of those women acted as if they had lost something.  Maybe it was a chance
to gossip about Laddie, for he hadn't left them a thing to guess at, and mother says the reason
gossip is so dreadful is because it is always GUESSWORK.  Well, that was all fair and plain.
He had told those people, our very best friends, what he thought about everything, the way
they acted included.  He was carrying something to each member of the Pryor family, and he'd
left a way to return joking and unashamed, if they wouldn't let him in.  He had fixed things
so no one had anything to guess at, and it would look much worse for the Pryors than it would
for him, if he did come back.

I wondered if he had been born that smart, or if he learned it in college.  If he did, no wonder
Leon was bound to go.  Come to think of it, though, mother said Laddie was always like that.
She said he never bit her when he nursed; he never mauled her as if she couldn't be hurt when
he was little, he never tore his clothes and made extra work as he grew, and never in his life
gave her an hour's uneasiness.  But I guess she couldn't have said that about uneasiness lately,
for she couldn't keep from looking troubled as all of us followed to the gate to see him start.

How they joked, and tried to tease him!  But they couldn't get a breath ahead.  He shot back
answers as fast as they could ask questions, while he cut the branch and untied the horse.
He gave the limb and basket to mother to hold, kissed her good-bye, and me too, before he mounted.
With my arms around his neck--I never missed a chance to try to squeeze into him how I loved
him--I whispered:  "Laddie, is it a secret any more?"

He threw back his head and laughed the happiest.

"Not the ghost of a secret!" he said.  "But you let me do the talking, until I tell you." 
Then he went on right out loud: "I'm riding up the road waving the banner of peace.  If I suffer
repulse, the same thing has happened to better men before, so I'll get a different banner and
try again."

Laddie mounted, swept a circle in the road, dropped Flos on her knees in a bow, and waved the
branch.  Leon began to sing at the top of his voice, "Nothing but leaves, nothing but leaves,"
while Laddie went flashing up the road.

The women went back to the house; the men stood around the gate, watched him from sight, talked
about his horse, how he rode, and made wagers that he'd get shut out, like every one did, but
they said if that happened he wouldn't come back.  Father was annoyed.

"You heard Laddie say he'd return immediately if they wouldn't let him in," he said.  "He's
a man of his word.  He will either enter or come home at once."

It was pitch dark and we had supper before some of them left; they never stayed so late.  After
we came from church, father read the chapter and we were ready for bed; still Laddie hadn't
come back.  And father liked it!  He just plain liked it!  He chuckled behind the Advocate
until you could see it shake; but mother had very little to say, and her lips closed tight.

At bedtime he said to mother:  "Well, they don't seem in a hurry about sending the boy back."

"Did you really think he WOULD be sent back?" asked mother.

"Not ordinarily," said father, "no!  If he had no brain, no wit, no culture, on an animal basis,
a woman would look twice before she'd send him away; but with such fanatics as Pryors, one
can't always tell what will happen."

"In a case like this, one can be reasonably certain," said mother.

"You don't know what social position they occupied at home.  Their earmarks are all good. 
We've no such notions here as they have."

"Thank God for so much, at any rate," said mother.  "How old England would rise up and exult
if she had a man in line with Laddie's body, blood and brain, to set on her throne.  This talk
about class and social position makes me sick.  Men are men, and Laddie is as much above the
customary timber found in kings and princes, physically and mentally, as the sky is above the
earth.  Talk me no talk about class! If I catch it coming from any of mine, save you, I will
beat it out of them.  He has admitted he's in love with the girl; the real question is, whether
she's fit to be his wife."

"I should say she appears so," said father.

"Drat appearances!" cried mother.  "When it's a question of lifetime misery, and the soul's
salvation of my son, if things go wrong, I've no time for appearances.  I want to know!"

He might have known he would make her angry when he laughed.  She punched the pillow, and wouldn't
say another word; so I went to sleep, and didn't miss anything that time.

Next morning at breakfast Laddie was beaming, and father hardly waited to ask the blessing
before he inquired:  "Well, how did you make it, son?"

Laddie laughed and answered:  "Altogether, it might have been much worse."

That was all he would say until Miss Amelia started to school, then he took me on his lap and
talked as he buttoned my coat.

"Thomas met me at the gate," he said, "and held my horse while I went to the door.  One of
their women opened it, and I inquired for Mr. Pryor.  She said he was in the field looking
at the horses, so I asked for Miss Pryor.  She came in a minute, so I gave her the branch,
told her about it, and offered the jelly and cake for her mother.  The Princess invited me
to enter.  I told her I couldn't without her father's permission, so I went to the field to
see him.  The dogs were with him and he had the surprise of his life when his man-eaters rolled
at my feet, and licked my hands."

"What did he say?" chuckled father.

"Told Thomas they'd been overfed and didn't amount to a brass farthing; to take them to the
woods and shoot them.  Thomas said he'd see to it the very first thing in the morning, and
then Mr. Pryor told him he would shoot him if he did."

"Charming man to work for," said mother.

"Then I told him I'd been at the house to carry a little gift to his wife and daughter, and
to inquire if I might visit an hour, and as he was not there, I had come to the field to ask
him.  Then I looked him in the eye and said:  'May I?'

"'I'll warrant the women asked you to come in,' he said.

"'Miss Pryor was so kind,' I answered, 'but I enter no man's house without his permission.
May I talk with your daughter an hour, and your wife, if she cares to see me?'

"'It makes no earthly difference to me,' he said, which was not gracious, but might have been
worse, so I thanked him, and went back to the house.  When I knocked the second time, the Princess
came, and I told her the word was that it made 'no difference to her father' if I came in,
so she opened the door widely, took my hat and offered me a seat.  Then she went to the next
room and said:  'Mother, father has given Mr. Stanton permission to pay us a call.  Do you
feel able to meet him?'  She came at once, offering her hand and saying:  'I have already met
Mr. Stanton so often, really, we should have the privilege of speaking.'"

"What did she mean by that?" asked mother.

"She meant that I have haunted the road passing their place for two years, and she'd seen me
so frequently that she came to recognize me."

"Umph!" said mother.

"Laddie tell on!" I begged.

"Well, I sharpened all the wits I had and went to work.  I never tried so hard in my life to
be entertaining.  Of course I had to feel my way. I'd no idea what would interest a delicate,
high-bred lady"--mother sniffed again--"so I had to search and probe, and go by guess until
I saw a shade of interest, then I worked in more of the same.  It was easy enough to talk to
the Princess--all young folks have a lot in common, we could get along on fifty topics; it
was different with the housebound mother.  I did my best, and after a while Mr. Pryor came
in. I asked him if any of his horses had been attacked with the trouble some of the neighbours
were having, and told him what it was.  He had the grace to thank me.  He said he would tell
Thomas not to tie his horse at the public hitching rack when he went to town, and once he got
started, he was wild to talk with a man, and I'd no chance to say a word to the women.  He
was interested in our colleges, state, and national laws, in land development, and everything
that all live men are.  When a maid announced dinner I apologized for having stayed so long,
and excused myself, because I had been so interested, but Mrs. Pryor merely said:  'I'm waiting
to be offered your arm.'

"Well, you should have seen me drop my hat and step up.  I did my best, and while I talked
to him a little, I made it most to the women.  Any one could see they were starved for company,
so I took the job of entertaining them.  I told some college jokes, funny things that had happened
in the neighbourhood, and everything of interest I could think up.  I know we were at the table
for two hours with things coming and going on silver platters."

Mother sat straight suddenly.

"Just what did they have to eat, and how did they serve it?" she asked.

"Couldn't tell if I were to be shot for it, mummy," said Laddie. "Forgive me!  Next time I'll
take notes for you.  This first plunge, I had to use all my brains, not to be a bore to them;
and to handle food and cutlery as the women did.  It's quite a process, but as they were served
first, I could do right by waiting.  I never was where things were done quite so elaborately
before."

"And they didn't know they would have company until you went to the table?"

"Well, they must have thought likely, there was a place for me."

"Umph!" said mother.  "Fine idea!  Then any one who drops in can be served, and see that they
are not a mite of trouble.  Candace, always an extra place after this!"

Father just shouted.

"I thought you'd get something out of it!" he said.

"Happy to have justified your faith!" replied mother calmly.  "Go on, son!"

"That's all!" said Laddie.  "We left the table and talked an hour more. The women asked me
to come again; he didn't say anything on that subject; but when he ordered my horse, he asked
the Princess if she would enjoy a little exercise, and she said she would, so he told Thomas
to bring their horses, and we rode around the section, the Princess and I ahead, Mr. Pryor
following.  Where the road was good and the light fine enough that there was no danger of laming
a horse, we dropped back, one on either side of him, so we could talk.  Mrs. Pryor ate the
cake and said it was fine; and the 'conserve,' she called it, delicious as she ever had tasted.
She said all our fruits here had much more flavour than at home; she thought it was the dryer
climate and more sunshine.  She sent her grateful thanks, and she wants your recipe before
next preserving time."

Mother just beamed.  My! but she did love to have the things she cooked, bragged on.

"Possibly she'd like my strawberries?" she said.

"There isn't a doubt about it," said Laddie.  "I've yet to see the first person who doesn't."

"Is that all?" asked mother.

"I can think of nothing more at this minute," answered Laddie.  "If anything comes to my mind
later, I won't forget to tell you.  Oh yes, there was one thing:  You couldn't keep Mr. Pryor
from talking about Leon.  He must have taken a great fancy to him.  He talked until he worried
the Princess, and she tried to keep him away from the subject, but his mind seemed to run on
it constantly.  When we were riding she talked quite as much as he, and it will hustle us to
think what the little scamp did, any bigger than they do.  Of course, father, you understood
the price Mr. Pryor made on one of his very finest colts was a joke.  There's a strain of Arab
in the father--he showed me the record--and the mother is bluegrass.  There you get gentleness
and endurance combined with speed and nerve.  I'd trade Flos for that colt as it stands to-day.
There's nothing better on earth in the way of horse.  His offer is practically giving it away.
I know, with the records to prove its pedigree, what that colt would bring him in any city market."

"I don't like it," said mother.  "I want Leon to have a horse, but a boy in a first experience,
and reckless as he is, doesn't need a horse like that, for one thing, and what is more important,
I refuse to be put under any obligations to Pryors."

"That's the reason Mr. Pryor asked anything at all for the horse.  It is my opinion that he
would be greatly pleased to give it to Leon, if he could do what he liked."

"Well, that's precisely the thing he can't do in this family," said mother sternly.

"What do you think, father?" asked Laddie.

"I think Amen! to that proposition," said father; "but I would have to take time to thresh
it out completely.  It appeals to me that Leon is old enough to recognize the value of the
animal; and that the care of it would develop and strengthen his character.  It would be a
responsibility that would steady him.  You could teach him to tend and break it."

"Break it!" cried Laddie.  "Break it!  Why father, he's riding it bareback all over the Pryor
meadow now, and jumping it over logs. Whenever he leaves, it follows him to the fence, and
the Princess says almost any hour of the day you look out you can see it pacing up and down
watching this way and whinnying for him to come."

"And your best judgment is----?"

Laddie laughed as he tied my hood strings.  "Well I don't feel about the Pryors as the rest
of you do," he said.  "If the money isn't claimed inside the time you specified, I would let
Leon and Mr. Pryor make their own bargain.  The boy won't know for years that it is practically
a gift, and it would please Mr. Pryor immensely.  Now run, or you'll be late!"

I had to go, so I didn't know how they settled it, but if they wouldn't let Leon have that
horse, it was downright mean.  What if we were under obligations to Mr. Pryor?  We were to
Sarah Hood, and half the people we knew, and what was more, we LIKED to be.

When I came from school that night father had been to town.  He had an ax and was opening a
big crate, containing two of the largest, bluest geese you ever saw.  Laddie said being boxed
that way and seeing them so close made them look so big; really, they were no finer than Pryors',
where he had got the address of the place that sold them. Mother was so pleased.  She said
she had needed a new strain, for a long time, to improve her feathers; now she would have pillows
worth while, in a few years.  They put them in the barn where our geese stayed over night,
and how they did scream.  That is, one of them did; the other acted queerly and father said
to Laddie that he was afraid the trip was hard on it.  Laddie said it might have been hurt,
and mother was worried too.  Before she had them an hour, she had sold all our ganders; spring
had come, she had saved the blue goose eggs, set them under a hen, raised the goslings with
the little chickens, never lost one, picked them and made a new pair of pillows too fine for
any one less important than a bishop, or a judge, or Dr. Fenner to sleep on.  Then she began
saving for a featherbed.  And still the goose didn't act as spry or feel as good as the gander.
He stuck up his head, screamed, spread his wings and waved them, and the butts looked so big
and hard, I was not right certain whether it would be safe to tease him or not.

The first person who came to see them was Sarah Hood, and she left with the promise of a pair
as soon as mother could raise them.  Father said the only reason mother didn't divide her hair
with Sarah Hood was because it was fast, and she couldn't.  Mother said gracious goodness!
she'd be glad to get rid of some of it if she could, and of course Sarah should have first
chance at it.  Hadn't she kept her over night so she could see her new home when she was rested,
and didn't she come with her, and help her get settled, and had she ever failed when we had
a baby, or sickness, or trouble, or thrashers, or a party?  Of course she'd gladly divide,
even the hair of her head, with Sarah Hood.  And father said, "Yes, he guessed she would, and
come to think of it, he'd just as soon spare Sarah part of his," and then they both laughed,
when it was nothing so very funny that I could see.

The next caller the geese had was Mrs. Freshett.  My! she thought they were big and fine. 
Mother promised her a couple of eggs to set under a hen.  Father said she was gradually coming
down the scale of her feelings, and before two weeks she'd give Isaac Thomas, at least, a quill
for a pen.  Almost no one wrote with them any more, but often father made a few, and showed
us how to use them.  He said they were gone with candles, sand boxes, and snuff.  Mother said
she had no use for snuff, but candles were not gone, she'd make and use them to the day of
her death, as they were the nicest light ever invented to carry from room to room, or when
you only wanted to sit and think.  Father said there was really no good pen except the quill
you sharpened yourself; and while he often used steel ones like we children had at school to
write to the brothers and sisters away, and his family, he always kept a few choice quills
in the till of his chest, and when he wrote a deed, or any valuable paper, where there was
a deal with money, he used them.  He said it lent the dignity of a past day to an important
occasion.

After mother and Mrs. Freshett had talked over every single thing about the geese, and that
they were like Pryors' had been settled, Mrs. Freshett said:  "Since he told about it before
all of us, and started out the way he did, would it be amiss to ask how Laddie got on at Pryors'?"

"Just the way I thought he would," said mother.  "He stayed until all of us were in bed, and
I'd never have known when he came in, if it were not a habit of his always to come to my door
to see if I'm sleeping. Sometimes I'm wakeful, and if he pommels my pillow good, brings me
a drink, and rubs my head a few strokes with his strong, cool hands, I can settle down and
have a good night's rest.  I was awake when he came, or I'd never have known.  It was almost
midnight; but they sat two hours at the table, and then all of them rode."

"Not the Missus?"

"Oh no!  She's not strong enough.  She really has incurable heart trouble, the worst kind there
is; her daughter told me so."

"Then they better look out," said Mrs. Freshett.  "She is likely to keel over at a breath."

"They must know it.  That's why she keeps so quiet."

"And they had him to supper?"

"It was a dinner served at night.  Yes.  He took Mrs. Pryor in on his arm, and it was like
a grand party, just as they fixed for themselves, alone.  Waiters, and silver trays, and things
carried in and out in courses."

"My land!  Well, I s'pose he had enough schoolin' to get him through it all right!"

My mother's face grew red.  She never left any one in doubt as to what she meant.  Father said
that "was the Dutch of it."  And mother always answered that if any one living could put things
plainer than the English, she would like to hear them do it.

"He certainly had," said mother, "or they wouldn't have invited him to come again.  And all
mine, Mrs. Freshett, knew how to sit properly at the table, and manage a knife, fork and napkin,
before they ever took a meal away from home."

"No 'fence," laughed Mrs. Freshett.  "I meant that maybe his years of college schoolin' had
give him ways more like theirs than most of us have.  For all the money it takes to send a
boy to college, he ought to get somethin' out of it more than jest fillin' his head with figgers,
an' stars, an' oratin'; an' most always you can see that he does."

"It is contact with cultivated people," said mother.  "You are always influenced by it, without
knowing it often."

"Maybe you are, bein' so fine yourself," said Mrs. Freshett.  "An' me too, I never get among
my betters that I don't carry home a lot I put right into daily use, an' nobody knows it plainer.
I come here expectin' to learn things that help me, an' when I go home I know I have."

"Why, thank you," said mother.  "I'm sure that is a very nice compliment, and I wish I really
could feel that it is well deserved."

"Oh I guess you do!" said Mrs. Freshett laughing.  "I often noticed you makin' a special effort
to teach puddin' heads like me somethin', an' I always thank you for it.  There's a world in
right teachin'.  I never had any.  So all I can pick up an' hammer into mine is a gain for
me an' them.  If my Henry had lived, an' come out anything like that boy o' yourn an' the show
he made last Sunday, I'd do well if I didn't swell up an' bust with pride.  An' the little
tow-haired strip, takin' the gun an' startin' out alone after a robber, even if he wa'n't much
of a man, that was downright spunky.  If my boys will come out anywhere near like yourn, I'll
be glad."

"I don't know how my boys will come out," said mother.  "But I work, pray, hope, and hang to
them; that's all I know to do."

"Well, if they don't come out right, they ought to be bumped!" said Mrs. Freshett.  "After
all the chances they've had!  I don' know jest how Freshett was brung up, but I'd no chance
at all.  My folks--well, I guess the less said--little pitchers, you know!  I can't see as
I was to blame.  I was the youngest, an' I knew things was wrong.  I fought to go to school,
an' pap let me enough that I saw how other people lived.  Come night I'd go to the garret,
an' bar the trapdoor; but there would be times when I couldn't help seein' what was goin' on.
How'd you like chances such as that for a girl of yourn?"

"Dreadful!" said mother.  "Mrs. Freshett, please do be careful!"

"Sure!" laughed Mrs. Freshett.  "I was jest goin' to tell you about me an' Josiah.  He come
to our house one night, a stranger off the road. He said he was sick, an' tired, an' could
he have a bed.  Mother said, 'No, for him to move on.'  He tried an' he couldn't.  They was
somethin' about him--well, you know how them things go!  I wa'n't only sixteen, but I felt
so sorry for him, all fever burned and mumblin', I helped pap put him to bed, an' doctored
him all I could.  Come mornin' he was a sick man.  Pap went for the county doctor, an' he took
jest one look an' says: 'Small pox!  All of ye git!'

"I was bound I wouldn't go, but pap made me, an' the doctor said he'd send a man who'd had
it; so I started, but I felt so bad, come a chanct when they got to Groveville, I slipped out
an' went back.  The man hadn't come, so I set to work the best I knowed.  'Fore long Josiah
was a little better an' he asked who I was, an' where my folks went, an' I told him, an' he
asked WHY I came back an' I didn't know what to say, so I jest hung my head an' couldn't face
him.  After a while he says, 'All right!  I guess I got this sized up.  If you'll stay an'
nuss me through, I'll be well enough to pull you out, by the time you get it, an' soon as you're
able we'll splice, if you say so.'

"'Marry me, you mean?' says I.  They wa'n't ever any talk about marryin' at our house.  'Sure!'
says he.  'You're a mighty likely lookin' girl!  I'll do fair by ye.'  An' he always has, too!
But I didn't feel right to let him go it blind, so I jest up and says.  'You wouldn't if you
knowed my folks!'  'You look as decent as I do,' says he; 'I'll chance it!'  Then I tole him
I was as good as I was born, an' he believed me, an' he always has, an' I was too!  So I nussed
him, but I didn't make the job of it he did.  You 'member he is pitted considerable.  He was
so strong I jest couldn't keep him from disfigerin' himself, but he tied me.  I begged to be
loose, an' he wouldn't listen, so I got a clean face, only three little scars, an' they ain't
deep to speak of.  He says he looks like a piece of side meat, but say! they ain't nothin'
the matter with his looks to me!

"The nuss man never did come, but the county doctor passed things in the winder, till I was
over the worst, an' Josiah sent for a preacher an' he married us through the winder--I got
the writin's to show, all framed an' proper.  Josiah said he'd see I got all they was in it
long that line, anyway.  When I was well, hanged if he didn't perdooce a wad from his clothes
before they burnt 'em, an' he got us new things to wear, an' a horse, an' wagon, an' we driv
away here where we thought we could start right, an' after we had the land, an' built the cabin,
an' jest as happy as heart could wish, long come a man I'd made mad once, an' he tole everythin'
up and down.  Josiah was good about it.  He offered to sell the land, an' pull up an' go furder.
'What's the use?' says I.  'Hundreds know it.  We can't go so far it won't be like to follow
us; le's stay here an' fight it.'  'All right,' says Josiah, but time an' ag'in he has offered
to go, if I couldn't make it.  'Hang on a little longer,' says I, every time he knew I was
snubbed an' slighted. I never tole what he didn't notice.  I tried church, when my children
began to git a size I wanted 'em to have right teachin', an' you come an' welcomed me an' you
been my friend, an' now the others is comin' over at last, an' visitin' me, an' they ain't
a thing more I want in life."

"I am so glad!" said mother.  "Oh my dear, I am so glad!"

"Goin' right home an' tell that to Josiah," said Mrs. Freshett, jumping up laughing and crying
like, "an' mebby I'll jest spread wings and fly! I never was so happy in all my life as I was
Sunday, when you ast me before all of them, so cordial like, an' says I to Josiah, 'We'll go
an' try it once,' an' we come an' nobody turned a cold shoulder on us, an' I wa'n't wearin'
specks to see if they did, for I never knowed him so happy in all his days.  Orter heard him
whistle goin' home, an' he's tryin' all them things he learned, on our place, an' you can see
it looks a heap better a'ready, an' now he's talkin' about buildin' in the spring.  I knowed
he had money, but he never mentioned buildin' before, an' I always thought it was bekase he
'sposed likely we'd have to move on, some time.  'Pears now as if we can settle, an' live like
other folks, after all these years.  I knowed ye didn't want me to talk, but I had to tell
you!  When you ast us to the weddin', and others began comin' round, says I to Josiah, 'Won't
she be glad to know that my skirts is clear, an' I did as well as I could?'  An' he says, 'That
she will!  An' more am I,' says he.  'I mighty proud of you,' says he. Proud!  Think of that!
Miss Stanton, I'd jest wade fire and blood for you!"

"Oh my dear!" said mother.  "What a dreadful thing to say!"

"Gimme the chanct, an' watch if I don't," said Mrs. Freshett.  "Now, Josiah is proud I stuck
it out!  Now, I can have a house!  Now, my children can have all the show we can raise to give
'em!  I'm done cringin' an' dodgin'!  I've always done my best; henceforth I mean to hold up
my head an' say so.  I sure can't be held for what was done 'fore I was on earth, or since
neither.  You've given me my show, I'm goin' to take it, but if you want to know what's in
my heart about you, gimme any kind of a chanct to prove, an' see if I don't pony right up to it!"

Mother laughed until the tears rolled, she couldn't help it.  She took Mrs. Freshett in her
arms and hugged her tight, and kissed her mighty near like she does Sarah Hood.  Mrs. Freshett
threw her arms around mother, and looked over her shoulder, and said to me, "Sis, when you
grow up, always take a chanct on welcomin' the stranger, like your maw does, an' heaven's bound
to be your home!  My, but your maw is a woman to be proud of!" she said, hugging mother and
patting her on the back.

"All of us are proud of her!" I boasted.

"I doubt if you are proud enough!" cried Mrs. Freshett.  "I have my doubts!  I don't see how
people livin' with her, an' seein' her every day, are in a shape to know jest what she can
do for a person in the place I was in.  I have my doubts!"

That night when I went home from school mother was worrying over the blue goose.  When we went
to feed, she told Leon that she was afraid it was weak, and not getting enough to eat when
it fed with the others. She said after the work was finished, to take it out alone, and give
it all it would eat; so when the horses were tended, the cows milked, everything watered, and
the barn ready to close for the night, Laddie took the milk to the house, while Leon and I
caught the blue goose, carried her to the well, and began to shell corn.  She was starved to
death, almost.  She ate a whole ear in no time and looked for more, so Leon sent me after another.
By the time that was most gone she began to eat slower, and stick her bill in the air to help
the grains slip down, so I told Leon I thought she had enough.

"No such thing!" said Leon.  "You distinctly heard mother tell me to give her 'all she would
eat.'  She's eating, isn't she?  Go bring another ear!"

So she was, but I was doubtful about more.

Leon said I better mind or he would tell mother, so I got it.  She didn't begin on it with
any enthusiasm.  She stuck her bill higher, stretched her neck longer, and she looked so funny
when she did it, that we just shrieked.  Then Leon reached over, took her by the bill, and
stripped her neck to help her swallow, and as soon as he let go, she began to eat again.

"You see!" said Leon, "she's been starved.  She can't get enough.  I must help her!"

So he did help her every little bit.  By that time we were interested in seeing how much she
could hold; and she looked so funny that Leon sent me for more corn; but I told him I thought
what she needed now was water, so we held her to the trough, and she tried to drink, but she
couldn't swallow much.  We set her down beside the corn, and she went to eating again.

"Go it, old mill-hopper!" cried Leon.

Right then there was an awful commotion in the barn, and from the squealing we knew one of
the horses was loose, and fighting the others. We ran to fix them, and had a time to get Jo
back into his stall, and tied.  Before we had everything safe, the supper bell rang, and I
bet Leon a penny I could reach the house while he shut the door and got there.  We forgot every
single thing about the goose.

At supper mother asked Leon if he fed the goose all she would eat, and I looked at him guilty-like,
for I remembered we hadn't put her back. He frowned at me cross as a bear, and I knew that
meant he had remembered, and would slip back and put her inside when he finished his supper,
so I didn't say anything.

"I didn't feed her ALL she would eat!" said Leon.  "If I had, she'd be at it yet.  She was
starved sure enough!  You never saw anything like the corn she downed."

"Well I declare!" said mother.  "Now after this, take her out alone, for a few days, and give
her as much as she wants."

"All right!" chuckled Leon, because it was a lot of fun to see her run her bill around, and
gobble up the corn, and stick up her head.

The next day was Saturday, so after breakfast I went with Leon to drive the sheep and geese
to the creek to water; the trough was so high it was only for the horses and cattle; when we
let out the geese, the blue one wasn't there.

"Oh Leon, did you forget to come back and put her in?"

"Yes I did!" he said.  "I meant to when I looked at you to keep still, and I started to do
it, but Sammy Deam whistled, so I went down in the orchard to see what he wanted, and we got
to planning how to get up a fox chase, and I stayed until father called for night, and then
I ran and forgot all about the blame old goose."

"Oh Leon!  Where is she?  What will mother say? 'Spose a fox got her!"

"It wouldn't help me any if it had, after I was to blame for leaving her outside.  Blast a
girl!  If you ever amounted to anything, you could have put her in while I fixed the horses.
At least you could have told me to."

I stood there dumblike and stared at him.  He has got the awfulest way of telling the truth
when he is scared or provoked.  Of course I should have thought of the goose when he was having
such a hard fight with the horses.  If I'd been like he was, I'd have told him that he was
older, mother told HIM to do it, and it wasn't my fault; but in my heart I knew he did have
his hands full, and if you're your brother's keeper, you ought to HELP your brother remember.
So I stood gawking, while Leon slowly turned whiter and whiter.

"We might as well see if we can find her," he said at last, so slow and hopeless like it made
my heart ache.  So he started around the straw stack one way, and I the other, looking into
all the holes, and before I had gone far I had a glimpse of her, and it scared me so I screamed,
for her head was down, and she didn't look right.  Leon came running and pulled her out.  The
swelled corn rolled in a little trail after her, and the pigs ran up and began to eat it. 
Pigs are named righter than anything else I know.

"Busted!" cried Leon in tones of awe; about the worst awe you ever heard, and the worst bust
you ever saw.

From bill to breast she was wide open, and the hominy spilling.  We just stood staring at her,
and then Leon began to kick the pigs; because it would be no use to kick the goose; she would
never know. Then he took her up, carried her into the barn, and put her on the floor where
the other geese had stayed all night.  We stood and looked at her some more, as if looking
and hoping would make her get up and be alive again.  But there's nothing in all this world
so useless as wishing dead things would come alive; we had to do something.

"What are you going to tell mother?"

"Shut up!" said Leon.  "I'm trying to think."

"I'll say it was as much my fault as yours.  I'll go with you.  I'll take half whatever they
do to you."

"Little fool!" said Leon.  "What good would that do me?"

"Do you know what they cost?  Could you get another with some of your horse money?"

I saw it coming and dodged again, before I remembered the Crusaders.

"All right!" I said.  "If that's the way you are going to act, Smarty, I'll lay all the blame
on you; I won't help you a bit, and I don't care if you are whipped until the blood runs."

Then I went out of the barn and slammed the door.  For a minute I felt better; but it was a
short time.  I SAID that to be mean, but I did care.  I cared dreadfully; I was partly to blame,
and I knew it. Coming around the barn, I met Laddie, and he saw in a flash I was in trouble,
so he stopped and asked:  "What now, Chicken?"

"Come into the barn where no one will hear us," I said.

So we went around the outside, entered at the door on the embankment, and he sat in the wheelbarrow
on the threshing floor while I told him. I thought I felt badly enough, but after I saw Laddie,
it grew worse, for I remembered we were short of money that fall, that the goose was a fine,
expensive one, and how proud mother was of her, and how she'd be grieved, and that was trouble
for sure.

"Run along and play!" said Laddie, "and don't tell any one else if you can help it.  I'll hide
the goose, and see if I can get another in time to take the place of this one, so mother won't
be worried."

I walked to the house slowly, but I was afraid to enter.  When you are all choked up, people
are sure to see it, and ask fool questions.  So I went around to the gate and stood there looking
up and down the road, and over the meadow toward the Big Woods; and all at once, in one of
those high, regular bugle calls, like they mostly scream in spring, one of Pryors' ganders
split the echoes for a mile; maybe farther.

I was across the road and slinking down inside the meadow fence before I knew it.  There was
no thought or plan.  I started for Pryors' and went straight ahead, only I kept out of line
with our kitchen windows. I tramped through the slush, ice, and crossed fields where I was
afraid of horses; but when I got to the top of the Pryor backyard fence, I stuck there, for
the bulldogs were loose, and came raving at me.  I was going to be eaten alive, for I didn't
know the word Laddie did; and those dogs climbed a fence like a person; I saw them the time
Leon brought back Even So.  I was thinking what a pity it was, after every one had grown accustomed
to me, and had begun loving me, that I should be wasted for dog feed, when Mr. Pryor came to
the door, and called them; they didn't mind, so he came to the fence, and crossest you ever
heard, every bit as bad as the dogs, he cried:  "Whose brat are you, and what are you doing here?"

I meant to tell him; but you must have a minute after a thing like that.

"God of my life!" he fairly frothed.  "What did anybody send a dumb child here for?"

"Dumb child!"  I didn't care if Mr. Pryor did wear a Crown of Glory. It wasn't going to do
him one particle of good, unless he was found in the way of the Lord.  "Dumb child!"  I was
no more dumb than he was, until his bulldogs scared me so my heart got all tangled up with
my stomach, my lungs, and my liver.  That made me mad, and there was nothing that would help
me to loosen up and talk fast, like losing my temper.  I wondered what kind of a father he had.

I should think not, if it had any chance at all to get away!  I was so angry by that time I
meant to tell him what I thought.  Polite or not polite, I'd take a switching if I had to,
but I wasn't going to stand that.

"You haven't got any God in your life," I reminded him, "and no one sent me here.  I came to
see the Princess, because I'm in awful trouble and I hoped maybe she could fix up a way to
help me."

"Ye Gods!" he cried.  He would stick to calling on God, whether he believed in Him or not.
"If it isn't Nimrod!  I didn't recognize you in all that bundling."

Probably he didn't know it, but Nimrod was from the Bible too!  By bundling, he meant my hood
and coat.  He helped me from the fence, sent the bulldogs rolling--sure enough he did kick
them, and they didn't like it either--took my hand and led me straight into the house, and
the Princess was there, and a woman who was her mother no doubt, and he said:  "Pamela, here
is our little neighbour, and she says she's in trouble, and she thinks you may be of some assistance
to her.  Of course you will be glad if you can."

"Surely!" said the Princess, and she introduced me to her mother, so I bowed the best I knew,
and took off my wet mitten, dirty with climbing fences, to shake hands with her.  She was so
gracious and lovely I forgot what I went after.  The Princess brought a cloth and wiped the
wet from my shoes and stockings, and asked me if I wouldn't like a cup of hot tea to keep me
from taking a chill.

"I've been much wetter than this," I told her, "and I never have taken a chill, and anyway
my throat's too full of trouble to drink."

"Why, you poor child!" said the Princess.  "Tell me quickly!  Is your mother ill again?"

"Not now, but she's going to be as soon as she finds out," I said, and then I told them.

They all listened without a sound until I got where Leon helped the goose eat, and from that
on Mr. Pryor laughed until you could easily see that he had very little feeling for suffering
humanity.  It was funny enough when we fed her, but now that she was bursted wide open there
was nothing amusing about it; and to roar when a visitor plainly told you she was in awful
trouble, didn't seem very good manners to me. The Princess and her mother never even smiled;
and before I had told nearly all of it, Thomas was called to hitch the Princess' driving cart,
and she took me to their barnyard to choose the goose that looked most like mother's, and all
of them seemed like hers, so we took the first one Thomas could catch, put it into a bag in
the back of the cart, and then we got in and started for our barn.  As we reached the road,
I said to her:  "You'd better go past Dovers', for if we come down our Little Hill they will
see us sure; it's baking day."

"All right!" said the Princess, so we went the long way round the section, but goodness me!
when she drove no way was far.

When we were opposite our barn she stopped, hitched her horse to the fence, and we climbed
over, and slipping behind the barn, carried the goose around to the pen and put it in with
ours.  She said she wanted the broken one, because her father would enjoy seeing it.  I didn't
see how he could!  We were ready to slip out, when our geese began to run at the new one, hiss
and scream, and make such a racket that Laddie and Leon both caught us.  They looked at the
goose, at me, the Princess, and each other, and neither said a word.  She looked back a little
bit, and then she laughed as hard as she could.  Leon grew red, and he grinned ashamed-like,
so she laughed worse than ever.  Laddie spoke to me:  "You went to Mr. Pryor's and asked for
that goose?"

"She did not!" said the Princess before I could answer.  "She never asked for anything.  She
was making a friendly morning call and in the course of her visit she told about the pathetic
end of the goose that was expected to lay the golden egg--I mean stuff the Bishop's pillow--and
as we have a large flock of blue geese, father gave her one, and he had the best time he's
had in years doing it.  I wouldn't have had him miss the fun he got from it for any money.
He laughed like home again.  Now I must slip away before any one sees me, and spoils our secret.
Leon, lad, you can go to the house and tell your little mother that the feeding stopped every
pain her goose had, and hereafter it looks to you as if she'd be all right."

"Miss Pryor," said Leon, "did you care about what I said at you in church that day?"

"'Thou art all fair, my love.  There is no spot in thee.'  Well, it was a little pointed, but
since you ask a plain question, I have survived it."

"I'm awfully sorry," said Leon.  "Of course I never would, if I'd known you could be this nice."

The Princess looked at Laddie and almost gasped, and then both of them laughed.  Leon saw that
he had told her he was sorry he said she was "fair, and no spot in her."

"Oh I don't mean that!" he said.  "What I do mean is that I thank you awful much for the goose,
and helping me out like such a brick of a good fellow, and what I wish is, that I was as old
as Laddie, and he'd hump himself if he got to be your beau."

The Princess almost ran.  Laddie and I followed to the road, where he unhitched the horse and
helped her in.  Then he stood stroking its neck, as he held the bridle.

"I don't know what to say!" said Laddie.

"In such case, I would counsel silence," advised the Princess.

"I hope you understand how I thank you."

"I fail to see what for.  Father gave the goose to Little Sister.  Her thanks and Leon's are
more than enough for him.  We had great sport."

"I insist on adding mine.  Deep and fervent!"

"You take everything so serious.  Can't you see the fun of this?"

"No," said Laddie.  "But if you can, I am glad, and I'm thankful for anything that gives me
a glimpse of you."

"Bye, Little Sister," said the Princess, and when she loosened the lines the mud flew a rod high.

When dusk closed in it would be Christmas eve.  All day I had three points--a chair beside
the kitchen table, a lookout melted through the frost on the front window, and the big sitting-room
fireplace.

All the perfumes of Araby floated from our kitchen that day.  There was that delicious smell
of baking flour from big snowy loaves of bread, light biscuit, golden coffee cake, and cinnamon
rolls dripping a waxy mixture of sugar, butter, and spice, much better than the finest butterscotch
ever brought from the city.  There was the tempting odour of boiling ham and baking pies. 
The air was filled with the smell of more herbs and spices than I knew the names of, that went
into mincemeat, fruit cake, plum pudding, and pies.  There was a teasing fragrance in the spiced
vinegar heating for pickles, a reminder of winesap and rambo in the boiling cider, while the
newly opened bottles of grape juice filled the house with the tang of Concord and muscadine.
It seemed to me I never got nicely fixed where I could take a sly dip in the cake dough or
snipe a fat raisin from the mincemeat but Candace would say:  "Don't you suppose the backlog
is halfway down the lane?"

Then I hurried to the front window, where I could see through my melted outlook on the frosted
pane, across the west eighty to the woods, where father and Laddie were getting out the Christmas
backlog.  It was too bitterly cold to keep me there while they worked, but Laddie said that
if I would watch, and come to meet them, he would take me up, and I might ride home among the
Christmas greens on the log.

So I flattened my nose against the pane and danced and fidgeted until those odours teased me
back to the kitchen; and no more did I get nicely located beside a jar of pudding sauce than
Candace would object to the place I had hung her stocking.  It was my task, my delightful all-day
task, to hang the stockings.  Father had made me a peg for each one, and I had ten feet of
mantel front along which to arrange them. But it was no small job to do this to every one's
satisfaction.  No matter what happened to any one else, Candace had to be pleased: for did
not she so manage that most fowls served on mother's table went gizzardless to the carving?
She knew and acknowledged the great importance of trying cookies, pies, and cake while they
were hot.  She was forever overworked and tired, yet she always found time to make gingerbread
women with currant buttons on their frocks, and pudgy doughnut men with clove eyes and cigars
of cinnamon.  If my own stocking lay on the hearth, Candace's had to go in a place that satisfied
her--that was one sure thing.  Besides, I had to make up to her for what Leon did, because
she was crying into the corner of her apron about that.

He slipped in and stole her stocking, hung it over the broomstick, and marched around the breakfast
table singing to the tune of--

  "Ha, ha, ha, who wouldn't go--
    Up on the housetop click, click, click?
  Down through the chimney,
    With good Saint Nick----"

words he made up himself.  He walked just fast enough that she couldn't catch him, and sang
as he went:

  "Ha, ha, ha, good Saint Nick,
    Come and look at this stocking, quick!

  If you undertake its length to fill,
    You'll have to bust a ten-dollar bill.
  Who does it belong to?  Candace Swartz.
    Bring extra candy,--seven quarts----"

She got so angry she just roared, so father made Leon stop it, but I couldn't help laughing
myself.  Then we had to pet her all day, so she'd cheer up, and not salt the Christmas dinner
with her tears.  I never saw such a monkey as Leon!  I trotted out to comfort her, and snipped
bites, until I wore a triangle on the carpet between the kitchen and the mantel, the mantel
and the window, and the window and the kitchen, while every hour things grew more exciting.

There never had been such a flurry at our house since I could remember; for to-morrow would
be Christmas and bring home all the children, and a house full of guests.  My big brother,
Jerry, who was a lawyer in the city, was coming with his family, and so were Frank, Elizabeth,
and Lucy with theirs, and of course Sally and Peter--I wondered if she would still be fixing
his tie--and Shelley came yesterday, blushing like a rose, and she laughed if you pointed your
finger at her.

Something had happened to her in Chicago.  I wasn't so sure as I had been about a city being
such a dreadful place of noise, bad air, and wicked people.  Nothing had hurt Shelley.  She
had grown so much that you could see she was larger.  Her hair and face--all of Shelley just
shone.  Her eyes danced, she talked and laughed all the time, and she hugged every one who
passed her.  She never loved us so before.  Leon said she must have been homesick and coming
back had given her a spell. I did hope it would be a bad one, and last forever.  I would have
liked for all our family to have had a spell if it would have made them act and look like Shelley.
The Princess was not a speck lovelier, and she didn't act any nicer.

If I could have painted, I'd have made a picture of Shelley with a circle of light above her
head like the one of the boy Jesus where He talked with the wise men in the temple.  I asked
father if he noticed how much prettier and nicer she was, and he said he did.  Then I asked
him if he thought now, that a city was such a bad place to live in, and he said where she was
had nothing to do with it, the same thing would happen here, or anywhere, when life's greatest
experience came to a girl.  That was all he would say, but figuring it out was easy.  The greatest
experience that happened to our girls was when they married, like Sally, so it meant that Shelley
had gone and fallen in love with that lawyer man, and she liked sitting on the sofa with him,
and no doubt she fixed his ties.  But if any one thought I would tell anything I saw when he
came they were badly mistaken.

All of us rushed around like we were crazy.  If father and mother hadn't held steady and kept
us down, we might have raised the roof.  We were all so glad about getting Leon and the money
back; mother hadn't been sick since the fish cured her; the new blue goose was so like the
one that had burst, even father never noticed any difference; all the children were either
home or coming, and after we had our gifts and the biggest dinner we ever had, Christmas night
all of us would go to the schoolhouse to see our school try to spell down three others to whom
they had sent saucy invitations to come and be beaten.

Mother sat in the dining-room beside the kitchen door, so that she could watch the baking,
brewing, pickling, and spicing.  It took four men to handle the backlog, which I noticed father
pronounced every year "just a little the finest we ever had," and Laddie strung the house with
bittersweet, evergreens, and the most beautiful sprays of myrtle that he raked from under the
snow.  Father drove to town in the sleigh, and the list of things to be purchased mother gave
him as a reminder was almost a yard long.

The minute they finished the outdoor work Laddie and Leon began bringing in baskets of apples,
golden bellflowers, green pippins, white winter pearmains, Rhode Island greenings, and striped
rambos all covered with hoarfrost, yet not frozen, and so full of juice you had to bite into
them carefully or they dripped and offended mother.  These they washed and carried to the cellar
ready for use.

Then they cracked big dishes of nuts; and popped corn that popped with the most resounding
pops in all my experience--popped a tubful, and Laddie melted maple sugar and poured over it
and made big balls of fluff and sweetness.  He took a pan and filled it with grains, selected
one at a time, the very largest and whitest, and made an especial ball, in the middle of which
he put a lovely pink candy heart on which was printed in red letters: "How can this heart be
mine, yet yours, unless our hearts are one?"  He wouldn't let any of them see it except me,
and he only let me because he knew I'd be delighted.

It was almost dusk when father came through the kitchen loaded with bundles and found Candace
and the girls still cooking.

We were so excited we could scarcely be gathered around the supper table, and mother said we
chattered until she couldn't hear herself think.  After a while Laddie laid down his fork and
looked at our father.

"Have you any objection to my using the sleigh to-morrow night?" he asked.

Father looked at mother.

"Had you planned to use it, mother?"

Mother said:  "No.  If I go, I'll ride in the big sled with all of us. It is such a little
way, and the roads are like glass."

So father said politely, as he always spoke to us:  "Then it will give me great pleasure for
you to take it, my son."

That made Leon bang his fork loudly as he dared and squirm in his chair, for well he knew that
if he had asked, the answer would have been different.  If Laddie took the sleigh he would
harness carefully, drive fast, but reasonably, blanket his horse, come home at the right time,
and put everything exactly where he found it.  But Leon would pitch the harness on some way,
race every step, never think of his steaming horse, come home when there was no one so wild
as he left to play pranks with, and scatter the harness everywhere.  He knew our father would
love to trust him the same as he did Laddie.  He wouldn't always prove himself trustworthy,
but he envied Laddie.

"You think you'll take the Princess to the spelling bee, don't you?" he sneered.

"I mean to ask her," replied Laddie.

"Maybe you think she'll ride in our old homemade, hickory cheesebox, when she can sail all
over the country like a bird in a velvet-lined cutter with a real buffalo robe."

There was a quick catch in mother's breath and I felt her hand on my chair tremble.  Father's
lips tightened and a frown settled on his face, while Laddie fairly jumped.  He went white
to the lips, and one hand dropped on the table, palm up, the fingers closing and unclosing,
while his eyes turned first to mother, and then to father, in dumb appeal.  We all knew that
he was suffering.  No one spoke, and Leon having shot his arrow straight home, saw as people
so often do in this world that the damage of unkind words could not easily be repaired; so
he grew red in the face and squirmed uncomfortably.

At last Laddie drew a deep, quivering breath.  "I never thought of that," he said.  "She has
seemed happy to go with me several times when I asked her, but of course she might not care
to ride in ours, when she has such a fine sleigh of her own."

Father's voice fairly boomed down the length of the table.

"Your mother always has found our sleigh suitable," he said.

The fact was, father was rarely proud of it.  He had selected the hickory in our woods, cut
it and hauled it to the mill, cured the lumber, and used all his spare time for two winters
making it.  With the exception of having the runners turned at a factory and iron-bound at
a smithy, he had completed it alone with great care, even to staining it a beautiful cherry
colour, and fitting white sheepskins into the bed.  We had all watched him and been so proud
of it, and now Leon was sneering at it.  He might just as well have undertaken to laugh at
father's wedding suit or to make fun of "Clark's Commentaries."

Laddie appealed to mother:  "Do you think I'd better not ask her?"

He spoke with an effort.

"Laddie, that is the first time I ever heard you propose to do any one an injustice," she said.

"I don't see how," said Laddie.

"It isn't giving the Princess any chance at all," replied mother "You've just said that she
has seemed pleased to accompany you before, now you are proposing to cut her out of what promises
to be the most delightful evening of the winter, without even giving her the chance to say
whether she'd go with you or not.  Has she ever made you feel that anything you offered her
or wanted to do for her was not good enough?"

"Never!" exclaimed Laddie fervently.

"Until she does, then, do you think it would be quite manly and honourable to make decisions
for her?  You say you never thought of anything except a pleasant time with her; possibly she
feels the same. Unless she changes, I would scarcely let a boy's foolish tongue disturb her
pleasure.  Moreover, as to the matter of wealth, your father may be as rich as hers; but they
have one, we have many.  If what we spend on all our brood could be confined to one child,
we could easily duplicate all her luxuries, and I think she has the good sense to realize the
fact as quickly as any one.  I've no doubt she would gladly exchange half she has for the companionship
of a sister or a brother in her lonely life."

Laddie turned to father, and father's smile was happy again.  Mother was little but she was
mighty.  With only a few words she had made Leon feel how unkind and foolish he had been, quieted
Laddie's alarm, and soothed the hurt father's pride had felt in that he had not been able to
furnish her with so fine a turnout as Pryors had.

Next morning when the excitement of gifts and greetings was over, and Laddie's morning work
was all finished, he took a beautiful volume of poems and his popcorn ball and started across
the fields due west; all of us knew that he was going to call on and offer them to the Princess,
and ask to take her to the spelling bee.  I suppose Laddie thought he was taking that trip
alone, but really he was surrounded.  I watched him from the window, and my heart went with
him.  Presently father went and sat beside mother's chair, and stroking her hand, whispered
softly: "Please don't worry, little mother.  It will be all right.  Your boy will come home happy."

"I hope so," she answered, "but I can't help feeling dreadfully nervous.  If things go wrong
with Laddie, it will spoil the day."

"I have much faith in the Princess' good common sense," replied father, "and considering what
it means to Laddie, it would hurt me sore to lose it."

Mother sat still, but her lips moved so that I knew she was making soft little whispered prayers
for her best loved son.  But Laddie, plowing through the drift, never dreamed that all of us
were with him.  He was always better looking than any other man I ever had seen, but when,
two hours later, he stamped into the kitchen he was so much handsomer than usual, that I knew
from the flush on his cheek and the light in his eye, that the Princess had been kind, and
by the package in his hand, that she had made him a present.  He really had two, a beautiful
book and a necktie.  I wondered to my soul if she gave him that, so she could fix it!  I didn't
believe she had begun on his ties at that time; but of course when he loved her as he did,
he wished she would.

It was the very jolliest Christmas we ever had, but the day seemed long.  When night came we
were in a precious bustle.  The wagon bed on bobs, filled with hay and covers, drawn by Ned
and Jo, was brought up for the family, and the sleigh made spick-and-span and drawn by Laddie's
thoroughbred, stood beside it.  Laddie had filled the kitchen oven with bricks and hung up
a comfort at four o'clock to keep the Princess warm.

Because he had to drive out of the way to bring her, Laddie wanted to start early; and when
he came down dressed in his college clothes, and looking the manliest of men, some of the folks
thought it funny to see him carefully rake his hot bricks from the oven, and pin them in an
old red breakfast shawl.  I thought it was fine, and I whispered to mother: "Do you suppose
that if Laddie ever marries the Princess he will be good to her as he is to you?"

Mother nodded with tear-dimmed eyes, but Shelley said:  "I'll wager a strong young girl like
the Princess will laugh at you for babying over her."

"Why?" inquired Laddie.  "It is a long drive and a bitter night, and if you fancy the Princess
will laugh at anything I do, when I am doing the best I know for her comfort, you are mistaken.
At least, that is the impression she gave me this morning."

I saw the swift glance mother shot at father, and father laid down his paper and said, while
he pretended his glasses needed polishing:  "Now there is the right sort of a girl for you.
No foolishness about her, when she has every chance.  Hurrah for the Princess!"

It was easy to see that she wasn't going to have nearly so hard a time changing father's opinion
as she would mother's.  It was not nearly a year yet, and here he was changed already.  Laddie
said good-bye to mother--he never forgot--gathered up his comfort and bricks, and started for
Pryors' downright happy.  We went to the schoolhouse a little later, all of us scoured, curled,
starched, and wearing our very best clothes.  My! but it was fine.  There were many lights
in the room and it was hung with greens.  There was a crowd even though it was early.  On Miss
Amelia's table was a volume of history that was the prize, and every one was looking and acting
the very best he knew how, although there were cases where they didn't know so very much.

Our Shelley was the handsomest girl there, until the Princess came, and then they both were.
Shelley wore one of her city frocks and a quilted red silk hood that was one of her Christmas
gifts, and she looked just like a handsome doll.  She made every male creature in that room
feel that she was pining for him alone.  May had a gay plaid frock and curls nearly a yard
long, and so had I, but both our frocks and curls were homemade; mother would have them once
in a while; father and I couldn't stop her.

But there was not a soul there who didn't have some sort of gift to rejoice over, and laughter
and shouts of "Merry Christmas!" filled the room.  It was growing late and there was some talk
of choosers, when the door opened and in a rush of frosty air the Princess and Laddie entered.
Every one stopped short and stared.

There was good reason.  The Princess looked as if she had accidentally stepped from a frame.
She was always lovely and beautifully dressed, but to-night she was prettier and finer than
ever before.  You could fairly hear their teeth click as some of the most envious of those
girls caught sight of her, for she was wearing a new hat!--a black velvet store hat, fitting
closely over her crown, with a rim of twisted velvet, a scarlet bird's wing, and a big silver
buckle.  Her dress was of scarlet cloth cut in forms, and it fitted as if she had been melted
and poured into it.  It was edged around the throat, wrists, and skirt with narrow bands of
fur, and she wore a loose, long, silk-lined coat of the same material, and worst of all, furs--furs
such as we had heard wealthy and stylish city ladies were wearing.  A golden brown cape that
reached to her elbows, with ends falling to the knees, finished in the tails of some animal,
and for her hands a muff as big as a nail keg.

Now, there was not a girl in that room, except the Princess, an she had those clothes, who
wouldn't have flirted like a peacock, almost bursting with pride; but because the Princess
had them, and they didn't, they sat stolid and sullen, and cast glances at each other as if
they were saying:  "The stuck-up thing!" "Thinks she's smart, don't she?"

Many of them should have gone to meet her and made her welcome, for she was not of our district
and really their guest.  Shelley did go, but I noticed she didn't hurry.

The choosers began at once, and Laddie was the first person called for our side, and the Princess
for the visitors'.  Every one in the room was chosen on one side or the other; even my name
was called, but I only sat still and shook my head, for I very well knew that no one except
father would remember to pronounce easy ones for me, and besides I was so bitterly disappointed
I could scarcely have stood up.  They had put me in a seat near the fire; the spellers lined
either wall, and a goodly number that refused to spell occupied the middle seats.  I couldn't
get a glimpse of Laddie or the home folks, or worst of all, of my idolized Princess.

I never could bear to find a fault with Laddie, but I sadly reflected that he might as well
have left me at home, if I were to be buried where I could neither hear nor see a thing.  I
was just wishing it was summer so I could steal out to the cemetery, and have a good visit
with the butterflies that always swarmed around Georgiana Jane Titcomb's grave at the corner
of the church.  I never knew Georgiana Jane, but her people must have been very fond of her,
for her grave was scarlet with geraniums, and pink with roses from earliest spring until frost,
and the bright colours attracted swarms of butterflies.  I had learned that if I stuck a few
blossoms in my hair, rubbed some sweet smelling ones over my hands, and knelt and kept so quiet
that I fitted into the landscape, the butterflies would think me a flower too, and alight on
my hair, dress, and my hands, even.  God never made anything more beautiful than those butterflies,
with their wings of brightly painted velvet down, their bright eyes, their curious antennae,
and their queer, tickly feet.  Laddie had promised me a book telling all about every kind there
was, the first time he went to a city, so I was wishing I had it, and was among my pet beauties
with it, when I discovered him bending over me.

He took my arm, and marching back to his place, helped me to the deep window seat beside him,
where with my head on a level, and within a foot of his, I could see everything in the whole
room.  I don't know why I ever spent any time pining for the beauties of Georgiana Jane Titcomb's
grave, even with its handsome headstone on which was carved a lamb standing on three feet and
holding a banner over its shoulder with the fourth, and the geraniums, roses, and the weeping
willow that grew over it, thrown in.  I might have trusted Laddie.  He never had forgotten
me; until he did, I should have kept unwavering faith.

Now, I had the best place of any one in the room, and I smoothed my new plaid frock and shook
my handmade curls just as near like Shelley as ever I could.  But it seems that most of the
ointment in this world has a fly in it, like in the Bible, for fine as my location was, I soon
knew that I should ask Laddie to put me down, because the window behind me didn't fit its frame,
and the night was bitter.  Before half an hour I was stiff with cold; but I doubt if I would
have given up that location if I had known I would freeze, because this was the most fun I
had ever seen.

Miss Amelia began with McGuffey's spelling book, and whenever some poor unfortunate made a
bad break the crowd roared with laughter.  Peter Justice stood up to spell and before three
rounds he was nodding on his feet, so she pronounced "sleepy" to him.  Some one nudged Pete
and he waked up and spelled it, s-l-e, sle, p-e, pe, and because he really was so sleepy it
made every one laugh.  James Whittaker spelled compromise with a k, and Isaac Thomas spelled
soap, s-o-a-p-e, and it was all the funnier that he couldn't spell it, for from his looks you
could tell that he had no acquaintance with it in any shape.  Then Miss Amelia gave out "marriage"
to the spooniest young man in the district, and "stepfather" to a man who was courting a widow
with nine children; and "coquette" to our Shelley, who had been making sheep's eyes at Johnny
Myers, so it took her by surprise and she joined the majority, which by that time occupied seats.

There was much laughing and clapping of hands for a time, but when Miss Amelia had let them
have their fun and thinned the lines to half a dozen on each side who could really spell, she
began business, and pronounced the hardest words she could find in the book, and the spellers
caught them up and rattled them off like machines.

"Incompatibility," she gave out, and before the sound of her voice died away the Princess was
spelling:  "I-n, in, c-o-m, com, in com, p-a-t, pat, incompat, i, incompati, b-i-l, bil, incompatibil,
i, incompatibili, t-y, ty, incompatibility."

Then Laddie spelled "incomprehensibility," and they finished up the "bilities" and the "alities"
with a rush and changed McGuffey's for Webster, with five on Laddie's side and three on the
Princess', and when they quit with it, the Princess was alone, and Laddie and our little May
facing her.

From that on you could call it real spelling.  They spelled from the grammars, hyperbole, synecdoche,
and epizeuxis.  They spelled from the physiology, chlorophyll, coccyx, arytenoid, and the names
of the bones and nerves, and all the hard words inside you.

They tried the diseases and spelled jaundice, neurasthenia, and tongue-tied.  They tried all
the occupations and professions, and went through the stores and spelled all sorts of hardware,
china and dry goods.  Each side kept cheering its own and urging them to do their best, and
every few minutes some man in the back of the house said something that was too funny.  When
Miss Amelia pronounced "bombazine" to Laddie our side cried, "Careful, Laddie, careful! you're
out of your element!"

And when she gave "swivel-tree" to the Princess, her side whispered, "Go easy!  Do you know
what it is?  Make her define it."

They branched over the country.  May met her Jonah on the mountains. Katahdin was too much
for her, and Laddie and the Princess were left to fight it out alone.  I didn't think Laddie
liked it.  I'm sure he never expected it to turn out that way.  He must have been certain he
could beat her, for after he finished English there were two or three other languages he knew,
and every one in the district felt that he could win, and expected him to do it.  It was an
awful place to put him in, I could see that.  He stood a little more erect than usual, with
his eyes toward the Princess, and when his side kept crying, "Keep the prize, Laddie!  Hold
up the glory of the district!" he ground out the words as if he had a spite at them for not
being so hard that he would have an excuse for going down.

The Princess was poised lightly on her feet, her thick curls, just touching her shoulders,
shining in the light; her eyes like stars, her perfect, dark oval face flushed a rich red,
and her deep bosom rising and falling with excitement.  Many times in later years I have tried
to remember when the Princess was loveliest of all, and that night always stands first.

I was thinking fast.  Laddie was a big man.  Men were strong on purpose so they could bear
things.  He loved the Princess so, and he didn't know whether she loved him or not; and every
marriageable man in three counties was just aching for the chance to court her, and I didn't
feel that he dared risk hurting her feelings.

Laddie said, to be the man who conquered the Princess and to whom she lifted her lips for a
first kiss was worth life itself.  I made up my mind that night that he knew just exactly what
he was talking about.  I thought so too.  And I seemed to understand why Laddie--Laddie in
his youth, strength, and manly beauty, Laddie, who boasted that there was not a nerve in his
body--trembled before the Princess.

It looked as if she had set herself against him and was working for the honours, and if she
wanted them, I didn't feel that he should chance beating her, and then, too, it was beginning
to be plain that it was none too sure he could.  Laddie didn't seem to be the only one who
had been well drilled in spelling.

I held my jaws set a minute, so that I could speak without Laddie knowing how I was shivering,
and then I whispered:  "Except her eyes are softer, she looks just like a cardinal."

Laddie nodded emphatically and moving a step nearer laid his elbow across my knees.  Heavens,
how they spelled!  They finished all the words I ever heard and spelled like lightning through
a lot of others the meaning of which I couldn't imagine.  Father never gave them out at home.
They spelled epiphany, gaberdine, ichthyology, gewgaw, kaleidoscope, and troubadour.  Then
Laddie spelled one word two different ways; and the Princess went him one better, for she spelled
another three.

They spelled from the Bible, Nebuchadnezzar, Potiphar, Peleg, Belshazzar, Abimelech, and a
host of others I never heard the minister preach about.  Then they did the most dreadful thing
of all.  "Broom," pronounced the teacher, and I began mentally, b-r-o-o-m, but Laddie spelled
"b-r-o-u-g-h-a-m," and I stared at him in a daze.  A second later Miss Amelia gave out "Beecham"
to the Princess, and again I tried it, b-e-e-c-h, but the Princess was spelling "B-e-a-u-c-h-a-m-p,"
and I almost fell from the window.

They kept that up until I was nearly crazy with nervousness; I forgot I was half frozen.  I
pulled Laddie's sleeve and whispered in his ear: "Do you think she'll cry if you beat her?"

I was half crying myself, the strain had been awful.  I was torn between these dearest loves
of mine.

"Seen me have any chance to beat her?" retorted Laddie.

Miss Amelia seemed to have used most of her books, and at last picked up an old geography and
began giving out points around the coast, while Laddie and the Princess took turns snatching
the words from her mouth and spelling them.  Father often did that, so Laddie was safe there.
They were just going it when Miss Amelia pronounced, "Terra del Fuego," to the Princess.  "T-e-r-r-a,
Terra, d-e-l, del, F-i-e-u-g-o," spelled the Princess, and sat down suddenly in the midst of
a mighty groan from her side, swelled by a wail from one little home district deserter.

"Next!" called Miss Amelia.

"T-e-r-r-a, Terra, d-e-l, del, F-e-u-g-o," spelled Laddie.

"Wrong!" wailed Miss Amelia, and our side breathed one big groan in concert, and I lifted up
my voice in that also.  Then every one laughed and pretended they didn't care, and the Princess
came over and shook hands with Laddie, and Laddie said to Miss Amelia:

"Just let me take that book a minute until I see how the thing really does go."  It was well
done and satisfied the crowd, which clapped and cheered; but as I had heard him spell it many,
many times for father, he didn't fool me.

Laddie and the Princess drew slips for the book and it fell to her.  He was so pleased he kissed
me as he lifted me down and never noticed I was so stiff I could scarcely stand--and I did
fall twice going to the sleigh.  My bed was warm and my room was warm, but I chilled the night
through and until the next afternoon, when I grew so faint and sleepy I crept to Miss Amelia's
desk, half dead with fright--it was my first trip to ask an excuse--and begged:  "Oh teacher,
I'm so sick.  Please let me go home."

I think one glance must have satisfied her that it was true, for she said very kindly that
I might, and she would send Leon along to take care of me.  But my troubles were only half
over when I had her consent.  It was very probable I would be called a baby and sent back when
I reached home, so I refused company and started alone.  It seemed a mile past the cemetery.
I was so tired I stopped, and leaning against the fence, peeped through at the white stones
and the whiter mounds they covered, and wondered how my mother would feel if she were compelled
to lay me beside the two little whooping cough and fever sisters already sleeping there.  I
decided that it would be so very dreadful, that the tears began to roll down my cheeks and
freeze before they fell.

Down the Big Hill slowly I went.  How bare it looked then!  Only leafless trees and dried seed
pods rattling on the bushes, the sand frozen, and not a rush to be seen for the thick blanket
of snow.  A few rods above the bridge was a footpath, smooth and well worn, that led down to
the creek, beaten by the feet of children who raced it every day and took a running slide across
the ice.  I struck into the path as always; but I was too stiff to run, for I tried.  I walked
on the ice, and being almost worn out, sat on the bridge and fell to watching the water bubbling
under the glassy crust.  I was so dull a horse's feet struck the bridge before I heard the
bells--for I had bells in my ears that day--and when I looked up it was the Princess--the Princess
in her red dress and furs, with a silk hood instead of her hat, her sleigh like a picture,
with a buffalo robe, that it was whispered about the country, cost over a hundred dollars,
and her thoroughbred mare Maud dancing and prancing.  "Bless me!  Is it you, Little Sister?"
she asked.  "Shall I give you a ride home?"

Before I could scarcely realize she was there, I was beside her and she was tucking the fine
warm robe over me.  I lifted a pair of dull eyes to her face.

"Oh Princess, I am so glad you came," I said.  "I don't think I could have gone another step
if I had frozen on the bridge."

The Princess bent to look in my face.  "Why, you poor child!" She exclaimed, "you're white
as death!  Where are you ill?"

I leaned on her shoulder, though ordinarily I would not have offered to touch her first, and
murmured:  "I am not ill, outdoors, only dull, sleepy, and freezing with the cold."

"It was that window!" she exclaimed.  "I thought of it, but I trusted Laddie."

That roused me a little.

"Oh Princess," I cried, "you mustn't blame Laddie!  I knew it was too cold, but I wouldn't
tell him, because if he put me down I couldn't see you, and we thought, but for your eyes being
softer, you looked just like a cardinal."

The Princess hugged me close and laughed merrily.  "You darling!" she cried.

Then she shook me up sharply:  "Don't you dare go to sleep!" she said. "I must take you home
first."

Once there she quieted my mother's alarm, put me to bed, drove three miles for Dr. Fenner and
had me started nicely on the road to a month of lung fever, before she left.  In my delirium
I spelled volumes; and the miracle of it was I never missed a word until I came to "Terra del
Fuego," and there I covered my lips and stoutly insisted that it was the Princess' secret.

To keep me from that danger sleep on the road, she shook me up and asked about the spelling
bee.  I thought it was the grandest thing I had ever seen in my life, and I told her so.  She
gathered me close and whispered:  "Tell me something, Little Sister, please."

The minx!  She knew I thought that a far finer title than hers.

"Would Laddie care?" I questioned.

"Not in the least!"

"Well then, I will."

"Can Laddie spell 'Terra del Fuego?'" she whispered.

I nodded.

"Are you sure?"

"I have heard him do it over and over for father."

The Princess forgot I was so sick, forgot her horse, forgot everything. She threw her head
back and her hands up, until her horse stopped in answer to the loosened line, and she laughed
and laughed.  She laughed until peal on peal re-echoed from our Big Woods clear across the
west eighty.  She laughed until her ringing notes set my slow pulses on fire, and started my
numbed brain in one last effort.  I stood up and took her lovely face between my palms, turning
it until I could see whether the thought that had come to me showed in her eyes, and it did.

"Oh you darling, splendid Princess!" I cried.  "You missed it on purpose to let Laddie beat!
You can spell it too!"

Leon said our house reminded him of the mourners' bench before any one had "come through."
He said it was so deadly with Sally and Shelley away, that he had a big notion to marry Susie
Fall and bring her over to liven things up a little.  Mother said she thought that would be
a good idea, and Leon started in the direction of Falls', but he only went as far as Deams'.
When he came back he had a great story to tell about dogs chasing their sheep, and foxes taking
their geese.  Father said sheep were only safe behind securely closed doors, especially in
winter, and geese also.  Leon said every one hadn't as big a barn as ours, and father said
there was nothing to prevent any man from building the sized barn he needed to shelter his
creatures in safety and comfort, if he wanted to dig in and earn the money to put it up. There
was no answer to that, and Mr. Leon didn't try to make any. Mostly, he said something to keep
on talking, but sometimes he saw when he had better quit.

I was having a good time, myself.  Of course when the fever was the worst, and when I never
had been sick before, it was pretty bad, but as soon as I could breathe all right, there was
no pain to speak of, and every one was so good to me.  I could have Bobby on the footboard
of my bed as long as I wanted him, and he would crow whenever I told him to. I kept Grace Greenwood
beside me, and spoiled her dress making her take some of each dose of medicine I did, but Shelley
wrote that she was saving goods and she would make her another as soon as she came home. I
made mother put red flannel on Grace's chest and around her neck, until I could hardly find
her mouth when she had to take her medicine, but she swallowed it down all right, or she got
her nose held, until she did.  She was not nearly so sick as I was, though.  We both grew better
together, and, when Dr. Fenner brought me candy, she had her share.

When I began to get well it was lovely.  Such toast, chicken broth, and squirrels, as mother
always had.  I even got the chicken liver, oranges, and all of them gave me everything they
had that I wanted--I must almost have died to make them act like that!

Laddie and father would take me up wrapped in blankets and hold me to rest my back.  Father
would rock me and sing about "Young Johnny," just as he had when I was little.  We always laughed
at it, we knew it was a fool song, but we liked it.  The tune was smooth and sleepy-like and
the words went:

  "One day young Johnny, he did go,
   Way down in the meadow for to mow.

All of them told me stories, read to me, and Frank, one of my big gone-away brothers, sent
me the prettiest little book.  It had a green cover with gold on the back, and it was full
of stories and poems, not so very hard, because I could read every one of them, with help on
a few words.  The piece I liked best was poetry.  If it hadn't been for that, I'm afraid, I
was having such a good time, I'd have lain there until I forgot how to walk, with all of them
trying to see who could be nicest to me.  The ones who really could, were Laddie and the Princess,
except mother.  Laddie lifted me most carefully, the Princess told the best stories, but after
all, if the burning and choking grew so bad I could scarcely stand it, mother could lay her
hand on my head and say, "Poor child," in a way that made me work to keep on breathing.  Maybe
I only THOUGHT I loved Laddie best.  I guess if I had been forced to take my choice when I
had the fever, I'd have stuck pretty tight to mother. Even Dr. Fenner said if I pulled through
she'd have to make me.  I might have been lying there yet, if it hadn't been for the book Frank
sent me, with the poetry piece in it.  It began:

  "Somewhere on a sunny bank, buttercups are bright,
  Somewhere 'mid the frozen grass, peeps the daisy white."

I read that so often I could repeat it quite as well with the book shut as open, and every
time I read it, I wanted outdoors worse.  In one place it ran:

  "Welcome, yellow buttercups, welcome daisies white,
  Ye are in my spirit visioned a delight.
  Coming in the springtime of sunny hours to tell,
  Speaking to our hearts of Him who doeth all things well."

That piece helped me out of bed, and the blue gander screaming opened the door.  It was funny
about it too.  I don't know WHY it worked on me that way; it just kept singing in my heart
all day, and I could shut my eyes and go to sleep seeing buttercups in a gold sheet all over
our Big Hill, although there never was a single one there; and meadows full of daisies, which
were things father said were a pest he couldn't tolerate, because they spread so, and he grubbed
up every one he found. Yet that piece filled our meadow until I imagined I could roll on daisies.
They might be a pest to farmers, but sheets of them were pretty good if you were burning with
fever.  Between the buttercups and the daisies I left the bed with a light head and wobbly legs.

Of course I wasn't an idiot.  I knew when I looked from our south window exactly what was to
be seen.  The person who wrote that piece was the idiot.  It sang and sounded pretty, and it
pulled you up and pushed you out, but really it was a fool thing, as I very well knew.  I couldn't
imagine daisies peeping through frozen grass.  Any baby should have known they bloomed in July.
Skunk cabbage always came first, and hepatica.  If I had looked from any of our windows and
seen daisies and buttercups in March, I'd have fallen over with the shock.  I knew there would
be frozen brown earth, last year's dead leaves, caved-in apple and potato holes, the cabbage
row almost gone, puddles of water and mud everywhere, and I would hear geese scream and hens
sing.  And yet that poem kept pulling and pulling, and I was happy as a queen--I wondered if
they were for sure; mother had doubts--the day I was wrapped in shawls and might sit an hour
in the sun on the top board of the back fence, where I could see the barn, orchard, the creek
and the meadow, as you never could in summer because of the leaves.  I wasn't looking for buttercups
and daisies either.  I mighty well knew there wouldn't be any.

But the sun was there.  A little taste of willow, oak and maple was in the air.  You could
see the buds growing fat too, and you could smell them.  If you opened your eyes and looked
in any direction you could see blue sky, big, ragged white clouds, bare trees, muddy earth
with grassy patches, and white spots on the shady sides where unmelted snow made the icy feel
in the air, even when the sun shone.  You couldn't hear yourself think for the clatter of the
turkeys, ganders, roosters, hens, and everything that had a voice.  I was so crazy with it
I could scarcely hang to the fence; I wanted to get down and scrape my wings like the gobbler,
and scream louder than the gander, and crow oftener than the rooster.  There was everything
all ice and mud.  They would have frozen, if they hadn't been put in a house at night, and
starved, if they hadn't been fed; they were not at the place where they could hunt and scratch,
and not pay any attention to feeding time, because of being so bursting full.  They had no
nests and babies to rejoice over. But there they were!  And so was I!  Buttercups and daisies
be-hanged! Ice and mud really!  But if you breathed that air, and shut your eyes, north, you
could see blue flags, scarlet lilies, buttercups, cattails and redbirds sailing over them;
east, there would be apple bloom and soft grass, cowslips, and bubbling water, robins, thrushes,
and bluebirds; and south, waving corn with wild rose and alder borders, and sparrows, and larks
on every fence rider.

Right there I got that daisy thing figured out.  It wasn't that there were or ever would be
daisies and buttercups among the frozen grass; but it was forever and always that when this
FEEL came into the air, you knew they were COMING.  THAT was what ailed the gander and the
gobbler.  They hadn't a thing to be thankful for yet, but something inside them was swelling
and pushing because of what was coming.  I felt exactly as they did, because I wanted to act
the same way, but I'd been sick enough to know that I'd better be thankful for the chance to
sit on the fence, and think about buttercups and daisies.  Really, one old brown and purple
skunk cabbage with a half-frozen bee buzzing over it, or a few forlorn little spring beauties,
would have set me wild, and when a lark really did go over, away up high, and a dove began
to coo in the orchard, if Laddie hadn't come for me, I would have fallen from the fence.

I simply had to get well and quickly too, for the wonderful time was beginning.  It was all
very well to lie in bed when there was nothing else to do, and every one would pet me and give
me things; but here was maple syrup time right at the door, and the sugar camp most fun alive;
here was all the neighbourhood crazy mad at the foxes, and planning a great chase covering
a circuit of miles before the ground thawed; here was Easter and all the children coming, except
Shelley--again, it would cost too much for only one day--and with everything beginning to hum,
I found out there would be more amusement outdoors than inside.  That was how I came to study
out the daisy piece.  There was nothing in the silly, untrue lines: the pull and tug was in
what they made you think of.

I was still so weak I had to take a nap every day, so I wasn't sleepy as early at night, and
I heard father and mother talk over a lot of things before they went to bed.  After they mentioned
it, I remembered that we hadn't received nearly so many letters from Shelley lately, and mother
seldom found time to read them aloud during the day and forgot, or her eyes were tired, at night.

"Are you worrying about Shelley?" asked father one night.

"Yes, I am," answered mother.

"What do you think is the trouble?"

"I'm afraid things are not coming out with Mr. Paget as she hoped."

"If they don't, she is going to be unhappy?"

"That's putting it mildly."

"Well, I was doubtful in the beginning."

"Now hold on," said mother.  "So was I; but what are you going to do? I can't go through the
world with my girls, and meet men for them.  I trained them just as carefully as possible before
I started them out; that was all I could do.  Shelley knows when a man appears clean, decent
and likable.  She knows when his calling is respectable.  She knows when his speech is proper,
his manners correct, and his ways attractive.  She found this man all of these things, and
she liked him accordingly.  At Christmas she told me about it freely."

"Have you any idea how far the thing has gone?"

"She said then that she had seen him twice a week for two months.  He seemed very fond of her.
He had told her he cared more for her than any girl he ever had met, and he had asked her to
come here this summer and pay us a visit, so she wanted to know if he might."

"Of course you told her yes."

"Certainly I told her yes.  I wish now we'd saved money and you'd gone to visit her and met
him when she first wrote of him.  You could have found out who and what he was, and with your
experience you might have pointed out signs that would have helped her to see, before it was
too late."

"What do you think is the trouble?"

"I wish I knew!  She simply is failing to mention him in her letters; all the joy of living
has dropped from them, she merely writes about her work; and now she is beginning to complain
of homesickness and to say that she doesn't know how to endure the city any longer.  There's
something wrong."

"Had I better go now?"

"Too late!" said mother, and I could hear her throat go wrong and the choke come into her voice.
"She is deeply in love with him; he hasn't found in her what he desires; probably he is not
coming any more; what could you do?"

"I could go and see if there is anything I could do?"

"She may not want you.  I'll write her to-morrow and suggest that you or Laddie pay her a visit
and learn what she thinks."

"All right," said father.

He kissed her and went to sleep, but mother was awake yet, and she got up and stood looking
down at the church and the two little white gravestones she could see from her window, until
I thought she would freeze, and she did nearly, for her hands were cold and the tears falling
when she examined my covers, and felt my face and hands before she went to bed.  My, but the
mother of a family like ours is never short of a lot of things to think of!

I had a new one myself.  Now what do you suppose there was about that man?

Of course after having lived all her life with father and Laddie, Shelley would know how a
man should look, and act to be right; and this one must have been right to make her bloom out
in winter the way other things do in spring; and now what could be wrong?  Maybe city girls
were prettier than Shelley.  But all women were made alike on the outside, and that was as
far as you could see.  You couldn't find out whether they had pure blood, true hearts, or clean
souls.  No girl could be so very much prettier than Shelley; they simply were not made that
way.  She knew how to behave; she had it beaten into her, like all of us.  And she knew her
books, what our schools could teach her, and Groveville, and Lucy, who had city chances for
years, and there never was a day at our house when books and papers were not read and discussed,
and your spelling was hammered into you standing in rows against the wall, and memory tests--what
on earth could be the matter with Shelley that a man who could make her look and act as she
did at Christmas, would now make her unhappy?  Sometimes I wanted to be grown up dreadfully,
and again, times like that, I wished my bed could stay in mother's room, and I could creep
behind father's paper and go to sleep between his coat and vest, and have him warm my feet
in his hands forever.

This world was too much for me.  I never worked and worried in all my life as I had over Laddie
and the Princess, and Laddie said I, myself, never would know how I had helped him.  Of course
nothing was settled; he had to try to make her love him by teaching her how lovable he was.
We knew, because we always had known him, but she was a stranger and had to learn.  It was
mighty fine for him that he could force his way past the dogs, Thomas, the other men, her half-crazy
father, and through the locked door, and go there to try to make her see, on Sunday nights,
and week days, every single chance he could invent, and he could think up more reasons for
going to Pryors' than mother could for putting out an extra wash.

Now just as I got settled a little about him, and we could see they really wanted him there,
at least the Princess and her mother did, and Mr. Pryor must have been fairly decent or Laddie
never would have gone; and the Princess came to our house to bring me things to eat, and ask
how mother was, and once to learn how she embroidered Sally's wedding chemise, and social things
like that; and when father acted as if he liked her so much he hadn't a word to say, and mother
seemed to begin to feel as if Laddie and the Princess could be trusted to fix it up about God;
and the old mystery didn't matter after all; why, here Shelley popped up with another mystery,
and it belonged to us.  But whatever ailed that man I couldn't possibly think.  It had got
to be him, for Shelley was so all right at Christmas, it made her look that pretty we hardly
knew her.

I was thinking about her until I scarcely could study my lessons, so I could recite to Laddie
at night, and not fall so far behind at school. Miss Amelia offered to hear me, but I just
begged Laddie, and father could see that he taught me fifty things in a lesson that you could
tell to look at Miss Amelia, she never knew.  Why, he couldn't hear me read:

  "We charged upon a flock of geese,
    And put them all to flight
  Except one sturdy gander
    That thought to show us fight,"--

without teaching me that the oldest picture in all the world was made of a row of geese, some
of which were kinds we then had--the earth didn't seem so old when you thought of that--and
how a flock of geese once wakened an army and saved a city, and how far wild geese could fly
without alighting in migration, and everything you could think of about geese, only he didn't
know why eating the same grass made feathers on geese and wool on sheep.  Anyway, Miss Amelia
never told you a word but what was in the book, and how to read and spell it.  May said that
father was very much disappointed in her, and he was never going to hire another teacher until
he met and talked with her, no matter what kind of letters she could send.  He was not going
to help her get a summer school, and O my soul!  I hope no one does, for if they do, I have
to go, and I'd rather die than go to school in the summer.

Leon came in about that time with more fox stories.  Been in Jacob Hood's chicken house and
taken his best Dorking rooster, and father said it was time to do something.  He never said
a word so long as they took Deams', except they should have barn room for their geese, but
when anything was the matter at Hoods' father and mother started doing something the instant
they heard of it.  So father and Laddie rode around the neighbourhood and talked it over, and
the next night they had a meeting at our schoolhouse; men for miles came, and they planned
a regular old-fashioned foxchase, and every one was wild about it.

Laddie told it at Pryors' and the Princess wanted to go; she asked to go with him, and if you
please, Mr. Pryor wanted to go too, and their Thomas.  They attended the meeting to tell how
people chase foxes in England, where they seem to hunt them most of the time.  Father said:
"Thank God for even a foxchase, if it will bring Mr. Pryor among his neighbours and help him
to act sensibly."  They are going away fifteen miles or farther, and form a big circle of men
from all directions, some walking in a line, and others riding to bring back any foxes that
escape, and with dogs, and guns, they are going to rout out every one they can find, and kill
them so they won't take the geese, little pigs, lambs, and Hoods' Dorking rooster.  Laddie
had a horn that Mr. Pryor gave him when he told him this country was showing signs of becoming
civilized at last; but Leon grinned and said he'd beat that.

Then when you wanted him, he was in the wood house loft at work, but father said he couldn't
get into mischief there.  He should have seen that churn when it was full of wedding breakfast!
We ate for a week afterward, until things were all moulded, and we didn't dare anymore. One
night I begged so hard and promised so faithfully he trusted me; he did often, after I didn't
tell about the Station; and I went to the loft with him, and watched him work an hour.  He
had a hollow limb about six inches through and fourteen long.  He had cut and burned it to
a mere shell, and then he had scraped it with glass inside and out, until it shone like polished
horn.  He had shaved the wool from a piece of sheepskin, soaked, stretched, and dried it, and
then fitted it over one end of the drumlike thing he had made, and tacked and bound it in a
little groove at the edge.  He put the skin on damp so he could stretch it tight.  Then he
punched a tiny hole in the middle, and pulled through it, down inside the drum, a sheepskin
thong rolled in resin, with a knot big enough to hold it, and not tear the head.  Then he took
it under his arm and we slipped across the orchard below the Station, and went into the hollow
and tried it.

It worked!  I almost fell dead with the first frightful sound.  It just bellowed and roared.
In only a little while he found different ways to make it sound by his manner of working the
tongue.  A long, steady, even pull got that kind of a roar.  A short, quick one made it bark.
A pull half the length of the thong, a pause, and another pull, made it sound like a bark and
a yelp.  To pull hard and quick, made it go louder, and soft and easy made it whine.  Before
he had tried it ten minutes he could do fifty things with it that would almost scare the livers
out of those nasty old foxes that were taking every one's geese, Dorking roosters, and even
baby lambs and pigs.  Of course people couldn't stand that; something had to be done!

Even in the Bible it says, "Beware of the little foxes that spoil the vines," and geese, especially
blue ones, Dorking roosters, lambs, and pigs were much more valuable than mere vines; so Leon
made that awful thing to scare the foxes from their holes that's in the Bible too, about the
holes I mean, not the scaring.  I wanted Leon to slip to the back door and make the dumb-bell--that's
what he called it; if I had been naming it I would have called it the thunder-bell--go; but
he wouldn't.  He said he didn't propose to work as he had, and then have some one find out,
and fix one like it.  He said he wouldn't let it make a sound until the night before the chase,
and then he'd raise the dead.  I don't know about the dead; but it was true of the living.
Father went a foot above his chair and cried: "Whoo-pee!"  All of us, even I, when I was waiting
for it, screamed as if Paddy Ryan raved at the door.  Then Leon came in and showed us, and
every one wanted to work the dumb-bell, even mother.  Leon marched around and showed off; he
looked "See the conquering hero comes," all over.  I never felt worse about being made into
a girl than I did that night.

I couldn't sleep for excitement, and mother said I might as well, for it would be at least
one o'clock before they would round-up in our meadow below the barn.  All the neighbours were
to shut up their stock, tie their dogs, or lead them with chains, if they took them, so when
the foxes were surrounded, they could catch them alive, and save their skins.  I wondered how
some of those chasing people, even Laddie, Leon, and father--think of that!  father was going
too--I wondered how they would have liked to have had something as much bigger than they were,
as they were bigger than the foxes, chase them with awful noises, guns and dogs, and catch
them alive--to save their skins.  No wonder I couldn't sleep!  I guess the foxes wouldn't either,
if they had known what was coming.  Maybe hereafter the mean old things would eat rabbits and
weasels, and leave the Dorking roosters alone.

May, Candace, and Miss Amelia were going to Deams' to wait, and when the round-up formed a
solid line, they planned to stand outside, and see the sport.  If they had been the foxes,
maybe they wouldn't have thought it was so funny; but of course, people just couldn't have
even their pigs and lambs taken.  We had to have wool to spin yarn for our stockings, weave
our blankets and coverlids, and our Sunday winter dresses of white flannel with narrow black
crossbars were from the backs of our own sheep, and we had to have ham to fry with eggs, and
boil for Sunday night suppers, and bacon to cook the greens with--of course it was all right.

Before it was near daylight I heard Laddie making the kitchen fire, so father got right up,
Leon came down, and all of them went to the barn to do the feeding.  I wanted to get up too,
but mother said I should stay in bed until the house was warm, because if I took more cold
I'd be sick again.  At breakfast May asked father about when they should start for Deams' to
be ahead of the chase, and he said by ten o'clock at least; because a fox driven mad by pursuit,
dogs, and noise, was a very dangerous thing, and a bite might make hy----the same thing as
a mad dog.  He said our back barn door opening from the threshing floor would afford a fine
view of the meet, but Candace, May, and Miss Amelia wanted to be closer.  I might go with them
if they would take good care of me, and they promised to; but when the time came to start,
there was such a queer feeling inside me, I thought maybe it was more fever, and with mother
would be the best place for me, so I said I wanted to watch from the barn.  Father thought
that was a capital idea, because I would be on the east side, where there would be no sun and
wind, and it would be perfectly safe; also, I really could see what was going on better from
that height than on the ground.

The sun was going to shine, but it hadn't peeped above Deams' strawstack when father on his
best saddle horse, and Laddie on Flos, rode away, their eyes shining, their faces red, their
blood pounding so it made their voices sound excited and different.  Leon was to go on foot.
Father said he would ride a horse to death.  He just grinned and never made a word of complaint.
Seemed funny for him.

"I was over having a little confidential chat with my horse, last night," he said, "and next
year we'll be in the chase, and we'll show you how to take fences, and cut curves; just you wait!"

"Leon, DON'T build so on that horse," wailed mother.  "I'm sure that money was stolen like
ours, and the owner will claim it! I feel it in my bones!"

"Aw, shucks!" said Leon.  "That money is mine.  He won't either!"

When they started, father took Leon behind him to ride as far as the county line.  He said
he would go slowly, and it wouldn't hurt the horse, but Leon slipped off at Hoods', and said
he'd go with their boys, so father let him, because light as Leon was, both of them were quite
a load for one horse.  Laddie went to ride with the Princess.  We could see people moving around
in Pryors' barnyard when our men started.  Candace washed, Miss Amelia wiped the dishes, May
swept, and all of them made the beds, and then they went to Deams', while I stayed with mother.
When she thought it was time, she bundled me up warmly, and I went to the barn.  Father had
the east doors standing open for me, so I could sit in the sun, hang my feet against the warm
boards, and see every inch of our meadow where the meet was to be.  I was really too warm there,
and had to take off the scarf, untie my hood, and unbutton my coat.

It was a trifle muddy, but the frost had not left the ground yet, the sparrows were singing
fit to burst, so were the hens.  I didn't care much for the music of the hen, but I could see
she meant well.  She liked her nest quite as much as the red velvet bird with black wings,
or the bubbly yellow one, and as for baby chickens, from the first peep they beat a little
naked, blind, wobbly tree bird, so any hen had a right to sing for joy because she was going
to be the mother of a large family of them.  A hen had something was going to be the mother
of a large family of them.  A hen had something to sing about all right, and so had we, when
we thought of poached eggs and fried chicken.  When I remembered them, I saw that it was no
wonder the useful hen warbled so proudlike; but that was all nonsense, for I don't suppose
a hen ever tasted poached eggs, and surely she wouldn't be happy over the prospect of being
fried.  Maybe one reason she sang was because she didn't know what was coming; I hardly think
she'd be so tuneful if she did.

Sometimes the geese, shut in the barn, raised an awful clatter, and the horses and cattle complained
about being kept from the sunshine and fresh air.  You couldn't blame them.  It was a lovely
day, and the big upper door the pleasantest place.  I didn't care if the fox hunters never
came, there was so much to see, hear, and smell.  Everything was busy making signs of spring,
and one could become tired of ice and snow after a while, and so hungry for summer that those
first days which were just hints of what was coming were almost better than the real thing
when it arrived.  Bud perfume was stronger than last week, many doves and bluebirds were calling,
and three days more of such sunshine would make cross-country riding too muddy to be pleasant.
I sat there thinking; grown people never know how much children do think, they have so much
time, and so many bothersome things to study out.  I heard it behind me, a long, wailing, bellowing
roar, and my hood raised right up with my hair.  I was in the middle of the threshing floor
in a second, in another at the little west door, cut into the big one, opening it a tiny crack
to take a peep, and see how close they were.

I could see nothing, but I heard a roar of dreadful sound steadily closing in a circle around
me.  No doubt the mean old foxes wished then they had let the Dorking roosters alone.  Closer
it came and more dreadful.  Never again did I want to hear such sounds coming at me; even when
I knew what was making them.  And then away off, beyond Pryors', and Hoods', and Dovers', I
could see a line of tiny specks coming toward me, and racing flying things that must have been
people on horses riding back and forth to give the foxes no chance to find a hiding place.
No chance!  Laddie and the Princess, Mr. Pryor and father, and all of them were after the bad
old foxes; and they were going to get them; because they'd have no chance--Not with a solid
line of men with raving dogs surrounding them, and people on horseback racing after them, no!
the foxes would wish now that they had left the pigs and lambs alone.  In that awful roaring
din, they would wish, Oh how they would wish, they were birds and could fly!  Fly back to their
holes like the Bible said they had, where maybe they LIKED to live, and no doubt they had little
foxes there, that would starve when their mammies were caught alive, to save their skins.

To save their skins!  I could hear myself breathe, and feel my teeth click, and my knees knock
together.  And then!  Oh dear!  There they came across our cornfield.  Two of them!  And they
could fly, almost. At least you could scarcely see that they touched the ground.  The mean
old things were paying up for the pigs and lambs now.  Through the fence, across the road,
straight toward me they came.  Almost red backs, nearly white beneath, long flying tails, beautiful
pointed ears, and long tongues, fire red, hanging from their open mouths; their sleek sides
pulsing, and that awful din coming through the woods behind them. One second, the first paused
to glance toward either side, and threw back its head to listen.  What it saw, and heard, showed
it.  I guess then it was sorry it ever took people's ham, and their greens, and their blankets;
and it could see and hear that it had no chance--to save its skin.

"Oh Lord!  Dear Lord!  Help me!" I prayed.

It had to be me, there was no one else.  I never had opened the big doors; I thought it took
a man, but when I pushed with all my might--and maybe if the hairs of our heads were numbered,
and the sparrows counted, there would be a little mercy for the foxes--I asked for help; maybe
I got it.  The doors went back, and I climbed up the ladder to the haymow a few steps and clung
there, praying with all my might:  "Make them come in!  Dear Lord, make them come in!  Give
them a chance!  Help them to save their skins, O Lord!"

With a whizz and a flash one went past me, skimmed the cider press, and rushed across the hay;
then the other.  I fell to the floor and the next thing I knew the doors were shut, and I was
back at my place.  I just went down in a heap and leaned against the wall and shook, and then
I laughed and said:  "Thank you, Lord!  Thank you for helping with the door!  And the foxes!
The beautiful little red and white foxes! They've got their chance!  They'll save their skins!
They'll get back to their holes and their babies!  Praise the Lord!"

I knew when I heard that come out, that it was exactly like my father said it when Amos Hurd
was redeemed.  I never knew father to say it so impressively before, because Amos had been
so bad, people really were afraid of him, and father said if once he got started right, he
would go at it just as hard as he had gone at wrongdoing.  I suppose I shouldn't have said
it about a fox, when there were the Dorkings, and ham, and white wool dresses, and all that,
but honestly, I couldn't remember that I cared particularly whether Amos Hurd was redeemed
or not; he was always lovely to children; while I never in all my life had wanted anything
worse than I wanted those foxes to save their skins.  I could hear them pant like run out dogs;
and I could hear myself, and I hadn't been driven from my home and babies, maybe--and chased
miles and miles, either.

Then I just shook.  They came pounding, roaring and braying right around the barn, and down
the lane.  The little door flew open and a strange man stuck in his head.

"Shut that door!" I screamed.  "You'll let them in on me, and they bite!  They're poison! 
They'll kill me!"

I hadn't even thought of it before.

"See any foxes?" cried the man.

"Two crossed our barnyard headed that way!" I cried back, pointing east.  "Shut the door!"

The man closed it and ran calling as he went:  "It's all right!  They crossed the barnyard.
We've got them!"

I began to dance and beat my hands, and then I stopped and held my breath.  They were passing,
and the noise was dreadful.  They struck the sides of the barn, poked around the strawstack,
and something made me look up, and at the edge of the hay stood a fox ready to spring.  If
it did, it would go from the door, right into the midst thereof. Nothing but my red hood sailing
straight at it, and a yell I have, drove it back.  No one hit the barn again, the line closed
up, and went on at a run now, they were so anxious to meet and see what they had. Then came
the beat of hoofs and I saw that all the riders had dropped back, and were behind the line
of people on foot.  I watched Laddie as he flew past waving to me, and I grabbed my scarf to
wave at him.  The Princess flashed by so swiftly I couldn't see how she looked, and then I
heard a voice I knew cry:  "Ep!  Ep!  Over Lad!"  And I almost fell dead where I stood.  Mr.
Pryor sailed right over the barnyard fence into the cornfield, ripping that dumb-bell as he
went, and neck and neck, even with him, on one of his finest horses, was our Leon.  His feet
were in the stirrups, he had the reins tight, he almost stood as he arose, his face was crimson,
his head bare, his white hair flying, the grandest sight you ever saw.  At the top of my voice
I screamed after them, "Ep!  Ep!  Over lad!" and then remembered and looked to see if I had
to chase back the foxes, but they didn't mind only me, after what they had been through.  Then
I sat down suddenly again.

Well!  What would father think of that!  Leon kill a horse of ours indeed!  There he was on
one of Mr. Pryor's, worth as much as six of father's no doubt, flying over fences, and the
creek was coming, and the bank was steep behind the barn.  I was up again straining to see.

"Ep!  Ep!  Over!" rang the cry.

There they went!  Laddie and the Princess too.  I'll never spend another cent on paper dolls,
candy, raisins, or oranges.  I'll give all I have to help Leon buy his horse; then I'm going
to begin saving for mine.

The line closed up, a solid wall of men with sticks, clubs and guns; the dogs ranged outside,
and those on horseback stopped where they could see best; and inside, raced back and forth,
and round and round, living creatures.  I couldn't count they moved so, but even at that distance
I could see that some were poor little cotton tails.  The scared things!  A whack over the
head, a backward toss, and the dogs were mouthing them.  The long tailed, sleek, gracefully
moving ones, they were foxes, the foxes driven from their holes, and nothing on earth could
save their skins for them now; those men meant to have them.

I pulled the doors shut suddenly.  I was so sick I could scarcely stand.  I had to work, but
at last I pushed the west doors open again. I don't think the Lord helped me any that time,
for I knew what it took--before, they just went.  Or maybe He did help me quite as much, but
I had harder work to do my share, because I felt so dizzy and ill. Anyway, they opened.  Then
I climbed the upright ladder to the top beam, walked it to the granary, and there I danced,
pounded and yelled so that the foxes jumped from the hay, leaped lightly to the threshing floor,
and stood looking and listening.  I gave them time to hear where the dreadful racket was, and
then I jumped to the hay and threw the pitchfork at them.  It came down smash! and both of
them sprang from the door.  When I got down the ladder and where I could see, they were so
rested they were hiking across the cornfield like they never had raced a step before; and as
the clamour went up behind me, that probably meant the first fox had lost its beautiful red
and white skin, they reached our woods in safety.  The doors went shut easier, and I started
to the house crying like any blubbering baby; but when mother turned from the east window,
and I noticed her face, I forgot the foxes.

"You saw Leon!" I cried.

"That I did!" she exulted, rocking on her toes the same as she does at the Meeting House when
she is going to cry, "Glory!" any minute.  "That I did!  Ah! the brave little chap!  Ah! the
fine fellow!"

Her cheeks were the loveliest pink, and her eyes blazed.  I scarcely knew her.

"What will father say?"

"If his father isn't every particle as proud of him as I am this day, I've a big disappointment
coming," she answered.  "If Mr. Pryor chose to let him take that fine horse, and taught him
how to ride it, father should be glad."

"If he'd gone into the creek, you wouldn't feel so fine."

"Ah! but he didn't!  He didn't!  He stuck to the saddle and sailed over in one grand, long
sweep!  It was fine!  I hope--to my soul, I hope his father saw it!"

"He did!" I said.  "He did!  He was about halfway down the lane.  He was where he could see fine."

"You didn't notice----?"

"I was watching if Leon went under.  What if he had, mother?"

"They'd have taken him out, and brought him to me, and I'd have worked with all the strength
and skill God has given me, and if it were possible to us, he would be saved, and if it were
not, it would be a proud moment for a woman to offer a boy like that to the God who gave him.
One would have nothing to be ashamed of!"

"Could you do it, like you are now, and not cry, mother?" I asked wonderingly.

"Patience no!" said she.  "Before long you will find out, child, that the fountain head of
tears and laughter lies in the same spot, deep in a woman's heart.  Men were made for big things!
They must brave the wild animals, the Indians, fight the battles, ride the races, till the
fields, build the homes.  In the making of a new country men must have the thing in their souls
that carried Leon across the creek.  If he had checked that horse and gone to the ford, I would
have fallen where I stood!"

"Father crossed the ford!"

"True!  But that's different.  He never had a chance at a horse like that!  He never had time
for fancy practice, and his nose would have been between the pages of a book if he had.  But
remember this!  Your father's hand has never faltered, and his aim has never failed.  All of
us are here, safe and comfortable, through him.  It was your father who led us across the wilderness,
and fended from us the wildcat, wolf, and Indian.  He built this house, cleared this land,
and gave to all of us the thing we love.  Get this in your head straight.  Your father rode
a plow horse; he never tried flourishes in riding; but no man can stick in the saddle longer,
ride harder, and face any danger with calmer front.  If you think this is anything, you should
have seen his face the day he stood between me and a band of Indians, we had every reason to
think, I had angered to the fighting point."

"Tell me!  Please tell me!" I begged.

All of us had been brought up on that story, but we were crazy to hear it, and mother loved
to tell it, so she dropped on a chair and began:

"We were alone in a cabin in the backwoods of Ohio.  Elizabeth was only nine months old, and
father always said a mite the prettiest of any baby we ever had.  Many of the others have looked
quite as well to me, but she was the first, and he was so proud of her he always wanted me
to wait in the wagon until he hitched the horses, so he would get to take and to carry her
himself.  Well, she was in the cradle, cooing and laughing, and I had my work all done, and
cabin shining.  I was heating a big poker red-hot, and burning holes into the four corners
of a board so father could put legs in it to make me a bench.  A greasy old squaw came to the
door with her papoose on her back.  She wanted to trade berries for bread.  There were berries
everywhere for the picking; I had more dried than I could use in two years.  We planted only
a little patch of wheat and father had to ride three days to carry to mill what he could take
on a horse.  I baked in an outoven and when it was done, a loaf of white bread was by far the
most precious thing we had to eat. Sometimes I was caught, and forced to let it go.  Often
I baked during the night and hid the bread in the wheat at the barn.  There was none in the
cabin that day and I said so.  She didn't believe me.  She set her papoose on the floor beside
the fireplace, and went to the cupboard.  There wasn't a crumb there except cornbread, and
she didn't want that.  She said:  'Brod!  Brod!'

"She learned that from the Germans in the settlement.  I shook my head. Then she pulled out
a big steel hunting knife, such as the whites traded to the Indians so they would have no trouble
in scalping us neatly, and walked to the cradle.  She took that knife loosely between her thumb
and second finger and holding it directly above my baby's face, she swung it lightly back and
forth and demanded:  'Brod!  Brod!'

"If the knife fell, it would go straight through my baby's head, and Elizabeth was reaching
her little hands and laughing.  There was only one thing to do, and I did it.  I caught that
red-hot poker from the fire, and stuck it so close her baby's face, that the papoose drew back
and whimpered.  I scarcely saw how she snatched it up and left.  When your father came, I told
him, and we didn't know what to do.  We knew she would come back and bring her band.  If we
were not there, they would burn the cabin, ruin our crops, kill our stock, take everything
we had, and we couldn't travel so far, or so fast, that on their ponies they couldn't overtake
us.  We endangered any one with whom we sought refuge, so we gripped hands, knelt down and
told the Lord all about it, and we felt the answer was to stay.  Father cleaned the gun, and
hours and hours we waited.

"About ten o'clock the next day they came, forty braves in war paint and feathers.  I counted
until I was too sick to see, then I took the baby in my arms and climbed to the loft, with
our big steel knife in one hand.  If your father fell, I was to use it, first on Elizabeth,
then on myself.  The Indians stopped at the woodyard, and the chief of the band came to the
door, alone.  Your father met him with his gun in reach, and for a whole eternity they stood
searching each other's eyes. I was at the trapdoor where I could see both of them.

"To the depths of my soul I enjoyed seeing Leon take the fence and creek: but what was that,
child, to compare with the timber that stood your father like a stone wall between me and forty
half-naked, paint besmeared, maddened Indians?  Don't let any showing the men of to-day can
make set you to thinking that father isn't a king among men.  Not once, but again and again
in earlier days, he fended danger from me like that.  I can shut my eyes and see his waving
hair, his white brow, his steel blue eyes, his unfaltering hand.  I don't remember that I had
time or even thought to pray.  I gripped the baby, and the knife, and waited for the thing
I must do if an arrow or a shot sailed past the chief and felled father.  They stood second
after second, like two wooden men, and then slowly and deliberately the chief lighted his big
pipe, drew a few puffs and handed it to father.  He set down his gun, took the pipe and quite
as slowly and deliberately he looked at the waiting band, at the chief, and then raised it
to his lips.

"'White squaw brave!  Heap much brave!' said the chief.

"'In the strength of the Lord.  Amen!' said father.

"Then he reached his hand and the chief took it, so I came down the ladder and stood beside
father, as the Indians began to file in the front door and out the back.  As they passed, every
man of them made the peace sign and piled in a heap, venison, fish, and game, while each squaw
played with the baby and gave me a gift of beads, a metal trinket, or a blanket she had woven.
After that they came often, and brought gifts, and if prowling Gypsies were pilfering, I could
look to see a big Indian loom up and seat himself at my fireside until any danger was past.
I really got so I liked and depended on them, and father left me in their care when he went
to mill, and I was safe as with him.  You have heard the story over and over, but to-day is
the time to impress on you that an exhibition like THIS is the veriest child's play compared
with what I have seen your father do repeatedly!"

"But it was you, the chief said was brave!"

Mother laughed.

"I had to be, baby," she said.  "Mother had no choice.  There's only one way to deal with an
Indian.  I had lived among them all my life, and I knew what must be done."

"I think both of you were brave," I said, "you, the bravest!"

"Quite the contrary," laughed mother.  "I shall have to confess that what I did happened so
quickly I'd no time to think.  I only realized the coal red iron was menacing the papoose when
it drew back and whimpered.  Father had all night to face what was coming to him, and it was
not one to one, but one to forty, with as many more squaws, as good fighters as the braves,
to back them.  It was a terror but I never have been sorry we went through it together.  I
have rested so securely in your father ever since."

"And he is as safe in you," I insisted.

"As you will," said mother.  "This world must have her women quite as much as her men.  It
is shoulder to shoulder, heart to heart, business."

The clamour in the meadow arose above our voices and brought us back to the foxes.

"There goes another!" I said, the tears beginning to roll again.

"It is heathenish business," said mother.  "I don't blame you!  If people were not too shiftless
to care for their stuff, the foxes wouldn't take their chickens and geese.  They never get ours!"

"Hoods aren't shiftless!" I sobbed.

"There are always exceptions," said mother, "and they are the exception in this case."

The door flew open and Leon ran in.  He was white with excitement, and trembling.

"Mother, come and see me take a fence on Pryor's Rocket!" he cried.

Mother had him in her arms.

"You little whiffet!" she said.  "You little tow-haired whiffet!"

Both of them were laughing and crying at the same time, and so was I.

"I saw you take one fence and the creek, Weiscope!" she said, holding him tight, and stroking
his hair.  "That will do for to-day.  Ride the horse home slowly, rub it down if they will
allow you, and be sure to remember your manners when you leave.  To trust such a child as you
with so valuable a horse, and for Mr. Pryor to personally ride with you and help you, I think
that was a big thing for a man like him to do."

"But, mother, he's been showing me for weeks, or I couldn't have done it to-day.  It was our
secret to surprise you.  When I get my horse, I'll be able to ride a little, as well as Mr.
Laddie."

"Leon, don't," said mother, gripping him tighter.

"You must bear in mind, word about that money may come any day."

"Aw, it won't either," said Leon, pulling away.  "And say, mother, that dumb-bell was like
country boys make in England.  He helped me hunt the wood and showed me, and I couldn't ride
and manage it, so he had it all day, and you should have heard him make it rip.  Say, mother,
take my word, he was some pumpkins in England.  I bet he ordered the Queen around, when he
was there!"

"No doubt!" laughed mother, kissing him and pushing him from the door.

Some people are never satisfied.  After that splendid riding and the perfect day, father, Leon,
and Laddie came home blaming every one, and finding fault, and trying to explain how it happened,
that the people from the east side claimed two foxes, and there was only one left for the west
side, when they had seen and knew they had driven three for miles.  They said they lost them
in our Big Woods.

I didn't care one speck.  I would as lief wear a calico dress, and let the little foxes have
their mammies to feed them; and I was willing to bet all my money that we would have as much
ham, and as many greens next summer as we ever had.  And if the foxes took Hoods' Dorkings
again, let them build a coop with safe foundations.  The way was to use stone and heap up dirt
around it in the fall, to be perfectly sure, and make it warmer.

We took care of our chickens because we had to have them.  All the year we needed them, but
most especially for Easter.  Mother said that was ordained chicken time.  Turkeys for Thanksgiving,
sucking pigs for Christmas, chickens for Easter, goose, she couldn't abide.  She thought it
was too strong.  She said the egg was a symbol of life; of awakening, of birth, and the chickens
came from the eggs, first ones about Easter, so that proved it was chicken time.

I am going to quit praying about little things I can manage myself. Father said no prayer would
bring an answer unless you took hold and pulled with all your being for what you wanted.  I
had been intending for days to ask the Lord to help me find where Leon hid his Easter eggs.
It had been the law at our house from the very first, that for the last month before Easter,
aside from what mother had to have for the house, all of us might gather every egg we could
find and keep them until Easter.  If we could locate the hiding place of any one else, we might
take all theirs.  The day before Easter they were brought in, mother put aside what she required,
and the one who had the most got to sell all of them and take the money.  Sometimes there were
two washtubs full, and what they brought was worth having, for sure.  So we watched all year
for safe places, and when the time came we almost ran after the hens with a basket.  Because
Laddie and Leon were bigger they could outrun us, and lots of hens laid in the barn, so there
the boys always had first chance.  Often during the month we would find and take each other's
eggs a dozen times.

We divided them, and hid part in different places, so that if either were found there would
still be some left.

Laddie had his in the hopper of the cider press right on the threshing floor, and as he was
sure to get more than I had anyway, I usually put mine with his.  May had hers some place,
and where Leon had his, none of us could find or imagine.  I almost lay awake of nights trying
to think, and every time I thought of a new place, the next day I would look, and they wouldn't
be there.  Three days before Easter, mother began to cook and get the big dinner ready, and
she ran short of eggs. She told me to go to the barn and tell the boys that each of them must
send her a dozen as quickly as they could.  Of course that was fair, if she made both give
up the same number.  So I went to the barn.

The lane was muddy, and as I had been sick, I wore my rubbers that spring.  I thought to keep
out of the deep mud, where horses and cattle trampled, I'd go up the front embankment, and
enter the little door. My feet made no sound, and it so happened that the door didn't either,
and as I started to open it.  I saw Leon disappearing down the stairway, with a big sack on
his back.  I thought it was corn for the horses, and followed him, but he went to the cow stable
door and started toward the lane, and then I thought it was for the pigs, so I called Laddie
and told him about the eggs.  He said he'd give me two dozen of his, and Leon could pay him
back.  We went together to get them, and there was only one there.

Wasn't that exactly like Leon?  Leave ONE for the nest egg!  If he were dying and saw a joke
or a trick, he'd stop to play it before he finished, if he possibly could.  If he had no time
at all, then he'd go with his eyes twinkling over the thoughts of the fun it would have been
if he possibly could have managed it.  Of course when we saw that one lonely egg in the cider
hopper, just exactly like the "Last Rose of Summer, left to pine on the stem," I thought of
the sack Leon carried, and knew what had been in it.  We hurried out and tried to find him,
but he was swallowed up.  You couldn't see him or hear a sound of him anywhere.

Mother was as cross as she ever gets.  Right there she made a new rule, and it was that two
dozen eggs must be brought to the house each day, whether any were hidden or not.  She had
to stop baking until she got eggs.  She said a few times she had used a goose egg in custard.
I could fix that.  I knew where one of our gray geese had a nest, and if she'd cook any goose
egg, it would be a gray one.  Of course I had sense enough not to take a blue one.  So I slipped
from the east door, crossed the yard and orchard corner, climbed the fence and went down the
lane.  There was the creek up and tearing.  It was half over the meadow, and the floodgate
between the pasture and the lane rocked with the rush of water; still, I believed I could make
it.  So I got on the fence and with my feet on the third rail, and holding by the top one,
I walked sidewise, and so going reached the floodgate.  It was pretty wobbly, but I thought
I could cross on the run.  I knew I could if I dared jump at the other end; but there the water
was over the third rail, and that meant above my head.

It was right at that time of spring when you felt so good you thought you could do most anything,
except fly--I tried that once--so I went on.  The air was cold for all the sun shone, the smell
of catkin pollen, bursting buds, and the odour of earth steaming in the sun, was in every breath;
the blackbirds were calling, and the doves; the ganders looked longingly at the sky and screamed
a call to every passing wild flock, and Deams' rooster wanted to fight all creation, if you
judged by the boasting he was doing from their barnyard gate.  He made me think of eggs, so
I set my jaws, looked straight ahead, and scooted across the floodgate to the post that held
it and the rails of the meadow fence.  I made it too, and then the fence was easy, only I had
to double quite short, because the water was over the third rail there, but at last it was
all gone, and I went to the fence corner and there was the goose on the nest, laying an egg.
She had built on a little high place, among puddles, wild rose bushes, and thorns, and the
old thing wouldn't get off.  She just sat there and stuck out her head and hissed and hissed.
I never noticed before that geese were so big and so aggravating.  I wasn't going to give up,
after that floodgate, so I hunted a big stick, set it against her wing, pushed her off and
grabbed three eggs and ran.  When I got to the fence, I was in a pickle for sure.  I didn't
know what in the world to do with the eggs.

At last I unbuttoned my coat, put them in my apron front, gathered it up, and holding it between
my teeth, started back.  I had to double more than ever on account of the eggs, and when I
reached the floodgate it rocked like a branch in the wind; but I had to get back, so I rested
and listened to the larks a while.  That was a good plan.  They were calling for mates, and
what they said was so perfectly lovely, you couldn't think of anything else; and the less you
thought about how that gate rocked, and how deep and swift the water ran, the better for you.
At last one lark went almost from sight and he rang, twisted and trilled his call, until my
heart swelled so big it hurt.  I crossed on the jump with no time to think at all.  That was
a fine plan, for I made it, but I hit the post so hard I broke the middle egg.  I was going
to throw it away, but there was so much starch in my apron it held like a dish, and it had
been clean that morning, now the egg soiled it anyway, so I ran and got home all right.

Mother was so pleased about the eggs she changed the apron and never said a word, except to
brag on me.  She said she couldn't keep house without me, and I guess that was a fact.  I came
in handy a lot of times.  But at dinner when she scolded the boys about the eggs, and told
them I brought the goose eggs for her custard, else there would have been no pie, father broke
loose, and I thought he was going to whip me sure.  He told mother all about the water and
the gate, and how I had to cross, and he said, 'it was a dispensation of Providence that we
didn't have a funeral instead of celebrating Easter,' so I said:

"Well, if you think I came so near drowning myself, when you rejoice because Christ is risen
from the dead, you can be glad I am too, and that will make it all the better."

The boys laughed, but father said it was no laughing matter.  I think that speech saved me
from going on the threshing floor, for he took me on his lap when I thought I'd have to go,
and told me never, never to do anything like that again, and then he hugged me until I almost
broke.  Gracious!  He should have seen us going to school some days. Why, we even walked the
top rail when it was the only one above water, and we could cross the bridge if we wanted to.
At least when Laddie or Miss Amelia was not around, we did.

Leon was so bursting full he scarcely could eat, and Laddie looked pretty glum when he had
to admit he had no eggs; so Laddie had to hand over the whole two dozen.  Leon didn't mind
that, but he said if he must, then all of us should stay in the dining-room until he brought
them, because of course he couldn't walk straight and get them in broad daylight with us watching,
and not show where they were.  Father said that was fair, so Leon went out and before so very
long he came back with the eggs.

I thought until my skull almost cracked, about where he COULD have gone, and I was almost to
the place where the thing seemed serious enough that I'd ask the Lord to help me find Laddie's
eggs, when mother sent me to the garret for red onion skins.  She had an hour to rest, and
she was going to spend it fixing decorations for our eggs.  Of course there were always red
and black aniline ones, and yellow and blue, but none of us ever like them half so well as
those mother coloured, herself.

She took the dark red skins and cut boys, girls, dogs, cats, stars, flowers, butterflies, fish,
and everything imaginable, and wet the skins a little and laid them on very white eggs that
had been soaked in alum water to cut the grease, and then wrapped light yellow skins over,
and then darker ones, and at last layer after layer of cloth, and wet that, and roasted them
an hour in hot ashes and then let them cool and dry, before unwrapping.  When she took them
out, rubbed on a little grease and polished them--there they were!  They would have our names,
flowers, birds, animals, all in pale yellow, deep rich brown, almost red, and perfectly beautiful
colours, while you could hunt and hunt before you found everything on one egg.  And sometimes
the onion skins slipped, and made things of themselves that she never put on.

I was coming from the bin with an apron full of skins and I almost fell over.  I couldn't breathe
for a long time.  I danced on my toes, and held my mouth to keep from screaming.  On the garret
floor before me lay a little piece of wet mud, and the faintest outline of a boot, a boot about
Leon's size.  That was all I needed to know.  As soon as I could hold steady, I took the skins
to mother, slipped back and hunted good; and of course I had to find them--grainsacks half
full of them--carried in the front door in the evening, and up the front stairs, where no one
went until bedtime, unless there were company. Away back under the eaves, across the joists,
behind the old clothing waiting to be ripped, coloured and torn for carpet rangs and rugs,
Mr. Leon had almost every egg that had been laid on the place for a month.

NOW he'd see what he'd get for taking Laddie's!

Then I stopped short.  What I thought most made me sick, but I didn't propose to lie in bed
again for a year at least, for it had its bad parts as well as its good; so I went straight
and whispered to Laddie. He never looked pleased at all, so I knew I had been right.  He kissed
me, and thanked me, and then said slowly:  "It's mighty good of you, Little Sister, but you
see it wouldn't be FAIR.  He found mine himself, so he had a right to take them.  But I don't
dare touch his, when you tell me where they are.  I never in a month of Sundays would have
looked for them in the house.  I was going to search the wood house and smoke house this afternoon.
I can't take them.  But thank you just as much."

Then I went to father and he laughed.  How he did laugh!

"Laddie is right!" he said at last.  "He didn't find them, and he mustn't take them.  But you
may!  They're yours!  That front door scheme of Leon's was fairly well, but it wasn't quite
good enough.  If he'd cleaned his feet as he should, before he crossed mother's carpet and
climbed the stairs, he'd have made it all right.  'His tracks betrayed him,' as tracks do all
of us, if we are careless enough to leave any.  The eggs are yours, and to-night is the time
to produce them.  Where do you want to hide them?"

Well of all things! and after I had stumbled on them without pestering the Lord, either!  Just
as slick as anything!  Mine!  I never ever thought of it.  But when I did think, I liked it.
The more I thought, the funnier it grew.

"Under mother's bed," I whispered.  "But I never can get them.  They're in wheat sacks, and
full so high, and they'll have to be handled like eggs."

"I'll do the carrying," laughed father.  "Come show me!"

So we took all those eggs, and put them under mother's bed.

Of course she and Candace saw us, but they didn't hunt eggs and they'd never tell.  If ever
I thought I'd burst wide open!  About dusk I saw Leon coming from the barn carrying his hat
at his side--more eggs--so I ran like a streak and locked the front door, and then slipped
back in the dining-room and almost screamed, when I could hear him trying it, and he couldn't
get in.  After a while he came in, fussed around, and finally went into the sitting-room, and
the key turned and he went upstairs.  I knew I wouldn't dare look at him when he came down,
so I got a reader and began on a piece I just love:

  "A nightingale made a mistake;
    She sang a few notes out of tune:
  Her heart was ready to break,
    And she hid away from the moon."

When I did get a peep, gracious but he was black!  Maybe it wasn't going to be so much fun
after all.  But he had the money last year, and the year before, and if he'd cleaned his feet
well--I was not hunting his eggs, when I found them.  "His tracks betrayed him," as father
said.  I was thankful supper was ready just then, and while it was going on mother said:  "As
soon as you finish, all bring in your eggs. I want to wrap the ones to colour to-night, and
bury them in the fireplace so they will colour, dry, and be ready to open in the morning."

No one said a word, but neither Laddie nor Leon looked very happy, and I took awful bites to
keep my face straight.  When all of us finished May brought a lot from the bran barrel in the
smoke house, but Laddie and Leon only sat there and looked silly; it really was funny.

"I must have more eggs than this?" said mother.  "Where are they to come from?"

Father nodded to me and I said:  "From under your bed!"

"Oh, it was you!  And I never once caught you snooping!" cried Leon.

"Easy son!" said father.  "That will do.  You lost through your own carelessness.  You left
wet mud on the garret floor, and she saw it when mother sent her for the onion skins.  You
robbed Laddie of his last egg this morning; be a good loser yourself!"

"Well, anyway, you didn't get 'em," said Leon to Laddie.

"And she only found them by accident!"

Then we had a big time counting all those eggs, and such another heap as there was to sell,
after mother filled baskets to cook with and colour.  When the table was cleared, Laddie and
Leon made tallow pencils from a candle and wrote all sorts of things over eggs that had been
prepared to colour.  Then mother boiled them in copperas water, and aniline, and all the dyes
she had, and the boys polished them, and they stood in shining black, red, blue and yellow
heaps.  The onion ones would be done in the morning.  Leon had a goose egg and mother let him
keep it, so he wrote and wrote on it, until Laddie said it would be all writing, and no colour,
and he boiled it in red, after mother finished, and polished it himself.  It came out real
pretty with roses on it and lots of words he wouldn't let any of us read; but of course it
was for Susie Fall.

Next morning he slipped it to her at church.  When we got home, all of us were there except
Shelley, and we had a big dinner and a fine time and Laddie stayed until after supper, before
he went to Pryors'.

"How is he making it?" asked Sally.

"You could see she was making it all right; she never looked lovelier, and mother said Peter
was letting her spend away too much money on her clothes.  She told him so, but Peter just
laughed and said business was good, and he could afford it, and she was a fine advertisement
for his store when she was dressed well."

"All I know is," said mother, "that he goes there every whipstitch, and the women, at least,
seem glad to have him.  He says Mr. Pryor treats him decently, and that is more than he does
his own family and servants.  He and the girl and her mother are divided about something. She
treats her father respectfully, but she's in sympathy with mother."

"Laddie can't find out what the trouble is?"

"I don't think that he tries."

"Maybe he'd feel better not to know," said Peter.

"Possibly!" said mother.

"Nonsense!" said father.

"You seem to be reconciled," said Elizabeth.

"That girl would reconcile a man to anything," said father.

"Not to the loss of his soul, I hope," said mother stiffly.

"Souls are not so easy to lose," said father.  "Besides, I am counting on Laddie saving hers."

CHAPTER XIII

The Garden of the Lord

  "With what content and merriment,
  Their days are spent, whose minds are bent
  To follow the useful plow."

That spring I decided if school didn't stop pretty soon, I'd run away again, and I didn't in
the least care what they did to me.  A country road was all right and it was good enough, if
it had been heaped up, leveled and plenty of gravel put on; and of course our road would be
fine, because father was one of the commissioners, and as long as he filled that office, every
road in the county would be just as fine as the law would allow him to make it.  I have even
heard him tell mother that he "stretched it a leetle mite," when he was forced to by people
who couldn't seem to be made to understand what was required to upbuild a nation.  He said
our language was founded on the alphabet, and to master it you had to begin with "a".  And
he said the nation was like that; it was based on townships, and when a township was clean,
had good roads, bridges, schoolhouses, and churches, a county was in fine shape, and when each
county was in order, the state was right, and when the state was prosperous, the nation could
rejoice in its strength.

He said Atlas in the geography book, carrying the world on his back, was only a symbol, but
it was a good one.  He said when the county elected him to fill an important office, it used
his shoulder as a prop for the nation, so it became his business to stand firmly, and use every
ounce of strength and brains he had, first of all to make his own possessions a model, then
his township, his county, and his state, and if every one worked together doing that, no nation
on earth had our amount of territory and such fine weather, so none of them could beat us.

Our road was like the barn floor, where you drove: on each side was a wide grassy strip, and
not a weed the length of our land.  All the rails in the fences were laid straight, the gates
were solid, sound, and swung firmly on their beams, our fence corners were full of alders,
wild roses, sumac, blackberry vines, masses of wild flowers beneath them, and a bird for every
bush.  Some of the neighbours thought that to drive two rails every so often, lay up the fences
straight, and grub out the shrubs was the way, but father said they were vastly mistaken. He
said that was such a shortsighted proceeding, he would be ashamed to indulge in it.  You did
get more land, but if you left no place for the birds, the worms and insects devoured your
crops, and you didn't raise half so much as if you furnished the birds shelter and food.  So
he left mulberries in the fields and fence corners and wild cherries, raspberries, grapes,
and every little scrub apple tree from seeds sown by Johnny Appleseed when he crossed our land.

Mother said those apples were so hard a crane couldn't dent them, but she never watched the
birds in winter when the snow was beginning to come and other things were covered up.  They
swarmed over those trees until spring, for the tiny sour apples stuck just like oak leaves
waiting for next year's crop to push them off.  She never noticed us, either.  After a few
frosts, we could almost get tipsy on those apples; there was not a tree in our orchard that
had the spicy, teasing tang of Johnny Appleseed's apples.  Then too, the limbs could be sawed
off and rambo and maiden's-blush grafted on, if you wanted to; father did on some of them,
so there would be good apples lying beside the road for passers-by, and they needn't steal
to get them.  You could graft red haws on them too, and grow great big, little haw-apples,
that were the prettiest things you ever saw, and the best to eat.  Father said if it didn't
spoil the looks of the road, he wouldn't care how many of his neighbours straightened their
fences.  If they did, the birds would come to him, and the more he had, the fewer bugs and
worms he would be troubled with, so he would be sure of big crops, and sound fruit.  He said
he would much rather have a few good apples picked by robins or jays, than untouched trees,
loaded with wormy falling ones he could neither use nor sell.  He always patted my head and
liked every line of it when I recited, sort of tearful-like and pathetic:

  "Don't kill the birds! the happy birds,
  That bless the field and grove;
  So innocent to look upon,
  They claim our warmest love."

The roads crossing our land were all right, and most of the others near us; and a road is wonderful,
if it is taking you to the woods or a creek or meadow; but when it is walking you straight
to a stuffy little schoolhouse where you must stand up to see from a window, where a teacher
is cross as fire, like Miss Amelia, and where you eternally HEAR things you can't see, there
comes a time about the middle of April when you had quite as soon die as to go to school any
longer; and what you learn there doesn't amount to a hill of beans compared with what you can
find out for yourself outdoors.

Schoolhouses are made wrong.  If they must be, they should be built in a woods pasture beside
a stream, where you could wade, swim, and be comfortable in summer, and slide and skate in
winter.  The windows should be cut to the floor, and stand wide open, so the birds and butterflies
could pass through.  You ought to learn your geography by climbing a hill, walking through
a valley, wading creeks, making islands in them, and promontories, capes, and peninsulas along
the bank.  You should do your arithmetic sitting under trees adding hickory-nuts, subtracting
walnuts, multiplying butternuts, and dividing hazelnuts.  You could use apples for fractions,
and tin cups for liquid measure.  You could spell everything in sight and this would teach
you the words that are really used in the world.  Every single one of us could spell incompatibility,
but I never heard father, or the judge, or even the Bishop, put it in a speech.

If you simply can't have school THAT way, then you should be shut in black cells, deep under
the ground, where you couldn't see, or hear a sound, and then if they'd give you a book and
candle and Miss Amelia, and her right-hand man, Mister Ruler, why you might learn something.
This way, if you sat and watched the windows you could see a bird cross our woods pasture to
the redbird swamp every few minutes; once in a while one of my big hawks took your breath as
he swept, soared, sailed, and circled, watching the ground below for rabbits, snakes, or chickens.
The skinny old blue herons crossing from the Wabash to hunt frogs in the cowslip swale in our
meadow, sailed so slow and so low, that you could see their sharp bills stuck out in front,
their uneven, ragged looking feathers, and their long legs trailing out behind.  I bet if Polly
Martin wore a blue calico dress so short her spindle-shanks showed, and flew across our farm,
you couldn't tell her from a heron.

There were so many songs you couldn't decide which was which to save you; it was just a pouring
jumble of robins, larks, doves, blackbirds, sparrows, everything that came that early; the
red and the yellow birds had not come yet, or the catbirds or thrushes.  You could hear the
thumping wings of the roosters in Sills' barnyard nearest the schoolhouse, and couldn't tell
which was whipping, so you had to sit there and wonder; and worst of all you must stand Miss
Amelia calmly telling you to pay attention to your books or you would be kept in, and all the
time you were forced to bear torments, while you watched her walk from window to window to
see every speck of the fight.  One day they had thumped and fought for half an hour; she had
looked from every window in the room, and at last there was an awful whacking, and then silence.
It grew so exciting I raised my hand, and almost before she nodded permission, "Which whipped?"
I asked.

Miss Amelia turned red as a beet.  Gee, but she was mad!

"I did!" she said.  "Or at least I will.  You may remain for it after school is dismissed."

Now if you are going to be switched, they never do it until they are just so angry anyway,
and then they always make it as hard as they dare not to stripe you, so it isn't much difference
HOW provoked they are, it will be the same old thrashing, and it's sure to sting for an hour
at least, so you might as well be beaten for a little more as hardly anything at all.  At that
instant from the fence not far from my window came a triumphant crow that fairly ripped across
the room.

"Oh, it was the Dorking!" I said.  "No wonder you followed clear around the room to see him
thrash a Shanghai three times his size!  I bet a dollar it was great!"

Usually, I wouldn't have put up more than five cents, but at that time I had over six dollars
from my Easter eggs, and no girl of my age at our school ever had half that much.  Miss Amelia
started toward me, and I braced my feet so she'd get a good jolt herself, when she went to
shake me; she never struck us over the head since Laddie talked to her that first day; but
John Hood's foot was in the aisle.  I thought maybe I'd have him for my beau when we grew up,
because I bet he knew she was coming, and stuck out his foot on purpose; anyway, she pitched,
and had to catch a desk to keep off the floor, and that made her so mad at him, that she forgot
me, while he got his scolding; so when my turn came at last, she had cooled down enough that
she only marched past to her desk, saying I was to remain after school.  I had to be careful
after that to be mighty good to May and Leon.

When school was out they sat on the steps before the door and waited. Miss Amelia fussed around
and there they sat.  Then her face grew more gobblerish than usual, and she went out and told
them to go home. Plain as anything I heard May say It:  "She's been awful sick, you know, and
mother wouldn't allow it."  And then Leon piped up:  "You DID watch the roosters, all the time
they fought, and of course all of us wanted to see just as badly as you did."

She told them if they didn't go right home she'd bring them back and whip them too; so they
had to start, and leave me to my sad fate.  I was afraid they had made it sadder, instead of
helping me; she was so provoked when she came in she was crying, and over nothing but the plain
truth too; if we had storied on her, she'd have had some cause to beller.  She arranged her
table, cleaned the board, emptied the water bucket, and closed the windows.  Then she told
me I was a rude, untrained child.  I was rude, I suppose, but goodness knows, I wasn't untrained;
that was hard on father and mother; I had a big notion to tell them; and then, she never whipped
me at all.  She said if I wanted her to love me, I mustn't be a saucy, impudent girl, and I
should go straight home and think it over.

I went, but I was so dazed at her thinking I wanted her to love me, that I hardly heard May
and Leon calling; when I did I went to the cemetery fence and there they lay in the long grass
waiting.

"If you cried, we were coming back and pitch into her," said Leon.

There was a pointer.  Next time, first cut she gave me, I decided to scream bloody murder.
But that would be no Crusader way.  There was one thing though.  No Crusader ever sat and heard
a perfectly lovely fight going on, and never even wondered which whipped.

May and Leon stepped one on each side, took a hand, and we ran like Indians, and slid down
the hill between the bushes, climbed the fence, crossed the pasture back of the church, and
went to the creek.  There we sat on a log, I told them, and we just laughed.  I didn't know
what I could do to pay them, for they saved me sure as fate that time.

I wished we lived in the woods the way it was when father and mother were married and moved
to Ohio.  The nearest neighbours were nine miles, and there wasn't a dollar for school funds,
so of course the children didn't have to go, and what their fathers and mothers taught them
was all they knew.  That would not have helped me much though, for we never had one single
teacher who knew anything to compare with what father and mother did, and we never had one
who was forever reading books, papers, and learning more things that help, to teach other people.
I wished father had time to take our school.  It would have been some fun to go to him, because
I just knew he would use the woods for the room, and teach us things it would do some good
to know about.

I began debating whether it was a big enough thing to bother the Lord with: this being penned
up in the schoolhouse droning over spelling and numbers, when you could smell tree bloom, flower
bloom, dozens of birds were nesting, and everything was beginning to hum with life.  I couldn't
think for that piece about "Spring" going over in my head:

  "I am coming, I am coming:
    Hark! the little bee is humming:
  See! the lark is soaring high,
    In the bright and sunny sky;
  All the birds are on the wing:
    Little maiden, now is spring."

I made up my mind that it was of enough importance to call for the biggest prayer I could think
of and that I would go up in the barn to the top window, stand on a beam, and turn my face
to the east, where Jesus used to be, and I'd wrestle with the Lord for freedom, as Jacob wrestled
with the Angel on the banks of the Jabbok in the land of Ammon.  I was just getting up steam
to pray as hard as ever I could; for days I'd been thinking of it, and I was nearly to the
point where one more killdeer crying across the sky would have sent me headlong from the schoolhouse
anywhere that my feet were on earth, and the air didn't smell of fried potatoes, kraut, sweat,
and dogs, like it did whenever you sat beside Clarissa Polk.  When I went to supper one night;
father had been to Groveville, and he was busy over his papers. After he finished the blessing,
he seemed worried, at last he said the funds were all out, and the county would make no appropriation
so school would have to close next week.

Well that beats me!  I had faith in that prayer I was going to make, and here the very thing
I intended to ask for happened before I prayed. I decided I would save the prayer until the
next time I couldn't stand anything another minute, and then I would try it with all my might,
and see if it really did any good.  After supper I went out the back door, spread my arms wide,
and ran down the orchard to the fence in great bounds, the fastest I ever went in my life.
I climbed my pulpit in the corner and tried to see how much air my lungs would hold without
bursting, while I waved my arms and shouted at the top of my voice: "Praise ye the Lord!  Praised
be His holy name!"

"Ker-awk!" cried an old blue heron among the cowslips below me.  I had almost scared it to
death, and it arose on flapping wings and paid me back by frightening me so I screamed as I
dodged its shadow.

"What is all this?" asked father behind me.

"Come up and take a seat, and I'll try to tell you," I said.

So he stepped on my pulpit and sat on the top rail, while I stood between his knees, put my
arms around his neck, took off his hat and loosened his hair so the wind could wave it, and
make his head feel cool and good.  His hair curled a little and it was black and fine. His
cheeks were pink and his eyes the brightest blue, with long lashes, and heavier brows than
any other man I ever have seen.  He was the best looking--always so clean and fresh, and you
never had to be afraid of him, unless you had been a bad, sinful child.  If you were all right,
you would walk into his arms, play with his hair, kiss him all you pleased, and there wasn't
a thing on earth you couldn't tell him, excepting a secret you had promised to keep.

So I explained all this, and more too.  About how I wanted to hunt for the flowers, to see
which bloomed first, and watch in what order the birds came, and now it was a splendid time
to locate nests, because there were no leaves, so I could see easily, and how glad mother would
be to know where the blue goose nested, and her white turkey hen; because she wanted her geese
all blue, and the turkeys all white, as fast as she could manage.

Every little thing that troubled me or that I wanted, I told him.

He sat there and he couldn't have listened with more interest or been quieter if I had been
a bishop, which is the biggest thing that ever happened at our house; his name was Ninde and
he came from Chicago to dedicate our church when it was new.  So father listened and thought
and held his arms around me, and--

"And you think the Lord was at the bottom of the thing that makes you happy?"

"Well, you always go to Him about what concerns you, and you say, 'Praise the Lord,' when things
go to please you."

"I do indeed!" said father.  "But I had thought of this running short of school funds as a
calamity.  If I had been praying about it, I would have asked Him to show me a way to raise
money to continue until middle May at least."

"Oh father!"

I just crumpled up in his arms and began to cry; to save me I couldn't help it.  He held me
tight.  At last he said:  "I think you are a little overstrained this spring.  Maybe you were
sicker than we knew, or are growing too fast.  Don't worry any more about school.  Possibly
father can fix it."

Next morning when I wakened, my everyday clothes lay across the foot of the bed, so I called
mother and asked if I should put them on; she took me in her arms, and said father thought
I had better be in the open, and I needn't go to school any more that spring.  I told her I
thought I could bear it a few more days, now it was going to be over so soon; but she said
I might stay at home, father and Laddie would hear me at night, and I could take my books anywhere
I pleased and study when I chose, if I had my spelling and reading learned at evening.  NOW,
say the Lord doesn't help those who call on Him in faith believing!

