And then she fell into the same deadly gloom; but I think she had almost a wild animal's longing
for solitude; for she made a solemn promise not to attempt her life if we would only leave
her alone!

And we did, though we took care someone was within hearing; for she was still very weak, and
we had not a bell in the house, except a little hand one on the table.

So the Easter holidays drew on, and she was still far too weak and unwell for any thought of
moving her; so that we were in trouble about Alured's holidays, not liking him to come home
to a house of illness that would renew his sorrow, and advising him to accept some invitations
from his schoolfellows; but he wrote that he particularly wished to come home--he could not
bear to be away, and Maitland wanted to see the place and know all about dear Lea, so might
he bring him home?

We were only too glad to consent, and I had gone to sleep with Jaquetta, so as to make room--feeling
very happy over the best school report of our boy we had ever had, though not the best we were
to have.

He spent two or three days at Mr. Maitland's in London, and then he and his friend, John, came
on here.

The railway did not come within twenty miles then, and they had to post from it in flies. 
How delightful it was to see the tall hat and wide white collar, as he stood up in the open
fly, signalling to us, and pointing us out to his friend.  Only, what must it have been to
the poor sufferer in the room above?

Oh! did not one's heart go out in prayer for her!

Out jumped Alured among all of us, and all the dogs at the garden gate; and the first thing,
after his kiss to us all, was to turn to the fly and take out a flower-pot with a beautiful
delicate forced rose in it.

"Where's Hester?" he said.

"My dear child, she has not left her room yet."

"She is well enough for me to take this to her, I suppose?" he said. "He always did get some
flower like this to bring home to her, you know, she liked them so much."

It was just his one idea that Trevor had told him to take his place to her.  We looked doubtfully
at each other, but Fulk quietly said, "Yes, you may go."  And added, as the boy went off, "It
can do no harm to her in the end, poor thing!"

"To her, no; that was not my fear."

There was Alured, almost exactly what Trevor had been when last she saw him, with his bright
sweet honest face over the rose, running up the stairs, knocking, and coming in with his boyish,
"Good morning, Hester, I do hope you are better;" and bending down with his fresh brotherly
kiss on her poor hot forehead, "I've got this rose for you, the bud will be out in a day or two."

If ever there was a modern version of St. Dorothy's roses it was there.

That boy's kiss and his gift touched the place in her heart.  She caught him passionately in
her arms, and held him till he almost lost breath, and then she held him off from her as vehemently.

"Boy--Trevorsham--what do you come to me for?"

"He told me," said Alured, half dismayed.  "Besides, you are my sister."

"Sister, indeed!  Don't you know we would have killed you?"

"Never mind that," said Alured, with an odd sort of readiness.  "You are my sister all the
same, and oh--if you would let me try to be a little bit of Trevor to you, though I know I can't--"

"You--who must hate me?"

"No," said he, "I always did like you, Hester; and I've been thinking about you all the half--whenever
I thought of him."

And as the tears came into the boy's eyes, the blessed weeping came at last to Hester.

He thought he had done her harm, for she cried till she was absolutely spent, sick, faint and
weak as a child.

But she was like a child, and when her head was on the pillow she begged for Trevorsham to
wish her good-night.  I think she tried to fancy his kiss was Trevor's.

Any way the bitter black despair was gone from that time.  She believed in and accepted his
kindness like a sort of after glow from Trevor's love.  Perhaps it did her the more good that
after all he was only a boy, sometimes forgot her, and sometimes hurried after his own concerns,
so that there was more excitement in it than if it had been the steady certain tenderness of
an older person on which she could reckon.

She certainly cared for no one like Trevorsham.  She even came downstairs that she might see
him more constantly, and while he was at home, she seemed to think of no one else.  But she
had softened to us all, and accepted us as her belongings, in a matter-of-course kind of way.
Only when he was gone did she one day say in a heavy dreary tone, that she must soon be leaving us.

But I told her, as we had agreed, that she was very far from well enough to go away alone;
for indeed, it was true that disease of the lungs had set in, and to send her away to languish
and die alone was not to be thought of.

My answer made her look up to me, and say, "I don't see why you should all be so good to me!
Do you know how I have hated you?"

I could not help smiling a little at that, it had so little to do with the matter; but I bent
down and kissed her, the first time I had ever done so.

"I don't understand it," she said, and then pushing me away suddenly. "No! you cannot know,
that I--I--I was the first to devise mischief against that boy.  Perrault would never have
thought of it, but for me! Now, you see whom you are harbouring!  Perhaps, you thought it all
Perrault's doing."

"No, we did not," I said.

"And you still cherish me!  I--who drove you from your home and rank, and came from wishing
the death of your darling, to contriving it!"

I told her we knew it.  And at last, after a long, long silence, she looked up from her joined
hands, and said, "If I may only see my child again, even from the other side of the great gulf,
I would be ready for any torment!  It would be no torment to me, so I saw him! Do you think
I shall be allowed, Ursula?"

How I longed for more power, more words to tell her how infinitely more mercy there was than
she thought of!  I don't think she took it in then, but the beginning was made, and she turned
away no more from what she looked on at first as a means of bringing her to her boy, but by-and-by
became even more to her.

Gradually she told how the whole history had come about.  She had thought nothing of the discovery
of her birth till her boy was born, but from that time the one thought of seeing him in the
rank she thought his due had eaten into her heart.  She had loved her husband before, but his
resistance had chafed her, and gradually she felt it an injustice and cruelty, and her love
and respect withered away, till she regarded him as an obstacle.  And when she had spent her
labour on the voyage, and obtained recognition from her father--behold! Alured's existence
deprived her of the prize almost within her grasp.

A settled desire for the poor baby's death was the consequence, kept up by the continued reports
of his danger.  Till that time she had prayed. Then a sense that Heaven was unjust to her and
her boy filled her with grim rebellion, and she prayed no more; and Perrault, by his constant
return to the subject and speculations on it, kept her mind on it far more.

But Alured lived, and every time she saw him she half hated him, half loved him; hated him
as standing in her son's light, loved him because she could not help loving Trevor's shadow.

That day, when Emily met them--it had been a sudden impulse--Alured had been talking to her
about his plans for Trevor's birthday; and, as he spoke of that street, the wild thought came
over her how easily a fever might yet sweep him away.  And yet she says, all down the street,
she was trying to persuade herself to forget Emily's warning, and to disbelieve in the infection.
After all, she thought, even if she had not met Emily, she should have made some excuse for
turning back, such a pitiful thought came of the fair, fresh face flushing and dying.

But it was prevented, only it left fruits; for Perrault had heard what passed between her and
Trevorsham.  "Did you take him to the shop?" he asked.  And when she mentioned Miss Deerhurst's
reminder, he said, "Ah! that game wants skill and coolness to carry it out."

She says that was almost all that passed in so many words; but from that time she never doubted
that Perrault would take any opportunity of occasioning danger to Trevorsham; and, strange
to say, she lived in a continued agony, half of hope, half of terror and grief and pity, her
longing for Trevor's promotion, balanced by the thought of the grief he would suffer for his
friend.  Any time those five years she told me she thought that had she seen Perrault hurting
him, she should have rushed between to save him; and yet in other moods, when she planned for
her son, she would herself have done anything to sweep Alured from his path.

And the frequent discussion with Perrault of plans depending on the possession of the Trevorsham
property, kept the consciousness of his purpose before her, and as debt and desperation grew,
she was more and more sure of it.

That last day, when Trevor had been driven away, lamenting his inability to go out duck shooting,
Perrault had quietly said in the late evening, "I shall take a turn in the salt marshes to-night--opportunities
may offer."

The wretch!  Fulk thinks he said so to implicate her.

At any rate it left her shuddering with dread and remorse, yet half triumphant at the notion
of putting an end to Fulk's power over the estate, and of installing her son as heir of Trevorsham.

She had no fears for him, she trusted to his lame foot to detain him, and said to herself that
if it was to be, he would be spared the sight. She was growing jealous of his love for Alured
and of us, and had a fierce glad hope of getting him more to herself.

And then! oh! poor Hester!

No wonder her desire was to be

     Anywhere, anywhere,
     Out of the world.

But out of all the anguish, the remorse, the despair, repentance grew at last.  Love seemed
to open the heart to it.  The sense of infinite redeeming love penetrated at last, and trust
in pardon, and with pardon came peace.  Peace grew on her, through increasing self-condemnation,
and bearing her up as the bodily powers failed more and more.

There is little more to say.  She was a dear and precious charge to us, and as she grew weaker,
she also became more cheerful! and even that terrible, broken-hearted sense of bereavement calmed.

She found out about Jaquetta and Arthur, and took great interest in his arrangements for getting
a partnership at Shinglebay.

"And Hester," said Jaquetta, "it is so lucky for me that I came down from being a fine lady.
I might never have known Arthur; and if I had, what an absurd creature I should have been as
a poor man's wife!"

As to the Deerhursts, the mother sent a servant once or twice to inquire, but never came herself
to see her dear friend; and Miss Prior took care to tell us that there were horrid whispers
about, that Hester had known, and if not, Mrs. Deerhurst could not have on her visiting list
the wife of a man with a warrant out against him! She thought it very unfeeling in us to harbour
her.

But Emily came.  Hester had a great longing to thank her for checking her on that walk to the
scarlet-fever place, and asked Jaquetta one day to write to her and beg her to come to see
a dying woman.

Emily showed the note to her mother, and did not ask leave.  The white doe had become a much
more valiant animal.

Hester had liked Emily even while Emily shrank from her, and she now realized what she had
inflicted upon her and Fulk.

She asked Emily's pardon for it, as she had asked Fulk's, and said that when she was gone she
hoped all would come right.  Of course the old position could not be restored, but she knew
now why Joel Lea had such an instinct against it.

"I feel," she once said, "as if Satan had offered me all this for my soul, and I had taken
the bargain.  Aye, and if God's providence had allowed our wicked purpose, he would have had
it too.  My husband! he prayed for me! and my boy did too."

She always called Joel Lea "my husband" now, and thought and talked much of their early love
and his warnings.  I think the way she had saddened his later years grieved her as much as
anything, and all her affection seemed revived.

She lingered on, never leaving the house indeed, but not much worse, till the year had come
round again, and we loved her more each day we nursed her.  And when the end came suddenly
at last, we mourned as for a dear sister.

Perrault wrote once--a threatening, swaggering letter from America, demanding hush-money. 
It did not come till she was too ill to open it--only in the last week before her death, and
it was left till we settled her affairs.

Then Fulk wrote and told him of the verdict against him, and recommended him to let himself
be heard of no more.  And he took the advice.

We found that dear Hester had left all the fortune, 30,000 pounds, which had been settled on
herself and Trevor, to be divided equally between us three.  Nor had we any scruple in profiting
by it.

Trevorsham had enough, and it was what my father would have given us if he could.

It was enough to make Jaquetta and her young Dr. Cradock settle down happily and prosperously
on the practice they bought.

And enough too, together with Emily's strong quiet determination, to make Mrs. Deerhurst withdraw
her opposition.  Daughters of twenty-nine years old may get their own way.

Moreover a drawing-room and dining-room were built on to Skimping's Lawn, though Alured declares
they have spoilt the place, and nothing ever was so jolly as the keeping-room.

We had a beautiful double wedding in the summer, in our old church, and since that I have come
to make the old Hall homelike to my boy in the holidays.

We are very happy together when he comes home, and fills the house with his young friends;
and if it feels too large and empty for me in his absence, I can always walk down for a happy
afternoon with Emily, or go and make a longer visit to Jaquetta.

And I don't think, as a leader of the fashion, she would have been half so happy as the motherly,
active, ready-handed doctor's wife.

But best of all to me, are those quiet moments when Alured's earnest spirit shows itself, and
he talks out what is in his heart; that it is a great responsibility to stand in the place
such a man as Fulk would have had--yes--and to have been saved at the cost of Trevor's life.

I believe the pure, calm remembrance of Trevor Lea's life will be his guiding star, and that
he will be worthy of it.