The gold of her virtue had been well tried in the crucible of tribulation, but as yet, it had
not been subjected to the fiery ordeal of temptation; through this, for its more entire refinement
it was now to pass. All at once her ordinary enjoyment of her spiritual exercises was succeeded
by utter disinclination. The sweetness and patience which had scarcely cost her an effort in
her intercourse with her neighbour, gave place to a sensitiveness and irritability which would
have caused her many faults if she had not been closely and constantly on her guard. Her childlike
submission to her director appear intolerable yoke; her dependence on her sister a positive
degradation. The humiliations so freely embraced, and so long and dearly prized, seemed in
her altered views, inconsistent with self-respect. Rather one must learn to give honour where
honour is due, to bow down in true reverence before all spirits that are noble and adorable,
whether they wear crowns and bear titles of honour, or whether they are simple and unnoted persons,
who wear no gold on their garments. Her only support
in these terrible interior trials was in the remembrance of God's promise "to be with those
who are in tribulation" (Ps. xc. 15), and truly He was with hers in hers, and by His almighty
grace brought her so triumphantly through them, that amidst her complicated sufferings, she
never failed in her fidelity to her Lord; never omitted the smallest duty or fell into the
slightest impatience. He who does not permit His creatures to be tried beyond their strength,
granted her relief when she least expected it. In the restored light, she clearly saw that
the object of the tempter had been to lure her from the path of perfection to which God had
called her, and on which, as we have seen, she had already made gigantic strides; and she discovered
with equal distinctness that the ordeal through which she had passed was a necessary preparation
for the higher graces to come. By her example on this occasion, as well as by her subsequent
instructions, she teaches that however strong may be the pressure of temptation, however impenetrable
the darkness of aridity, the afflicted soul should not omit any of her accustomed exercises,
whether of obligation or of mere devotion, or lose her trust in that divine grace which never
deserts her in her conflicts, but powerfully, though perhaps imperceptibly supports her in
every difficulty.

CHAPTER VI.

SUPERNATURAL FAVOURS--VISION OF THE MOST ADORABLE TRINITY.--RENEWED INTERIOR TRIALS.--NEW HEAVENLY
FAVOURS.

As the released torrent rushes on with increased impetuosity after a temporary restraint, so
did the emancipated soul of the holy Mother bound to God with ten-fold ardour, now that the
pressure of temptation, and the darkness of doubt had been removed. As a reward for her fidelity
in her late trials, our Blessed Lord one day showed her His Heart and her own so entirely united,
so completely fused, that they seemed to form but one. After this grace, her love of God appeared
to change its character, and to become altogether divine. Her heart was no longer her own,
for it had been made the possession of the Heart of Jesus. Absorbed in transports and ecstasies
of holy love, she grieved that even the short time which she allowed to sleep, should interrupt
the recollection of the only Desired of her soul: She aspired with ever increasing ardour to
the mystic union so long promised and so long delayed. It was to be, as it were, the culminating
point of the Divine favours;--meantime she was permitted, if not to reach the summit, at least
to ascend to mysterious heights on the holy mountain, and there behold wonders not destined
for sight of mortal eyes;--wonders which she herself confesses to be inexplicable by human
words. Miraculously strengthened to bear the overwhelming flood of splendour, her soul was
elevated even, to the vision, of the most august and adorable Trinity. She saw the relations
between the Three Divine Persons; their unity, their distinction, their operations within and
outside themselves. She saw their operations also in the nine choirs of angels, and understood
how the human soul is created to the image of God. It took but a moment, she says, to receive
the impression of all these wonders, whereas the effort to describe them requires time, for
human language cannot express in a word, what the mind can grasp in an instant. The ecstasy
lasted five hours, at the end of which she found herself still kneeling exactly in the spot
of the church where it had commenced. She describes herself during that time as absolutely
lost in those unfathomable splendours; capable only of passively receiving the impression of
the purely intellectual vision unfolded to her with indescribable clearness and singleness
of view. Writing of this great favour towards the end of life, she says that it was then as
vividly present to her in all its circumstances as at the time of its occurrence, adding in
her own simple way, that "great things like this are never forgotten." It has been observed
that the terms in which she speaks of the most abstruse mysteries of faith, are too clear,
top precise, too strictly in accordance with the teaching of theology, to have come within
the natural lights of a woman of ordinary education; therefore while the style of the narrative
has excited the admiration of the learned, it has left them without a doubt as to the Divine
source of her inspiration. For a long time after the vision, her soul was so completely concentrated
in the most adorable Trinity, that she had no power to detach her thoughts from the ineffable
mystery.

We might anticipate that the wonderful favour just recorded, would be the last prelude to the
elevation of God's chosen servant to the promised high degree of Divine union, but such is
the incomprehensible purity of the all-holy God, that even after so many delays, so many trials,
so much fidelity, so much love and devotedness, He did not yet find her sufficiently free from
the dust of the earth, sufficiently disengaged from every creature, sufficiently detached even
from His own sensible gifts, to be worthy of that mysterious union which requires the purity
of an angel. The work of preparation was accordingly to go on; the arduous work of self-annihilation,
of interior crucifixion, of total sacrifice of every feeling, and absolute death to every inclination.
Our Lord showed her her soul as it would appear when adorned with the required degree of holiness,
and she confessed that He did her but justice in still deferring the hour for which she sighed.

It is the remark of her son in the Life of his holy Mother, that temptation is among the most
efficacious means employed by the Almighty for the purification of His creatures, for as in
that state, the soul is pursued by a vivid and constant apprehension of committing sin, she
lives in an habitual hatred of, and watchfulness against it, which are but too apt to relax
when the presence of evil is less apparent, and the necessity for combating it less urgent.
Through this grievous, suffering, the servant of God had once more to pass. It appeared to
her, she said as if she had suddenly fallen from paradise into purgatory. She found herself
not only deprived of all consolation, but filled with alarm at the remembrance of past favours,
which seemed to her to have been unreal and delusive. The thought of God was, as usual, ever
present to her mind, but it brought no comfort, for with it came an afflicting doubt of the
sincerity of her love for Him. Far down in the depths of her soul, it is true, reposed the
solid peace founded on submission to His will, but it was a matter of difficulty to realize
the existence of that submission. Nature had once more asserted its sensitiveness to humiliation
and contradiction. In short, so profound was her anguish of soul that she could scarcely support
herself. This sore affliction, lasted for some months, then gradually abated, and as it did,
she learned to realize the sweet use of sorrow. Trial, seconded by her own fidelity, had done
its work. Faith had triumphed over sense. Like "a two-edged sword reaching unto the division
of the soul and the spirit" (Heb. iv. 12), it had cut away the last remnant of natural life,
and left behind only the supernatural.  Long disengaged in mind and heart from all things on
earth, she was now so detached even from the consolations of heaven, so singly centred in God
alone, that she could rejoice in her spiritual poverty, and thank the Lord for seeming to have
withdrawn, the favours which in her humility, she considered exposed to defilement in passing
through her heart. The Almighty who delights in manifesting Himself to the humble, was pleased
to reward her fidelity by a lively impression of His adorable attributes, and a clear knowledge
of the mysteries contained in the first chapter of St. John. "During a holy week," she says,
"our Lord granted me new lights regarding His Divine attributes. I contemplated the Unity of
God, and in the Unity, I beheld His Eternity without beginning or end; His immense Greatness;
His adorable Infinitude; and in an ecstasy of admiration, I could only exclaim, 'Goodness!
O Immensity! O Eternity!' I understood how all things have their origin in God, from whom emanates
whatever is beautiful and good, and I cried, 'O more than Good! more than Beautiful! more than
Adorable! Thou art God! Thou art the great God!' Sinking into the very depths of my lowliness,
feeling in His mighty presence as if I had been the veriest worm, still I could not refrain
from telling Him of my love; still I could not but rejoice that my God is so great; still I
exulted that He is All, and that I am nothing, for if I had been anything, then He would not
have been All. O Breadth! O Length! O height! O  Depth! immense, adorable, incomprehensible
to all but Thyself! my Centre! my Beginning! my End! my Beatitude! my All!" Unable to satisfy
her desire to die,--if that were possible, in order to render homage to the perfections of
her God, she substituted the slow martyrdom of still more rigorous austerities than she had
yet practised, and, after this new sacrifice, her mind, she says, was so filled with light
as to be in a manner dazzled, and as it were blinded by the grandeur of the Majesty of the
Most High. Thus purified by trial, sanctified by grace, adorned with virtue, resplendent with
Divine love, elevated above earth and self and all their influences, her happy soul presented
no farther, obstacle to the designs of her all- gracious Lord: it was ready for the ardently,
desired union with Him,-- and now, at last, the promise so long made, and the expectations
so long cherished, were about to be realized.

CHAPTER VII.

SECOND VISION OF THE MOST ADORABLE TRINITY.--REALIZATION OF THE DIVINE PROMISE.

A second vision of the most august Trinity was granted to Marie Guyart, just two years after
she had been favoured with the first. She was then in her twenty-seventh year, and seven years
had elapsed since the memorable vision of the application of the precious blood of Jesus to
her soul. In this second vision, the will was more strongly affected than the intellect; the
heart absolutely consumed with the burning fire of love; the mind, as before, inundated with
floods of light. This grace gave, as it were, the finishing touch to the beauty of her soul,
seeming to supply what had hitherto been wanting to its perfection. While her spirit was absorbed,
and in a manner annihilated in the contemplation of the three most adorable Persons of the
Trinity, the Eternal Word, according to His promise, united her to Himself in close, mysterious
bonds which there are no human words to describe. [Footnote: The lives of St. Francis of Assisium,
St. Teresa, St Catherine of Sienna, St. Gertrude, and some other saints furnish instances of
supernatural favours similar to that now granted to the Venerable Mother Mary of the Incarnation.]
"He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit" (1 Cor. v. 17).

Often had she sighed for this hour, and with the Spouse in the Canticles besought the Lord
to show her His face, and to let her hear His voice-- that face so comely, and that voice so
sweet. Now at last, possession had replaced hope, so now she might entone the canticle of triumph,
"I found him whom my soul loveth: I hold him: and I will not let him go. My beloved to me,
and I to him who feedeth among the lilies. Till the "glorious dawn of eternity" break, and
the shadows of time retire," (Cant. iii. 4, ii., 17.) "when I shall see Him as He is, face
to face, and know Him even as I am known" (l Cor, xiii. 12). She seemed to have passed into
a new state of being. Ardent as her love of God had been before, it now rose to heights hitherto
unknown. Her whole soul appeared to be transformed into love. Her life became one unbroken
act, one uninterrupted hymn of ecstatic love. In the busy streets, in distracting business,
amidst household cares and duties, at all times and in all places, she gave vent to her irrepressible
transports in the sweet song of ceaseless praise, silently entoned within her own heart, and
audible only to her heavenly Spouse and His angels. Even in sleep, she could scarcely be said
to discontinue it, for while she slept, her heart watched, and at each interruption to her
short repose, it resumed the strain, returning to the actual exercise of love with the first
moment of full awakening consciousness. Sometimes fearing that her emotions might betray themselves
exteriorly, she relieved their uncontrollable impetuosity by committing them to writing, afterwards
burning these effusions. A few of them, however, by chance escaped destruction, and have happily
reached us. From these, as well as from the account of her manner of prayer written at the
command of one of her confessors, we learn something of the holy ardour which consumed her.
"O Love!" she cried, "how sweet Thou art! how captivating are Thy charms! how light Thy bonds!
Sometimes Thou woundest, sometimes Thou enslavest, but still art Thou ever sweet. As I am all
Thine, so art Thou all mine, mine for ever, O my most desirable Life! And what do I desire
of Thee, O my All? I desire Thy love, and Thy love alone. O Love! O great Love! Thou art all,
and I am nothing, but it is enough that the mighty All should love the poor nothing, and that
the miserable nothing should love the great All! O great God! mayest Thou be blessed by every
tongue and love by every heart!"

The impossibility of satisfying her holy eagerness to be inseparably united to her God, caused
her inexplicable suffering. It was death to her that she could not die. "I long, O Lord," she
would say, "to be free from the prison of the body, that I may fly to Thee, and behold Thee
in all Thy beauty and Divine attractions. O Love! when shall I embrace Thee! When shall I see
Thee without cloud or veil! Knowest Thou not that I love but Thee? Come then, that I may expire
in Thy sacred arms. He was in fact an egotist with strong fancies and preferences; and, though
he was an ascetic by preference, he cannot be called a simple-minded man, because the essence of
simplicity is not to ride a hobby hard. He thought and talked too much about simplicity; and the
fact is that simplicity, like humility, cannot exist side by side with self-consciousness. The moment
that a man is conscious that he is simple and humble, he is simple and humble no longer.
 While the sensible sweetness lasts, we are happy in Thee, our Treasure,
our Life, our Love, but no sooner are we left to ourselves, than we feel once more the full
force of our poverty and misery.  Who will grant to my soul to burst its prison bars and ascend
to Thee! May I be all Thine, as Thou art all mine! O Sacred Heart of Jesus! be Thou the Altar
of sacrifice on which my heart shall be immolated! O Furnace of charity! enkindle in it that
celestial flame in which I desire to be consumed. Can it rest on an Altar of fire and not be
set on fire?" But notwithstanding her desire to be dissolved, that she might be with Christ,
she loved her Lord's will too purely to wish for death or life except in conformity to it,
therefore she offered herself to bear the burden of existence until the day of judgment, if
God could be thus more glorified,--satisfied if meantime she accomplished nothing more than
to teach some simple soul to know and love our Blessed Lady. Her chief relief and support was
still, as ever, in daily Communion, which uniting her really, though invisibly to her Lord
and Treasure, consoled her in some degree for the delay to the eternal union for which she
languished. She says of this most adorable Sacrament, "that it is a fathomless and shoreless
abyss of grace, and that eternity's light alone will reveal the ineffable wonders which God
discovered to her soul at the time of her sacramental union with him."

We know from the testimony of the saints who have endured the martyrdom of Divine love, that
the greatest of its pains proceeds from the inability of the soul to lore God with an ardour
proportioned either to her own desire to love Him, or to the extent of His claims on her love. I
have always believed that it is better to stimulate than to correct, to fortify rather than to
punish, to help rather than to blame. If there is one attitude that I fear and hate more than
another it is the attitude of the cynic.
 "Thou hast made me for Thyself, O God!" she would say; "for Thyself who
art Love; why then should I not speak of love? But alas! what can I say of it? I cannot speak
of it on earth. The saints who see Thee in heaven, silently adore Thee, and their silence speaks.
Why, O Lord, cannot we burn like them with silent love? If Thou art their love, Thou art also
ours. They see Thee as Thou art, and in this are more favoured than we on earth, but when we
are released from this prison, we shall behold Thee like them; we shall praise, embrace, possess
Thee like them; we shall be absorbed in Thee as they are,--in Thee who art my Love, my only
Love, my great and glorious God, my mercy and my All!" While her soul was thus rapt in a continual
ecstasy of love, her bodily strength wasted away under the action of the consuming fire. In
one of the many phases of the martyrdom of love which it was her privilege to pass through,
it pleased her Lord that the body should suffer more than the soul, enduring in its turn a
real agony, and that so violent, that she says she must have died if it had lasted a few days.

While these miracles of grace were being wrought in the soul of this admirable woman, no external
sign gave indications of the work going on within, for she took care to enfold her treasures
under the mantle of humility. Always devoted, laborious and active, she seemed altogether intent
on her harassing duties, yet, multiplied and fatiguing as these were, she found time to attend
to the spiritual interests of her brother's numerous workmen, sometimes calling them round
her to teach them the Christian doctrine, sometimes profiting of conversation at table to speak
to them of God and the concerns of their souls. Reverencing her as a saint, they submitted
to her like docile children, gave her an account of their conduct, adopted her advice, bore
her reproofs, and carried obedience so far as to rise from bed to say their night prayers,
if by accident she discovered that any one had retired without complying with the duty. Solicitous
for their temporal, as for their eternal welfare, she interceded for them with her brother-in-law
when they had incurred his displeasure, and attended them in sickness with truly maternal devotedness.
Although her close attention to the presence of God never interfered with the fulfilment of
her duties, it incapacitated her from following up the thread of any conversation unconnected
with them. Her brother-in-law perceiving this, sometimes amused himself by asking her a question
referring to something that had been said, but her confusion on these occasions was so evident,
that in order not to increase it, the subject was quickly changed.

Finally, these vehement transports and exhausting languishings of divine love were succeeded
by a profound and permanent calm. Her soul sweetly reposed in God, its Centre--that Centre
was within herself, and there she enjoyed a peace surpassing all understanding. In the account
written by her confessor's command of the special favours she had received from God, she observes
in reference to this highest degree of divine union, that "the soul elevated to it, enjoys
as far as possible here below, the felicity of the blessed. Storms," she says, "may sweep over
her inferior part, but they do not reach the interior temple where the Spouse reigns, and she
rests tranquilly in His presence. It is alike to her whether she is immersed in embarrassing
cares, or buried in most profound solitude. Amidst the turmoil of life and the distraction
of business, she is alone with God in her heart, enjoying His sweet company, conversing with
Him familiarly, transformed as it were into a paradise, of which His smile is the light and
the bliss. Vainly would she endeavour to explain what passes in that interior heaven, for the
subject is too sublime to come within the reach of weak, defective human language. She is so
elevated above the world, that all its combined splendours appear to her but as a contemptible
atom of dust. Thus does the Almighty 'raise the needy from the earth, to place them with the
princes of his people,' and in doing so, He only exalts His own glory, and shows forth His
magnificence."

The intimate union with God, here described, became henceforth the Venerable Mother's habitual
condition. It must however be noted that she does not speak of this privileged state as excluding
temptation and suffering, but only says, that violent and frequent as may be their assaults,
they do not disturb the inner region of the soul where God has established His Kingdom in peace.
The superior part remains tranquil, although the inferior may be troubled and agitated, just
as the ocean depths repose in peaceful calm while its surface is lashed by the angry tempest.
By noticing this distinction, it will become easy to reconcile the apparently contradictory
statements which attribute to the Mother of the Incarnation uninterrupted interior peace, with
intense and almost continuous interior suffering.

CHAPTER VIII.

ENTRANCE TO THE URSULINE NOVITIATE AT TOURS.

From her early years, the desires of the Venerable Mother had turned to the cloister, as we
have already seen. Her engagement in married life had seemed at first to oppose an insuperable
obstacle to their fulfilment, but God who had destined her for religion, removed the impediment,
leaving her free by the death of her husband to follow her first impulse, as soon as duty should
allow her to separate from her little son. That time had now come; the child had attained his
twelfth year, and could dispense with her immediate care. So far, she had faithfully fulfilled
her obligations towards him, watching over his infancy and childhood with tender solicitude,
training him in the ways of God as she had been trained herself; forming his tender heart to
piety, and giving his first habits the right bent. The impression of her holy instructions
and example was never effaced, and when in advanced years he referred to the period of their
early companionship, it was in terms of most profound veneration for her virtues, and boundless
admiration of her truly celestial life.

Like the storm-tost mariner nearing the haven, or the weary traveller approaching home, she
sighed with redoubled ardour for the end of her pilgrimage, now that the end was 'nigh. It
was but natural. Lovely as the tabernacles of the Lord had looked in the distance, their beauty
was immeasurably magnified by the closer view. If then she had felt even in the days of her
exile, that those are blessed who dwell in the house of God, can we wonder that she should
have absolutely longed. and fainted for His courts, now that their portals were about to be
thrown open for her admission? But although the hour of emancipation had come, she was yet
ignorant of the particular Order to which God called her. The perusal of the works of St. Teresa
had inspired her with a strong attraction for the Carmelites, whose particular profession of
prayer and recollection exactly harmonized with her own inclination and practice. On the other
hand, the General of the Feuillants, anxious to secure so precious a treasure for his own Order,
offered in the most flattering manner to receive her, promising to relieve her of all future
anxiety regarding the education of her son. This latter condition was of such vital importance,
that the proposal filled her with joy and gratitude. Besides, to the Carmelite spirit of prayer
and solitude, the Feuillantine Sisters added the practice of great austerities, thus presenting
a two-fold attraction to the holy widow. Yet it was not to either of these Orders that God
called her, nor was it indeed to a purely contemplative life that her own thoughts had originally
turned. On the contrary, her earliest inclination had been for the Ursulines, although strangely
enough, she had no acquaintance whatever with them, and could not even have told where they
were to be found. She merely knew in a general way, that the special object of their institute
is the salvation of souls, and that its mixed life of action and prayer closely resembles the
public life of our Lord on earth. These two considerations had always strongly influenced her
in its favour, nevertheless, the more austere Orders had not lost their charms, so, as God
had not yet clearly manifested His will, she waited calmly until circumstances should reveal
it beyond a doubt. At length Divine Providence interposed. About this very period, it happened
that the Ursulines established themselves at Tours, and as if to facilitate her introduction
to them, it further chanced that after a short time they removed from the house they had first
inhabited, to one quite near the residence of her brother. Some secret attraction seemed to
draw her in the direction of the new convent, which she never passed without experiencing an
indescribable emotion, and a strong impulse to linger round the precincts. In this monastery
there lived a saintly religious, who had been led to exalted virtue through much the same paths
as those which she had herself trodden. The people who do not desire to discuss others, or who disapprove
of doing it, may be pronounced to be, as a rule, either stupid, or egotistical, or Pharisaical; and
sometimes they are all three. The only principle to bear in mind is the principle of justice.
 Their acquaintance originated in a visit which the holy widow had occasion
to pay at the convent. At the first interview, each felt that she was understood by the other,
yet although, their intimacy soon ripened into a saintly friendship, Marie Guy art could never
prevail on herself to speak of her perplexities to Mother Francis of St. Bernard, wishing as
ever to leave herself altogether in the hands of God. Meantime Mother St. Bernard was elected
Superior of the new monastery, and no sooner had she taken office than she felt inspired to
make overtures to her friend to join the community. Having obtained the necessary permissions,
she sent for her, and in a few kind words offered her a place among the sisters. The generous
proposal did not take the holy woman by surprise, for as she was entering the house, a strong
presentiment had seized her as to the direct purport of the visit. Full of joy and thankfulness,
she humbly expressed her gratitude, and asked leave, before replying, to consult God and her
director. The latter was a man eminently versed, as already noticed, in the science of guiding
souls. The better to try her vocation, he received the application with apparent coldness,
and seemed for a while to have given up all idea of her quitting the world, so her state of
indecision continued. But one day, while she was in prayer, all doubts as to her future course
were suddenly and completely removed. Her temporary inclination for the more austere Orders
instantaneously vanished, giving place to an ardent, fixed desire to join the Ursulines, and
that as speedily as could be accomplished. Her director recognised the voice of God in the
urgent inspiration, and exhorted her to obey it without hesitation or delay.

But it was not to be expected that Satan would relinquish the prize without yet another struggle.
The career of the future Ursuline was to bring great glory to God through the salvation of
many souls; clearly, then, his interest demanded a last strong effort to deter her from the
life to which her Master called her. The artifice employed was so much the more dangerous,
as it wore the semblance of good. The tempter represented her flight from the world as a violation
of her duty to her little son, suggesting that so unnatural a neglect of her sacred maternal
obligations could not but compromise her own salvation, as. well as the highest and dearest
interests of her child. To the stratagems of Satan were added the persuasive entreaties of
some of her friends, and the violent opposition of others. The two-fold conflict was a hard
one, but, aided by divine grace, she conquered nature once again, as she had so often done
before, and God was pleased to reward her fidelity by so effectually changing the views of
her sister and her brother-in-law, that in the end they not only consented to her departure,
but even promised to take care of her child.

One more ordeal remained, and it was, indeed, a severe one. She had not yet acquainted her
son with her intention, but he seemed to have an instinctive presentiment of some event of
more than ordinary consequence to him. He noticed that he had all at once become a general
object of silent sympathy. The compassion which he read on every face communicated its saddening
influence to his little heart; the low tone in which people spoke in his presence, excited
his suspicions. Oppressed by the sense of some painful mystery, he took refuge at first in
solitude and tears, and before, long, unable to bear up against the weight of melancholy, he
made up his mind to go away altogether from the scene of his troubles. A fortnight before the
time appointed for his mother's entrance to the convent, he managed to escape unobserved from
the school where he was then a boarder. The discovery of his flight, seemed a signal for general
censure of his mother. The world declared that she alone was to be blamed for the disaster--she
alone to be held accountable for its consequences. It was difficult to bear, and that, too,
at a time when her whole soul was rent with anguish, when every feeling of nature re-echoed,
while every instinct of grace obliged her to resist the mighty pleadings of maternal love. Besides,
you know I am an old-fashioned person, and I disapprove of criticising people altogether. I
think it is a violation of the ninth commandment; I do not think we are justified in bearing
false witness against our neighbour."
 From the habitual charity of this good religious, she naturally expected his
especial sympathy at this trying moment. Great, then, was her dismay to find that far from
attempting to assuage, he seemed determined, on the contrary, to irritate the wound. Well convinced
by experience of the solidity of her virtue, he seized the present apparently inopportune occasion
of testing it anew. Assuming great sternness of voice and manner, he told her it was easy to
see that her virtue was only superficial, since she manifested so great a want of submission
to God's will, and of faith in His providence, adding that her excessive attachment to a creature
clearly indicated the ascendancy which nature still retained over her. Kneeling before her
censor, the humble mother listened to the harsh reproof in profound silence, but a sigh escaped
her, and this Dom Raymond declared to be a distinct confirmation of his late assertions, ordering
her to depart at once from the house of God, which was not meant to harbour souls so imperfect
as she was. She immediately rose, and, with a low inclination to her director, left the convent.
Perfectly amazed at the heroism of her virtue, the Reverend Father and the Mother Superior
returned thanks to God for having permitted them to witness so wonderful an example, and, without
informing her of it, sent messengers at their own expense to seek her son, those whom she had
herself employed not having discovered any trace of him.

By a singular coincidence, the flight of her boy occurred during the octave of the Epiphany,
when the Church reads the history of the loss of Jesus in the temple, and it also happened
that he, like the Divine Child, was twelve years of age at the time of his disappearance. These
circumstances greatly consoled the poor mother in her bereavement: she united her desolation
with that of the Mother of Sorrows, and hoped that, like her, she would recover her son at
the end of three days, and so it actually happened. Precisely at that time he was brought back
by a person who had accidentally met him at Blois. He then owned that he had planned to go
to Paris, where he hoped to be received by a partner of his uncle's, resident in that city.
The child's return removed the last obstacle to her departure; and now the day was fixed irrevocably,
notwithstanding the renewed entreaties of her relatives; notwithstanding the tears of her father;
notwithstanding the agony of her own soul at the parting from her only child whom she loved
most tenderly. She recalled the declaration of our Lord that "he who loves father or mother,
son or daughter more than Him is not worthy of Him" (St. Matt. x. 37), and the words inspired
her with invincible courage. No sooner was her final decision taken than uncertainty and perplexity
vanished utterly.

