THE MEMOIRS OF GENERAL PHILIP H. SHERIDAN

Volume I., Part 2

CHAPTER IX.

EXPEDITION TO BOONEVILLE--DESTROYING SUPPLIES--CONFEDERATE STRAGGLERS--SUCCESS OF THE EXPEDITION--A
RECONNOISSANCE--THE IMPORTANCE OF BODILY SUSTENANCE--THE BATTLE OF BOONEVILLE --RECOMMENDED
FOR APPOINTMENT AS A BRIGADIER-GENERAL.

The expedition referred to by General Halleck in his parting conversation was composed of the
Second Michigan and Second Iowa regiments of cavalry, formed into a brigade under command of
Colonel Washington L. Elliott, of the Second Iowa.  It was to start on the night of the 27th
of May at 12 o'clock, and proceed by a circuitous route through Iuka, Miss., to Booneville,
a station on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, about twenty-two miles below Corinth, and accomplish
all it could in the way of destroying the enemy's supplies and cutting his railroad communications.

The weather in that climate was already warm, guides unobtainable, and both men and horses
suffered much discomfort from the heat, and fatigue from the many delays growing out of the
fact that we were in almost total ignorance of the roads leading to the point that we desired
to reach.  In order that we might go light we carried only sugar, coffee, and salt, depending
on the country for meat and bread. Both these articles were scarce, but I think we got all
there was, for our advent was so unexpected by the people of the region through which we passed
that, supposing us to be Confederate cavalry, they often gave us all they had, the women and
servants contributing most freely from their, reserve stores.

Before reaching Booneville I had the advance, but just as we arrived on the outskirts of the
town the brigade was formed with the Second Iowa on my right, and the whole force moved forward,
right in front, preceded by skirmishers.  Here we encountered the enemy, but forced him back
with little resistance.  When we had gained possession of the station, Colonel Elliott directed
me to take the left wing of my regiment, pass to the south, and destroy a bridge or culvert
supposed to be at a little distance below the town on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad.  The right
wing, or other half of the regiment, was to be held in reserve for my support if necessary.
I moved rapidly in the designated direction till I reached the railroad, and then rode down
it for a mile and a half, but found neither bridge nor culvert.  I then learned that there
was no bridge of any importance except the one at Baldwin, nine miles farther down, but as
I was aware, from information recently received, that it was defended by three regiments and
a battery, I concluded that I could best accomplish the purpose for which I had been detached--crippling
the road--by tearing up the track, bending the rails, and burning the cross-ties.  This was
begun with alacrity at four different points, officers and men vieing with one another in the
laborious work of destruction.  We had but few tools, and as the difficulties to overcome were
serious, our progress was slow, until some genius conceived the idea that the track, rails
and ties, might be lifted from its bed bodily, turned over, and subjected to a high heat; a
convenient supply of dry fence-rails would furnish ample fuel to render the rails useless.
In this way a good deal of the track was effectively broken up, and communication by rail from
Corinth to the south entirely cut off. While we were still busy in wrecking the road, a dash
was made at my right and rear by a squadron of Confederate cavalry.  This was handsomely met
by the reserve under Captain Archibald P. Campbell, of the Second Michigan, who, dismounting
a portion of his command, received the enemy with such a volley from his Colt's repeating rifles
that the squadron broke and fled in all directions.  We were not molested further, and resumed
our work, intending to extend the break toward Baldwin, but receiving orders from Elliott to
return to Booneville immediately, the men were recalled, and we started to rejoin the main command.

In returning to Booneville, I found the railroad track above where I had struck it blocked
by trains that we had thus cut off, and the woods and fields around the town covered with several
thousand Confederate soldiers.  These were mostly convalescents and disheartened stragglers
belonging to General Beauregard's army, and from them we learned that Corinth was being evacuated.
I spent some little time in an endeavor to get these demoralized men into an open field, with
a view to some future disposition of them; but in the midst of the undertaking I received another
order from Colonel Elliott to join him at once.  The news of the evacuation had also reached
Elliott, and had disclosed a phase of the situation so different from that under which he had
viewed it when we arrived at Booneville, that he had grown anxious to withdraw, lest we should
be suddenly pounced upon by an overwhelming force from some one of the columns in retreat.
Under such circumstances my prisoners would prove a decided embarrassment, so I abandoned further
attempts to get them together--not even paroling them, which I thought might have been done
with but little risk. 

My earlier experiences of ill- arranged and badly managed theatres came back to me afresh. I was
particularly depressed when I realised that I had made myself an unconscious accomplice of Director
Cornet's basest interests. His one aim was to create a sensation, which he thought should be of
great service to me also; and not only did he put me off with a smaller
fee, but even suggested that it should be paid by gradual instalments.

The dignity of scenic decoration, of which he had not the smallest idea, was completely sacrificed
to the most ridiculous and tawdry showiness. He imagined that pageantry was all that was really
needed to secure my success. So he hunted out all the old fairy-ballet costumes from his stock,
and fancied that if they only looked gay enough, and if plenty of people were bustling about
on the stage, I ought to be satisfied. But the most sorry item of all was the singer he provided
for the title- role. He was a man of the name of Wurda, an elderly, flabby and voiceless tenor,
who sang Rienzi with the expression of a lover-- like Elvino, for instance, in the Somnanibula.
He was so dreadful that I conceived the idea of making the Capitol tumble down in the second
act, so as to bury him sooner in its ruins, a plan which would have cut out several of the processions,
which were so dear to the heart of the director. I found my one ray of light in a lady singer, who
delighted me with the fire with which she played the part of Adriano.

This was a Mme. Fehringer, who was afterwards engaged by Liszt for the role of Ortrud in the production
of Lohengrin at Weimar, but by that time her powers had greatly deteriorated. Nothing could be more
depressing than my connection with this opera under such dismal circumstances. And yet there
were no outward signs of failure. The manager hoped in any case to keep Rienzi in his repertoire
until Tichatschek was able to come to Hamburg and give the people of that town a true idea
of the play. This actually took place in the following summer.

My discouragement and ill-humour did not escape the notice of Herr
Cornet, and discovering that I wished to present my wife with a parrot,
he managed to procure a very fine bird, which he gave me as a parting
gift.

I carried it with me in its narrow cage on my melancholy journey home, and was touched to find that
it quickly repaid my care and became very much attached to me. Minna greeted me with great joy
when she saw this beautiful grey parrot, for she regarded it as a self-evident proof that I
should do something in life.  Pushing the Confederate scouts rapidly in with a running fire for
a mile or more, while we were approaching a little stream, I hoped to gobble the main body
of the enemy's pickets.  I therefore directed the sabre battalion of the regiment, followed
by that portion of it armed with revolving rifles, to dash forward in column, cut off these
videttes before they could cross the stream, and then gather them in.  The pickets fled hastily,
however, and a pell-mell pursuit carried us over the stream at their heels by a little bridge,
with no thought of halting till we gained a hill on the other side, and suddenly found ourselves
almost in the camp of a strong body of artillery and infantry.  Captain Campbell being in advance,
hurriedly dismounted his battalion for a further forward movement on foot, but it was readily
seen that the enemy was present in such heavy force as almost to ensure our destruction, and
I gave orders for a hasty withdrawal. We withdrew without loss under cover of thick woods,
aided much, however, by the consternation of the Confederates, who had hardly recovered from
their surprise at our sudden appearance in their camp before we had again placed the stream
between them and us by recrossing the bridge.  The reconnoissance was a success in one way
--that is, in finding out that the enemy was at the point supposed by, General Pope; but it
also had a tendency to accelerate Beauregard's retreat, for in a day or two his whole line
fell back as far south as Guntown, thus rendering abortive the plans for bagging a large portion
of his army.

General Beauregard's evacuation of Corinth and retreat southward were accomplished in the face
of a largely superior force of Union troops, and he reached the point where he intended to
halt for reorganization without other loss than that sustained in the destruction of the cars
and supplies at Booneville, and the capture of some stragglers and deserters that fell into
our hands while we were pressing his rear from General Pope's flank.  The number of these was
quite large, and indicated that the enemy was considerably demoralized.  Under such circumstances,
an energetic and skillfully directed pursuit might not have made certain the enemy's destruction,
but it would largely have aided in disintegrating his forces, and I never could quite understand
why it was not ordered.  The desultory affairs between rear and advance guards seemed as a
general, thing to have no particular purpose in view beyond finding out where the enemy was,
and when he was found, since no supporting colums were at hand and no one in supreme control
was present to give directions, our skirmishing was of little avail and brought but small reward.

A short time subsequent to these occurrences, Colonel Elliott was made a brigadier-general,
and as General Pope appointed him his Chief-of-Staff, I, on the 11th of June, 1862, fell in
command of the brigade by seniority.  For the rest of the month but little of moment occurred,
and we settled down into camp at Booneville on the 26th of June, in a position which my brigade
had been ordered to take up some twenty miles, in advance of the main army for the purpose
of covering its front.  Although but a few days had elapsed from the date of my appointment
as colonel of the Second Michigan to that of my succeeding to the command of the brigade, I
believe I can say with propriety that I had firmly established myself in the confidence of
the officers and men of the regiment, and won their regard by thoughtful care.  I had striven
unceasingly to have them well fed and well clothed, had personally looked after the selection
of their camps, and had maintained such a discipline as to allay former irritation.

Men who march, scout, and fight, and suffer all the hardships that fall to the lot of soldiers
in the field, in order to do vigorous work must have the best bodily sustenance, and every
comfort that can be provided.  I knew from practical experience on the frontier that my efforts
in this direction would not only be appreciated, but requited by personal affection and gratitude;
and, further, that such exertions would bring the best results to me.  Whenever my authority
would permit I saved my command from needless sacrifices and unnecessary toil; therefore, when
hard or daring work was to be done I expected the heartiest response, and always got it.  Soldiers
are averse to seeing their comrades killed without compensating results, and none realize more
quickly than they the blundering that often takes place on the field of battle.  They want
some tangible indemnity for the loss of life, and as victory is an offset the value of which
is manifest, it not only makes them content to shed their blood, but also furnishes evidence
of capacity in those who command them.  My regiment had lost very few men since coming under
my command, but it seemed, in the eyes of all who belonged to it, that casualties to the enemy
and some slight successes for us had repaid every sacrifice, and in consequence I had gained
not only their confidence as soldiers, but also their esteem and love as men, and to a degree
far beyond what I then realized.

As soon as the camp of my brigade was pitched at Booneville, I began to scout in every direction,
to obtain a knowledge of the enemy's whereabouts and learn the ground about me.  My standing
in drawing at the Military Academy had never been so high as to warrant the belief that I could
ever prove myself an expert, but a few practical lessons in that line were impressed on me
there, and I had retained enough to enable me to make rough maps that could be readily understood,
and which would be suitable to replace the erroneous skeleton outlines of northern Mississippi,
with which at this time we were scantily furnished; so as soon as possible I compiled for the
use of myself and my regimental commanders an information map of the surrounding country. 
This map exhibited such details as country roads, streams, farmhouses, fields, woods, and swamps,
and such other topographical features as would be useful.  I must confess that my crude sketch
did not evidence much artistic merit, but it was an improvement on what we already possessed
in the way of details to guide the command, and this was what I most needed; for it was of
the first importance that in our exposed condition we should be equipped with a thorough knowledge
of the section in which we were operating, so as to be prepared to encounter an enemy already
indicating recovery from the disorganizing effects of his recent retreat.

In the immediate vicinity of Booneville the country was covered with heavy forests, with here
and there clearings or intervening fields that had been devoted to the cultivation of cotton
and corn.  The ground was of a low character, typical of northeastern Mississippi, and abounded
in small creeks that went almost totally dry even in short periods of drought, but became flooded
with muddy water under the outpouring of rain peculiar to a semi-tropical climate.  In such
a region there were many chances of our being surprised, especially by an enemy who knew the
country well, and whose ranks were filled with local guides; and great precautions as well
as the fullest information were necessary to prevent disaster. We begged to sit by the fire till morning,
and to this she would not consent; indeed, if it had not been for the sake of the horse, I
would rather have lain in a barn than on the best of feather-beds
in the house of such a cruel woman.

We were now, after our long day’s journey, five miles from the inn at Blair, whither we, at
first, thought of returning; but finally resolved to go to a public-house which we had seen
in a village we passed through, about a mile above the ferry over the Tummel, having come from
that point to Blair, for the sake of the Pass of Killicrankie and Blair itself, and had now the
same road to measure back again. We were obliged to leave the Pass of Killicrankie unseen; but
this disturbed us little at a time when we had seven miles to travel in the dark, with a poor
beast almost sinking with fatigue, for he had not rested once all day. We went on spiritless,
and at a dreary pace. Passed by one house which we were half inclined to go up to and ask for
a night’s lodging; and soon after, being greeted by a gentle voice from a poor woman, whom,
till she spoke, though we were close to her, we had not seen, we stopped, and asked if she could
tell us where we might stay all night, and put up our horse. She mentioned the public-house left
behind, and we told our tale, and asked her if she had no house to
which she could take us.

‘Yes, to be sure she had a house, but it was only a small cottage;’ and she had no place for
the horse, and how we could lodge in her house she could not tell; but we should be welcome
to whatever she had, so we turned the car, and she walked by the side of it, talking to us
in a tone of human kindness which made us friends at once.

I remember thinking to myself, as I have often done in a stage-coach, though never with half
the reason to prejudge favourably, What sort of countenance and figure shall we see in this woman
when we come into the light? And indeed it was an interesting moment when, after we had entered her
house, she blew the embers on the hearth, and lighted a candle to
assist us in taking the luggage out of the car.

Her husband presently arrived, and he and William took the horse to the public-house. The poor
woman hung the kettle over the fire. We had tea and sugar of our own, and she set before us barley
cakes, and milk which she had just brought in; I recollect she said she ‘had been west to fetch
it.’ The Highlanders always direct you by east and west, north and south—very confusing to strangers.
She told us that it was her business to ‘keep the gate’ for Mr. ---, who lived at --- just
below,—that is, to receive messages, take in letters, etc. Her cottage stood by the side of the road
leading to his house, within the gate, having, as we saw in the morning, a dressed-up porter’s
lodge outside; but within was nothing but the naked walls, unplastered, and floors of mud,
as in the common huts. She said that they lived rent-free in return for their services; but
spoke of her place and Mr. --- with little respect, hinting that he was very proud; and indeed
her appearance, and subdued manners, and that soft voice which had prepossessed us so much
in her favour, seemed to belong to an injured and oppressed being. We talked a great deal with
her, and gathered some interesting facts from her conversation, which I wish I had written
down while they were fresh in my memory. They had only one child, yet seemed to be very poor, not discontented
but languid, and willing to suffer rather than rouse to any effort. Though it was plain she
despised and hated her master, and had no wish to conceal it, she
hardly appeared to think it worth while to speak ill of him. We were
obliged to sit up very late while our kind hostess was preparing our
beds.

In view of his numbers, the enemy soon regained confidence in his ability to overcome us, and
in a little while again began his flanking movements, his right passing around my left flank
some distance, and approaching our camp and transportation, which I had forbidden to be moved
out to the rear.  Fearing that he would envelop us and capture the camp and transportation,
I determined to take the offensive.  Remembering a circuitous wood road that I had become familiar
with while making the map heretofore mentioned, I concluded that the most effective plan would
be to pass a small column around the enemy's left, by way of this road, and strike his rear
by a mounted charge simultaneously with an advance of our main line on his front.  I knew that
the attack in rear would be a most hazardous undertaking, but in the face of such odds as the
enemy had the condition of affairs was most critical, and could be relieved, only by a bold
and radical change in our tactics; so I at once selected four sabre companies, two from the
Second Michigan and two from the Second Iowa, and placing Captain Alger, of the former regiment,
in command of them, I informed him that I expected of them the quick and desperate work that
is usually imposed on a forlorn hope.

To carry out the purpose now in view, I instructed Captain Alger to follow the wood road as
it led around the left of the enemy's advancing forces, to a point where 'it joined the Blackland
road, about three miles from Booneville, and directed him, upon reaching the Blackland road,
to turn up it immediately, and charge the rear of the enemy's line.  Under no circumstances
was he to deploy the battalion, but charge in column right through whatever he came upon, and
report to me in front of Booneville, if at all possible for him to get there.  If he failed
to break through the enemy's line, he was to go ahead as far as he could, and then if any of
his men were left, and he was able to retreat, he was to do so by the same route he had taken
on his way out.  To conduct him on this perilous service I sent along a thin, sallow, tawny-haired
Mississippian named Beene, whom I had employed as a guide and scout a few days before, on account
of his intimate knowledge of the roads, from the public thoroughfares down to the insignificant
by-paths of the neighboring swamps.  With such guidance I felt sure that the column would get
to the desired point without delay, for there was no danger of its being lost or misled by
taking any of the many by-roads which traversed the dense forests through which it would be
obliged to pass.  I also informed Alger that I should take the reserve and join the main line
in front of Booneville for the purpose of making an advance of my whole force, and that as
a signal he must have his men cheer loudly when he struck the enemy's rear, in order that my
attack might be simultaneous with his.

I gave him one hour to go around and come back through the enemy, and when he started I moved
to the front with the balance of the reserve, to put everything I had into the fight.  This
meant an inestimable advantage to the enemy in case of our defeat, but our own safety demanded
the hazard.  All along our attenuated line the fighting was now sharp, and the enemy's firing
indicated such numerical strength that fear of disaster to Alger increased my anxiety terribly
as the time set for his cheering arrived and no sound of it was heard.

Relying, however, on the fact that Beene's knowledge of the roads would prevent his being led
astray, and confident of Alger's determination to accomplish the purpose for which he set out,
as soon as the hour was up I ordered my whole line forward.  Fortunately, just as this moment
a locomotive and two cars loaded with grain for my horses ran into Booneville from Corinth.
I say fortunately, because it was well known throughout the command that in the morning, when
I first discovered the large numbers of the enemy, I had called for assistance; and my troops,
now thinking that reinforcements had arrived by rail from Rienzi, where a division of infantry
was encamped, and inspirated by this belief, advanced with renewed confidence and wild cheering.
Meantime I had the engineer of the locomotive blow his whistle loudly, so that the enemy might
also learn that a train had come; and from the fact that in a few moments he began to give
way before our small force, I thought that this strategem had some effect.  Soon his men broke,
and ran in the utmost disorder over the country in every direction.  I found later, however,
that his precipitous retreat was due to the pressure on his left from the Second Iowa, in concert
with the front attack of the Second Michigan, and the demoralization wrought in his rear by
Alger, who had almost entirely accomplished the purpose of his expedition, though he had failed
to come through, or so near that I could hear the signal agreed upon before leaving Booneville.

After Alger had reached and turned up the Blackland road, the first thing he came across was
the Confederate headquarters; the officers and orderlies about which he captured and sent back
some distance to a farm-house.  Continuing on a gallop, he soon struck the rear of the enemy's
line, but was unable to get through; nor did he get near enough for me to hear his cheering;
but as he had made the distance he was to travel in the time allotted, his attack and mine
were almost coincident, and the enemy, stampeded by the charges in front and rear, fled toward
Blackland, with little or no attempt to capture Alger's command, which might readily have been
done.  Alger's troopers soon rejoined me at Booneville, minus many hats, having returned by
their original route.  They had sustained little loss except a few men wounded and a few temporarily
missing.  Among these was Alger himself, who was dragged from his saddle by the limb of a tree
that, in the excitement of the charge, he was unable to flank. The missing had been dismounted
in one way or another, and run over by the enemy in his flight; but they all turned up later,
none the worse except for a few scratches and bruises.

My effective strength in this fight was 827 all told, and Alger's command comprised ninety
officers and men.  Chalmers's force was composed of six regiments and two battalions, and though
I have been unable to find any returns from which to verify his actual numbers, yet, from the
statements of prisoners and from information obtained from citizens along his line of march,
it is safe to say that he had in the action not less than five-thousand men.  Our casualties
were not many--forty-one in all.  His loss in killed and wounded was considerable, his most
severely wounded--forty men--falling into our hands, having been left at farm-houses in the
vicinity of the battlefield.

The victory in the face of such odds was most gratifying, and as it justified my disinclination--in
fact, refusal--to retire from Booneville without fighting (for the purpose of saving my transportation,
as directed by superior authority when I applied in the morning for reinforcements), it was
to me particularly grateful. It was also very valuable in, view of the fact that it increased
the confidence between the officers and men of my brigade and me, and gave us for the balance
of the month not only comparative rest, but entire immunity from the dangers of a renewed effort
to gobble my isolated outpost.  In addition to all this, commendation from my immediate superiors
was promptly tendered through oral and written congratulations; and their satisfaction at the
result of the battle took definite form a few days later, in the following application for
my promotion, when, by an expedition to Ripley, Miss., most valuable information as to the
enemy's location and plans was captured:

"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE MISSISSIPPI, "JULY 30, 1862.--3.05 P. M.

"MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK, "Washington, D. C.

"Brigadiers scarce; good ones scarce.  Asboth goes on the month's leave you gave him ten months
since; Granger has temporary command. The undersigned respectfully beg that you will obtain
the promotion of Sheridan.  He is worth his weight in gold.  His Ripley expedition has brought
us captured letters of immense value, as well as prisoners, showing the rebel plans and dispositions,
as you will learn from District Commander.

"W. S. ROSECRANS, Brigadier-General. "C. C. SULLIVAN,      "       " "G. GRANGER,         
"       " "W. L. ELLIOTT,       "       " "A. ASBOTH,           "       "     "

CHAPTER X.

IN CAMP NEAR RIENZI--GENERAL GRANGER--A VALUABLE CAPTURE AT RIPLEY --RAIDING A CORNFIELD--REPULSING
AN ATTACK--PRESENTED WITH THE BLACK HORSE "RIENZI"--MEETING GENERAL GRANT--APPOINTED A BRIGADIER-GENERAL.

After the battle of Booneville, it was decided by General Rosecrans, on the advice of General
Granger, that my position at Booneville was too much exposed, despite the fact that late on
the evening of the fight my force had been increased by the addition of, a battery of four
guns and two companies of infantry, and by the Third Michigan Cavalry, commanded by Colonel
John K. Mizner; so I was directed to withdraw from my post and go into camp near Rienzi, Mississippi,
where I could equally well cover the roads in front of the army, and also be near General Asboth's
division of infantry, which occupied a line in rear of the town.  This section of country,
being higher and more rolling than that in the neighborhood of Booneville, had many advantages
in the way of better camping-grounds, better grazing and the like, but I moved with reluctance,
because I feared that my proximity to Asboth would diminish to a certain extent my independence
of command.

General Asboth was a tall, spare, handsome man, with gray mustache and a fierce look.  He was
an educated soldier, of unquestioned courage, but the responsibilities of outpost duty bore
rather heavily on him, and he kept all hands in a state of constant worry in anticipation of
imaginary attacks.  His ideas of discipline were not very rigid either, and as by this time
there had been introduced into my brigade some better methods than those obtaining when it
first fell to my command, I feared the effect should he, have any control over it, or meddle
with its internal affairs.  However, there was nothing to do but to move to the place designated,
but General Granger, who still commanded the cavalry division to which the brigade belonged,
so arranged matters with General Rosecrans, who had succeeded to the command of the Army of
the Mississippi, that my independence was to be undisturbed, except in case of a general attack
by the enemy.

We went into camp near Rienzi, July 22, sending back to the general field-hospital at Tuscumbia
Springs all our sick--a considerable number--stricken down by the malarial influences around
Booneville. In a few days the fine grazing and abundance of grain for our exhausted horses
brought about their recuperation; and the many large open fields in the vicinity gave opportunity
for drills and parades, which were much needed.  I turned my attention to those disciplinary
measures which, on account of active work in the field, had been necessarily neglected since
the brigade had arrived at Pittsburg Landing, in April; and besides, we had been busy in collecting
information by scouting parties and otherwise, in prosecution of the purpose for which we were
covering the main army.

I kept up an almost daily correspondence with General Granger, concerning the, information
obtained by scouts and reconnoitring parties, and he came often to Rienzi to see me in relation
to this and other matters.  Previously I had not had much personal association with Granger.
While I was at Halleck's headquarters we met on one or two occasions, and the day I joined
the Second Michigan at Farmington I saw him for a few moments, but, with such slight exception,
our intercourse had been almost exclusively official.  He had suggested my name, I was told,
to Governor Blair, when the Governor was in search of an officer of the regular army to appoint
to the colonelcy of the Second Michigan Cavalry, but his recommendation must have been mainly
based on the favorable opinions he had heard expressed by General Halleck and by some of the
officers of his staff, rather than from any personal knowledge of my capacity. Of course I
was very grateful for this, but some of his characteristics did not impress me favorably, and
I sometimes wished the distance between our camps greater.  His most serious failing was an
uncontrollable propensity to interfere with and direct the minor matters relating to the command,
the details for which those under him were alone responsible.  Ill-judged meddling in this
respect often led to differences between us, only temporary it is true, but most harassing
to the subordinate, since I was compelled by the circumstances of the situation not only invariably
to yield my own judgment, but many a time had to play peacemaker--smoothing down ruffled feelings,
that I knew had been excited by Granger's freaky and spasmodic efforts to correct personally
some trifling fault that ought to have been left to a regimental or company commander to remedy.
Yet with all these small blemishes Granger had many good qualities, and his big heart was so
full of generous impulses and good motives as to far outbalance his short-comings; and not-withstanding
the friction and occasional acerbity of our official intercourse, we maintained friendly relations
till his death.

In pursuance of the fatal mistake made by dispersing Halleck's forces after the fall of Corinth,
General Don Carlos Buell's Army of the Ohio had been started some time before on its march
eastward toward Chattanooga; and as this movement would be followed of course by a manoeuvre
on the part of the enemy, now at Tupelo under General Braxton Bragg, either to meet Buell or
frustrate his designs by some counter-operation, I was expected to furnish, by scouting and
all other means available, information as to what was going on within the Confederate lines.
To do the work required, necessitated an increase of my command, and the Seventh Kansas Cavalry
was therefore added to it, and my picket-line extended so as to cover from Jacinto southwesterly
to a point midway between Rienzi and Booneville, and then northwesterly to the Hatchie River.
Skirmishes between outposts on this line were of frequent occurrence, with small results to
either side, but they were somewhat annoying, particularly in the direction of Ripley, where
the enemy maintained a considerable outpost. The lake does not wind, nor are the shores much varied
by bays,—the mountains not commanding; but the whole a pleasing scene. Our road took us out of
sight of the water, and we were obliged to procure a guide across a high moor, where it was impossible
that the horse should drag us at all, the ground being exceedingly rough and untracked: of course
fatiguing for foot-travellers, and on foot we must travel. After some time, the river Tummel
again served us for a guide, when it had left the lake.  This decisive evidence was of the
utmost importance, and without taking time to read all the letters, I forwarded them to General
Granger July 28, in a despatch which stated: "I deem it necessary to send them at once; the
enemy is moving in large force on Chattanooga."  Other than this the results of the expedition
were few; and the enemy, having fled from Ripley with but slight resistance, accompanied by
almost all the inhabitants, re-occupied the place next day after our people had quitted it,
and resumed in due time his annoying attacks on our outposts, both sides trying to achieve
something whenever occasion offered.

