

'My dear Lord Arthur, what do you owe to it?'

'Sybil,' he answered, handing his wife the roses, and looking into her violet eyes.

'What nonsense!' cried Lady Windermere.

THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET

One afternoon I was sitting outside the Cafe de la Paix, watching the splendour and shabbiness
of Parisian life, and wondering over my vermouth at the strange panorama of pride and poverty
that was passing before me, when I heard some one call my name.  I turned round, and saw Lord
Murchison.  We had not met since we had been at college together, nearly ten years before,
so I was delighted to come across him again, and we shook hands warmly.  At Oxford we had been
great friends.  I had liked him immensely, he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so honourable.
We used to say of him that he would be the best of fellows, if he did not always speak the
truth, but I think we really admired him all the more for his frankness.  I found him a good
deal changed.  He looked anxious and puzzled, and seemed to be in doubt about something.  I
felt it could not be modern scepticism, for Murchison was the stoutest of Tories, and believed
in the Pentateuch as firmly as he believed in the House of Peers; so I concluded that it was
a woman, and asked him if he was married yet.

'I don't understand women well enough,' he answered.

'My dear Gerald,' I said, 'women are meant to be loved, not to be understood.'

'I cannot love where I cannot trust,' he replied.

'I believe you have a mystery in your life, Gerald,' I exclaimed; 'tell me about it.'

'Let us go for a drive,' he answered, 'it is too crowded here.  No, not a yellow carriage,
any other colour--there, that dark green one will do'; and in a few moments we were trotting
down the boulevard in the direction of the Madeleine.

'Where shall we go to?' I said.

'Oh, anywhere you like!' he answered--'to the restaurant in the Bois; we will dine there, and
you shall tell me all about yourself.'

'I want to hear about you first,' I said.  'Tell me your mystery.'

He took from his pocket a little silver-clasped morocco case, and handed it to me.  I opened
it.  Inside there was the photograph of a woman.  She was tall and slight, and strangely picturesque
with her large vague eyes and loosened hair.  She looked like a clairvoyante, and was wrapped
in rich furs.

'What do you think of that face?' he said; 'is it truthful?'

I examined it carefully.  It seemed to me the face of some one who had a secret, but whether
that secret was good or evil I could not say.  Its beauty was a beauty moulded out of many
mysteries--the beauty, in fact, which is psychological, not plastic--and the faint smile that
just played across the lips was far too subtle to be really sweet.

'Well,' he cried impatiently, 'what do you say?'

'She is the Gioconda in sables,' I answered.  'Let me know all about her.'

'Not now,' he said; 'after dinner,' and began to talk of other things.

When the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of his promise.  He
rose from his seat, walked two or three times up and down the room, and, sinking into an armchair,
told me the following story:-

'One evening,' he said, 'I was walking down Bond Street about five o'clock.  There was a terrific
crush of carriages, and the traffic was almost stopped.  Close to the pavement was standing
a little yellow brougham, which, for some reason or other, attracted my attention.  As I passed
by there looked out from it the face I showed you this afternoon.  It fascinated me immediately.
All that night I kept thinking of it, and all the next day.  I wandered up and down that wretched
Row, peering into every carriage, and waiting for the yellow brougham; but I could not find
ma belle inconnue, and at last I began to think she was merely a dream.  About a week afterwards
I was dining with Madame de Rastail.  Dinner was for eight o'clock; but at half-past eight
we were still waiting in the drawing-room.  Finally the servant threw open the door, and announced
Lady Alroy.  It was the woman I had been looking for.  She came in very slowly, looking like
a moonbeam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight, I was asked to take her in to dinner.
After we had sat down, I remarked quite innocently, "I think I caught sight of you in Bond
Street some time ago, Lady Alroy."  She grew very pale, and said to me in a low voice, "Pray
do not talk so loud; you may be overheard."  I felt miserable at having made such a bad beginning,
and plunged recklessly into the subject of the French plays.  She spoke very little, always
in the same low musical voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of some one listening.  I fell
passionately, stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmosphere of mystery that surrounded her
excited my most ardent curiosity.  When she was going away, which she did very soon after dinner,
I asked her if I might call and see her.  She hesitated for a moment, glanced round to see
if any one was near us, and then said, "Yes; to-morrow at a quarter to five."  I begged Madame
de Rastail to tell me about her; but all that I could learn was that she was a widow with a
beautiful house in Park Lane, and as some scientific bore began a dissertation on widows, as
exemplifying the survival of the matrimonially fittest, I left and went home.

'The next day I arrived at Park Lane punctual to the moment, but was told by the butler that
Lady Alroy had just gone out.  I went down to the club quite unhappy and very much puzzled,
and after long consideration wrote her a letter, asking if I might be allowed to try my chance
some other afternoon.  I had no answer for several days, but at last I got a little note saying
she would be at home on Sunday at four and with this extraordinary postscript:  "Please do
not write to me here again; I will explain when I see you."  On Sunday she received me, and
was perfectly charming; but when I was going away she begged of me, if I ever had occasion
to write to her again, to address my letter to "Mrs. Knox, care of Whittaker's Library, Green
Street."  "There are reasons," she said, "why I cannot receive letters in my own house."

'All through the season I saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of mystery never left
her.  Sometimes I thought that she was in the power of some man, but she looked so unapproachable,
that I could not believe it.  It was really very difficult for me to come to any conclusion,
for she was like one of those strange crystals that one sees in museums, which are at one moment
clear, and at another clouded.  At last I determined to ask her to be my wife:  I was sick
and tired of the incessant secrecy that she imposed on all my visits, and on the few letters
I sent her.  I wrote to her at the library to ask her if she could see me the following Monday
at six. She answered yes, and I was in the seventh heaven of delight.  I was infatuated with
her:  in spite of the mystery, I thought then--in consequence of it, I see now.  No; it was
the woman herself I loved. The mystery troubled me, maddened me.  Why did chance put me in
its track?'

'You discovered it, then?' I cried.

'I fear so,' he answered.  'You can judge for yourself.'

'When Monday came round I went to lunch with my uncle, and about four o'clock found myself
in the Marylebone Road. If some other biographies I have read had stopped with the ancestry until a like
event occurred, it would have been a felicitous thing for the reading public. How does it strike
you?

HOW TO TELL A STORY
The Humorous Story an American Development.--Its Difference from
Comic and Witty Stories

I do not claim that I can tell a story as
it ought to be told. I only claim to know how a story ought to be
told, for I have been almost daily in the company of the most expert
story-tellers for many years.  I picked it up and
put it in my pocket.  Then I began to consider what I should do.  I came to the conclusion
that I had no right to spy on her, and I drove down to the club.  At six I called to see her.
She was lying on a sofa, in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones
that she always wore.  She was looking quite lovely.  "I am so glad to see you," she said;
"I have not been out all day."  I stared at her in amazement, and pulling the handkerchief
out of my pocket, handed it to her.  "You dropped this in Cumnor Street this afternoon, Lady
Alroy,"  I said very calmly.  She looked at me in terror but made no attempt to take the handkerchief.
"What were you doing there?" I asked.  "What right have you to question me?" she answered.
"The right of a man who loves you," I replied; "I came here to ask you to be my wife."  She
hid her face in her hands, and burst into floods of tears.  "You must tell me," I continued.
She stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said, "Lord Murchison, there is nothing
to tell you."--"You went to meet some one," I cried; "this is your mystery."  She grew dreadfully
white, and said, "I went to meet no one."--"Can't you tell the truth?" I exclaimed.  "I have
told it," she replied.  I was mad, frantic; I don't know what I said, but I said terrible things
to her.  Finally I rushed out of the house.  She wrote me a letter the next day; I sent it
back unopened, and started for Norway with Alan Colville. After a month I came back, and the
first thing I saw in the Morning Post was the death of Lady Alroy.  She had caught a chill
at the Opera, and had died in five days of congestion of the lungs.  I shut myself up and saw
no one.  I had loved her so much, I had loved her so madly.  Good God! how I had loved that woman!'

'You went to the street, to the house in it?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered.

'One day I went to Cumnor Street.  I could not help it; I was tortured with doubt.  I knocked
at the door, and a respectable- looking woman opened it to me.  I asked her if she had any
rooms to let.  "Well, sir," she replied, "the drawing-rooms are supposed to be let; but I have
not seen the lady for three months, and as rent is owing on them, you can have them."--"Is
this the lady?" I said, showing the photograph.  "That's her, sure enough," she exclaimed;
"and when is she coming back, sir?"--"The lady is dead," I replied. "Oh sir, I hope not!" said
the woman; "she was my best lodger.  She paid me three guineas a week merely to sit in my drawing-rooms
now and then."  "She met some one here?" I said; but the woman assured me that it was not so,
that she always came alone, and saw no one. "What on earth did she do here?" I cried.  "She
simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had tea," the woman answered.
I did not know what to say, so I gave her a sovereign and went away.  Now, what do you think
it all meant?  You don't believe the woman was telling the truth?'

'I do.'

'Then why did Lady Alroy go there?'

'My dear Gerald,' I answered, 'Lady Alroy was simply a woman with a mania for mystery.  She
took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with her veil down, and imagining she was
a heroine.  She had a passion for secrecy, but she herself was merely a Sphinx without a secret.'

'Do you really think so?'

'I am sure of it,' I replied.

He took out the morocco case, opened it, and looked at the photograph.  'I wonder?' he said
at last.

THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE

Unless one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow. Romance is the privilege
of the rich, not the profession of the unemployed.  The poor should be practical and prosaic.
It is better to have a permanent income than to be fascinating.  These are the great truths
of modern life which Hughie Erskine never realised. Poor Hughie!  Intellectually, we must admit,
he was not of much importance.  He never said a brilliant or even an ill-natured thing in his
life.  But then he was wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp brown hair, his clear-cut profile,
and his grey eyes.  He was as popular with men as he was with women and he had every accomplishment
except that of making money.  His father had bequeathed him his cavalry sword and a History
of the Peninsular War in fifteen volumes.  Hughie hung the first over his looking-glass, put
the second on a shelf between Ruff's Guide and Bailey's Magazine, and lived on two hundred
a year that an old aunt allowed him.  He had tried everything.  He had gone on the Stock Exchange
for six months; but what was a butterfly to do among bulls and bears?  He had been a tea-merchant
for a little longer, but had soon tired of pekoe and souchong.  Then he had tried selling dry
sherry. That did not answer; the sherry was a little too dry.  Ultimately he became nothing,
a delightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect profile and no profession.

To make matters worse, he was in love.  The girl he loved was Laura Merton, the daughter of
a retired Colonel who had lost his temper and his digestion in India, and had never found either
of them again.  Laura adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings. They were the
handsomest couple in London, and had not a penny-piece between them.  The Colonel was very
fond of Hughie, but would not hear of any engagement.

'Come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your own, and we will see about
it,' he used to say; and Hughie looked very glum in those days, and had to go to Laura for
consolation.

One morning, as he was on his way to Holland Park, where the Mertons lived, he dropped in to
see a great friend of his, Alan Trevor. Trevor was a painter.  Indeed, few people escape that
nowadays.  But he was also an artist, and artists are rather rare.  Personally he was a strange
rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged beard. Then they formed in echelon, by columns
of fours, refused the left, and retired in great style on the double-quick. I was enchanted, and said:

"Now,
doctor, that is something LIKE! Chickens are the ticket, there is
no doubt about it. What is the next squad?"  'The
only people a painter should know,' he used to say, 'are people who are bete and beautiful,
people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and an intellectual repose to talk to.  Men
who are dandies and women who are darlings rule the world, at least they should do so.'  However,
after he got to know Hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright, buoyant spirits
and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him the permanent entree to his studio.

When Hughie came in he found Trevor putting the finishing touches to a wonderful life-size
picture of a beggar-man.  The beggar himself was standing on a raised platform in a corner
of the studio.  He was a wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous
expression.  Over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all tears and tatters; his
thick boots were patched and cobbled, and with one hand he leant on a rough stick, while with
the other he held out his battered hat for alms.

'What an amazing model!' whispered Hughie, as he shook hands with his friend.

'An amazing model?' shouted Trevor at the top of his voice; 'I should think so!  Such beggars
as he are not to be met with every day.  A trouvaille, mon cher; a living Velasquez!  My stars!
what an etching Rembrandt would have made of him!'

'Poor old chap!' said Hughie, 'how miserable he looks!  But I suppose, to you painters, his
face is his fortune?'

'Certainly,' replied Trevor, 'you don't want a beggar to look happy, do you?'

'How much does a model get for sitting?' asked Hughie, as he found himself a comfortable seat
on a divan.

'A shilling an hour.'

'And how much do you get for your picture, Alan?'

'Oh, for this I get two thousand!'

'Pounds?'

'Guineas.  Painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.'

'Well, I think the model should have a percentage,' cried Hughie, laughing; 'they work quite
as hard as you do.'

'Nonsense, nonsense!  Why, look at the trouble of laying on the paint alone, and standing all
day long at one's easel!  It's all very well, Hughie, for you to talk, but I assure you that
there are moments when Art almost attains to the dignity of manual labour. But you mustn't
chatter; I'm very busy.  Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.'

After some time the servant came in, and told Trevor that the framemaker wanted to speak to him.

'Don't run away, Hughie,' he said, as he went out, 'I will be back in a moment.'

The old beggar-man took advantage of Trevor's absence to rest for a moment on a wooden bench
that was behind him.  He looked so forlorn and wretched that Hughie could not help pitying
him, and felt in his pockets to see what money he had.  All he could find was a sovereign and
some coppers.  'Poor old fellow,' he thought to himself, 'he wants it more than I do, but it
means no hansoms for a fortnight'; and he walked across the studio and slipped the sovereign
into the beggar's hand.

The old man started, and a faint smile flitted across his withered lips.  'Thank you, sir,'
he said, 'thank you.'

Then Trevor arrived, and Hughie took his leave, blushing a little at what he had done.  He
spent the day with Laura, got a charming scolding for his extravagance, and had to walk home.

That night he strolled into the Palette Club about eleven o'clock, and found Trevor sitting
by himself in the smoking-room drinking hock and seltzer.

'Well, Alan, did you get the picture finished all right?' he said, as he lit his cigarette.

'Finished and framed, my boy!' answered Trevor; 'and, by the bye, you have made a conquest.
That old model you saw is quite devoted to you.  I had to tell him all about you--who you are,
where you live, what your income is, what prospects you have--'

'My dear Alan,' cried Hughie, 'I shall probably find him waiting for me when I go home.  But
of course you are only joking.  Poor old wretch!  I wish I could do something for him.  I think
it is dreadful that any one should be so miserable.  I have got heaps of old clothes at home--do
you think he would care for any of them? Why, his rags were falling to bits.'

'But he looks splendid in them,' said Trevor.  'I wouldn't paint him in a frock coat for anything.
What you call rags I call romance. What seems poverty to you is picturesqueness to me.  However,
I'll tell him of your offer.'

'Alan,' said Hughie seriously, 'you painters are a heartless lot.'

'An artist's heart is his head,' replied Trevor; 'and besides, our business is to realise the
world as we see it, not to reform it as we know it.  A chacun son metier.  And now tell me
how Laura is. The old model was quite interested in her.'

'You don't mean to say you talked to him about her?' said Hughie.

'Certainly I did.  He knows all about the relentless colonel, the lovely Laura, and the 10,000
pounds.'

'You told that old beggar all my private affairs?' cried Hughie, looking very red and angry.

'My dear boy,' said Trevor, smiling, 'that old beggar, as you call him, is one of the richest
men in Europe.  He could buy all London to-morrow without overdrawing his account.  He has
a house in every capital, dines off gold plate, and can prevent Russia going to war when he
chooses.'

'What on earth do you mean?' exclaimed Hughie.

