The next year, 1745, the Young Pretender, 'Bonnie Prince Charlie,' raised the Highland clans
on behalf of his father, won several battles, and invaded England, in the hope of putting the
Hanoverian Georges off the throne of Great Britain and regaining it for the exiled Stuarts.
The Duke of Cumberland was sent to crush him; and with the duke went Wolfe. Prince Charlie's
army retreated and was at last brought to bay on Culloden Moor, six miles from Inverness. The
Highlanders were not in good spirits after their long retreat before the duke's army, which
enjoyed an immense advantage in having a fleet following it along the coast with plenty of
provisions, while the prince's wretched army was half starved. We may be sure the lesson was
not lost on Wolfe. Nobody understood better than he that the fleet is the first thing to consider
in every British war. And nobody saw a better example of this than he did afterwards in Canada.

At daybreak on April 16, 1746, the Highlanders found the duke's army marching towards Inverness,
and drew up in order to prevent it. Both armies halted, each hoping the other would make the
mistake of charging. At last, about one o'clock, the Highlanders in the centre and right could
be held back no longer. So eager were they to get at the redcoats that most of them threw down
their muskets without even firing them, and then rushed on furiously, sword in hand. ''Twas
for a time,' said Wolfe, 'a dispute between the swords and bayonets, but the latter was found
by far the most destructable [sic] weapon.' No quarter was given or taken on either side during
an hour of desperate fighting hand to hand. By that time the steady ranks of the redcoats,
aided by the cavalry, had killed five times as many as they had lost by the wild slashing of
the claymores. The Highlanders turned and fled. The Stuart cause was lost for ever.

Again another year of fighting: this time in Holland, where the British, Dutch, and Austrians
under the Duke of Cumberland met the French at the village of Laffeldt, on June 21, 1747. Wolfe
was now a brigade-major, which gave him the same sort of position in a brigade of three battalions
as an adjutant has in a single one; that is, he was a smart junior officer picked out to help
the brigadier in command by seeing that orders were obeyed. The fight was furious. As fast
as the British infantry drove back one French brigade another came forward and drove the British
back. The village was taken and lost, lost and taken, over and over again. Wolfe, though wounded,
kept up the fight. At last a new French brigade charged in and swept the British out altogether.
Then the duke ordered the Dutch and Austrians to advance: But the Dutch cavalry, right in the
centre, were seized with a sudden panic and galloped back, knocking over their own men on the
way, and making a gap that certainly looked fatal. But the right man was ready to fill it.
This was Sir John Ligonier, afterwards commander-in-chief of the British Army at the time of
Wolfe's campaigns in Canada. He led the few British and Austrian cavalry, among them the famous
Scots Greys, straight into the gap and on against the dense masses of the French beyond. These
gallant horsemen were doomed; and of course they knew it when they dashed themselves to death
against such overwhelming odds. But they gained the few precious moments that were needed.
The gap closed up behind them; and the army was saved, though they were lost.

During the day Wolfe was several times in great danger. He was thanked by the duke in person
for the splendid way in which he had done his duty. I lamed her by accident, and thought it
better to dismiss her the service immediately. I grieved at parting with so faithful a servant,
and have the comfort to know she is in good hands, will be very well fed, and taken care of
in her latter days.'

After recovering from a slight wound received at Laffeldt Wolfe was allowed to return to England,
where he remained for the winter. On the morrow of New Year's Day, 1748, he celebrated his
coming of age at his father's town house in Old Burlington Street, London. In the spring, however,
he was ordered to rejoin the army, and was stationed with the troops who were guarding the
Dutch frontier. The war came to an end in the same year, and Wolfe went home. Though then only
twenty-one, he was already an experienced soldier, a rising officer, and a marked man.

CHAPTER III

THE SEVEN YEARS' PEACE 1748-1755

Wolfe was made welcome in England wherever he went. In spite of his youth his name was well
known to the chief men in the Army, and he was already a hero among the friends of his family.
By nature he was fond of the society of ladies, and of course he fell in love. He had had a
few flirtations before, like most other soldiers; but this time the case was serious. The difference
was the same as between a sham fight and a battle. His choice fell on Elizabeth Lawson, a maid
of honour to the Princess of Wales. The oftener he saw her the more he fell in love with her.
But the course of true love did not, as we shall presently see, run any more smoothly for him
than it has for many another famous man.

In 1749, when Wolfe was only twenty-two, he was promoted major of the 20th Regiment of Foot.
He joined it in Scotland, where he was to serve for the next few years. At first he was not
very happy in Glasgow. He did not like the people, as they were very different from the friends
with whom he had grown up. Yet his loneliness only added to his zeal for study. He had left
school when still very young, and he now found himself ignorant of much that he wished to know.
As a man of the world he had found plenty of gaps in his general knowledge. Writing to his
friend Captain Rickson, he says: 'When a man leaves his studies at fifteen, he will never be
justly called a man of letters. I am endeavouring to repair the damages of my education, and
have a person to teach me Latin and mathematics.' From his experience in his own profession,
also, he had learned a good deal. In a letter to his father he points out what excellent chances
soldiers have to see the vivid side of many things: 'That variety incident to a military life
gives our profession some advantages over those of a more even nature. This is a knowledge
to be best acquired in an army; our actions are there in presence of the world, to be fully
censured or approved.'

Great commanders are always keen to learn everything really worth while. It is only the little
men who find it a bore. Of course, there are plenty of little men in a regiment, as there are
everywhere else in the world; and some of the officers were afraid Wolfe would insist on their
doing as he did. But he never preached. He only set the example, and those who had the sense
could follow it. One of his captains wrote home: 'Our acting colonel here is a paragon. He
neither drinks, curses, nor gambles. So we make him our pattern.' After a year with him the
officers found him a 'jolly good fellow' as well as a pattern; and when he became their lieutenant-colonel
at twenty-three they gave him a dinner that showed he was a prime favourite among them. He
was certainly quite as popular with the men. Indeed, he soon became known by a name which speaks
for itself--'the soldier's' friend.'

By and by Wolfe's regiment marched into the Highlands, where he had fought against Prince Charlie
in the '45. But he kept in touch with what was going on in the world outside. He wrote to Rickson
at Halifax, to find out for him all he could about the French and British colonies in America. But
in the Gulf of Lyons a breeze sprang up. It was quite a gentle breeze at first, and Reginald found
it rather stimulating. Towards evening, however, it freshened, and the ship began to stagger.
Reginald became conscious of those disquieting symptoms common to landsmen in such case. Fearful
for his reputation he crept below to suffer in solitude.

By midnight it was blowing a gale, and Reginald had lost interest in life. He was thinking mournfully
of the vanity of all human desires when a message was brought from the captain. They were about to
perish. Would his Excellency the Commander come up to the bridge
and save them, please?

It was a painful predicament, and Reginald was justly horrified. Could he venture out and display
the weakness of the British Navy in the face of a crew of unwashed Greek matelots? On the other
hand, could he skulk in his cabin and allow the Master to doubt his courage and resource? He
rose and lurched unsteadily on deck.

The Captain was distinctly excited. Destruction was imminent. He had appealed to the Saints
without avail. Would the British Commander come to their assistance? What did his Excellency
think of it?

Reginald thought it was perfectly horrible. He had never thought such
a ghastly scene possible. The ship appeared on the point of turning
turtle and he was soaked to the skin already. Then, realizing that
he could not remain on the bridge another minute without internal
disaster, he made a supreme effort.

"My dear skipper," he howled
at the top of his voice, "you surely don't call this a storm? The
merest breeze, I assure you. I really can't be disturbed for such
a trifle. About
this time there was a map made by a Frenchman in Paris which gave all the chief places in the
Lowlands quite rightly, but left the north of Scotland blank, with the words 'Unknown land
here, inhabited by the "Iglandaires"!' When his leave began Wolfe went first to Dublin--'dear,
dirty Dublin,' as it used to be called--where his uncle, Major Walter Wolfe, was living. He
wrote to his father: 'The streets are crowded with people of a large size and well limbed,
and the women very handsome. They have clearer skins, and fairer complexions than the women
in England or Scotland, and are exceeding straight and well made'; which shows that he had
the proper soldier's eye for every pretty girl. Then he went to London and visited his parents
in their new house at the corner of Greenwich Park, which stands to-day very much the same
as it was then. But, wishing to travel, he succeeded, after a great deal of trouble, in getting
leave to go to Paris. Lord Bury was a friend of his, and Lord Bury's father, the Earl of Albemarle,
was the British ambassador there. So he had a good chance of seeing the best of everything.
Perhaps it would be almost as true to say that he had as good a chance of seeing the worst
of everything. For there were a great many corrupt and corrupting men and women at the French
court. There was also much misery in France, and both the corruption and the misery were soon
to trouble New France, as Canada was then called, even more than they troubled Old France at home.

Wolfe wished to travel about freely, to see the French armies at work, and then to go on to
Prussia to see how Frederick the Great managed his perfectly disciplined army. This would have
been an excellent thing to do. But it was then a very new thing for an officer to ask leave
to study foreign armies. Moreover, the chief men in the British Army did not like the idea
of letting such a good colonel go away from his regiment for a year, even though he was going
with the object of making himself a still better officer. Perhaps, too, his friends were just
a little afraid that he might join the Prussians or the Austrians; for it was not, in those
days, a very strange thing to join the army of a friendly foreign country. Whatever the reason,
the long leave was refused and he went no farther than Paris.

Louis XV was then at the height of his apparent greatness; and France was a great country,
as it is still. But king and government were both corrupt. Wolfe saw this well enough and remembered
it when the next war broke out. There was a brilliant society in 'the capital of civilization,'
as the people of Paris proudly called their city; and there was a great deal to see. Nor was
all of it bad. He wrote home two days after his arrival.

   The packet [ferry] did not sail that night, but we
   embarked at half-an-hour after six in the morning and
   got into Calais at ten. I never suffered so much in
   so short a time at sea. The people [in Paris] seem to
   be very sprightly. The buildings are very magnificent,
   far surpassing any we have in London. Mr Selwin has
   recommended a French master to me, and in a few days
   I begin to ride in the Academy, but must dance and
   fence in my own lodgings. Lord Albemarle [the British
   ambassador] is come from Fontainebleau. I have very
   good reason to be pleased with the reception I met
   with. The best amusement for strangers in Paris is
   the Opera, and the next is the playhouse. The theatre
   is a school to acquire the French language, for which
   reason I frequent it more than the other.

In Paris he met young Philip Stanhope, the boy to whom the Earl of Chesterfield wrote his celebrated
letters; 'but,' says Wolfe, 'I fancy he is infinitely inferior to his father.' Keeping fit,
as we call it nowadays, seems to have been Wolfe's first object. He took the same care of himself
as the Japanese officers did in the Russo-Japanese War; and for the same reason, that he might
be the better able to serve his country well the next time she needed him. Writing to his mother
he says:

   I am up every morning at or before seven and fully
   employed till twelve. Then I dress and visit, and dine
   at two. At five most people go to the public
   entertainments, which keep you till nine; and at eleven
   I am always in bed. This way of living is directly
   opposite to the practice of the place. But no
   constitution could go through all. Four or five days
   in the week I am up six hours before any other fine
   gentleman in Paris. I ride, fence, dance, and have a
   master to teach me French. I succeed much better in
   fencing and riding than in the art of dancing, for
   they suit my genius better; and I improve a little in
   French. If it hadn't been for the conflagration she would
   never have dared to ask for a new hat. Now I came to
   remember, I had taken her out and bought her one on
   the first day of my leave.
   
   However, the damage was done (twice over, in fact),
   and I sat gently brooding over it in silence. Suddenly
   an inspiring thought struck me. Eagerly I made my way
   to the writing-table and drew out a long and bulky envelope from
the bottom drawer. For some time I sat there carefully mastering its
contents. I wonder
   a practice so useful is not introduced into England.

While in Paris Wolfe was asked if he would care to be military tutor to the Duke of Richmond,
or, if not, whether he knew of any good officer whom he could recommend. On this he named Guy
Carleton, who became the young duke's tutor. Three men afterwards well known in Canada were
thus brought together long before any of them became celebrated. The Duke of Richmond went
into Wolfe's regiment. The next duke became a governor-general of Canada, as Guy Carleton had
been before him. And Wolfe--well, he was Wolfe!

One day he was presented to King Louis, from whom, seven years later; he was to wrest Quebec.
'They were all very gracious as far as courtesies, bows, and smiles go, for the Bourbons seldom
speak to anybody.' Then he was presented to the clever Marquise de Pompadour, whom he found
having her hair done up in the way which is still known by her name to every woman in the world.
It was the regular custom of that time for great ladies to receive their friends while the
barbers were at work on their hair. 'She is extremely handsome and, by her conversation with
the ambassador, I judge she must have a great deal of wit and understanding.' But it was her
court intrigues and her shameless waste of money that helped to ruin France and Canada.

In the midst of all these gaieties Wolfe never forgot the mother whom he thought 'a match for
all the beauties.' He sent her 'two black laced hoods and a vestale for the neck, such as the
Queen of France wears.' Nor did he forget the much humbler people who looked upon him as 'the
soldier's friend.' He tells his mother that his letters from Scotland have just arrived, and
that 'the. women of the regiment take it into their heads to write to me sometimes.' Here is
one of their letters, marked on the outside, 'The Petition of Anne White':

   Collonnell,--Being a True Noble-hearted Pittyful
   gentleman and Officer your Worship will excuse these
   few Lines concerning ye husband of ye undersigned,
   Sergt. White, who not from his own fault is not behaving
   as Hee should towards me and his family, although good
   and faithfull till the middle of November last.

We may be sure 'Sergt. White' had to behave 'as Hee should' when Wolfe returned!

In April, to his intense disgust, Wolfe was again in Glasgow.

   We are all sick, officers and soldiers. In two days
   we lost the skin off our faces with the sun, and the
   third were shivering in great coats. The doctors let one.
   I've got a physician who lets me have any disease
   I fancy (except German measles and Asiatic cholera; for
   patriotic reasons he won't hear a good word spoken for
   either of them; says we've got just as good diseases
   of our own. Damned insularity!).
   
   If I send for this doctor he comes along, sits quietly
   beside my bed, eating my grapes, while I tell him where
   the pain isn't. The recital over he hands me a selection of ailments
to pick from. I choose one. The men of Glasgow drink till
   they are excessively drunk. The ladies are cold to
   everything but a bagpipe--I wrong them--there is not
   one that does not melt away at the sound of money.'

By the end of this year, however, he had left Scotland for good. He did not like the country
as he saw it. But the times were greatly against his doing so. Glasgow was not at all a pleasant
place in those narrowly provincial days for any one who had seen much of the world. The Highlands
were as bad. They were full of angry Jacobites, who could never forgive the redcoats for defeating
Prince Charlie. Yet Wolfe was not against the Scots as a whole; and we must never forget that
he was the first to recommend the raising of those Highland regiments which have fought so
nobly in every British war since the mighty one in which he fell.

During the next year and part of the year following, 1754-55, Wolfe was at Exeter, where the
entertainments seem to have been more to his taste than those at Glasgow. A lady who knew him
well at this time wrote: 'He was generally ambitious to gain a tall, graceful woman to be his
partner, as well as a good dancer. He seemed emulous to display every kind of virtue and gallantry
that would render him amiable.'

