 That light tone of contempt if
begun now would certainly not be dropped after their marriage. He had assumed an easy way of
almost laughing at her, of quizzing her pursuits, and, worse still, of only half listening
to her, which she felt to promise very badly for her future happiness. If he wanted his liberty
he should have it,--now and then. She would never be a drag on her husband's happiness. She
had resolved from the very first not to be an exigeant wife. Were a rock, if not a Böcklin ancestor,
is the creator of the bright rococo structures from the fifties of the 18. Century. The producing pictures
display a mother of Böcklin physiognomy of odd large slash and she was a fine, educated, gifted, well exactly
amazing woman, the well renowned their children. Böcklin youth has been no bad, he subsequent recalled
joyous some droll article from his boyhood. And, joined to all
the rest, there came a conviction that his real tastes did take that direction. She had never
before heard that he had a passion for the turf; but if it should turn out that he was a gambler!
Had any of her friends mentioned such an idea to her a week ago, how she would have rebuked
that friend! But now she added this to her other grievances, and began to tell herself that
she had become engaged to a man whom she did not know and whom she already doubted.

Then there came a week of very troubled existence,--of existence the more troubled because
she had no one to whom to tell her trouble. As to putting confidence in her mother,--that idea
never occurred to her. Her mother among her friends was the humblest of all. To tell her mother
that she was going to be married was a matter of course, but she had never consulted her mother
on the subject. And now, at the end of the week, she had almost resolved to break with the
man without having intimated to any one that such was her intention. And what excuse had she?
There was excuse enough to her own mind, to her own heart. But what excuse could she give to
him or to the world? He was confident enough,--so confident as to vex her by his confidence.
Though he had come to treat her with indifference, like a plaything, she was quite sure that
he did not dream of having his marriage broken off. He was secured,--she was sure that this
was his feeling,--by her love, by her ambition, by his position in the world. He could make
her Lady Geraldine! Was it to be supposed that she should not wish to be Lady Geraldine? He
could take what liberties he pleased without any danger of losing her! The great-grandfather of the painter was obviously an impoverished farmer
in a Basle factory sought and found his bread, his grandfather was a factory worker, with the
Father, however, began the ascent. He was an inventive mind, had been in very young acquired years
ago by the improvement of a red dye appreciation his master's, then twenty-two years a daughter from
an educated and somewhat affluent family later married and made their own.
 keep my secret. You must not tell your uncle. It must come to him from myself.
At the present moment he does not in the least know me,--but he will."

"And why? Why is there to be this break;--why to be these broken promises?"

"I put it to yourself whether you do not know the why. How often have you made excuses for
him? Why have the excuses been necessary? I am prepared to bear all the blame. I must bear
it. But I am not prepared to make myself miserable for ever because I have made a mistake as
to a man's character. Of course I shall suffer,--because I love him. He will not suffer much,--because
he does not love me."

"Oh, yes!"

