  Not the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship into port,
  though beaten back and many times baffled;
  Not the pathfinder penetrating inland weary and long,
  By deserts parch'd, snows chill'd, rivers wet, perseveres till he
            reaches his destination,
  More than I have charged myself, heeded or unheeded, to compose a
            march for these States,
  For a battle-call, rousing to arms if need be, years, centuries
            hence.

OVER THE CARNAGE ROSE PROPHETIC A VOICE.

  Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice,
  Be not dishearten'd, affection shall solve the problems of freedom
            yet,
  Those who love each other shall become invincible,
  They shall yet make Columbia victorious.

  Sons of the Mother of All, you shall yet be victorious,
  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the remainder of the
            earth.

  No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers,
  If need be a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves for one.
  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's comrade,
  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Oregonese, shall be
            friends triune,
  More precious to each other than all the riches of the earth.

  To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come,
  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted beyond death.

  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see manly
            affection,
  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face lightly,
  The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,
  The continuance of equality shall be comrades.

  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of iron,
  I, ecstatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers tie you.

  (Were you looking to be held together by lawyers?
  Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?
  Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)

I SAW OLD GENERAL AT BAY.

  I saw old General at bay,
  (Old as he was, his gray eyes yet shone out in battle like stars,)
  His small force was now completely hemm'd in, in his works,
  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines, a desperate
            emergency,
  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks, but two or three
            were selected,
  I saw them receive their orders aside, they listen'd with care, the
            adjutant was very grave,
  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their lives.

THE ARTILLERYMAN'S VISION.

  While my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars are over long,
  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the vacant midnight
            passes,
  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just hear, the
            breath of my infant,
  There in the room as I wake from sleep this vision presses upon me;
  The engagement opens there and then in fantasy unreal,
  The skirmishers begin, they crawl cautiously ahead, I hear the
            irregular snap! snap! "A
  Paris!" and "Plus Paris!" are words that Madame Delbet says will
            always ring in her ears, for
  these phrases exactly describe the picturesque side glimpse of the
            war that passed in her pretty little
  courtyard, lined with rose-bushes, near her rustic wooden
            bridge. Professor Pierre Delbet vouches
  for the implicit accuracy of this characteristic conversation between
  his mother and the young lieutenant-general of the Prussian Guard
  Corps.
            
  Saturday, September 12.
            
  Forty-first day of the war. Rain and drizzle with southwesterly wind.
            Thermometer at five P.M. 15 degrees centigrade.

Good
  news. Six days' steady, hard fighting results in a French victory
            all along
  the line of the Marne. The German retreat is general. It is astonishing
            to see how quietly
  and calmly Parisians receive the welcome news. They are naturally
            delighted,
  but there are no wild outbursts of enthusiasm. They fully realize that
            this is merely
  one of the phases of the long, hard struggle.
            
  Both General-in-Chief Joffre, and the German General Staff, foresaw that
            the great battle of the Marne must be decisive. General Joffre,
            in his order
  of the day of September 6, impressed upon his troops that "upon the
            coming battle the salvation of the
  country would depend," and admonished his soldiers that "if they should
            be unable to advance further, they must
  hold their ground or be killed on the spot, rather than retire."
  When the French cavalry made a sudden dash into Vitry-le-Francois
            and entered the house that had been
  occupied by the headquarters staff of the Eighth Army Corps, which
had been hastily abandoned a few minutes before, they found, signed
by Lieutenant-general Tulff von Tscheppe und Werdenbach, a general
order which ran as follows:

Vitry-le-Francois, September 7, 10.30
A.M.--The goal pursued by our long and painful marches is reached.
The principal French forces have had to accept battle after withdrawing
continually. The great decision is undoubtedly near at hand.

ETHIOPIA SALUTING THE COLOURS.

  Who are you dusky woman, so ancient hardly human,
  With your woolly-white and turban'd head, and bare bony feet
  Why rising by the roadside here, do you the colours greet?

  ('Tis while our army lines Carolina's sands and pines,
  Forth from thy hovel door thou Ethiopia com'st to me,
  As under doughty Sherman I march toward the sea.)

  Me master years a hundred since from my parents sunder'd,
  A little child, they caught me as the savage beast is caught,
  Then hither me across the sea the cruel slaver brought.

  No further does she say, but lingering all the day,
  Her high-borne turban'd head she wags, and rolls her darkling eye,
  And courtesies to the regiments, the guidons moving by.

  What is it fateful woman, so blear, hardly human?
  Why wag your head with turban bound, yellow, red and green?
  Are the things so strange and marvellous you see or have seen?

NOT YOUTH PERTAINS TO ME.

  Not youth pertains to me,
  Nor delicatesse, I cannot beguile the time with talk,
  Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant,
  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still, for learning
            inures not to me,
  Beauty, knowledge, inure not to me-yet there are two or three things
            inure to me,
  I have nourish'd the wounded and sooth'd many a dying soldier,
  And at intervals waiting or in the midst of camp,
  Composed these songs.

RACE OF VETERANS.

  Race of veterans--race of victors!
  Race of the soil, ready for conflict--race of the conquering march;
  (No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race,)
  Race henceforth owning no law but the law of itself,
  Race of passion and the storm.

WORLD TAKE GOOD NOTICE.

  World take good notice, silver stars fading,
  Milky hue ript, weft of white detaching,
  Coals thirty-eight, baleful and burning,
  Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,
  Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.

O TAN-FACED PRAIRIE-BOY.

  O tan-faced prairie-boy,
  Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,
  Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among the
            recruits,
  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give-we but look'd on each other,
  When lo; more than all the gifts of the world you gave me.

LOOK DOWN FAIR MOON.

AS I LAY WITH MY HEAD IN YOUR LAP CAMERADO.

