These oral lessons on real objects ought to be given in pure, simple, and plain language, level
to the understanding and capacity of children. It may be well at times to use words of a more
difficult or scientific character; but these should always have the proper explanation given;
the words used most frequently in common life, in ordinary and proper conversation, ought to
be most strongly impressed on their memories. It may, perhaps, be retorted on me--why then
teach the difficult and scientific names of geometrical figures. The answer is very simple.
Most of them have no other, and where they have I always give them also, as sloping, slanting,
inclined, for oblique. The geometrical figures are the elements of all forms, and the simplest
objects which can be presented to the young. I have found them always learned with the greatest
ease and pleasure. Pestalozzi, I have understood, was led to the use of them by observing the
wants of the young mind, in a similar manner that I was myself. This is, therefore, one of
the many coincidences in thought and discovery by minds wholly independent of each other, which
have been directed to the same subjects. This is an evitable result. If two men look at the
moon, both must see that it is round, bright, and mottled; and if two minds far apart, turn
their attention to similar subjects, the probability is that their views will coincide. The
most powerful mind will of course make the deepest and simplest discovery.

Object lessons should be given chiefly on such things as fall under more constant observation
and are daily coming before the sight, and then useful knowledge will be accumulated, and frequently
reimpressed upon the memory by the seeing of the objects.

GALLERY LESSONS ON A FEATHER.

We will suppose the children all properly seated, the little girls on one side of the gallery
and the little boys on the other, as represented on the plan-plate. If the morning is fine
and clear, a lesson may be given on an object that the children are not frequently in the habit
of seeing; but should the weather be hazy, and the atmosphere heavy, then a lesson must be
given on some object which they all frequently see, say, for example, a feather. The feather
must be held up in the hand, or placed in a small niche on the top of a pointer, so that every
child will see it, and it must be moved about in various directions to arrest their attention.
The first lesson should be pure development, which is to get every idea from the children relative
to the object before you. Explain to them yours; as for example,

"What is this?" The universal shout will be, "A feather." You may then ask them, What are its
uses? Some little creatures will say, to blow about; others will say, to cover birds; others
will say, to stuff pillows and beds to sleep upon. Having got all the information out of them
you can in their own simple language, you have acted according to nature's law, and it is now
your turn to infuse additional information into their minds, and, give them the benefit of
your superior knowledge; which may be done as follows:--You have told me that feathers are
useful to cover birds, it was for this that they were made by God; they keep the birds warm
just in the same way as your clothes keep you from being cold; and as the poor birds cannot
make themselves clothes as men can, God has given them feathers that they may not be cold when
the bad weather comes. The feathers are useful to the birds also in flying; the long feathers
in a bird's wing keep him in the air, which he could not fly through if he was covered with
any thing else, because feathers are very light. Seven of the large feathers out of the great
eagle's wing would not weigh more than two halfpennies.