"Why, honey," he repeated, "tell its old man all about it. Didn't it like the purty pitcher
thet its old husband bought for it? Was it too big--or too little--or too heavy for it to tote
all the way out here from that high mantel? Why didn't it wake up its lazy ol' man and make
him pack it out here for it?"

It was no use. She was crying louder than ever. He did not know what to do. He began to be
cold and he saw that she was shivering. There was no fire in the dining-room. He must do something.
"Tell its old man what it would 'a' ruther had," he whispered in her ear, "jest tell him, ef
it don't like its pitcher--" 

The Praetor who was appointed to the government of that province[2] had under him two quaestors,
who were a kind of comptrollers of the exchequer; and Cicero was
appointed to the western district, having his headquarters at Lilybaeum.

 Ain't
yours! Well, I like that. Lemme fetch that lamp over here till you read the writin' on the
side of it, an' I'll show you whose it is." He brought the lamp.

"Read that, now. Why, honey! Wh--wh--wh--what in thunder an' lightnin'! They've done gone an'
reversed it. The fool's put my name first--' Ephraim N. Trimble. From--his--'

"Why, Jerusalem jinger!

"No wonder she thought I was a low-down dog--to buy sech a thing an' mark it in my own name--no
wonder--here on Christmus, too. The idee o' Rowton not seein' to it thet it was done right--"

By this time the little woman had somewhat recovered herself. Still, she stammered fearfully.

"R-r-r-owton ain't never s-s-s-saw that pitcher. It come from L-l-l-awson's, d-d-down at Washin'ton,
an' I b-bought it for y-y-y-you!"

"Why, honey--darlin'--" A sudden light came into the old man's eyes. He seized the lamp and
hurried to the door of the bed-chamber, and looked in. This was enough. Perhaps it was mean--but
he could not help it--he set the lamp down on the table, dropped into a chair, and fairly howled
with laughter.

"No wonder I dremp' ol' Mis' Meredy was twins!" he screamed. "Why, h-h-honey," he was nearly
splitting his old sides--"why, honey, I ain't seen a thing but these two swingin' pitchers
all night. They've been dancin' before me--them an' what seemed like a pair o' ol' Mis' Meredys,
an' between 'em all I ain't slep' a wink."

"N-n-either have I. An' I dremp' about ol' Mis' M-m-m-eredy, too. I dremp' she had come to
live with us--an' thet y-y-you an' me had moved into the back o' the house. That's why I got
up. I couldn't sleep easy, an' I thought I might ez well git up an' see wh-wh-what you'd brought
me. But I didn't no mor'n glance at it. But you can't say you didn't sleep, for you was a-s-s-snorin'
when I come out here--"

"An' so was you, honey, when I 'ranged them things on the mantel. Lemme go an' git the other
set an' compare 'em. That one I picked out is mighty purty."

"I'll tell you befo' you fetch 'em thet they're exactly alike"--she began to cry again--"even
to the p-p-polar bear. I saw that at a glance, an' it makes it s-s-so much more ridic'--"

"Hush, honey. I'm reely ashamed of you--I reely am. Seems to me ef they're jest alike, so much
the better. What's the matter with havin' a pair of 'em? We might use one for buttermilk."

"Th-that would be perfectly ridiculous. A polar bear'd look like a fool on a buttermilk pitcher.
N-n-no, the place for pitchers like them is in halls, on tables, where anybody comin' in can
see 'em an' stop an' git a drink. They couldn't be nothin' tackier'n pourin' buttermilk out
of a' ice-pitcher."

"Of co'se, if you say so, we won't--I jest thought maybe--or, I tell you what we might do.
I could easy take out a panel o' banisters out of the side po'ch, an' put in a pair o' stairsteps,
so ez to make a sort o' side entrance to the house, an' we could set one of 'em in it. It would
make the pitcher come a little high, of co'se, but it would set off that side o' the house
lovely, an' ef you say so--

"Lemme go git 'em all out here together."

As he trudged in presently loaded up with the duplicate set he said, "I wonder ef you know
what time it is, wife?"

She glanced over her shoulder at the clock on the wall.

"Don't look at that. It's six o'clock last night by that. I forgot to wind her up. No. It's
half-past three o'clock--that's all it is." By this time he had placed his water-set beside
hers upon the table. "Why, honey," he exclaimed, "where on earth? I don't see a sign of a'
inscription on this--an' what is this paper in the spout? Here, you read it, wife, I ain't
got my specs."

    "'Too busy to mark to-day--send back after Christmas--sorry.

    ROWTON.'"

"Why, it--an' here's another paper. What can this be, I wonder?"

    "'To my darling wife, from her affectionate husband.'"

The little wife colored as she read it.

"Oh, that ain't nothin' but the motter he was to print on it. But ain't it lucky thet he didn't
do it? I'll change it--that's what I'll do--for anything you say. There, now. Don't that fix it?"

She was very still for a moment--very thoughtful. "An' affectionate is a mighty expensive word,
too," she said, slowly, glancing over the intended inscription, in her husband's handwriting.
"Yes. Your pitcher don't stand for a thing but generosity--an' mine don't mean a thing but
selfishness. Yes, take it back, cert'nly, that is ef you'll get me anything I want for it.
Will you?"

"Shore. They's a cow-topped butter-dish an' no end o' purty little things out there you might
like. An' ef it's goin' back, it better be a-goin'. I can ride out to town an' back befo' breakfast.
Come, kiss me, wife."

She threw both arms around her old husband's neck, and kissed him on one cheek and then on
the other. Then she kissed his lips. And then, as she went for pen and paper, she said: "Hurry,
now, an' hitch up, an' I'll be writin' down what I want in exchange--an' you can put it in
yo' pocket."

In a surprisingly short time the old man was on his way--a heaped basket beside him, a tiny
bit of writing in his pocket. When he had turned into the road he drew rein for a moment, lit
a match, and this is what he read:

    "MY DEAR HUSBAND,--I want one silver-mounted brier-wood pipe and
    a smoking set--a nice lava one--and I want a set of them fine
    overhauls like them that Mis Pope give Mr. Pope that time I said
    she was too extravagant, and if they's any money left over I want
    some nice tobacco, the best. I want all the price of the ice-set
    took up even to them affectionate words they never put on.

    "Your affectionate and loving wife,

    "KITTY."

When Ephraim put the little note back in his pocket, he took out his handkerchief and wiped
his eyes.

Her good neighbors and friends, even as far as Simpkinsville and Washington, had their little
jokes over Mis' Trimble's giving her splendor-despising husband a swinging ice-pitcher, but
they never knew of the two early trips of the twin pitcher, nor of the midnight comedy in the
Trimble home.

But the old man often recalls it, and as he sits in his front hall smoking his silver-mounted
pipe, and shaking its ashes into the lava bowl that stands beside the ice-pitcher at his elbow,
he sometimes chuckles to himself.

Noticing his shaking shoulders as he sat thus one day his wife turned from the window, where
she stood watering her geraniums, and said:

"What on earth are you a-laughin' at, honey?" (She often calls him "honey" now.)

"How did you know I was a-laughin'?" He looked over his shoulder at her as he spoke.

"Why, I seen yo' shoulders a-shakin'--that's how." And then she added, with a laugh, "An' now
I see yo' reflection in the side o' the ice-pitcher, with a zig-zag grin on you a mile long--yo'
smile just happened to strike a iceberg."

He chuckled again.

"Is that so? Well, the truth is, I'm just sort o' tickled over things in general, an' I'm a-settin'
here gigglin', jest from pure contentment."

A MINOR CHORD

I am an old bachelor, and I live alone in my corner upper room of an ancient house of Chambres
garnies, down on the lower edge of the French quarter of New Orleans.

When I made my nest here, forty years ago, I felt myself an old man, and the building was even
then a dilapidated old rookery, and since then we--the house and I--have lapsed physically
with the decline of the neighborhood about us, until now our only claims to gentility are perhaps
our memories and our reserves.

The habit of introspection formed by so isolated an existence tends to develop morbid views
of life, and throws one out of sympathetic relations with the world of progress, we are told;
but is there not some compensation for this in the acquisition of finer and more subtle perception
of things hidden from the social, laughing, hurrying world? So it seems to me, and even though
the nicer discernment bring pain, as it often does--as all refinement must--who would yield
it for a grosser content resulting from a duller vision?

To contemplate the procession that passes daily beneath my window, with its ever-shifting pictures
of sorrow, of decrepitude ill-matched with want, new motherhood, and mendicancy, with uplifted
eye and palm--to look down upon all this with only a passing sigh, as my worthy but material
fat landlady does, would imply a spiritual blindness infinitely worse than the pang which the
keener perception induces.

There are in this neighborhood of moribund pretensions a few special objects which strike a
note of such sadness in my heart that the most exquisite pain ensues--a pain which seems almost
bodily, such as those for which we take physic; yet I could never confuse it with the neuralgic
dart which it so nearly resembles, so closely does it follow the sight or sound which I know
induces it.

There is a young lawyer who passes twice a day beneath my window.... I say he is young, for
all the moving world is young to me, at eighty--and yet he seems old at five-and-forty, for
his temples are white.

I know this man's history. The only son of a proud house, handsome, gifted--even somewhat of
a poet in his youth--he married a soulless woman, who began the ruin which the wine-cup finished.
It is an old story. In a mad hour he forged another man's name--then, a wanderer on the face
of the earth, he drifted about with never a local habitation or a name, until his aged father
had made good the price of his honor, when he came home--"tramped home," the world says--and,
now, after years of variable steadiness, he has built upon the wreck of his early life a sort
of questionable confidence which brings him half-averted recognition; and every day, with the
gray always glistening on his temples and the clear profile of the past outlining itself--though
the high-bred face is low between the shoulders now--he passes beneath my window with halting
step to and from the old courthouse, where, by virtue of his father's position, he holds a
minor office.

Almost within a stone's throw of my chamber this man and his aged father--the latter now a
hopeless paralytic--live together in the ruins of their old home.

Year by year the river, by constant cavings, has swallowed nearly all its extensive grounds,
yet beyond the low-browed Spanish cottage that clings close within the new levee, "the ghost
of a garden" fronts the river. Here, amid broken marbles--lyreless Apollos, Pegasus bereft
of wings, and prostrate Muses--the hardier roses, golden-rod, and honeysuckle run riot within
the old levee, between the comings of the waters that at intervals steal in and threaten to
swallow all at a gulp.

The naked old house, grotesquely guarded by the stately skeleton of a moss-grown oak, is thus
bereft, by the river in front and the public road at its back, of all but the bare fact of
survival.

No visitor ever enters here; but in the summer evenings two old men may be seen creeping with
difficult steps from its low portal up to the brow of the bank, where they sit in silence and
watch the boats go by.

The picture is not devoid of pathos, and even the common people whisper together as they look
upon the figures of father and son sitting in the moonlight; and no one likes to pass the door
at night, for there are grewsome tales of ghosts afloat, in which decapitated statues are said
to stalk about the old garden at nightfall.

A sigh always escapes me as I look upon this desolate scene; but it is not now, but when the
old-young man, the son, passes my door each day, carrying in his pale hands a bunch of flowers
which he keeps upon his desk in the little back office, that my mysterious pain possesses me.

Why does this hope-forsaken man carry a bunch of flowers? Is it the surviving poet within him
that finds companionship in them, or does he seem to see in their pure hearts, as in a mirror,
a reflection of his own sinless youth?

These questions I cannot answer; but every day, as he passes with the flowers, I follow him
with fascinated eye until he is quite lost in the distance, my heart rent the while with this
incisive pain.

Finally, he is lost to view. The dart passes through and out my breast, and, as I turn, my
eye falls upon a pretty rose-garden across the way, where live a mother and her two daughters.

                  *          *          *          *

Seventeen years ago this woman's husband--the father--went away and never returned. The daughters
are grown, and they are poor. The elder performs some clerical work up in Canal Street, and
I love to watch her trig little figure come and go--early and late.

The younger, who is fairer, has a lover, and the two sit together on a little wrought-iron
bench, or gather roses from the box-bordered beds in the small inland garden, which lies behind
the moss-grown wall and battened gate; and sometimes the mother comes out and smiles upon the pair.

The mother is a gentlewoman, and though she wears a steel thimble with an open top, like a
tailor's, and her finger is pricked with the needle, she walks and smiles, even waters her
roses, with a lady's grace; but it seems to me that the pretty pink daughter's lover is less
a gentleman than this girl's lover should be--less than her grandfather must have been when
he courted her grandmother in this same rose-garden--less than this maid's lover would be if
her father had not gone to India, and her mother did not sew seams for a living. 

Executions often took place there, and the bodies of the criminals were afterwards thrown down
the Gemonian steps (which were close at hand) into the Forum, for the people to see.]

[Footnote 2: Life of Cicero, p. 119.]

For the present, however, all
went successfully. When I see this beacon in the deserted wife's chamber, and remember
that I have seen it burning there, like the faint but steadfast hope that refuses to be extinguished,
for seventeen years, the pain of pains comes into my heart.

                  *          *          *          *

There is a little old man with a hump upon his shoulder who passes often in the crowd, and
a sight of him always awakens this pain within me.

It is not the tragedy of senility which his extreme age pictures, nor yet the hump upon his
back, which stirs my note of pain.

