A Drama in Dutch.

Spectator: Certainly a book which has not merely cleverness but real vitality.

Speaker: Deliciously original ... and told with great spirit, humor and dramatic vigor.

"T. P." in Weekly Sun: What a delightful creation Mrs. de Griendt is! Indeed I should have
personally been glad if we had had more of her.... I think the reader will agree with me that
I have not exaggerated the literary merit of this exquisitely-described scene.

The World and a Man.

Academy: A masterful novelist.

Illustrated London News: One of the cleverest novels of the day.

Pall Mall Gazette: Finely told.... It is an achievement in a high form of art.

Daily Chronicle: It contains many passages which the greatest masters in the same genre might
have been proud to have written.

The Beautiful Miss Brooke.

Brooklyn Eagle: A brilliant bit of work.

Detroit Free Press: He has analyzed with ability and finish.... This is a story to be admired
for its discernment and its originality.

Boston Beacon: The story is thoroughly entertaining and well done, ... and in analysis of character,
force, and directness, it exceeds the author's previous essays in fiction.

Chicago Record: Very few recent novels which have come out of England will compare with this
story in two points--absolute conciseness of form and analysis of motive.... Here is a theme
of vital truthfulness and Mr. Louis Zangwill has dealt with it with the hand of a master of
form....

A Nineteenth Century Miracle.

Academy: As tantalizing a problem as was ever bound in cloth.

Pall Mall Gazette: As tangled a skein as ever the brain of Gaboriau evolved.

Daily Chronicle: We have seldom read a better piece of mystification.

Morning Leader: It would probably defy the most ingeniously imaginative reader to make in the
course of the story even an approximate leap toward the heart of the miracle that Louis Zangwill
has wrought for his astonishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLEO THE MAGNIFICENT

Or

The Muse of the Real

A Novel

by

LOUIS ZANGWILL

Author of "The Beautiful Miss Brooke," "The World and a Man," Etc., Etc.

New York: G. W. Dillingham Co., Publishers. London: Wm. Heinemann. MDCCCXCVIII.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1897, by G. W. DILLINGHAM CO., In the office
of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C.

Cleo the Magnificent.

BOOK I.

CLEO THE MAGNIFICENT

CHAPTER I.

It was past midnight, and both men were smoking leisurely by the study fireside. Morgan Druce
sat just on the edge of a low chair, his long, slim body bent forward, his clean-shaven boyish
face well within the glow of the fire. Though he appeared to be looking at it, he was only
conscious of its warmth.

Robert Ingram, middle-aged and bearded, lolled back in sensuous comfort. "The long and the
short of it is," he resumed, "you've a soul-crisis on just at present. Crises are bad for the
digestion, and I took care to grow out of them long ago."

"Our temperaments are very different," said Morgan.

"That's what makes your case so difficult to meet," returned Ingram. "It's your infernal temperament.
One never knows how to take it. In fact, you're the sort of person in whose existence I never
really believed; for though, as you know, I once had ideals and a literary conscience, I was
always aware they would go as soon as I had a market for everything I could manufacture. You
are the genuine incorruptible artist, to whom art is sacred. I really don't know whether to
be doubtful of my cynicism or your sanity."

"That my case is a pretty bad one I've already admitted," put in Morgan.

"Now, if you were only some poor devil who was alone in the world," went on Ingram without
heeding his remark, "I could take you in hand and make something of you, for you've quite brains
enough. Poor devils are generally more reasonable in their views than you, even when they're
geniuses. You simply keep on wearing out your heart day after day. Why? For fame? What is it
worth? Well, I won't answer the question--I deal quite enough in platitudes."

"You don't understand, Ingram. What do you really know of me?"

"Well, if I don't know you by this time, you must be an uncommonly deep person--or perhaps
I am an uncommonly shallow one."

Morgan Druce did not answer. His last remark had been more of a reflection than an interrogation.
What did Ingram really know of him, he asked himself again, despite the five years of the indefinable
relation between them? Admitting that the man beneath the cynic was kindly and sympathetic,
yet he could not but be aware that Ingram's treason to the aspirations of his youth had destroyed
the finer edge of feeling. His vision did not respond to subtler vibrations; his judgment was
broad and coarse.

Such was Morgan's intuition about Robert Ingram. He believed the man to be sincere with him
and he trusted him. And yet, as he looked up now and saw Ingram, relapsed into his luxurious
arm chair, blowing rings of smoke, he seemed to detect something in his expression that filled
him with a vague distrust about the genuineness of his professed interest in him. There was
a sort of swagger in his whole posture, a slickness about his well-dressed, well-fed body,
and a self-satisfaction in his somewhat burly face, nay, even in the manner his fat fingers
held his fat cigar, that set Morgan wondering for the first time whether Ingram's attitude
to literature did not in truth sum up the whole man; whether that popular novelist and dramatist
could really have a place in his heart for anything that was of unimportance to his own personal
existence--for a poor devil of a poetaster, for instance.

It was one of those sudden doubts that are created by a chance glimpse from an accidental new
point of view; and Morgan thrust it from him as absurd and unjust. It could have no foundation,
else why had Ingram responded to his appeal at the beginning? Why had he tolerated his calls
all these years? Why were they talking together in that room now?

He had often been puzzled about this relation between them, though, as with his friendship
with Lady Thiselton, its very strangeness and originality pleased him. His relation to that
charming woman was, he felt, both indefinable and incredible; and his relation to the man beside
him, though less odd, could be included neither in the category of acquaintanceship nor in
that of friendship. Morgan was ignorant of Ingram's personal life, even as Ingram was ignorant
of such a large fact in his own as Lady Thiselton. Their coming together had been always on
the ground of their one common interest; otherwise there was the most absolute mutual exclusiveness
between their existences. True that Morgan's periodical appearance at this Albert Gate flat,
of which Ingram had made for himself a luxurious bachelor's home, had eventually resulted in
a certain frankness of speech and familiarity of manner between them. But here their intercourse
began and ended.

Perhaps Morgan had all along seen the position a little bit out of perspective; the very freedom
with which Ingram had come to unmask himself before him and the intimacy with which they addressed
each other had perhaps misled him. The cheery breeziness of Ingram had attracted him a good
deal from the first, and he had liked the man for the ready good nature he had displayed towards
him. And altogether it had been easy for him to think that he had done more than just rub up
against the surface of Ingram's life, the depth and fullness of which he had scarcely realised.

At the beginning he had looked upon his being allowed to come and see the older man now and
again as a privilege. It had never struck him to look at these visits of his from the other's
point of view. It was precisely this point of view that now forced itself upon him as he struggled
with the suspicion that had come to him. Had Ingram looked upon him merely as somebody who
deserved to be good-humouredly tolerated? And was his openness only due to the consciousness
of his (Morgan's) being an outsider, into whose ears he had got into the habit of speaking
thoughts he would have told to no other living person, pretty much as he might have written
them in a diary? Such a habit was easy to acquire with regard to an outsider whom one came
into contact with periodically, and with whom one had a long talk each time.

He was not pleased, however, that such a train of thought should have come to him, and, urged
by something akin to remorse, his mind went travelling back over the past five years in search
of arguments in favour of Ingram.

There was a long interval during which both smoked in silence.

"Do you remember," asked Morgan, at length, "the circumstances under which we first became
acquainted?"

"Perfectly," responded Ingram. "You wrote me a long letter, a rather pathetic one. That was
the first intimation I had of your existence."

"Did you destroy that letter?"

"I never destroy letters--compromising ones, of course, always excepted."

"Then I may assume it still exists. Would it give you very much trouble to find it now?"

"I pride myself upon my system," answered Ingram.

"Please put it to the test, then."

"Your system is excellent," admitted Morgan, as at the end of about five minutes Ingram held
up the sheets in triumph. "Now I wonder if you'd read it to me. I want to hear how it sounds."

"Certainly, you amusing beggar," said Ingram. "You wrote it during your last crisis and you
want to compare your feelings then with now."

"I forget what I wrote," said Morgan, with an attempt at gaiety. "It must be very dramatic,
so please put the proper expression into it, just as if it were a passage in one of your plays."

"Dear Mr. Ingram," read out that gentleman. "For nearly six years I have been trying to live
by writing verse--ever since I was seventeen. Six years of passionate hope and longing, failure
and failure, all years of wandering in the desert, of groping in the dark. I know no one--no
one to criticise me--no one to encourage, to blame, or to praise; only the voice of purpose
in my breast. Amid loneliness this passion for fruitless labour has grown strong, frenzied,
blind. Perhaps one day I shall penetrate--if I live. But for life one must have food; for work
one must have shelter. At twenty-three one does not want to die; not when one has lived always
in the future, when one has striven and toiled for recognition that may yet come. Not mere
recognition of genius or talent, of knack or gift, but recognition of Truth as opposed to Imposture,
of my right to life, of my right to give free and full expression of the individuality that
is mine.

"As matters are now--I am utterly friendless so far as my inner life is concerned--I can see
no other end than fall. God knows what shape that fall is destined to take; into what mire
my soul must plunge in the fight for life. I could bear anything if I were not so utterly alone
and helpless. I would do hack-work if I but knew Grub Street. I would sell my soul to a publisher
for fifty pounds a year. Anything to get my foot on the lowest rung of the ladder! Anything
to help me on the way to freedom!

"If you could see me, speak to me, help me in any way! Believe me, I do not wish to force my
personality on you. I do not want you to give me any material thing. I only beg of you to aid
me in asserting my claim on life by telling how I may win bread.

"I should be deeply grateful for a word from you. In any case, pardon this intrusion. Yours,
etc., Morgan Druce."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ingram drew a long breath and threw the sheets on to the table.

"Have I read it nicely?" he asked.

"And I wrote that--to you, Robert Ingram!" exclaimed Morgan, brokenly.

"You did," said Ingram, quietly. "And you know what the sequel was."

"You were moved by my appeal. You came to seek me out."

"Well, your letter interested me. It was not the letter of a duffer or a swindler--the sort
of thing you can tell by its ornate pompousness; and it just caught me when I was somewhat
bored by things, so that I rather welcomed it as an excitement. I expected to find you lodging
in some miserable cottage--a Chatterton in a garret. I came to bring food to the hungry. Instead----"

"You found me living in a palace standing in a fine park, with no lack of loaves and fishes,
of milk and honey."

"It was the greatest surprise of my life. When I could no longer doubt that the only people
called Druce in the neighbourhood lived in the magnificent Elizabethan mansion, whose name
was that of the supposed cottage from which you addressed your letter, I began to think the
family kept a skeleton in one of the cupboards. In plain language----"

"You thought one of the members of the family must be a lunatic."

"Anyway, the champagne was first-class, the cigars were worth half-a-crown apiece," said Ingram,
laughing.

"And when you had gone into the matter you thought that if I wasn't quite a lunatic, I was
not far short of one for disagreeing with my father."

"Frankly, I did."

"You never really sympathised."

"I did--all the time I conceived of you as a Chatterton."

"A palace is worse than a garret," asserted Morgan, "under the conditions in which I lived."

"Bah! You know nothing about garrets. And, as I pointed out to you, even if, in spite of the
competition, you did sell your soul to a publisher for fifty pounds a year, he'd take care
to stick to it. You were hopelessly wrong in your ideas about getting your foot on the first
rung of the ladder."

"I am ashamed of ever having had those ideas--of ever having been willing to suppress my individuality,
if only temporarily, for the sake of living. It all ought to have ended then. Why did you advise
me to go on?"

"I only advised you to go on writing--I took the other thing for granted. In the light of my
experience of myself at the same age, I judged it was the only advice you would take. And then
having entered on the adventure, I wanted to finish it; so naturally I set about making peace
between father and son. Excellent man, your father! So open to reason! You must have been deuced
clumsy to irritate him. To refuse to enter such a business! You'd have been a rich man in a
few years. But I'm sorry to see your last remark implied a sort of reproach."

"It was a stupid remark," admitted Morgan. "Of course I wanted to go on. At twenty-three one
does not want to die."

"If there is still a prospect of being allowed to write poetry," added Ingram. "You wanted
to be put in the way of earning fifty pounds a year, and naturally you invoked the assistance
of the man who was reputed to have a weakness for embryo genius. However, at the age of twenty-eight,
it appears, one does want to die. I helped you over the last crisis; perhaps I may help you
over this one. Let us look at the facts. You've had a good chance and you've been defeated.
Your poetry is not wanted. As I've told you before, I am not competent to say whether it's
great or whether it's downright drivel--it's years since I discovered my limitations. You've
been imprudent enough to pay the expenses of publishing two small volumes, and certain it is
that nobody found any greatness in them. I admit I couldn't make head or tail of the bulk of
the stuff--I'm satisfied myself to write what plain folk can understand. To put the matter
bluntly, you send work to market that most people would look on as the ravings of a lunatic.
Now, my advice is--cut poetry. There is plenty in the world for you to live for. Go and travel
awhile. See men and cities, sculpture and paintings. Study humanity instead of merely thinking
about it. Sail over the wide seas; breathe in the good air; be true to your youth and fall
in love right bravely. You are rich--all this is in your power. I am sure your father will
be pleased."

Morgan was touched by the other's enthusiasm.

"I have always misunderstood you," he cried, remorsefully; "you are not the mere gross tradesman
you boast of being."

"Really, you embarrass me. Anyway, I hope that, now your opinion of me has gone up, my advice
will bear fruit. After which I shall not mind confessing that that last nice bit is a quotation
from my first novel. I could have invented nothing more apropos."

"You give me advice I am powerless to act on," said Morgan, after some hesitation. "I spent
my last shilling to-day."

"No money!" ejaculated Ingram. "The deuce! Don't you draw a regular income from your father?"

"That was not the arrangement," said Morgan. "I was the first-born, and he was mortally offended
by my refusal to enter the bank and carry on the name and the tradition of the house. During
all those six years there had been friction and bitterness between us. At last came an appalling
outbreak, and I was suffering from the full pain of my wounds when I wrote to you. You were
good enough to tell him that genius sometimes earned quite considerable amounts, and the ultimate
result of your intercession, of which you only knew the happy issue, not the details, was that
he agreed to give me six thousand pounds, with the understanding I was never to expect another
penny from him. My brother was to take my commercial birthright and I the responsibility for
my whole future. I've earned nothing save an odd few shillings now and again, and all I had
from my father I've somehow managed to mess away."

"Good God!" shrieked Ingram. "Six thousand pounds in five years! An exemplary young man of
simple habits like you! What could you have done with it all? You're not a spendthrift. You
don't gamble, do you?"

"I don't know how it has gone," said Morgan, helplessly. "I made bad investments, I lent some
of it away, and I suppose I spent the rest."

"And you wanted to sell your soul to a publisher for fifty pounds a year! The fact is, I suppose,
you don't know the value of money at all--it just melts away."

"For me money has no value. I don't care a pin about it," said Morgan, doggedly.

"That's scarcely the point," said Ingram. "Whether you care about it or not, you'll have to
raise some of it. Let me interview your father. The fault is his. He knew you were a poet,
and yet he was imprudent enough to give you capital instead of an income."

"It was my doing. I wanted to be perfectly free and independent of him--not to be worried by
sordid complaints and lectures and warnings with each quarter's cheque. I told him so frankly,
and I so annoyed him even at the end that he gave me the money, saying he did not care what
I did with it. I certainly intend to stand by the arrangement I made with him. That money was
to be the last, and the last it shall be."

"You are difficult," said Ingram.

"You must be indulgent."

Ingram lighted a new cigar and appeared lost in reflection a little while.

"There is only one thing, then, I can suggest," he said at last.

"And that is?" asked Morgan, in a tone that clearly indicated his belief that he was beyond
all suggestions.

"You can be my ghost. Don't be alarmed--you must do some work, you know, and that is the only
work I can think of for you. I have to refuse very many commissions. Try your hand at some
of them and I'll run over the work and sign. As I've said before, you've got brains enough
if you'll only use them in the right direction."

"You mean it for the best; but I could not be party to a fraud."

"How so? My business in life is to manufacture stories and plays for the people. My signature
merely guarantees the quality just as the name of a maker on a pianoforte guarantees the instrument.
But every such maker employs others whose names do not appear in connection with the finished
product."

"The whole thing is impossible. Forgive me for ignoring your arguments. I ought never to have
troubled you with my miserable concerns. It would, perhaps, have been better if I had never
written you this."

And Morgan took up his own letter from the table, morbidly fascinated by it, and impelled to
read again the words that had been wrung from him five years before by his torturing sense
of his position in life.

But, as he began to read, an odour he had been vaguely conscious of inhaling all along was
wafted very perceptibly to his nostrils. Then he became aware that the letter was subtly scented.

An unreasoning anger came upon him.

"Some woman has had this in her possession," he exclaimed.

Ingram looked at him strangely, hesitated, then seemed finally to comprehend.

"You are a veritable Lecoq," he said coolly.

Then that conception of Ingram that had before begun to hover in Morgan's mind now forced itself
upon him wholly. He had always understood that the man had been inclined to take him somewhat
as a good joke, but this he had not minded so much, so long as he believed that his personality
and his aspirations really interested him. Now his sense of not having been looked upon seriously
predominated, and with it came an exaggerated consciousness of everything in Ingram that was
obnoxious to his spirit. If the re-reading of the letter had been a torture for him, the knowledge
that it had been ruthlessly exposed to other eyes aggravated the pain tenfold, especially at
this particular moment.

"And so this person, whose vile scent impregnates this, has had my soul laid bare before her
for her amusement!"

"Whose vile scent?" repeated Ingram, angrily. "I must ask you not to use such language about
any friend of mine."

"You went to her, no doubt, to be praised and fawned upon for your generosity to me, and afterwards----"

"Don't be a fool!" exclaimed Ingram, cutting him short.

"Thank you. I shall take the advice. I have been a fool long enough."

Morgan moved out of the room, leaving Ingram flushed and motionless.

CHAPTER II.

As Morgan had told Ingram, he had that day spent his last shilling. He had thus no option but
to walk home to his rooms in Chester Terrace, Regent's Park. It was a long walk, and one had
already struck, but he did not hurry. The night was a fine one of early spring, and it suited
his mood to linger in the free air.

He had not really gone to Ingram for advice, though he had been unable to prevent his despair
from showing itself. He was sorry that the exhaustion of his funds should have come just at
the moment when he had resigned himself to the final abandonment of the ambition that had determined
his whole life. He was sure now that a mind like Ingram's would inevitably set down his despair
to his money difficulties. But the next moment he told himself it was grotesque on his part
to care just then what inference Ingram might draw about him. Ingram and he would be concerned
with each other but little in the future!

But what was the future to be? Were there not others who would be fully as astonished as Ingram
at learning the truth? And even if it were possible for him to hide besides there was Margaret
Medhurst. What meaning could the future have for him without her?

His old inner life had at length come to an end and he was now to pass from it into he knew
not what--perhaps a raw, cold air. And yet his feeling now was not so entirely one of despair
as when he had that evening rung Ingram's bell. He seemed to have been stung out of his terrible
apathy. The smart had stirred up his deadened nerves. He was trying to set in order the jumble
that possessed his mind and to think clear and straight.

The vague figure of a scented woman reading his letter haunted him, and at moments Ingram was
added to the picture, and he saw them uniting in mockery of him--prosaic, prosperous author,
and strange, romantic serpent-woman!

Though that letter of five years before had been wrung from him, he had written it with but
the vaguest idea of sending it. A romantic impulse had dictated its form as an appeal to a
prominent novelist, and it was only when he had finished it that the same romantic impulse
urged him to post it. His feeling about it was purely poetic, and he scarcely realised he was
addressing a real, living person. The commercial world of literature was to him a mysterious,
far-off chaos, and at very bottom he had no belief the letter would be the means of his getting
nearer to it.

So far as he was concerned at the moment, he had sent his bolt flying into the clouds, and
the contingency of its being shown about had never occurred to him; moreover, if Ingram had
left his appeal unanswered, the fact he now resented so much would never have come within the
sphere of his consciousness. But to become cognisant of it years later at a moment of despair
humiliated him unbearably. The mere re-reading of the letter had already humiliated him, for
the lapse of time, the change of circumstance, the literary degeneration of Ingram, and his
very acquaintance with the man, had made him feel the words very differently than when they
had come spontaneously out of his blood. His sense of their futility added to his resentment.

But as he now walked along he was beginning to be conscious that, side by side with this resentment,
had come something fantastic, something luring, immanent in the far faintness of the scent
that had perfumed his letter.

He found himself repeating Browning's lines with a sense of the thrill and romance of life.

If his sense of overwhelming defeat made for despair, he was conscious of his nature being
effectively appealed to from another direction. If he had that evening determined to throttle
his ambition and write poetry no more, he seemed to have become aware of the stirring of a
new motive for existence. But what it was he could not definitely tell himself.

And always before him rose the figure of the scented serpent-woman holding his letter in her
long fingers, her white teeth gleaming in mockery!

"I shall live--live!" he exclaimed, as he entered his own door at last.

He lighted the gas in his large, comfortable sitting-room, and noticed there were letters for
him on the mantel resting against the clock, whose hands pointed to half-past two.

But he would not look at them just yet. His was a strange mood just then and he did not wish
his thoughts disturbed. There was something he had to do at once. Let the letters wait till
he had finished.

Again he heard Ingram's voice reading. Every word had branded itself on him.

Soon he had the large table littered with bundles of manuscript. They represented his poetic
output. Many of them had travelled far and wide; never again should they be sent forth into
the world to bring him that which his heart had most desired. He took up one here and there
and ran his eye through it. Considering the years he had worked, the output--for a young man's
muse--was perhaps not large. But then he had only taken up his pen when inspiration had come.
Certainly during the earlier years most of his time had been spent in reading and study. Otherwise
he had had a habit of losing himself in the play of his imagination, awaking after having lived
in worlds innumerable. Thus the actual amount of verse he had produced in the first years was
really quite small.

He could not help dawdling a little before proceeding with the work of destruction. They were
strange products, most of these poems of his; mirroring vague metaphysical moods, unseizable
mystic fancies; incomprehensible save to one whose own inwardness they suggested, or to one
of infinite emotional sympathy. A blurred, shapeless spirit brooded behind these melodious
masses of words, these outpourings of disconnected ideas--a spirit invisible for reason and
responsive only to divination, as love responds to love. Sometimes it was hidden amid a flow
of sensuous images; sometimes in an impression of a landscape, of an atmospheric effect, of
a play of light and shade. Such impression was never pure and complete, such visual effect
never pictured for its own sake; for here and there amid it would lurk a phrase that was not
of it, that struck a note--an elusive key-note--which set vibrating something haunting in its
familiarity, terrifying in its strangeness; something mocking and meaningless, that went echoing
away into the infinite.

He had not been able to find contentment in the mere presentation of beauty. Even where he
dealt with the concrete there was always something to destroy the semblance of reality. The
world that was revealed to his vision was a surface-world, for he had not pierced it by experience,
but only dimly through the medium of books, and the elements it gave him he used freely. But
his combinations of them were seldom along the lines of the possible. Here a colour would flash
out at one; there a jewel would sparkle; now a perfume would be wafted; now a bird would sing.
But all this individual definiteness was merged into a general blur, or formed itself into
a sort of kaleidoscopic pattern that subtly suggested a meaning to be seized.

And all that Morgan now looked over again gave back to him the spirit he had put into them.
The gaps in his expression of that spirit he was blind to. Shaped in the mould of his peculiar
fantasy, these poems lived for the mind that had created them, that had been compelled by its
own inner necessity to give them what was to him their particular form, to others their very
formlessness.

His belief that this poetry was of immortal quality was unshaken, but he had been born into
a wrong world, he now told himself. He was aware that he did not know the world of every-day
affairs; that he was not fitted to know it. The very thought of its swirling incomprehensible
activities turned him giddy; and if he walked amid it daily it was for him pure visual perception.
Beyond that perception he did not seek to look and so he escaped discomfort.

Well, let him not linger. His old life--the singer's life--was over, and nothing of it must remain.

The grate was a big one, but even then the work of destruction would take some time. A fire
had been laid that morning, but had not been lighted. He put back the coals into the vase and
filled the grate with his manuscripts. Then, striking a match, he watched the blaze blackening
and curling up the edges of the sheets.

When eventually the table was bare, he reflected it was strange he should now feel so little
emotion. His predominating sense was one of physical fatigue, but the figure of the scented
woman was still with him. Would it not be splendid, he asked himself, now that his past life
lay there in a charred heap, to enter with his new life into the life of this woman--nay, to
win her away from Ingram?

He took his letters. There were three of them, and they read as follows:

     "My Dear Morgan:--This is to let you know I shall be in town
     to-morrow. I want you to come and meet me at Victoria at one
     o'clock and we shall lunch together before I go on to my hotel.
     My chief business is to see friend Medhurst about my eyes. I fear
     my present reading-glasses no longer suit me. By the way, I've
     some splendid ideas for you to work out. It's quite clear to me
     now from whom you inherited your genius. Mind you are in time.
     Your dad, Archibald D.

     "P. S.--The 'Pleiad' to-day publishes that little poem of yours
     about Diana. I feel very proud of being your father. Present my
     regards to Mr. Ingram."

Morgan merely smiled. He had not had a poem published for many months, and this was his first
indication that the one in point had been accepted. Curious, he reflected, it should just appear
that day.

     "Dear Prince Charming," ran the second. "This is to reproach you
     for not coming yesterday afternoon. For two hours I waited
     without giving up hope. Softest-hearted of mortals, for me alone
     is your heart a stone! I had all the sensations of Mariana in
     the moated grange, but whilst you are in the world, I certainly
     shall not wish myself dead.

     "When are you going to take me to Whitechapel? My mind wanders
     longingly from this prosaic Belgrave Square to yon fantastic
     region. It's quite a month since we last got lost together. I
     have next Monday and Thursday free. I wonder whether it will
     occur to you to connect the two last sentences. Either day--or
     both--will suit me. This doesn't count as a letter. I shall write
     you a real one this evening. Helen."

     "Dear Morgan," read the last. "As you have probably heard, your
     father is coming to town to see Mr. Medhurst professionally, and
     of course he is to dine here to-morrow evening. Come in and join
     us; we shall be strictly en famille. By the way, Margaret has
     not only finished 'Chiron' and the 'Spanish Marauder,' but she
     has actually sold both! They look very well, indeed, in bronze.
     Yours ever, Kate Medhurst.

     "P. S.--Diana sends her love and hopes that if you have any more
     stamps you will bring them with you."

This postscript was in the writing of the young lady herself.

The reading of these letters did not give him any pleasure just then. These other lives in
whose round he was an important figure were going on without any intuition of his inner tragedy,
without any suspicion that they would henceforwards have to go on without him; that he could
no more carry them forward into his vague, new life than those equally vital elements of his
old self--his poems! How strangely did their moods contrast with his--his father's playful
good-humour, Lady Thiselton's sprightly camaraderie and Mrs. Medhurst's cheerful domesticity!

But the last letter made him wince. It was only a simple invitation, but it hurt him as though
a finger had been put on a raw wound. For he, who had made a failure of his existence, whose
one remaining link with life was a mere grotesque possibility of an adventure with an unknown
serpent-woman, loved Margaret Medhurst with a poet's despairing love.

The figure of the scented woman floated up again. She had let the letter fall into her lap
now and her wonderful face seemed to smile at him.

CHAPTER III.

He awoke in the morning, acceptant of what he had done in the night. A calmness had set in
and with it had come a clarification of his thought. His grasp of the position was more definite,
and his feeling was that, to meet it adequately, he must disattach himself completely from
the past.

But the future was mystic and seductive.

However, his tendency to dwell on it had to be put aside in favour of commonplace things that
must be done immediately. As Ingram had pointed out to him, he might be as indifferent to money
as he pleased, yet he must give it his first attention. Though ready cash was exhausted, he
remembered almost with surprise he had several possessions that might be converted into it.

His breakfast was served to him as usual, but he did not open the promised letter which duly
arrived from Lady Thiselton. His general sense of things filled his mind sufficiently.

