In a hall which has plenty of light, but no sun, red is an effective and natural colour, copper-coloured
leather paper, cushions and rugs or carpets of varying shades of red, and transparent curtains
of the same tint give an effect of warmth and vitality. Red is truly a delightful colour to
deal with in shadowed interiors, its sensitiveness to light, changing from colour-tinted darkness
to palpitating ruby, and even to flame colour, on the slightest invitation of day-or lamp-light,
makes it like a living presence. It is especially valuable at the entrance of the home, where
it seems to meet one with almost a human welcome.

If we can succeed in making what would be a cold and unattractive entrance hospitable and cordial
by liberal use of warm and strong colour, by reversing the effort we can just as easily modify
the effect of glaring, or overpowering, sunlight.

Suppose the entrance-hall of the house to be upon the sunny side of the street, where in addition
to the natural effect of full rays of the sun there are also the reflections from innumerable
other house-fronts and house-windows.

In this case we must simulate shadow and mystery, and this can be done by the colour-tones
of blues and greens. I use these in the plural because the shadows of both are innumerable,
and because all, except perhaps turquoise and apple-green, are natural shadow-tints. Green
and blue can be used together or separately, according to the skill and what is called the
"colour-sense" with which they are applied.

To use them together requires not only observation of colour-occurrences in nature but sensitiveness
to the more subtle out-of-door effects, resulting from intermingling of shadows and reflection
of lights. Well done, it is one of the most beautiful and satisfactory of achievements, but
it may easily be bad by reason of sharp contrasts, or unmodified juxtaposition. 

They had been ready to make a social affair of the private view held in the "Maple Room" before
the auction. And now the whole spectacular business was capped by a sensation so dramatic
as to strain credulity to its limit. She could not believe it; yet here it was glaring at her
from the first page. Still--it might be an exaggeration, a mistake. She must go back to the beginning
and read it over slowly.

The striking of the hour hurried her. Shima's
announcement of dinner only sent her eyes faster down the page.

It will require little reflection to show that a hall skilfully treated with green or blue
tints would modify the colour of sunlight, without giving a sense of discord. It would be like
passing only from sunlight to grateful shadow, and this because in all art the actual representation
shadow-colour would be blue or green. The shadow of a tree falling upon snow on a sunny winter
day is blue. The shadow of a sunheated rock in summer is green, and the success of either of
these schemes of decoration would be because of adherence to an actual principle of colour,
or a knowledge of the peculiar qualities of certain colours and their proper use. It would
be an intelligent application of the medicinal or healing qualities of colour to the constitution
of the house, as skilful physicians use medicines to overcome constitutional defects or difficulties
in man.

This may be called corrective treatment of a room, and may, of course, include all the decorative
devices of ornament, design and furniture, and although it is not, strictly speaking, decoration,
it should certainly and always precede decoration.

It is sad to see an elaborate scheme of ornament based upon bad colour-treatment, and unfortunately
this not infrequently happens.

It is difficult to give a formula for the decoration of any room in relation to its colour-treatment,
except by a careful description of certain successful examples, each one of which illustrates
principles that may be of use to the amateur or student of the art.

One which occurs to me in this immediate connection is a dining-room in an apartment house,
where this room alone is absolutely without what may be called exterior light. Its two windows
open upon a well, the brick wall of which is scarcely ten feet away. Fortunately, it makes
a part of the home of a much travelled and exceedingly cultivated pair of beings, the business
of one being to create beauty in the way of pictures and the other of statues, so perhaps it
is less than a wonder that this square, unattractive well-room should have blossomed under
their hands into a dining-room perfect in colour, style, and fittings. As a background for herself
it struck her as incongruous.

Like a child looking at the landscape upside down, she felt herself in a foreign country. Yet it
was hers. She turned about to bring it into familiar association.
There was nothing wrong with it. The wood-work, including a five-foot wainscot of small square panels, is painted a
glittering varnished white which is warm in tone, but not creamy. The upper halves of the square
windows are of semi-opaque yellow glass, veined and variable, but clear enough everywhere to
admit a stained yellow light. Below these, thin yellow silk curtains cross each other, so that
the whole window-space radiates yellow light. If we reflect that the colour of sunlight is
yellow, we shall be able to see both the philosophy and the result of this treatment.

The wall above the wainscot is covered with a plain unbleached muslin, stencilled at the top
in a repeating design of faint yellow tile-like squares which fade gradually into white at
a foot below the ceiling. At intervals along the wall are water-colours of flat Holland meadows,
or blue canals, balanced on either side by a blue delft plate, and in a corner near the window
is a veritable blue porcelain stove, which once faintly warmed some far-off German interior.
The floor is polished oak, as are the table and chairs. I purposely leave out all the accessories
and devices of brass and silver, the quaint brass-framed mirrors, the ivy-encircled windows,
the one or two great ferns, the choice blue table-furniture:--because these are personal and
should neither be imitated or reduced to rules.

The lesson is in the use of yellow and white, accented with touches of blue, which converts
a dark and perfectly cheerless room into a glitter of light and warmth.

