1895

CHAPTER XXIII.

It was the 2d of January, 1805, exactly a month after the coronation, that I formed with the
eldest daughter of M. Charvet a union which has been, and will I trust ever be, the greatest
happiness of my life.  I promised the reader to say very little of myself; and, in fact, how
could he be interested in any details of my own private life which did not throw additional
light upon the character of the great man about whom I have undertaken to write?  Nevertheless,
I will ask permission to return for a little while to this, the most interesting of all periods
to me, and which exerted such an influence upon my whole life.  Surely he who recalls and relates
his souvenirs is not forbidden to attach some importance to those which most nearly concern
himself.  Moreover, even in the most personal events of my life, there were instances in which
their Majesties took a part, and which, from that fact, are of importance in enabling the reader
to form a correct estimate of the characters of both the Emperor and the Empress.

My wife's mother had been presented to Madame Bonaparte during the first campaign in Italy,
and she had been pleased with her; for Madame Bonaparte, who was so perfectly good, had, in
her own experience, also endured trials, and knew how to sympathize with the sorrows of others.

She promised to interest the General in the fate of my father-in-law, who had just lost his
place in the treasury.  During this time Madame Charvet was in correspondence with a friend
of her husband, who was, I think, the courier of General Bonaparte; and the latter having opened
and read these letters addressed to his courier, inquired who was this young woman that wrote
such interesting and intelligent letters, and Madame Charvet well deserved this double praise.
My father-in-law's friend, while replying to the question of the General-in-chief, took occasion
to relate the misfortunes of the family, and the General remarked that, on his return to Paris,
he wished to meet M. and Madame Charvet; in consequence of which they were presented to him,
and Madame Bonaparte rejoiced to learn that her protegees had also become those of her husband.
It had been decided that M. Charvet should follow the General to Egypt; but when my father-in-law
arrived at Toulon, Madame Bonaparte requested that he should accompany her to the waters of
Plombieres.  I have previously related the accident which occurred at Plombieres, and that
M. Charvet was sent to Saint-Germain to bring Mademoiselle Hortense from the boarding-school
to her mother.  On his return to Paris, M. Charvet searched through all the suburbs to find
a country-seat, as the General had charged his wife to purchase one during his absence.

When Madame Bonaparte decided on Malmaison, M. Charvet, his wife, and their three children
were installed in this charming residence.

My father-in-law was very faithful to the interests of these benefactors of his family, and
Madame Charvet often acted as private secretary to Madame Bonaparte.

Mademoiselle Louise, who became my wife, and Mademoiselle Zoe, her younger sister, were favorites
of Madame Bonaparte, especially the latter, who passed more time than Louise at Malmaison.
The condescension of their noble protectress had rendered this child so familiar, that she
said thou habitually to Madame Bonaparte.  One day she said to her, "Thou art happy.  Thou
hast no mamma to scold thee when thou tearest thy dresses."

During one of the campaigns that I made while in the service of the Emperor, I wrote to my
wife, inquiring about the life that her sister led at Malmaison.  In her answer, among other
things, she said (I copy a passage from one of her letters): "Sometimes we take part in performances
such as I had never dreamed of.  For instance, one evening the saloon was divided in half by
a gauze curtain, behind which was a bed arranged in Greek style, on which a man lay asleep,
clothed in long white drapery. Near the sleeper Madame Bonaparte and the other ladies beat
in unison (not in perfect accord, however) on bronze vases, making, as you may imagine, a terrible
kind of music.  During this charivari, one of the gentlemen held me around the waist, and raised
me from the ground, while I shook my arms and legs in time to the music.  The concert of these
ladies awoke the sleeper, who stared wildly at me, frightened at my gestures, then sprang up
and ran with all his might, followed by my brother, who crept on all fours, representing a
dog, I think, which belonged to this strange person.  As I was then a mere child, I have only
a confused idea of all this; but the society of Madame Bonaparte seemed to be much occupied
with similar amusements."

When the First Consul went to live at Saint-Cloud, he expressed his high opinion of my father-in-law
in the most flattering manner, and made him concierge of the chateau, which was a confidential
position, the duties and responsibilities of which were considerable.

M. Charvet was charged with organizing the household; and, by orders of the First Consul, he
selected from among the old servants of the queen those to whom he gave places as porters,
scrubbers, and grooms of the chateau, and he gave pensions to those unable to work.

When the chateau took fire in 1802, as I have related previously, Madame Charvet, being several
months pregnant, was terribly frightened; and as it was not thought best to bleed her, she
became very ill, and died at the age of thirty years.  Louise had been at a boarding-school
for several years; but her father now brought her home to keep house for him, though she was
then only twelve years old.  One of her friends has kindly allowed me to see a letter which
Louise addressed to her a short time after our marriage, and from which I have made the following
extracts:

     "On my return from boarding-school I went to see her Majesty the
     Empress (then Madame Bonaparte) at the Tuileries.  I was in deep
     mourning.  She took me on her knee, and tried to console me, saying
     that she would be a mother to me, and would find me a husband.  I
     wept, and said that I did not wish to marry.  Not at present,'
     replied her Majesty, I but that will come; be sure of it.  I was,
     however, by no means persuaded that this would be the case.  She
     caressed me a while longer, and I withdrew.  When the First Consul
     was at Saint-Cloud, all the chiefs of the different departments of
     the household service assembled in the apartments of my father, who
     was the most popular, as well as the eldest, member of the
     household.  M. Constant, who had seen me as a child at Malmaison,
     found me sufficiently attractive at Saint-Cloud to ask me of my
     father, subject to the approval of their Majesties; and it was
     decided that we should be married after the coronation.  I was
     fourteen years old fifteen days after our marriage.

     "Both my sister and I are always received with extreme kindness by
     her Majesty the Empress; and whenever, for fear of annoying her, we
     let some time pass without going to see her, she complains of it to
     my father.  She sometimes admits us to her morning toilet, which is
     conducted in our presence, and to which are admitted in her
     apartments only her women; and a few persons of her household, who,
     like us, count among their happiest moments those in which they can
     thus behold this adored princess.  The conversations are almost
     always delightful, and her Majesty frequently relates anecdotes
     which a word from one or another of us recalls to her."

Her Majesty the Empress had promised Louise a dowry; but the money which she intended for that
she spent otherwise, and consequently my wife had only a few jewels of little value and two
or three pieces of stuff.

M. Charvet was too refined to recall this promise to her Majesty's recollection.  However,
that was the only way to get anything from her; for she knew no better how to economize than
how to refuse.  The Emperor asked me a short time after my marriage what the Empress had given
my wife, and on my reply showed the greatest possible vexation; no doubt because the sum that
had been demanded of him for Louise's dowry had been spent otherwise.  His Majesty the Emperor
had the goodness, while on this subject, to assure me that he himself would hereafter look
after my interests, and that he was well satisfied with my services, and would prove it to me.

I have said above that my wife's younger sister was the favorite of her Majesty the Empress;
and yet she received on her marriage no richer dowry than Louise, nevertheless, the Empress
asked to have my sister-in-law's husband presented to her, and said to him in the most maternal
tone, "Monsieur, I recommend my daughter to you, and I entreat you to make her happy.  She
deserves it, and I earnestly hope that you know how to appreciate her!"  When my sister-in-law,
fleeing from Compiegne, in 1814, went with her husband's mother to Evreux for her confinement,
the Empress sent by her first valet de chambre every thing necessary for a young woman in that
condition, and, even reproached her with not having come to Navarre.

My sister-in-law had been reared in the same boarding-school as Mademoiselle Josephine Tallien,
god-daughter of the Empress, who has since married M. Pelet de la Lozere, and another daughter
of Madame Tallien, Mademoiselle Clemence Cabarus.  The school was conducted by Madame Vigogne,
widow of the colonel of that name, and an old friend of the Empress, who had advised her to
take a boarding-school, and promised to procure for her as many pupils as she could.  This
institution prospered under the direction of this lady, who was distinguished for her intelligence
and culture; and she frequently brought to the Empress these protegees, with other young persons
who by good conduct had earned this reward; and this was made a powerful means of exciting
the emulation of these children, whom her Majesty overwhelmed with caresses, and presented
with little gifts.

One morning just as Madame Vigogne was about to visit the Empress, and was descending the staircase
to enter her carriage, she heard piercing cries in one of the schoolrooms, and, hastening to
the spot, saw a young girl with her clothing on fire.  With a presence of mind worthy of a
mother, Madame Vigogne wrapped her pupil in the long train of her dress, and thus extinguished
the flames, not, however, until the hands of the courageous instructress had been most painfully
burned.  She made the visit to her Majesty in this condition, and related to her the sad accident
which had occurred; while her Majesty, who was easily moved by everything noble and generous,
overwhelmed her with praises for her courage, and was so deeply touched that she wept with
admiration, and ordered, her private physician to give his best services to Madame Vigogne
and her young pupil.

CHAPTER XXIV.

The Empress Josephine was of medium height, with an exquisite figure; and in all her movements
there was an airiness and grace which gave to her walk something ethereal, without detracting
from the majesty of the sovereign.  Her expressive countenance portrayed all the emotions of
her soul, while retaining the charming sweetness which was its ruling expression.  In pleasure,
as in grief, she was beautiful, and even against your will you would smile when she smiled;
if she was sad, you would be also.  Never did a woman justify better than she the expression
that the eyes are the mirror of the soul.  Hers were of a deep blue, and nearly always half
closed by her long lids, which were slightly arched, and fringed with the most beautiful lashes
in the world; in regarding her you felt yourself drawn to her by an irresistible power.  It
must have been difficult for the Empress to give severity to that seductive look; but she could
do this, and well knew how to render it imposing when necessary.  Her hair was very beautiful,
long and silken, its nut-brown tint contrasting exquisitely with the dazzling whiteness of
her fine fresh complexion.  At the commencement of her supreme power, the Empress still liked
to adorn her head in the morning with a red madras handkerchief, which gave her a most piquant
Creole air, and rendered her still more charming.

But what more than all else constituted the inexpressible charm of the Empress's presence were
the ravishing tones of her voice.  How many times have I, like many others, stopped suddenly
on hearing that voice; simply to enjoy the pleasure of listening to it.  It cannot perhaps
be said that the Empress was a strictly beautiful woman; but her lovely countenance, expressing
sweetness and good nature, and the angelic grace diffused around her person, made her the most
attractive of women.

During her stay at Saint-Cloud, the Empress rose habitually at nine o'clock, and made her first
toilet, which lasted till ten; then she passed into a saloon, where she found assembled those
persons who had solicited and obtained the favor of an audience; and sometimes also at this
hour, and in the same saloon, her Majesty received her tradespeople; and at eleven o'clock,
when the Emperor was absent, she breakfasted with her first lady of honor and a few others.
Madame de la Rochefoucauld, first lady of honor to the Empress, was a hunchback, and so small
that it was necessary, when she was to have a place at the table, to heighten the seat of her
chair by another very thick cushion made of violet satin. Madame de la Rochefoucauld knew well
how to efface, by means of her bright and sparkling, though somewhat caustic wit, her striking
elegance, and her exquisite court manners, any unpleasant impression which might be made by
her physical deformity.

Before breakfast the Empress had a game of billiards; or, when the weather was good, she walked
in the gardens or in the inclosed park, which recreation lasted only a short while, and her
Majesty soon returned to her apartments, and occupied herself with embroidery, while talking
with her ladies, like herself, occupied with some kind of needlework. When it happened that
they were not interrupted by visits, between two and three o'clock in the afternoon the Empress
took a drive in an open barouche; and on her return from this the grand toilet took place,
at which the Emperor was sometimes present.

Now and then, also, his Majesty surprised the Empress in her saloon; and we were sure to find
him, on those occasions, amusing, amiable, and in fine spirits.

At six o'clock dinner was served; this the Emperor frequently forgot, and delayed it indefinitely,
in consequence of which dinner was more than once eaten at nine or ten o'clock in the evening.
Their Majesties dined together alone, or in the company of a few invited guests, princes of
the imperial family, or ministers, after which there was a concert, reception, or the theater;
and at midnight every one retired except the Empress, who greatly enjoyed sitting up late,
and then played backgammon with one of the chamberlains.  The Count de Beaumont was thus honored
most frequently.

On the days of the chase the Empress and her ladies followed in the coach.  They had a special
costume for this occasion, consisting of a kind of green riding-habit, and a hat ornamented
with white plumes.  All the ladies who followed the chase dined with their Majesties.

