MA PETTENGILL

by

HARRY LEON WILSON

Author of Bunker Bean, Ruggles of Red Gap, Somewhere in Red Gap, etc.

1919

TO WILLIAM EUGENE LEWIS

CONTENTS

       I. MA PETTENGILL AND THE ANIMAL KINGDOM

      II. A LOVE STORY

     III. RED GAP AND THE BIG-LEAGUE STUFF

      IV. VENDETTA

       V. ONE ARROWHEAD DAY

      VI. THE PORCH WREN

     VII. CHANGE OF VENUS

    VIII. CAN HAPPEN!

      IX. THE TAKER-UP

       X. AS TO HERMAN WAGNER

      XI. CURLS

I

MA PETTENGILL AND THE ANIMAL KINGDOM

From the Arrowhead corrals I strolled up the poplar-bordered lane that leads past the bunk
house to the castle of the ranch's chatelaine. I said that father is in Paris while mother is in Austria and i cant wait
till they reached home.Once permission are granted by them, i will take appropiate actions. Father
asked about the medical certificate which i had took for the time being.It was an unproved
statement even for war cases. Philips took it without the other's consent and he was making
false accusations against his sibilings.

Then Philips held his mother's hand, speaking at a calm tone to her
saying "

Mother, it's just war and what a war is it!" No one at home is able
to fight at war which includes father,ludwig,the sisters and myself.

Mother was quiet for awhile and she thought " the englishman contains
world of enemies"

They sat at the table. Mother looked at Philip, going back to and
forth, providing the exhausted-looking traveller in a loving manner.
Philip the future soldier who wish to serve the nation became the
man of the war.

On 4th August, mother and I are on the estate of our grandparents with father's company. However,
he had to leave due to mother's health which lasted for the whole
vacation.

       The place was beautiful together with grandparents.

Grandmother gave me a lovely little room. Grandfather,an officer who was in the seventies war explained
to us about the news of the war.

This time round, i experienced war with father and we were all overjoyed.

That day, he contacted us via telegraph that he will visit us on the way home from Berlin. Though
he had left, we were satisfied when he visited us. We will always remember his words. I'm happy
and proud that father had witnessed everything. I was filled with
enthusiam and tears.

Father came from Berlin because of the war and they had a reunion
with the members from Reichstag.

This must be one of the special times compared to the ordinary times they had together
 I could
believe it or not, but that was the simple facts of the matter when all was said and done.
And the Chink was only too glad to show off how smart he was with a pair of needles.

This not only explained nothing but suggested that there might indeed be something to explain.
And it was Sandy's employer after all who resolved his woolen difficulty. She called to him
as he would have left me for the path to the kitchen door:

"You bring that right here!"

It was the tone of one born to command, and once was enough. Sandy brought it right there,
though going rather too much like a martyr to the stake, I thought; for surely it was not shameful
that he should prove inept in the new craft.

Nor was there aught but genial kindness in the lady's reception of him. Ma Pettengill, arrayed
in Sabbath bravery of apparel, as of a debutante at a summer hotel where the rates are exorbitant,
instantly laid by her own knitting and questioned him soothingly. It seemed to be a simple
difficulty. Sandy had reached the point where a sweater must have a neck, and had forgotten
his instructions. Cordially the woman aided him to subtract fourteen from two hundred and sixty-two
and then to ascertain that one hundred and twenty-four would be precisely half of the remainder.
It was all being done, as I have remarked, with the gentlest considering kindness, with no
hint of that bitterness which the neophyte had shown himself to be fearing in the lady. Was
she not kindness itself? Was she not, in truth, just a shade too kind? Surely there was a purr
to her voice, odd, unwonted; and surely her pupil already cringed under a lash that impended.

Yet this visible strain, it seemed, had not to do with knitted garments. Ma Pettengill praised
the knitting of Sandy; praised it to me and praised it to him. Of course her remark that he
seemed to be a born knitter and ought to devote his whole time to it might have seemed invidious
to a sensitive cowman, yet it was uttered with flawless geniality. But when Sandy, being set
right, would have taken his work and retired, as was plainly his eager wish, his mentor said
she would knit two of the new short rows herself, just to make sure. And while she knitted
these two rows she talked. She knitted them quickly, though the time must have seemed to Sandy
much longer than it was.

"Here stands the greatest original humorist in Kulanche County," said the lady, with no longer
a purring note in her voice. She boomed the announcement. Sandy, drooping above her, painfully
wore the affectation of counting each stitch of the flashing needles. "And practical jokes--my
sakes alive! He can think of the funniest jokes to put up on poor, unsuspecting people! Yes,
sir; got a genius for it. And witty! Of course it ain't just what he says that's so funny--it's
the noisy way he says it.

"And you wouldn't think it to look at him, but he's one of these here financial magnets, too.
Oh, yes, indeed! Send him out with a hatful of ten-dollar bills any day and he won't let one
of 'em go for a cent under six dollars, not if buyers is plenty--he's just that keen and avaricious.
That's his way. Never trained for it, either; just took it up natural."

With drawn and ashen face Mr. Sawtelle received back his knitting. His pose was to appear vastly
preoccupied and deaf to insult. He was still counting stitches as he turned away and clattered
down the steps.

"Say!" called his employer. Sandy turned.

"Yes, ma'am!"

"You seen the party that stopped here this morning in that big, pompous touring car?"

"No, ma'am!"

"They was after mules."

"Yes, ma'am!"

"They offered me five hundred dollars a span for mine."

"No, ma'am--I mean, yes, ma'am!"

"That's all. I thought you'd rejoice to know it." The lady turned to me as if Mr. Sawtelle
had left us. "Yes, sir; he'd make you die laughing with some of his pranks, that madcap would.
I tell you, when he begins cutting up--"

But Mr. Sawtelle was leaving us rapidly. His figure seemed to be drawn in, as if he would appear
smaller to us. Ma Pettengill seized her own knitting once more, stared grimly at it, then stared
grimly down at the bunk house, within which her victim had vanished. A moment later she was
pouring tobacco from a cloth sack into a brown cigarette paper. She drew the string of the
sack--one end between her teeth--rolled the cigarette with one swift motion and, as she waited
the blaze of her match, remarked that they had found a substitute for everything but the mule.
The cigarette lighted, she burned at least a third of its length in one vast inhalation, which
presently caused twin jets of smoke to issue from the rather widely separated corners of a
generous mouth. Upon which she remarked that old Safety First Timmins was a game winner, about
the gamest winner she'd ever lost to.

Three other mighty inhalations and the cigarette was done. Again she took up the knitting,
pausing for but one brief speech before the needles began their shrewd play. This concerned
the whale. She said the whale was the noblest beast left to us in all the animal kingdom and
would vanish like the buffalo if treated as food. She said it was shameful to reduce this majestic
creature of the deep to the dimensions of a chafing dish and a three-cornered slice of toast.
Then she knitted.

She had left numerous openings; some humorous emprise of Sandy Sawtelle, presumably distressing;
the gameness of one Timmins as a winner; the whale as a food animal; the spectacular price
of mules broken to harness. Rather than choose blindly among them I spoke of my day's fishing.
Departing at sunrise I had come in with a bounteous burden of rainbow trout, which I now said
would prove no mean substitute for meat at the evening meal.

Then, as she grimly knitted, Ma Pettengill discoursed of other boasted substitutes for meat,
none of which pleased her. Hogs and sheep were other substitutes, there being but one genuine
meat, to wit, Beef. Take hogs; mean, unsociable animals, each hog going off by himself, cursing
and swearing every step of the way. Had I ever seen a hog that thought any other hog was good
enough to associate with him? No, I hadn't; nor nobody else. A good thing hogs couldn't know
their present price. Stuck up enough already! And sheep? Silly. No minds of their own. Let
one die and all the rest think they got to die also. Do it too. No brain. Of course the price
tempted a lot of moral defectives to raise 'em, but when you reflected that you had to go afoot,
with a dog that was smarter than any man at it, and a flea-bitten burro for your mess wagon---not
for her. Give her a business where you could set on a horse. Yes, sir; people would get back
to Nature and raise beef after the world had been made safe once more for a healthy appetite.
This here craze for substitutes would die out. You couldn't tell her there was any great future
for the canned jack-rabbit business, for instance--just a fad; and whales the same. She knew
and I knew that a whale was too big to eat. People couldn't get any real feeling for it, and
not a chance on earth to breed 'em up and improve the flesh. Wasn't that the truth? And these
here diet experts, with their everlasting talk about carbos and hydrates, were they doing a
thing but simply taking all the romance out of food? 

Wiseli did not know what to say it, it was not been to school today and it did not know what to
do. It was at all completely out of order and form. "When can I expect, so you must too, or
then I do's not," cried the Cheppi again. Wiseli stayed maeuschenstill. Sun Cheppi would have
for a time his evil beings breath again, if not already the father would have come back from
the stable. He brought in two large, empty Futtersaecke on the shoulder and came to be on
the table.

"Make way," he said to Cheppi who kept propped his elbows on the table and the Head in the hands
supported. Then he spread out the bags, folded them again and again. He then went to the stove
and put the package out. "So," he said satisfied, "that's good.

And where did you get your bundle, kid?"

Wiseli it took out from a corner where it had lain until now, and
looked with astonishment how his uncle, the bundle at the upper end
of the package pushed the stove out that it is not quite spherical
stay.

"So, there you can sleep," he now said to Wiseli. "Do not you have to freeze, the furnace is
hot, and you may put the bundle on his head. So you're lying like a blanket. And you is three's
about time. Quickly to bed, "Then he took the oil lamp from the table
and went the kitchen, the three boys stomped after him.

At the door he turned once more around and said, ". Sleep well did not have to think today
because it is then much better."
Then he went out. The aunt had not heard any case, because she was
already half outside, as she wished good night, and had closed the
door behind himself. It was now the same way and sat on his bed. And the night before he's going to put his eighteen thousand into this lovely rubber stock
that will net him two hundred per cent, at the very lowest, on the capitalist's word of honour,
what does he do but sneak out and take the train for home on his return ticket that he'd made
the capitalist buy him.

"Ever talk to one of these rich capitalists that has rubber stock for sale in South America
or a self-starting banana orchard? You know how good they are.

"You're certainly entitled to anything of your own that you've kept after they get through
with you. And would you think that this poor, simple-minded old rancher would be any match
for their wiles? But if you knew he had been a match and had nicked 'em for at least three
hundred dollars, would you still think something malignant might be put over on him by a mere
scrub buckeroo named Sandy Sawtelle, that never made a cent in his life except by the most
degrading manual labour? No, you wouldn't. No fair-minded judge of criminals would.

"But I admit I had a weak moment. Yes, sir; for a brief spell I was all too human. Or I guess
what it was. I was all blinded up with immoral designs, this here snake-blooded Timmins having
put things over on me in stock deals from time to time till I'd got to lying awake nights thinking
how I could make a believer of him. I wanted him to know there is a God, even if it hadn't
ever seemed so to him.

"Of course I knew it would have to be some high-grade felony, he being proof against common
depredations. "Is it you got used differently? I'm not in the sense that
to Change. "

"It's probably better if the smaller first a little left in peace. He was not a must Scare, "said
the uncle, soothingly." It will be better. "

Now let it continue Wiseli alone, according to the others. The table was quickly back in Order.
The potato skins were heruntergewischt with their hands in the empty
milk tank, then washed off the slate, and when the aunt was done,
she said to Wiseli: "You have seen how I do's, which you can do from
now on."

And down at the table to set, on which was the dim oil lamp, did not dare.
"You can also do something," cried suddenly Cheppi incensed over
to him, "you are not the cleverest in the school. "e smaller first a little left in peace. He was not a must Scare, "said
the uncle, soothingly." It will be better. "

Now let it continue Wiseli alone, according to the others. The table was quickly back in Order.
The potato skins were heruntergewischt with their hands in the empty
milk tank, then washed off the slate, and when the aunt was done,
she said to Wiseli: "You have seen how I do's, which you can do from
now on."

And down at the table to set, on which was the dim oil lamp, did not dare.
"You can also do something," cried suddenly Cheppi incensed over
to him, "you are not the cleverest in the school. "

It merely brought more about mules. Five hundred dollars a span for mules looked good until
you remembered that you needed 'em worse than the other party did. She had to keep her twenty
span of old reliables because, what with the sailors and section hands you got nowadays to
do your haying, you had to have tame mules. Give 'em any other kind and they'd desert the ship
the minute a team started to run. It cost too much for wagon repairs.

Silence again.

