The ironical promiscuity of death had brought Mrs. Aubyn back to share the narrow hospitality
of her husband's last lodging; but though Glennard knew she had been buried near New York he
had never visited her grave. He was oppressed, as he now threaded the long avenues, by a chilling
vision of her return. There was no family to follow her hearse; she had died alone, as she
had lived; and the "distinguished mourners" who had formed the escort of the famous writer
knew nothing of the woman they were committing to the grave. Glennard could not even remember
at what season she had been buried; but his mood indulged the fancy that it must have been
on some such day of harsh sunlight, the incisive February brightness that gives perspicuity
without warmth. The white avenues stretched before him interminably, lined with stereotyped
emblems of affliction, as though all the platitudes ever uttered had been turned to marble
and set up over the unresisting dead. Here and there, no doubt, a frigid urn or an insipid
angel imprisoned some fine-fibred grief, as the most hackneyed words may become the vehicle
of rare meanings; but for the most part the endless alignment of monuments seemed to embody
those easy generalizations about death that do not disturb the repose of the living. Glennard's
eye, as he followed the way indicated to him, had instinctively sought some low mound with
a quiet headstone. He had forgotten that the dead seldom plan their own houses, and with a
pang he discovered the name he sought on the cyclopean base of a granite shaft rearing its
aggressive height at the angle of two avenues.

"How she would have hated it!" he murmured.

A bench stood near and he seated himself. The monument rose before him like some pretentious
uninhabited dwelling; he could not believe that Margaret Aubyn lay there. It was a Sunday morning
and black figures moved among the paths, placing flowers on the frost-bound hillocks. Glennard
noticed that the neighboring graves had been thus newly dressed; and he fancied a blind stir
of expectancy through the sod, as though the bare mounds spread a parched surface to that commemorative
rain. He rose presently and walked back to the entrance of the cemetery. Several greenhouses
stood near the gates, and turning in at the first he asked for some flowers.

"Anything in the emblematic line?" asked the anaemic man behind the dripping counter.

Glennard shook his head.

"Just cut flowers? This way, then." The florist unlocked a glass door and led him down a moist
green aisle. The hot air was choked with the scent of white azaleas, white lilies, white lilacs;
all the flowers were white; they were like a prolongation, a mystical efflorescence, of the
long rows of marble tombstones, and their perfume seemed to cover an odor of decay. The rich
atmosphere made Glennard dizzy. As he leaned in the doorpost, waiting for the flowers, he had
a penetrating sense of Margaret Aubyn's nearness--not the imponderable presence of his inner
vision, but a life that beat warm in his arms....

The sharp air caught him as he stepped out into it again. He walked back and scattered the
flowers over the grave. The edges of the white petals shrivelled like burnt paper in the cold;
and as he watched them the illusion of her nearness faded, shrank back frozen.

XII

The motive of his visit to the cemetery remained undefined save as a final effort of escape
from his wife's inexpressive acceptance of his shame. It seemed to him that as long as he could
keep himself alive to that shame he would not wholly have succumbed to its consequences. His
chief fear was that he should become the creature of his act. His wife's indifference degraded
him; it seemed to put him on a level with his dishonor. Margaret Aubyn would have abhorred
the deed in proportion to her pity for the man. The sense of her potential pity drew him back
to her. The one woman knew but did not understand; the other, it sometimes seemed, understood
without knowing.

In its last disguise of retrospective remorse, his self-pity affected a desire for solitude
and meditation. He lost himself in morbid musings, in futile visions of what life with Margaret
Aubyn might have been. There were moments when, in the strange dislocation of his view, the
wrong he had done her seemed a tie between them.

To indulge these emotions he fell into the habit, on Sunday afternoons, of solitary walks prolonged
till after dusk. The days were lengthening, there was a touch of spring in the air, and his
wanderings now usually led him to the Park and its outlying regions.

One Sunday, tired of aimless locomotion, he took a cab at the Park gates and let it carry him
out to the Riverside Drive. It was a gray afternoon streaked with east wind. Glennard's cab
advanced slowly, and as he leaned back, gazing with absent intentness at the deserted paths
that wound under bare boughs between grass banks of premature vividness, his attention was
arrested by two figures walking ahead of him. This couple, who had the path to themselves,
moved at an uneven pace, as though adapting their gait to a conversation marked by meditative
intervals. Now and then they paused, and in one of these pauses the lady, turning toward her
companion, showed Glennard the outline of his wife's profile. The man was Flamel.

The blood rushed to Glennard's forehead. He sat up with a jerk and pushed back the lid in the
roof of the hansom; but when the cabman bent down he dropped into his seat without speaking.
Then, becoming conscious of the prolonged interrogation of the lifted lid, he called out--"Turn--drive
back--anywhere--I'm in a hurry--"

As the cab swung round he caught a last glimpse of the two figures. They had not moved; Alexa,
with bent head, stood listening.

"My God, my God--" he groaned.

It was hideous--it was abominable--he could not understand it. The woman was nothing to him--less
than nothing--yet the blood hummed in his ears and hung a cloud before him. He knew it was
only the stirring of the primal instinct, that it had no more to do with his reasoning self
than any reflex impulse of the body; but that merely lowered anguish to disgust. Yes, it was
disgust he felt--almost a physical nausea. The poisonous fumes of life were in his lungs. He
was sick, unutterably sick....

He drove home and went to his room. They were giving a little dinner that night, and when he
came down the guests were arriving. He looked at his wife: her beauty was extraordinary, but
it seemed to him the beauty of a smooth sea along an unlit coast. She frightened him.

He sat late that night in his study. He heard the parlor-maid lock the front door; then his
wife went upstairs and the lights were put out. His brain was like some great empty hall with
an echo in it; one thought reverberated endlessly.... At length he drew his chair to the table
and began to write. He addressed an envelope and then slowly re-read what he had written.

"MY DEAR FLAMEL,"

"Many apologies for not sending you sooner the enclosed check, which represents the customary
percentage on the sale of the Letters."

"Trusting you will excuse the oversight,

"Yours truly,

"STEPHEN GLENNARD."

He let himself out of the darkened house and dropped the letter in the post-box at the corner.

The next afternoon he was detained late at his office, and as he was preparing to leave he
heard someone asking for him in the outer room. He seated himself again and Flamel was shown in.

The two men, as Glennard pushed aside an obstructive chair, had a moment to measure each other;
then Flamel advanced, and drawing out his note-case, laid a slip of paper on the desk.

"My dear fellow, what on earth does this mean?" Glennard recognized his check.

"That I was remiss, simply. It ought to have gone to you before."

Flamel's tone had been that of unaffected surprise, but at this his accent changed and he asked,
quickly: "On what ground?"

Glennard had moved away from the desk and stood leaning against the calf-backed volumes of
the bookcase. "On the ground that you sold Mrs. Aubyn's letters for me, and that I find the
intermediary in such cases is entitled to a percentage on the sale."

Flamel paused before answering. "You find, you say. It's a recent discovery?"

"Obviously, from my not sending the check sooner. You see I'm new to the business."

"And since when have you discovered that there was any question of business, as far as I was
concerned?"

Glennard flushed and his voice rose slightly. "Are you reproaching me for not having remembered
it sooner?"

Flamel, who had spoken in the rapid repressed tone of a man on the verge of anger, stared a
moment at this and then, in his natural voice, rejoined, good-humoredly, "Upon my soul, I don't
understand you!"

The change of key seemed to disconcert Glennard. "It's simple enough--" he muttered.

"Simple enough--your offering me money in return for a friendly service? I don't know what
your other friends expect!"

"Some of my friends wouldn't have undertaken the job. Those who would have done so would probably
have expected to be paid."

He lifted his eyes to Flamel and the two men looked at each other. Flamel had turned white
and his lips stirred, but he held his temperate note. "If you mean to imply that the job was
not a nice one, you lay yourself open to the retort that you proposed it. But for my part I've
never seen, I never shall see, any reason for not publishing the letters."

"That's just it!"

"What--?"

"The certainty of your not seeing was what made me go to you. When a man's got stolen goods
to pawn he doesn't take them to the police-station."

"Stolen?" Flamel echoed. "The letters were stolen?"

Glennard burst into a coarse laugh. "How much longer to you expect me to keep up that pretence
about the letters? You knew well enough they were written to me."

Flamel looked at him in silence. "Were they?" he said at length. "I didn't know it."

"And didn't suspect it, I suppose," Glennard sneered.

The other was again silent; then he said, "I may remind you that, supposing I had felt any
curiosity about the matter, I had no way of finding out that the letters were written to you.
You never showed me the originals."

"What does that prove? There were fifty ways of finding out. It's the kind of thing one can
easily do."

Flamel glanced at him with contempt. "Our ideas probably differ as to what a man can easily
do. It would not have been easy for me."

Glennard's anger vented itself in the words uppermost in his thought. "It may, then, interest
you to hear that my wife DOES know about the letters--has known for some months...."

"Ah," said the other, slowly. Glennard saw that, in his blind clutch at a weapon, he had seized
the one most apt to wound. Flamel's muscles were under control, but his face showed the undefinable
change produced by the slow infiltration of poison. Every implication that the words contained
had reached its mark; but Glennard felt that their obvious intention was lost in the anguish
of what they suggested. He was sure now that Flamel would never have betrayed him; but the
inference only made a wider outlet for his anger. He paused breathlessly for Flamel to speak.

"If she knows, it's not through me." It was what Glennard had waited for.

