These kind attempts served only to feed and nourish that melancholy which pined within his
bosom.  Monimia still haunted him in the midst of these amusements, while his reflection whispered
to him, "Pleasures like these I might have relished with her participation."  That darling
idea mingled in all the female assemblies at which he was present, eclipsing their attractions,
and enhancing the bitterness of his loss; for absence, enthusiasm, and even his despair had
heightened the charms of the fair orphan into something supernatural and divine.

Time, that commonly weakens the traces of remembrance, seemed to deepen its impressions in
his breast; nightly, in his dreams, did he converse with his dear Monimia, sometimes on the
verdant bank of a delightful stream, where he breathed, in soft murmurs, the dictates of his
love and admiration; sometimes reclined within the tufted grove, his arm encircled and sustained
her snowy neck, whilst she, with looks of love ineffable, gazed on his face, invoking Heaven
to bless her husband and her lord. Yet, even in these illusions was his fancy oft alarmed for
the ill-fated fair.  Sometimes he viewed her tottering on the brink of a steep precipice, far
distant from his helping hand; at other times she seemed to sail along the boisterous tide,
imploring his assistance, then would he start with horror from his sleep, and feel his sorrows
more than realised; he deserted his couch, he avoided the society of mankind, he courted sequestered
shades where he could indulge his melancholy; there his mind brooded over his calamity until
his imagination became familiar with all the ravages of death; it contemplated the gradual
decline of Monimia's health, her tears, her distress, her despair at his imagined cruelty;
he saw, through that perspective, every blossom of her beauty wither, every sparkle vanish
from her eyes; he beheld her faded lips, her pale cheek, and her inanimated features, the symmetry
of which not death itself was able to destroy.  His fancy conveyed her breathless corse to
the cold grave, o'er which, perhaps, no tear humane was shed, where her delicate limbs were
consigned to dust, where she was dished out a delicious banquet to the unsparing worm.

Over these pictures he dwelt with a sort of pleasing anguish, until he became so enamoured
of her tomb, that he could no longer resist the desire that compelled him to make a pilgrimage
to the dear hallowed spot, where all his once gay hopes lay buried; that he might nightly visit
the silent habitation of his ruined love, embrace the sacred earth with which she was now compounded,
moisten it with his tears, and bid the turf lie easy on her breast.  Besides the prospect of
this gloomy enjoyment, he was urged to return to England, by an eager desire of taking vengeance
on the perfidious Fathom, as well as of acquitting himself of the obligations he owed in that
kingdom, to those who had assisted him in his distress.  He therefore communicated his intention
to Farrel, who would have insisted upon attending him in the journey, had not he been conjured
to stay and manage Renaldo's affairs in his absence.  Every previous step being taken, he took
leave of the Countess and his sister, who had, with all their interest and elocution, opposed
his design, the execution of which, they justly feared, would, instead of dissipating, augment
his chagrin; and now, seeing him determined, they shed a flood of tears at his departure, and
he set out from Vienna in a post-chaise, accompanied by a trusty valet-de-chambre on horseback.

As this domestic was very well qualified for making all the proper dispositions, and adjusting
every necessary article on the road, Renaldo totally abstracted himself from earthly considerations,
and mused without ceasing on that theme which was the constant subject of his contemplation.
He was blind to the objects that surrounded him; he scarce ever felt the importunities of nature;
and had not they been reinforced by the pressing entreaties of his attendant, he would have
proceeded without refreshment or repose.  In this absence of mind did he traverse a great part
of Germany, in his way to the Austrian Netherlands, and arrived at the fortress of Luxemburg,
where he was obliged to tarry a whole day on account of an accident which had happened to his
chaise. Here he went to view the fortifications; and as he walked along the ramparts, his ears
were saluted with these words: "Heaven bless the noble Count de Melvil! will not he turn the
eyes of compassion on an old fellow-soldier reduced to misfortune and disgrace?"

Surprised at this address, which was attended with the clanking of chains, Renaldo lifted up
his eyes, and perceived the person who spoke to be one of two malefactors shackled together,
who had been sentenced for some crime to work as labourers on the fortifications.  His face
was so covered with hair, and his whole appearance so disguised by the squalid habit which
he wore, that the Count could not recollect his features, until he gave him to understand that
his name was Ratchcali. Melvil immediately recognised his fellow-student at Vienna, and his
brother-volunteer upon the Rhine, and expressed equal surprise and concern at seeing him in
such a deplorable situation.

Nothing renders the soul so callous and insensible as the searing brands of infamy and disgrace.
Without betraying the least symptoms of shame or confusion, "Count," says he, "this is the
fate of war, at least of the war in which I have been engaged, ever since I took leave of the
Imperial army, and retreated with your old companion Fathom.  Long life to that original genius!
If he is not unhappily eclipsed by some unfortunate interposition, before his terrene parts
are purified, I foresee that he will shine a star of the first magnitude in the world of adventure."

At mention of this detested name, Renaldo's heart began to throb with indignation; yet he suppressed
the emotion, and desired to know the meaning of that splendid encomium which he had bestowed
upon his confederate.  "It would be quite unnecessary," replied Ratchcali, "for a man in my
present situation to equivocate or disguise the truth.  The nature of my disgrace is perfectly
well known.  I am condemned to hard labour for life; and unless some lucky accident, which
I cannot now foresee, shall intervene, all I can expect is some alleviation of my hard lot
from the generosity of such gentlemen as you, who compassionate the sufferings of your fellow-creatures.
In order to engage your benevolence the more in my behalf, I shall, if you will give me the
hearing, faithfully inform you of some particulars, which it may import you to know, concerning
my old acquaintance Ferdinand Count Fathom, whose real character hath perhaps hitherto escaped
your notice."

Then he proceeded to give a regular detail of all the strokes of finesse which he, in conjunction
with our adventurer, had practised upon Melvil and others, during their residence at Vienna,
and the campaigns they had made upon the Rhine.  He explained the nature of the robbery which
was supposed to have been done by the Count's valet, together with the manner of their desertion.
He described his separation from Fathom, their meeting at London, the traffic they carried
on in copartnership; and the misfortune that reduced Ferdinand to the condition in which he
was found by Melvil.

"After having gratified the honest lawyer," said he, "with a share of the unfortunate Fathom's
spoils, and packed up all my own valuable effects, my new auxiliary Maurice and I posted to
Harwich, embarked in the packet-boat, and next day arrived at Helvoetsluys; from thence we
repaired to the Hague, in order to mingle in the gaieties of the place, and exercise our talents
at play, which is there cultivated with universal eagerness.  But, chancing to meet with an
old acquaintance, whom I did not at all desire to see, I found it convenient to withdraw softly
to Rotterdam; from whence we set out for Antwerp; and, having made a tour of the Austrian Netherlands,
set up our rest at Brussels, and concerted a plan for laying the Flemings under contribution.

"From our appearance we procured admission into the most polite assemblies, and succeeded to
a wonder in all our operations; until our career was unfortunately checked by the indiscretion
of my ally, who, being detected in the very act of conveying a card, was immediately introduced
to a magistrate.  And this minister of justice was so curious, inquisitive, and clear-sighted,
that Count Maurice, finding it impossible to elude his penetration, was fain to stipulate for
his own safety, by giving up his friend to the cognisance of the law.  I was accordingly apprehended,
before I knew the cause of my arrest; and being unhappily known by some soldiers of the Prince's
guard, my character turned out so little to the approbation of the inquisitors, that all my
effects were confiscated for the benefit of the state, and I was by a formal sentence condemned
to labour on the fortifications all the days of my life; while Maurice escaped at the expense
of five hundred stripes, which he received in public from the hands of the common executioner.

"Thus have I, without evasion or mental reservation, given a faithful account of the steps
by which I have arrived at this barrier, which is likely to be the ne plus ultra of my peregrinations,
unless the generous Count de Melvil will deign to interpose his interest in behalf of an old
fellow-soldier, who may yet live to justify his mediation."

Renaldo had no reason to doubt the truth of this story, every circumstance of which tended
to corroborate the intelligence he had already received touching the character of Fathom, whom
he now considered with a double portion of abhorrence, as the most abandoned miscreant that
nature had ever produced.  Though Ratchcali did not possess a much higher place in his opinion,
he favoured him with marks of his bounty, and exhorted him, if possible, to reform his heart;
but he would by no means promise to interpose his credit in favour of a wretch self-convicted
of such enormous villany and fraud.  He could not help moralising upon this rencontre, which
inspired him with great contempt for human nature.  And next day he proceeded on his journey
with a heavy heart, ruminating on the perfidy of mankind, and, between whiles, transported
with the prospect of revenging all his calamities upon the accursed author.

While he was wrapped up in these reveries, his carriage rolled along, and had already entered
a wood between Mons and Tournay, when his dream was suddenly interrupted by the explosion of
several pistols that were fired among the thickets at a little distance from the road.  Roused
at this alarm, he snatched his sword that stood by him, and springing from the chaise, ran
directly towards the spot, being close followed by his valet, who had alighted and armed himself
with a pistol in each hand.  About forty yards from the highway, they arrived in a little glade
or opening, where they saw a single man standing at bay against five banditti, after having
killed one of their companions, and lost his own horse, that lay dead upon the ground.

Melvil seeing this odds, and immediately guessing their design, rushed among them without hesitation,
and in an instant ran his sword through the heart of one whose hand was raised to smite the
gentleman behind, while he was engaged with the rest in front.  At the same time the valet
disabled another by a shot in the shoulder; so that the number being now equal on both sides,
a furious combat ensued, every man being paired with an antagonist, and each having recourse
to swords, as all their pieces had been discharged.  Renaldo's adversary, finding himself pressed
with equal fury and skill, retreated gradually among the trees, until he vanished altogether
into the thickest of the wood; and his two companions followed his example with great ease,
the valet-de-chambre being hurt in the leg, and the stranger so much exhausted by the wounds
he had received before Renaldo's interposition, that, when the young gentleman approached to
congratulate him on the defeat of the robbers, he, in advancing to embrace his deliverer, dropped
down motionless on the grass.

The Count, with that warmth of sympathy and benevolence which was natural to his heart, lifted
up the wounded cavalier in his arms, and carried him to the chaise, in which he was deposited,
while the valet-de-chambre reloaded his pistols, and prepared for a second attack, as they
did not doubt that the banditti would return with a reinforcement.  However, before they reappeared,
Renaldo's driver disengaged him from the wood, and in less than a quarter of an hour they arrived
at a village, where they halted for assistance to the stranger, who, though still alive, had
not recovered the use of his senses.

After he was undressed, and laid in a warm bed, a surgeon examined his body, and found a wound
in his neck by a sword, and another in his right side, occasioned by a pistol-shot; so that
his prognostic was very dubious.  Meanwhile, he applied proper dressings to both; and, in half
an hour after this administration, the gentleman gave some tokens of perception.  He looked
around him with a wildness of fury in his aspect, as if he had thought himself in the hands
of the robbers by whom he had been attacked.  But, when he saw the assiduity with which the
bystanders exerted themselves in his behalf, one raising his head from the pillow, while another
exhorted him to swallow a little wine which was warmed for the purpose; when he beheld the
sympathising looks of all present, and heard himself accosted in the most cordial terms by
the person whom he recollected as his deliverer, all the severity vanished from his countenance;
he took Renaldo's hand, and pressed it to his lips; and, while the tears gushed from his eyes,
"Praised be God," said he, "that virtue and generosity are still to be found among the sons
of men."

Everybody in the apartment was affected by this exclamation; and Melvil, above all the rest,
felt such emotions as he could scarcely restrain.  He entreated the gentleman to believe himself
in the midst of such friends as would effectually secure him from all violence and mortification;
he conjured him to compose the perturbation of his spirits, and quiet the apprehensions of
his mind with that reflection; and protested, that he himself would not quit the house while
his attendance should be deemed necessary for the stranger's cure, or his conversation conducive
to his amusement.

These assurances, considered with the heroic part which the young Hungarian had already acted
in his behalf, inspired the cavalier with such a sublime idea of Melvil, that he gazed upon
him with silent astonishment, as an angel sent from heaven for his succour; and, in the transport
of his gratitude, could not help exclaiming, "Sure Providence hath still something in reserve
for this unfortunate wretch, in whose favour such a miracle of courage and generosity hath
interposed!"

Being accommodated with proper care and attendance, his constitution in a little time overcame
the fever; and, at the third dressing, the surgeon declared him out of all danger from his
wounds.  Then was Renaldo indulged with opportunities of conversing with the patient, and of
inquiring into the particulars of his fortune and designs in life, with a view to manifest
the inclination he felt to serve him in his future occasions.

The more this stranger contemplated the character of the Count, the more his amazement increased,
on account of his extraordinary benevolence in favour of a person whose merit he could not
possibly know; he even expressed his surprise on this subject to Renaldo, who at length told
him, that, although his best offices should always be ready for the occasions of any gentleman
in distress, his particular attachment and regard to him was improved by an additional consideration.
"I am no stranger," said he, "to the virtues and honour of the gallant Don Diego de Zelos."

"Heaven and earth!" cried the stranger, starting from his seat with extreme emotion, "do I
then live to hear myself addressed by that long-lost appellation! my heart glows at the expression!
my spirits are kindled with a flame that thrills through every nerve!  Say, young gentleman,
if you are really an inhabitant of earth, by what means are you acquainted with the unhappy
name of Zelos?"

In answer to this eager interrogation, Renaldo gave him to understand, that in the course of
his travels, he had resided a short time at Seville, where he had frequently seen Don Diego,
and often heard his character mentioned with uncommon esteem and veneration.  "Alas!" replied
the Castilian, "that justice is no longer done to the wretched Zelos; his honours are blasted,
and his reputation canker-bitten by the venomous tooth of slander."

He then proceeded to unfold his misfortunes, as they have already been explained in the former
part of these memoirs; at the recapitulation of which, the heart of Melvil, being intendered
by his own calamities, was so deeply affected, that he re-echoed the groans of Don Diego, and
wept over his sufferings with the most filial sympathy.  When he repeated the story of that
cruel fraud which was practised upon him by the faithless Fadini, Melvil, whose mind and imagination
teemed with the villanies of Fathom, was immediately struck with the conjecture of his being
the knave; because, indeed, he could not believe that any other person was so abandoned by
principle and humanity as to take such a barbarous advantage of a gentleman in distress.

CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO

HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND, AND MIDNIGHT PILGRIMAGE TO MONIMIA'S TOMB.

He considered the date of that unparalleled transaction, which agreed with his conjecture,
and from the inquiries he made concerning the person of the traitor, gathered reasons sufficient
to confirm his supposition. Thus certified, "That is the villain," cried the Count, "whose
infernal arts have overwhelmed me with such misery as Heaven itself hath made no remedy to
dispel!  To revenge my wrongs on that perfidious miscreant, is one of the chief reasons for
which I deign to drag about an hateful being.  O Don Diego! what is life, when all its enjoyments
are so easily poisoned by the machinations of such a worm!"  So saying, he smote his breast
in all the agony of woe, and besought the Spaniard to relate the steps he took in consequence
of this disaster.

The Castilian's cheeks reddened at this information, which enforced his own resentment, and
casting up his eyes to heaven, "Sacred powers!" cried he, "let him not perish, before you bring
him within my reach.  You ask me, noble cavalier, what measures I took in this abyss of misery?
For the first day, I was tortured with apprehensions for the friendly Fadini, fearing that
he had been robbed and murdered for the jewels which he had, perhaps, too unwarily exposed
to sale.  But this terror soon vanished before the true presages of my fate, when, on the morrow,
I found the whole family in tears and confusion, and heard my landlord pour forth the most
bitter imprecations against the fugitive, who had deflowered his daughter, and even robbed
the house.  You will ask, which of the passions of my heart were interested on this occasion?
they were shame and indignation.  All my grief flowed in another channel; I blushed to find
my judgment deceived; I scorned to complain; but, in my heart, denounced vengeance against
my base betrayer.  I silently retired to my apartment, in order to commune with my own thoughts.

"I had borne greater calamities without being driven to despair; I summoned all my fortitude
to my assistance, and resolved to live in spite of affliction.  Thus determined, I betook myself
to the house of a general officer, whose character was fair in the world; and having obtained
admission in consequence of my Oriental appearance, 'To a man of honour,' said I, 'the unfortunate
need no introduction.  My habit proclaims me a Persian; this passport from the States of Holland
will confirm that supposition.  I have been robbed of jewels to a considerable value, by a
wretch whom I favoured with my confidence; and now, reduced to extreme indigence, I come to
offer myself as a soldier in the armies of France.  I have health and strength sufficient to
discharge that duty. Nor am I unacquainted with a military life, which was once my glory and
occupation.  I therefore sue for your protection, that I may be received, though in the lowest
order of them that serve the King; and that your future favour may depend upon my behaviour
in that capacity.'

"The general, surprised at my declaration, surveyed me with uncommon attention; he perused
my certificate; asked divers questions concerning the art of war, to which I returned such
answers as convinced him that I was not wholly ignorant in that particular.  In short, I was
enlisted as a volunteer in his own regiment, and soon after promoted to the rank of a subaltern,
and the office of equerry to his own son, who, at that time, had attained to the degree of
colonel, though his age did not exceed eighteen years.

"This young man was naturally of a ferocious disposition, which had been rendered quite untractable
by the pride of birth and fortune, together with the licence of his education.  As he did not
know the respect due to a gentleman, so he could not possibly pay it to those who were, unfortunately,
under his command.  Divers mortifications I sustained with that fortitude which became a Castilian
who lay under obligations to the father; till, at length, laying aside all decorum, he smote
me.  Sacred Heaven! he smote Don Diego de Zelos, in presence of his whole household.

"Had my sword been endowed with sensation, it would of itself have started from its scabbard
at this indignity offered to its master.  I unsheathed it without deliberation, saying, 'Know,
insolent boy, he is a gentleman whom thou hast outraged; and thou hast thus cancelled the ties
which have hitherto restrained my indignation.'  His servants would have interposed, but he
commanded them to retire; and, flushed with that confidence which the impetuosity of his temper
inspired, he drew, in his turn, and attacked me with redoubled rage; but his dexterity being
very unequal to his courage, he was soon disarmed, and overthrown; when, pointing my sword
to his breast, 'In consideration of thy youth and ignorance,' said I, 'I spare that life which
thou hast forfeited by thy ungenerous presumption.'

"With these words, I put up my weapon, retired through the midst of his domestics, who, seeing
their master safe, did not think proper to oppose my passage, and, mounting my horse, in less
than two hours entered the Austrian dominions, resolving to proceed as far as Holland, that
I might embark in the first ship for Spain, in order to wash away, with my own blood, or that
of my enemies, the cruel stain which hath so long defiled my reputation.

