Chiang-chiu is a large city, some twelve miles or more beyond Chioh-be, and about thirty-five
miles from Amoy. In times past, several efforts have been made to establish a Station at Chiang-chiu,
but always without success, until during the past year. At the close of the year there had
not yet been any baptisms at that Station. Since the beginning of this year, there have been
several. The Church members are reckoned to the Church at Chioh-be, and are under the oversight
of the Chioh-be Consistory. Both Missions work as one at Chiang-chiu. Each Mission is to furnish
half the expense. To simplify the work, it was thought best that one Mission be responsible
for the control of the Station, and direct the work. At present this is the Mission of the
Reformed Dutch Church. If the work be prospered, it is proposed to form two Stations, one under
the care of each Mission.

[The remaining part of the Report, having no bearing on the subject before us, need not be quoted.]

From the Report for 1862.

[It will be sufficient merely to transcribe the Tabular View, and add one or two explanatory
remarks.]

Churches and Mission Stations under the care of the Reformed Dutch and English Presbyterian
Missions at Amoy, December 31, 1862.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     |       |        |No. of   |Died  |
                     |       |        |Members, |during|Excommunicated
                     |       |        |Dec. 31, |the   |during
                     |Elders.|Deacons.|1861.    |year. |the year.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
First Church at Amoy |   4   |   4    |   122   |  6   |     2
Second  "        "   |   4   |   4    |    89   | ...  |    ...
Church at Chioh-be   |   4   |   4    |    51   |  1   |    ...
  "    "  Peh-chui-ia|   2   |   2    |    27   | ...  |    ...
  "    "  Ma-peng    |   1   |   3    |    37   |  2   |    ...
Station at An-hai    |  ..   |  ..    |    29   |  2   |    ...
  "     "  Khang-thau|The members at this Station are reckoned to the
                     |First Church, Amoy.
  "     "  Kang-khau |The members at this Station are reckoned to the
                     |Church at Ma-peng.
  "     "  E-mng-kang|The members at this Station are reckoned to the
                     |First Church, Amoy.
  "     " Chiang-chiu|The members at this Station are reckoned to the
                     |Church at Chioh-be.
  "     " Go-chhng   |
  "     " Te-soa     |
  "     " Khi-be     |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     |No. of    |Under       |Infant     |Helpers
                     |Members,  |suspension  |baptisms   |supported by
                     |Dec. 31,  |Dec. 31,    |during     |Native
                     |1862.     |1862.       |the year.  |Church.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
First Church at Amoy |   139    |     4      |    17     |     1
Second  "        "   |   100    |     3      |     2     |     1
Church at Chioh-be   |    70    |     2      |     9     |     1
  "    "  Peh-chui-ia|    30    |    ...     |    ...    |    ...
  "    "  Ma-peng    |    38    |    ...     |    ...    |    ...
Station at An-hai    |    30    |    ...     |    ...    |    ...
  "     " The other Churches and Stations as in previous
Report.]

The Board of Foreign Missions, being simply the organ of Synod, felt bound in their Report
to eliminate, as far as possible, all the Presbyterian elements from the above Reports of the
Mission. By so doing, we think that they, undesignedly of course, keep our Church in ignorance,
not only of the absolute unity of the Churches in the region of Amoy, but also of the real
progress of the cause of Christ and of the Church of our order there. Among the members set
down to our churches are those who belong to stations under the care of the English Presbyterian
Mission, as is shown by the Tabular Views. The Church at home, not aware of this fact, gives
to their Mission credit which does not belong to them; and then, when, in the progress of the
work, new churches are organized at these stations, and these members are set off to them,
because they belong there, the Dutch Mission is charged with deficiency of denominational feeling,
in giving to the English Presbyterians that which, "by all rules of Christian courtesy and
harmonious Missionary action," belongs to the Dutch Church. Is it well that we should be disputing
among ourselves concerning who shall have that credit which all belongs to Christ? I know it
has been asked, with disapprobation, by very high authority (not, indeed, by the Board) concerning
the unity of the Churches at Amoy--"how it came to exist at all." In answer to such questions,
let us consider one case, that of the Station, now Church, at E-mng-kang. It is near enough
to the First Church, at Amoy, to be under its supervision. Doubtless, we might have said to
our Presbyterian brethren, In gathering a church, we are willing to labor with you in preaching
the Gospel, for no one will censure us for that, and we admit that, by all principles of our
Church order, it would be altogether proper that the converts gathered in at E-mng-kang should
be received and watched over by the First Church, at Amoy; but, by allowing this, there will
be danger of unity between the Christians at E-mng-kang and Amoy ("that they all may be one"),
which will be a violation of the important and radical distinction existing between them, because
"some are supported by our funds, some by the funds of the English Presbyterians;" and then,
when it becomes necessary to divide these Churches, for where there is such a radical distinction,
"a division will necessarily come at some period, and the longer it is delayed, the more trying
and sorrowful it will be," it will be found that the Church at Amoy can never "relinquish its
powers and abnegate its authority" over the Church at E-mng-kang--therefore, rather than incur
such risks of unity, we had better violate our principles of Church order at the commencement,
and not allow the native Elders any responsibility in receiving and watching over the Church
members. We might have acted on such principles, but shall we be censured for not doing it?

Let it be distinctly understood, that I do not publish the above Reports with such remarks
with any design of throwing blame on the Board of Foreign Missions. The members of it, and
the Missionaries, have had no feelings towards each other but such as are altogether pleasant.
Perhaps the Board, in view of all the circumstances, has simply performed its duty. I add this
Appendix only to illustrate the unity of the churches at Amoy, and show that the Missionaries
have acted according to the doctrines of God's Word and the fundamental principles of our Church
order.

Appendix B.

In the Christian Intelligencer of June 18, 1863, in the Report of the Proceedings of General
Synod of Thursday, June 11, the last day of the session, appeared the following paragraphs:

     "AMOY MISSION.

     "Rev. Dr. Porter arose and said that he was about to utter what to
     himself was the gladdest and happiest word he had been permitted to
     speak during the Synodical sessions, delightful as they all had
     been. He was informed by his beloved brother Talmage, that by
     permission of Synod, he would like to express briefly his content,
     in the main, with the action which the Synod had taken respecting
     the Amoy Mission. It is of the Lord. He has melted all hearts
     together as one, for his own work and honor. We see eye to eye, and
     Zion may lift up her voice in thanksgiving.

     "Rev. J.V.N. Talmage said he wished to express his gratitude to the
     fathers and brethren for all their kindness to himself and the
     Missionaries at Amoy. If the Synod has not arrived at the very best
     decision, he hoped it is the best under the circumstances. He felt
     no desire to disobey the Synod, nor will the Missionaries at Amoy.
     If we cannot organize a Classis at once, we will do the best we
     can. He had been defeated, and he had no qualms of conscience in
     submitting to the decision that had been reached."

I was willing to allow the previous, and, as I considered, very partial, report of the proceedings
of Synod to pass unnoticed, but felt that I had no right to allow errors, such as are contained
in the above two paragraphs, to remain uncorrected. Therefore I addressed to the editor the
following note:

     "To the Christian Intelligencer.

     "Mr. Editor:

     "In looking over the report of General Synod, as given in the last
     number of the Intelligencer, I find a very grave mistake in
     reference to the position taken by me near the close of the
     session. A similar mistake appears in the report made to the New
     York Observer.[3]

     [Footnote 3: I addressed to the editors of the Observer a card,
     correcting the mistake which had appeared in their paper, and they
     published it.]

     "When, in the order of business on Thursday morning, there seemed a
     suitable opportunity for me to address the Synod, I was sitting
     near Dr. Porter, and remarked to him that I wished to make such
     address. He said that he desired to speak first. He arose and
     addressed the Synod, in substance, as is reported. I was altogether
     surprised, for I had given him no authority to speak for me;
     neither had I expressed to him or any other man the sentiments he
     attributed to me. I felt that his speech was altogether
     unfortunate, for it seemed almost to demand of me a restatement of
     my views. But I felt, also, that it would be improper, then, to
     occupy the time of Synod with any further discussion, and contented
     myself with merely taking exception to Dr. Porter's statement,
     saying that I could not use the language he had just used.

     "I also stated that although the Synod had not arrived at the best
     decision, yet perhaps it was the best under all the
     circumstances. As these circumstances seem to be entirely
     misunderstood by some, I may now explain them. I had remarked in
     the previous debate, and still firmly believe, that the decision of
     Synod, if it be fully carried out, would only be disastrous in its
     results, as far as the churches at Amoy were concerned. But there
     was another disaster to be apprehended. If the Synod had allowed
     the work of God to proceed at
     Amoy, as it had always been carried forward, and with such
     marvelous blessings from on high, for so many years past, it was
     feared that some of the members of Synod would use their influence
     in the Church against that Mission, to such an extent as possibly
     to cut off the resources of the mission. Such were the
     circumstances to which I alluded, and I was well understood, at
     least by some of the members of Synod. It seemed necessary to
     choose between two evils. My own opinion was, and is, that the
     Synod had chosen the greater evil, still I was willing to yield
     'the benefit of the doubt,' and therefore remarked that perhaps
     (I used the word 'perhaps') the decision was the best under the
     circumstances.

     "I did express for myself, and as I believed, in accordance with
     the views of the Missionaries at Amoy, that we did not wish, and
     never had wished to disobey the injunctions of Synod. Besides this,
     we were under obligations to do what was best for the churches
     under our care. If we were not allowed to do that which is
     absolutely best, we should do the best we could.

     "I also expressed my gratitude that the Synod had manifested so
     much patience and Christian courtesy towards myself and the
     Mission, for with one or two exceptions, not an unkind word had
     been uttered.

     "The closing sentence of my remarks being somewhat playful, might
     have been omitted from the report, but if thought worthy of
     publication, it should have been given correctly. I know that I can
     give it now with accuracy, almost verbatim. 'I have fought hard,
     and have been beaten; I could wish I had been able to fight better,
     but I did my best, and consequently have no qualms of conscience on
     the subject.' Does that mean that we had no qualms of conscience
     about 'submitting to the decision that had been reached?' No. It
     means that I was not responsible for the evils of that decision.

     "It will, I think, serve the cause of truth, Mr. Editor, if you
     will be so kind as to publish this card in your next issue. If I
     was so unfortunate in the use of language as not to express
     sentiments similar to the above, I desire now to express them.

     "Allow me also to ask whether you will open the columns of your
     paper for a full statement of the views of the Amoy Mission on the
     subject of the ecclesiastical relations of the churches under their
     care? I find that there is still altogether a mistaken impression
     among our churches on this subject. Our people who sustain the
     Mission have a right to know the condition of that Mission. From
     the report in the last Intelligencer, they will get no light on
     that subject, but will get the impression that some great mistake
     has been committed by the Missionaries at Amoy. Allowing this to
     be the case, the Missionaries have a right to be heard before the
     churches. Let the churches understand the matter, and decide
     concerning the mistake. The Missionaries have been desirous for
     years to get their views made public, but have not yet succeeded.

"Very truly, yours, &c, "J.V.N. TALMAGE." June 19, 1863.

Instead of finding my note inserted in the next number of the Intelligencer I found the following:

     "REV. MR. TALMAGE'S LETTER.

     "We have received from the Rev. J.V.N. Talmage, a communication
     respecting our report of his remarks at the close of the session of
     the General Synod, accompanied with a request that he be permitted
     to appeal through these columns to the Churches in support of his
     position. The communication is long, and perhaps we can give the
     substance of it briefly.

     "1st. He wishes to correct the statement of Rev. Dr. Porter. I also stated that, although
     the Synod had not arrived at the best decision, yet perhaps it was
     the best, under all the circumstances.'

     "So far Mr. Talmage, in disclaiming agreement with the statement
     made by Dr. Porter.

     "We can, on this point, only express regret that there should have
     been either seeming or real difference. But as Brother Talmage
     confesses that our report correctly represents him as having said,
     that

     "'Although the Synod had not arrived at the best decision, yet
     perhaps it was the best, under all the circumstances,'

     "We therefore suppose that the report of verbal differences--if the
     spirit of the remarks be anything--between him and the gentleman to
     whom he refers, cannot be accounted as very serious.

     "2d. As it respects the opening of these columns to a fresh
     discussion of the matter relating to the Amoy Churches before
     Synod, we have simply to say that we dare not give consent, for the
     following reasons: The Synod is the legislative body for the
     Church. The documents and statements respecting the Amoy Churches
     were full and thorough in the information imparted. Four sessions
     and more of the Synod were occupied with a careful preparatory
     hearing and final adjudication of the matter, and it is not the
     duty of the Christian Intelligencer to allow itself to be used as
     the agent of dissension among the Churches, and of opposition to
     the constituted authority of the Synod."

Whether my views were misrepresented, and whether I was charged with seeking a different object
from that for which I had asked--I had not asked that the columns of the paper be opened for
a fresh "discussion of the matter" which had been "before Synod," but "for a full statement
of the views of the Amoy Mission," because of "mistaken impressions" in "our Churches"--the
Church will be able to decide as accurately as myself. But I wish to say this much. Your Missionaries
do not consider that by becoming Missionaries they lose their rights as men, and Ministers
of the Dutch Church. They have the right to expect that, when away from home, their reputation
will be protected. When mistaken statements concerning their views get abroad in the Church,
there should be, and we believe there is, a responsible party whose duty it is to correct such
statements. At any rate, a paper which professes to be the organ of the Dutch Church, has no
right to refuse to the Missionaries themselves the privilege of correcting mistaken statements
of their own views and their own language, that appear in its columns. The Editor doubtless
is responsible for what appears in his paper. He may refuse to publish improper articles, but
he may not garble and misrepresent them without incurring reproof. The expense of publishing
in pamphlet form corrections of mistakes which appear in the columns of a newspaper, is too
heavy a tax to impose on any of the Ministry of the Church, especially on your Missionaries;
and, even then, the corrections can be read by only a small portion of those who read the misstatements.