CAPTAIN FRACASSE

by Theophile Gautier

CONTENTS

     I.     Castle Misery
     II.    The chariot of Thespis
     III.   The Blue Sun Inn
     IV.    An adventure with brigands
     V.     At the Chateau de Bruyeres
     VI.    A snow-storm and its consequences
     VII.   Captain Fracasse
     VIII.  The Duke of Vallombreuse
     IX.    A melee and a duel
     X.     A midnight adventure
     XI.    The Pont-Neuf
     XII.   The Crowned Radish
     XIII.  A double attack
     XIV.   Lampourde's delicacy
     XV.    Malartic at work
     XVI.   Vallombreuse
     XVII.  The amethyst ring
     XVIII. A family party
     XIX.   Nettles and cobwebs
     XX.    Chiquita's declaration of love
     XXI.   "Hymen! Oh Hymen!"
     XXII.  The castle of happiness

CAPTAIN FRACASSE

CHAPTER I. CASTLE MISERY

Upon the southern slope of one of those barren hills that rise abruptly here and there in the
desolate expanse of the Landes, in South-western France, stood, in the reign of Louis XIII,
a gentleman's residence, such as abound in Gascony, and which the country people dignify by
the name of chateau.

Two tall towers, with extinguisher tops, mounted guard at the angles of the mansion, and gave
it rather a feudal air. The deep grooves upon its facade betrayed the former existence of a
draw-bridge, rendered unnecessary now by the filling up of the moat, while the towers were
draped for more than half their height with a most luxuriant growth of ivy, whose deep, rich
green contrasted happily with the ancient gray walls.

A traveller, seeing from afar the steep pointed roof and lofty towers standing out against
the sky, above the furze and heather that crowned the hill-top, would have pronounced it a
rather imposing chateau--the residence probably of some provincial magnate; but as he drew
near would have quickly found reason to change his opinion. The road which led to it from the
highway was entirely overgrown with moss and weeds, save a narrow pathway in the centre, though
two deep ruts, full of water, and inhabited by a numerous family of frogs, bore mute witness
to the fact that carriages had once passed that way.

The roof, of dark red tiles, was disfigured by many large, leprous-looking, yellow patches,
while in some places the decayed rafters had given way, leaving formidable gaps. The numerous
weather-cocks that surmounted the towers and chimneys were so rusted that they could no longer
budge an inch, and pointed persistently in various directions. The high dormer windows were
partially closed by old wooden shutters, warped, split, and in every stage of dilapidation;
broken stones filled up the loop-holes and openings in the towers; of the twelve large windows
in the front of the house, eight were boarded up; the remaining four had small diamond-shaped
panes of thick, greenish glass, fitting so loosely in their leaden frames that they shook and
rattled at every breath of wind; between these windows a great deal of the stucco had fallen
off, leaving the rough wall exposed to view.

Above the grand old entrance door, whose massive stone frame and lintel retained traces of
rich ornamentation, almost obliterated by time and neglect, was sculptured a coat of arms,
now so defaced that the most accomplished adept in heraldry would not be able to decipher it.
Only one leaf of the great double door was ever opened now, for not many guests were received
or entertained at the chateau in these days of its decadence. Swallows had built their nests
in every available nook about it, and but for a slender thread of smoke rising spirally from
a chimney at the back of this dismal, half-ruined mansion, the traveller would have surely
believed it to be uninhabited. This was the only sign of life visible about the whole place,
like the little cloud upon the mirror from the breath of a dying man, which alone gives evidence
that he still lives.

Upon pushing open the practicable leaf of the great worm-eaten door, which yielded reluctantly,
and creaked dolefully as it turned upon its rusty hinges, the curious visitor entered a sort
of portico, more ancient than the rest of the building, with fine, large columns of bluish
granite, and a lofty vaulted roof. At the point of intersection of the arches was a stone shield,
bearing the same coat of arms that was sculptured over the entrance without. This one was in
somewhat better preservation than the other, and seemed to bear something resembling three
golden storks (cigognes) on an azure field; though it was so much in shadow, and so faded and
dingy, that it was impossible to make it out clearly. Fastened to the wall, at a convenient
height from the ground, were great iron extinguishers, blackened by the smoke from torches
in long by-gone years, and also iron rings, to which the guests' horses were made fast in the
olden times, when the castle was in its glory. The dust that lay thick upon them now showed
that it was long since they had been made use of.

From this portico--whence a door on either side opened into the main building; one leading
into a long suite of apartments on the ground floor, and the other into what had probably been
a guard-room--the explorer passed into an interior court, dismal, damp, and bare. In the corners
nettles and various rank weeds were growing riotously amid the great heaps of rubbish fallen
from the crumbling cornice high above, and grass had sprung up everywhere in the crevices of
the stone pavement. Opposite the entrance a flight of dilapidated, shaky steps, with a heavy
stone balustrade, led down into a neglected garden, which was gradually becoming a perfect
thicket. Excepting in one small bed, where a few cabbages were growing, there was no attempt
at cultivation, and nature had reasserted her rights everywhere else in this abandoned spot,
taking, apparently, a fierce delight in effacing all traces of man's labour. The fruit trees
threw out irregular branches without fear of the pruning knife; the box, intended to form a
narrow border to the curiously shaped flower-beds and grass-plots, had grown up unchecked into
huge, bushy shrubs, while a great variety of sturdy weeds had usurped the places formerly devoted
to choice plants and beautiful, fragrant flowers. Brambles, bristling with sharp thorns, which
had thrown their long, straggling arms across the paths, caught and tried to hold back any
bold adventurer who attempted to penetrate into the mysterious depths of this desolate wilderness.
Solitude is averse to being surprised in dishabille, and surrounds herself with all sorts of
defensive obstacles.

However, the courageous explorer who persisted in following the ancient, overgrown alley, and
was not to be daunted by formidable briers that tore his hands and clothing, nor low-hanging,
closely interlaced branches that struck him smart blows in the face as he forced his way through
them, would have reached at last a sort of rocky niche, fancifully arranged as a grotto. Besides
the masses of ivy, iris and gladiolus, that had been carefully planted long ago in the interstices
of the rock, it was draped with a profusion of graceful wild vines and feathery ferns, which
half-veiled the marble statue, representing some mythological divinity, that still stood in
this lonely retreat. It must have been intended for Flora or Pomona, but now there were tufts
of repulsive, venomous-looking mushrooms in the pretty, graceful, little basket on her arm,
instead of the sculptured fruit or flowers that should have filled it. Although her nose was
broken, and her fair body disfigured by many dark stains, and overgrown in part with clinging
mosses, it could still plainly be seen that she had once been very lovely. At her feet was
a marble basin, shaped like a shell, half full of discoloured, stagnant water; the lion's head
just above it, now almost entirely concealed by a thick curtain of leaves, no longer poured
forth the sparkling stream that used to fall into it with a musical murmur. This little grotto,
with its fountain and statue, bore witness to former wealth; and also to the aesthetic taste
of some long-dead owner of the domain. The marble goddess was in the Florentine style of the
Renaissance, and probably the work of one of those Italian sculptors who followed in the train
of del Rosso or Primaticcio, when they came to France at the bidding of that generous patron
of the arts, Francis I; which time was also, apparently, the epoch of the greatest prosperity
of this noble family, now so utterly fallen into decay.

Behind the grotto rose a high wall, built of stone, crumbling and mouldy now, but still bearing
some broken remains of trellis-work, evidently intended to be covered with creepers that would
entirely conceal the wall itself with a rich tapestry of verdure. This was the limit of the
garden; beyond stretched the wide expanse of the sandy, barren Landes, flecked here and there
with patches of scanty heather, and scattered groves of pine trees.

Turning back towards the chateau it became apparent that this side of it was even more neglected
and ruinous than the one we have already described; the recent poverty-stricken owners having
tried to keep up appearances as far as possible, and concentrated their efforts upon the front
of their dilapidated abode. In the stable, where were stalls for twenty horses, a miserable,
old, white pony stood at an empty manger, nibbling disconsolately at a scanty truss of hay,
and frequently turning his sunken, lack-lustre eyes expectantly towards the door. In front
of an extensive kennel, where the lord of the manor used to keep a whole pack of hounds, a
single dog, pathetically thin, lay sleeping tranquilly and soundly, apparently so accustomed
to the unbroken solitude of the place that he had abandoned all habits of watchfulness.

Entering the chateau the visitor found himself in a broad and lofty hall, containing a grand
old staircase, with a richly carved, wooden balustrade--a good deal broken and defaced now,
like everything else in this doleful Castle Misery. The walls had been elaborately frescoed,
representing colossal figures of Hercules supporting brackets upon which rested the heavily
ornamented cornice. Springing from it fantastic vines climbed upward on the arched ceiling,
and above them the blue sky, faded and dingy, was grotesquely variegated with dark spots, caused
by the water filtering through from the dilapidated roof. Between the oft-repeated figures
of Hercules were frescoed niches, wherein heads of Roman emperors and other illustrious historical
characters had been depicted in glowing tints; but all were so vague and dim now that they
were but the ghosts of pictures, which should be described with the shadows of words--ordinary
terms are too substantial to apply to them. The very echoes in this deserted hall seemed startled
and amazed as they repeated and multiplied the unwonted sound of footsteps.

A door near the head of the first flight of stairs opened into what had evidently been the
great banqueting hall in the old days when sumptuous repasts and numerous guests were not uncommon
things in the chateau. A huge beam divided the lofty ceiling into two compartments, which were
crossed at regular intervals by smaller joists, richly carved, and retaining some traces of
gilding. The spaces between had been originally of a deep blue tint, almost lost now under
the thick coating of dust and spiders' webs that no housemaid's mop ever invaded. Above the
grand old chimney-piece was a noble stag's head, with huge, spreading antlers, and on the walls
hung rows of ancient family portraits, so faded and mouldy now that most of the faces had a
ghastly hue, and at night, by the dim, flickering lamp-light, they looked like a company of
spectres. Nothing in the world is sadder than a collection of old portraits hanging thus, neglected
and forgotten, in deserted halls--representations, half obliterated themselves, of forms and
faces long since returned to dust. Yet these painted phantoms were most appropriate inhabitants
of this desolate abode; real living people would have seemed out of place in the death-stricken
house.

In the middle of the room stood an immense dining-table of dark, polished wood, much worm-eaten,
and gradually falling into decay. Two tall buffets, elaborately carved and ornamented, stood
on opposite sides of the room, with only a few odd pieces of Palissy ware, representing lizards,
crabs, and shell-fish, reposing on shiny green leaves, and two or three delicate wine-glasses
of quaint patterns remaining upon the shelves where gold and silver plate used to glitter in
rich profusion, as was the mode in France. At length everything was loaded up, and the return
trip began. There was some trouble in getting a number of the younger dogs to take to the ice
and keep up with the trains; numbers would persist in turning round and hurrying back.

"We cannot blame them," Sam said afterward, and his Irish oratory burst forth as he described what
had been their happy condition. "Just think," he said, "on that beautiful island in the pleasant
springtime they were born. There they have had a happy, careless puppyhood life. There they have spent
the pleasant summer time with plenty to eat and nothing to do. On the sandy beaches and over
the smooth rocks they have gamboled together, and in the warm, rippling waters they have splashed
and battled. Now the cold weather has suddenly come and the snow has covered their favourite romping
grounds, and even their great bathing places are hard with slippery
ice."

There was, however, but little sentiment in the minds of Mr Ross and the Indians. On the contrary,
they were very much annoyed at the delay the refractory young dogs
were causing, and so had to adopt prompt measures, or they well knew
that the night would be upon them ere home was reached.

The younger puppies were packed in the carioles around our travellers, and some of the more obstinate
older ones were led by ropes fastened to their collars and tied to the sleds, while the great
majority, coaxed by little pieces of meat occasionally dropped on the ice, kept well up to the trains.
Thus on they pushed until they reached the rapid current in the lake where the thin ice had
given them so much trouble in the morning. Fortunately the additional hours of bitter cold
had so strengthened it that no serious difficulty was anticipated
in crossing over, even if the loads were much heavier.

But another event occurred, quite unexpected, indeed, and which, while it did much to impede
their progress, created a good deal of excitement and interest.

The first intimation of its coming was the sudden cry of wild geese not very far away. Their
"Honk! honk!" was very distinct, and not only excited the boys, but also the dogs. The loose dogs,
in spite of all the calls of the Indians, at once dashed off in the direction from which the
loud calls were coming, while the sleigh dogs were almost unmanageable. Prompt and quick were
the men to act. The excited dog-trains were bunched and tied together and left in charge of
a couple of Indians, while Mr Ross and the boys and a couple of Indians went forward to investigate.

To
the right, a couple of hundred yards away, was a rocky island, on one side of which was a reedy
marsh. From among the reeds and rushes the loud calls of the geese were coming. Into these plunged
the dogs, while the men and boys climbed up on the rocks where they could overlook the whole
spot, which was only of a few acres in extent. The experienced eyes of the Indians took in the whole
situation at a glance. The young geese had not been strong enough to fly away to the sunny South
Land when the call to go had come, and so the old geese had left them behind to perish. And so
now here they were, over twenty of them. A novel goose hunt was organised, and, while the boys
looked on, the Indians, with the dogs' help, soon secured quite a number. Some of them were
easily killed, as they were securely frozen to the icy reeds. Others rushed about in a vain attempt
to escape, but they were so chilled by the cold that they were easily captured. The sleds were
piled up with this additional load of geese, and the journey was resumed.

Later on in the evening the boys heard from Kinesasis more about those young geese and why they
were there. They also learned some truths from nature that abode with them for many a day.

Without
much difficulty the dangerous places in Playgreen Lake were passed, and the return run down
Jack River was begun. The loose young dogs were pretty well wearied by the long trip and required
some coaxing, and even the occasional crack of the whip was necessary to urge them to keep up.
It is amazing what a latent amount of strength and speed there is in a tired dog. Here was
a striking example of it. While the trains were jogging along, and the young dogs with tongues out
and tails down were wearily following after and looking as though
they were deeply bemoaning their lot, suddenly a splendid cross-fox
sprang out from the dense forest on one side of the river and deliberately
dashed across before the dogs on the frozen ice toward the other shore.

All evidence of weariness at once disappeared. With a hue and cry that would have done credit
to a first-class pack of hounds they were all off, sleigh dogs as well as loose ones.

The ice was so slippery that it required quite an effort on the part of the drivers of the carioles
to control their dogs and get them in line. If the truth must be
told, the boys richly enjoyed the short burst of speed and the exciting
chase, which ended almost as soon as it began, for Reynard was too
much for the young dogs and soon reached the shelter of the wooded
shore. He had the
usual characteristics of the Basque race; a long face, hooked nose, and dark, gipsy-like complexion.
He wore a sort of livery, which was so old and threadbare that it would be impossible to make
out its original colour, and his stiff, soldier-like carriage and movements proclaimed that
he had at some time in his life served in a military capacity. "The young master is late to-night,"
he muttered to himself, as the daylight faded. "What possible pleasure can he find in these
long, solitary rambles over the dunes? It is true though that it is so dreary here, in this
lonely, dismal house, that any other place is preferable."

At this moment a joyous barking was heard without, the old pony in the stable stamped and whinnied,
and the cat jumped down from his place beside Pierre and trotted off towards the door with
great alacrity. In an instant the latch was lifted, and the old servant rose, taking off his
woollen cap respectfully, as his master came into the kitchen. He was preceded by the poor
old dog, trying to jump up on him, but falling back every time without being able to reach
his face, and Beelzebub seemed to welcome them both--showing no evidence of the antipathy usually
existing between the feline and canine races; on the contrary, receiving Miraut with marks
of affection which were fully reciprocated.

The Baron de Sigognac, for it was indeed the lord of the manor who now entered, was a young
man of five or six and twenty; though at first sight he seemed much older, because of the deep
gravity, even sadness, of his demeanour; the feeling of utter powerlessness which poverty brings
having effectually chased away all the natural piety and light-heartedness of youth. Dark circles
surrounded his sunken eyes, his cheeks were hollow, his mustache drooped in a sorrowful curve
over his sad mouth. His long black hair was negligently pushed back from his pale face, and
showed a want of care remarkable in a young man who was strikingly handsome, despite his doleful
desponding expression. The constant pressure of a crushing grief had drawn sorrowful lines
in a countenance that a little animation would have rendered charming. All the elasticity and
hopefulness natural to his age seemed to have been lost in his useless struggles against an
unhappy fate. Though his frame was lithe, vigorous, and admirably proportioned, all his movements
were slow and apathetic, like those of an old man. His gestures were entirely devoid of animation,
his whole expression inert, and it was evidently a matter of perfect indifference to him where
he might chance to find himself at home, in his dismal chateau, or abroad in the desolate Landes.

He had on an old gray felt hat, much too large for him, with a dingy, shabby feather, that
drooped as if it felt heartily ashamed of itself, and the miserable condition to which it was
reduced. A broad collar of guipure lace, ragged in many places, was turned down over a just-au-corps,
which had been cut for a taller and much stouter man than the slender, young baron. The sleeves
of his doublet were so long that they fell over his hands, which were small and shapely, and
there were large iron spurs on the clumsy, old-fashioned riding-boots he wore. These shabby,
antiquated clothes had belonged to his father; they were made according to the fashion that
prevailed during the preceding reign; and the poor young nobleman, whose appearance in them
was both ridiculous and touching, might have been taken for one of his own ancestors. Although
he tenderly cherished his father's memory, and tears often came into his eyes as he put on
these garments that had seemed actually a part of him, yet it was not from choice that young
de Sigognac availed himself of the paternal wardrobe. Unfortunately he had no other clothes,
save those of his boyhood, long ago outgrown, and so he was thankful to have these, distasteful
as they could not fail to be to him. The peasants, who had been accustomed to hold them in
respect when worn by their old seignior, did not think it strange or absurd to see them on
his youthful successor; just as they did not seem to notice or be aware of the half-ruined
condition of the chateau. It had come so gradually that they were thoroughly used to it, and
took it as a matter of course. The Baron de Sigognac, though poverty-stricken and forlorn,
was still in their eyes the noble lord of the manor; the decadence of the family did not strike
them at all as it would a stranger; and yet it was a grotesquely melancholy sight to see the
poor young nobleman pass by, in his shabby old clothes, on his miserable old pony, and followed
by his forlorn old dog.

The baron sat down in silence at the table prepared for him, having recognised Pierre's respectful
salute by a kindly gesture. The old servant immediately busied himself in serving his master's
frugal supper; first pouring the hot soup--which was of that kind, popular among the poor peasantry
of Gascony, called "garbure"--upon some bread cut into small pieces in an earthen basin, which
he set before the baron; then, fetching from the cupboard a dish of bacon, cold, and cooked
in Gascon fashion, he placed that also upon the table, and had nothing else to add to this
meagre repast. The baron ate it slowly, with an absent air, while Miraut and Beelzebub, one
on each side of him, received their full share from his kind hand.

The supper finished, he fell into a deep reverie. Miraut had laid his head caressingly upon
his master's knee, and looked up into his face with loving, intelligent eyes, somewhat dimmed
by age, but still seeming to understand his thoughts and sympathize with his sadness. Beelzebub
purred loudly meantime, and occasionally mewed plaintively to attract his attention, while
Pierre stood in a respectful attitude, cap in hand, at a little distance, motionless as a statue,
waiting patiently until his master's wandering thoughts should return. By this time the darkness
had fallen, and the flickering radiance from the few sticks blazing in the great fireplace
made strange effects of light and shade in the spacious old kitchen. It was a sad picture;
this last scion of a noble race, formerly rich and powerful, left wandering like an uneasy
ghost in the castle of his ancestors, with but one faithful old servant remaining to him of
the numerous retinue of the olden times; one poor old dog, half starved, and gray with age,
where used to be a pack of thirty hounds; one miserable, superannuated pony in the stable where
twenty horses had been wont to stand; and one old cat to beg for caresses from his hand.

At last the baron roused himself, and signed to Pierre that he wished to retire to his own
chamber; whereupon the servant lighted a pine knot at the fire, and preceded his master up
the stairs, Miraut and Beelzebub accompanying them. The smoky, flaring light of the torch made
the faded figures on the wall seem to waver and move as they passed through the hall and up
the broad staircase, and gave a strange, weird expression to the family portraits that looked
down upon this little procession as it moved by below them. When they reached the tapestried
chamber Pierre lighted a little copper lamp, and then bade the baron good-night, followed by
Miraut as he retraced his steps to the kitchen; but Beelzebub, being a privileged character,
remained, and curled himself up comfortably in one of the old arm-chairs, while his master
threw himself listlessly into the other, in utter despair at the thought of his miserable loneliness,
and aimless, hopeless life. If the chamber seemed dreary and forlorn by day, it was far more
so by night. The faded figures in the tapestry had an uncanny look; especially one, a hunter,
who might have passed for an assassin, just taking aim at his victim. The smile on his startlingly
red lips, in reality only a self-satisfied smirk, was fairly devilish in that light, and his
ghastly face horribly life-like. The lamp burned dimly in the damp heavy air, the wind sighed
and moaned along the corridors, and strange, frightful sounds came from the deserted chambers
close at hand. The storm that had long been threatening had come at last, and large, heavy
rain-drops were driven violently against the window-panes by gusts of wind that made them rattle
loudly in their leaden frames. Sometimes it seemed as if the whole sash would give way before
the fiercer blasts, as though a giant had set his knee against it, and was striving to force
an entrance. Now and again, when the wind lulled for a moment while it gathered strength for
a fresh assault, the horrid shriek of an owl would be heard above the dashing of the rain that
was falling in torrents.

The master of this dismal mansion paid little attention to this lugubrious symphony, but Beelzebub
was very uneasy, starting up at every sound, and peering into the shadowy corners of the room,
as if he could see there something invisible to human eyes. The baron took up a little book
that was lying upon the table, glanced at the familiar arms stamped upon its tarnished cover,
and opening it, began to read in a listless, absent way. His eyes followed the smooth rhythm
of Ronsard's ardent love-songs and stately sonnets, but his thoughts were wandering far afield,
and he soon threw the book from him with an impatient gesture, and began slowly unfastening
his garments, with the air of a man who is not sleepy, but only goes to bed because he does
not know what else to do with himself, and has perhaps a faint hope of forgetting his troubles
in the embrace of Morpheus, most blessed of all the gods. The sand runs so slowly in the hour-glass
on a dark, stormy night, in a half-ruined castle, ten leagues away from any living soul.

The poor young baron, only surviving representative of an ancient and noble house, had much
indeed to make him melancholy and despondent. His ancestors had worked their own ruin, and
that of their descendants, in various ways. Some by gambling, some in the army, some by undue
prodigality in living--in order that they might shine at court--so that each generation had
left the estate more and more diminished. The fiefs, the farms, the land surrounding the chateau
itself, all had been sold, one after the other, and the last baron, after desperate efforts
to retrieve the fallen fortunes of the family--efforts which came too late, for it is useless
to try to stop the leaks after the vessel has gone down--had left his son nothing but this
half-ruined chateau and the few acres of barren land immediately around it. The unfortunate
child had been born and brought up in poverty. His mother had died young, broken-hearted at
the wretched prospects of her only son; so that he could not even remember her sweet caresses
and tender, loving care. His father had been very stern with him; punishing him severely for
the most trivial offences; yet he would have been glad now even of his sharp rebukes, so terribly
lonely had he been for the last four years; ever since his father was laid in the family vault.
His youthful pride would not allow him to associate with the noblesse of the province without
the accessories suitable to his rank, though he would have been received with open arms by
them, so his solitude was never invaded. Those who knew his circumstances respected as well
as pitied the poor, proud young baron, while many of the former friends of the family believed
that it was extinct; which indeed it inevitably would be, with this its only remaining scion,
if things went on much longer as they had been going for many years past.

The baron had not yet removed a single garment when his attention was attracted by the strange
uneasiness of Beelzebub, who finally jumped down from his arm-chair, went straight to one of
the windows, and raising himself on his hind legs put his fore-paws on the casing and stared
out into the thick darkness, where it was impossible to distinguish anything but the driving
rain. A loud howl from Miraut at the same moment proclaimed that he too was aroused, and that
something very unusual must be going on in the vicinity of the chateau, ordinarily as quiet
as the grave. Miraut kept up persistently a furious barking, and the baron gave up all idea
of going to bed. He hastily readjusted his dress, so that he might be in readiness for whatever
should happen, and feeling a little excited at this novel commotion.

"What can be the matter with poor old Miraut? He usually sleeps from sunset to sunrise without
making a sound, save his snores. Can it be that a wolf is prowling about the place?" said the
young man to himself, as he buckled the belt of his sword round his slender waist. A formidable
weapon it was, that sword, with long blade, and heavy iron scabbard.

At that moment three loud knocks upon the great outer door resounded through the house. Who
could possibly have strayed here at this hour, so far from the travelled roads, and in this
tempest that was making night horrible without? No such thing had occurred within the baron's
recollection. What could it portend?

CHAPTER II. THE CHARIOT OF THESPIS

The Baron de Sigognac went down the broad staircase without a moment's delay to answer this
mysterious summons, protecting with his hand the feeble flame of the small lamp he carried
from the many draughts that threatened to blow it out. The light, shining through his slender
fingers, gave them a rosy tinge, so that he merited the epithet applied by Homer, the immortal
bard, to the laughing, beautiful Aurora, even though he advanced through the thick darkness
with his usual melancholy mien, and followed by a black cat, instead of preceding the glorious
god of day.

Setting down his lamp in a sheltered corner, he proceeded to take down the massive bar that
secured the door, cautiously opened the practicable leaf, and found himself face to face with
a man, upon whom the light of the lamp shone sufficiently to show rather a grotesque figure,
standing uncovered in the pelting rain. His head was bald and shining, with a few locks of
gray hair clustering about the temples. A jolly red nose, bulbous in form, a small pair of
twinkling, roguish eyes, looking out from under bushy, jet-black eyebrows, flabby cheeks, over
which was spread a network of purplish fibres, full, sensual lips, and a scanty, straggling
beard, that scarcely covered the short, round chin, made up a physiognomy worthy to serve as
the model for a Silenus; for it was plainly that of a wine-bibber and bon vivant. Yet a certain
expression of good humour and kindness, almost of gentleness, redeemed what would otherwise
have been a repulsive face. The comical little wrinkles gathering about the eyes, and the merry
upward turn of the comers of the mouth, showed a disposition to smile as he met the inquiring
gaze of the young baron, but he only bowed repeatedly and profoundly, with exaggerated politeness
and respect.

This extraordinary pantomime finished, with a grand flourish, the burlesque personage, still
standing uncovered in the pouring rain, anticipated the question upon de Sigognac's lips, and
began at once the following address, in an emphatic and declamatory tone:

"I pray you deign to excuse, noble seignior, my having come thus to knock at the gates of your
castle in person at this untimely hour, without sending a page or a courier in advance, to
announce my approach in a suitable manner. Necessity knows no law, and forces the most polished
personages to be guilty of gross breaches of etiquette at times."

"What is it you want?" interrupted the baron, in rather a peremptory tone, annoyed by the absurd
address of this strange old creature, whose sanity he began to doubt.

"Hospitality, most noble seignior; hospitality for myself and my comrades--princes and princesses,
heroes and beauties, men of letters and great captains, pretty waiting-maids and honest valets,
who travel through the provinces from town to town in the chariot of Thespis, drawn by oxen,
as in the ancient times. This chariot is now hopelessly stuck in the mud only a stone's throw
from your castle, my noble lord."

"If I understand aright what you say," answered the baron, "you are a strolling band of players,
and have lost your way. Though my house is sadly dilapidated, and I cannot offer you more than
mere shelter, you are heartily welcome to that, and will be better off within here than exposed
to the fury of this wild storm."

The pedant--for such seemed to be his character in the troupe--bowed his acknowledgments.

During this colloquy, Pierre, awakened by Miraut's loud barking, had risen and joined his master
at the door. As soon as he was informed of what had occurred, he lighted a lantern, and with
the baron set forth, under the guidance of the droll old actor, to find and rescue the chariot
in distress. When they reached it Leander and Matamore were tugging vainly at the wheels, while
his majesty, the king, pricked up the weary oxen with the point of his dagger. The actresses,
wrapped in their cloaks and seated in the rude chariot, were in despair, and much frightened
as well--wet and weary too, poor things. This most welcome re-enforcement inspired all with
fresh courage, and, guided by Pierre's suggestions, they soon succeeded in getting the unwieldy
vehicle out of the quagmire and into the road leading to the chateau, which was speedily reached,
and the huge equipage safely piloted through the grand portico into the interior court. The
oxen were at once taken from before it and led into the stable, while the actresses followed
de Sigognac up to the ancient banqueting hall, which was the most habitable room in the chateau.
Pierre brought some wood, and soon had a bright fire blazing cheerily in the great fireplace.
It was needed, although but the beginning of September and the weather still warm, to dry the
dripping garments of the company; and besides, the air was so damp and chilly in this long
disused apartment that the genial warmth and glow of the fire were welcome to all.

Although the strolling comedians were accustomed to find themselves in all sorts of odd, strange
lodgings in the course of their wanderings, they now looked with astonishment at their extraordinary
surroundings; being careful, however, like well-bred people, not to manifest too plainly the
surprise they could not help feeling.

"I regret very much that I cannot offer you a supper," said their young host, when all had
assembled round the fire, "but my larder is so bare that a mouse could not find enough for
a meal in it. I live quite alone in this house with my faithful old Pierre; never visited by
anybody; and you can plainly perceive, without my telling you, that plenty does not abound here."

"Never mind that, noble seignior," answered Blazius, the pedant, "for though on the stage we
may sit down to mock repasts--pasteboard fowls and wooden bottles--we are careful to provide
ourselves with more substantial and savoury viands in real life. As quartermaster of the troupe
I always have in reserve a Bayonne ham, a game pasty, or something, of that sort, with at least
a dozen bottles of good old Bordeaux."

"Bravo, sir pedant," cried Leander, "do you go forthwith and fetch in the provisions; and if
his lordship will permit, and deign to join us, we will have our little feast here. The ladies
will set the table for us meanwhile I am sure."

The baron graciously nodded his assent, being in truth so amazed at the whole proceeding that
he could not easily have found words just then; and he followed with wondering and admiring
eyes the graceful movements of Serafina and Isabelle, who, quitting their seats by the fire,
proceeded to arrange upon the worn but snow-white cloth that Pierre had spread on the ancient
dining-table, the plates and other necessary articles that the old servant brought forth from
the recesses of the carved buffets. The pedant quickly came back, carrying a large basket in
each hand, and with a triumphant air placed a huge pasty of most tempting appearance in the
middle of the table. To this he added a large smoked tongue, some slices of rosy Bayonne ham,
and six bottles of wine.

Beelzebub watched these interesting preparations from a distance with eager eyes, but was too
much afraid of all these strangers to approach and claim a share of the good things on the
table. The poor beast was so accustomed to solitude and quiet, never seeing any one beyond
his beloved master and Pierre, that he was horribly frightened at the sudden irruption of these
noisy newcomers.

Finding the feeble light of the baron's small lamp rather dim, Matamore bad gone out to the
chariot and brought back two showy candelabra, which ordinarily did duty on the stage. They
each held several candles, which, in addition to the warm radiance from the blazing fire, made
quite a brilliant illumination in this room, so lately dark, cheerless, and deserted. It had
become warm and comfortable by this time; its family portraits and tarnished splendour looked
their best in the bright, soft light, which had chased away the dark shadows and given a new
beauty to everything it fell upon; the whole place was metamorphosed; a festive air prevailed,
and the ancient banqueting hall once more resounded with cheery voices and gay laughter.

The poor young baron, to whom all this had been intensely disagreeable at first, became aware
of a strange feeling of comfort and pleasure stealing over him, to which, after a short struggle,
he finally yielded himself entirely. Isabelle, Serafina, even the pretty soubrette, seemed
to him, unaccustomed as he was to feminine beauty and grace, like goddesses come down from
Mount Olympus, rather than mere ordinary mortals. They were all very pretty, and well fitted
to turn heads far more experienced than his. The whole thing was like a delightful dream to
him; he almost doubted the evidence of his own senses, and every few minutes found himself
dreading the awakening, and the vanishing of the entrancing vision.

When all was ready de Sigognac led Isabelle and Serafina to the table, placing one on each
side of him, with the pretty soubrette opposite. Mme. Leonarde, the duenna of the troupe, sat
beside the pedant, Leander, Matamore, his majesty the tyrant, and Scapin finding places for
themselves. The youthful host was now able to study the faces of his guests at his ease, as
they sat round the table in the full light of the candles burning upon it in the two theatrical
candelabra. He turned his attention to the ladies first, and it perhaps will not be out of
place to give a little sketch of them here, while the pedant attacks the gigantic game pasty.

Serafina, the "leading lady" of the troupe, was a handsome young woman of four or five and
twenty, who had quite a grand air, and was as dignified and graceful withal as any veritable
noble dame who shone at the court of his most gracious majesty, Louis XIII. She had an oval
face, slightly aquiline nose, large gray eyes, bright red lips--the under one full and pouting,
like a ripe cherry---a very fair complexion, with a beautiful colour in her cheeks when she
was animated or excited, and rich masses of dark brown hair most becomingly arranged. She wore
a round felt hat, with the wide rim turned up at one side, and trimmed with long, floating
plumes. A broad lace collar was turned down over her dark green velvet dress, which was elaborately
braided, and fitted closely to a fine, well-developed figure. A long, black silk scarf was
worn negligently around her shapely shoulders and although both velvet and silk were old and
dingy, and the feathers in her hat wet and limp, they were still very effective, and she looked
like a young queen who had strayed away from her realm; the freshness and radiant beauty of
her face more than made up for the shabbiness of her dress, and de Sigognac was fairly dazzled
by her many charms.

Isabelle was much more youthful than Serafina, as was requisite for her role of ingenuous young
girl, and far more simply dressed. She had a sweet, almost childlike face, beautiful, silky,
chestnut hair, with golden lights in it, dark, sweeping lashes veiling her large, soft eyes,
a little rosebud of a mouth, and an air of modesty and purity that was evidently natural to
her--not assumed. A gray silk gown, simply made, showed to advantage her slender, graceful
form, which seemed far too fragile to endure the hardships inseparable from the wandering life
she was leading. A high Elizabethan ruff made a most becoming frame for her sweet, delicately
tinted, young face, and her only ornament was a string of pearl beads, clasped round her slender,
white neck. Though her beauty was less striking at first sight than Serafina's, it was of a
higher order: not dazzling like hers, but surpassingly lovely in its exquisite purity and freshness,
and promising to eclipse the other's more showy charms, when the half-opened bud should have
expanded into the full-blown flower.

The soubrette was like a beautiful Gipsy, with a clear, dark complexion, rich, mantling colour
in her velvety cheeks, intensely black hair--long, thick, and wavy--great, flashing, brown
eyes, and rather a large mouth, with ripe, red lips, and dazzling white teeth--one's very beau-ideal
of a bewitching, intriguing waiting-maid, and one that might be a dangerous rival to any but
a surpassingly lovely and fascinating mistress. She was one of the beauties that women are
not apt to admire, but men rave about and run after the world over. She wore a fantastic costume
of blue and yellow, which was odd, piquant, and becoming, and seemed fully conscious of her
own charms.

Mme. Leonarde, the "noble mother" of the troupe dressed all in black, like a Spanish duenna,
was portly of figure, with a heavy, very pale face, double chin, and intensely black eyes,
that had a crafty, slightly malicious expression. She had been upon the stage from her early
childhood, passing through all the different phases, and was an actress of decided talent,
often still winning enthusiastic applause at the expense of younger and more attractive women,
who were inclined to think her something of an old sorceress.

So much for the feminine element. The principal roles were all represented; and if occasionally
a re-enforcement was required, they could almost always pick up some provincial actress, or
even an amateur, at a pinch. The actors were five in number: The pedant, already described,
who rejoiced in the name of Blazitis; Leander; Herode, the tragic tyrant; Matamore, the bully;
and Scapin, the intriguing valet.

Leander, the romantic, irresistible, young lover--darling of the ladies--was a tall, fine-looking
fellow of about thirty, though apparently much more youthful, thanks to the assiduous care
he bestowed on his handsome person. His slightly curly, black hair was worn long, so that he
might often have occasion to push it back from his forehead, with a hand as white and delicate
as a woman's, upon one of whose taper fingers sparkled an enormous diamond--a great deal too
big to be real. He was rather fancifully dressed, and always falling into such graceful, languishing
attitudes as he thought would be admired by the fair sex, whose devoted slave he was. This
Adonis never for one moment laid aside his role. He punctuated his sentences with sighs, even
when speaking of the most indifferent matters, and assumed all sorts of preposterous airs and
graces, to the secret amusement of his companions. But he had great success among the ladies,
who all flattered him and declared he was charming, until they had turned his head completely;
and it was his firm belief that he was irresistibly fascinating.

The tyrant was the most good-natured, easy-going creature imaginable; but, strangely enough,
gifted by nature with all the external signs of ferocity. With his tall, burly frame, very
dark skin, immensely thick, shaggy eyebrows, black as jet, crinkly, bushy hair of the same
hue, and long beard, that grew far up on his cheeks, he was a very formidable, fierce-looking
fellow; and when he spoke, his loud, deep voice made everything ring again. He affected great
dignity, and filled his role to perfection.

Matamore was as different as possible, painfully thin--scarcely more than mere skin and bones--a
living skeleton with a large hooked nose, set in a long, narrow face, a huge mustache turned
up at the ends, and flashing, black eyes. His excessively tall, lank figure was so emaciated
that it was like a caricature of a man. The swaggering air suitable to his part had become
habitual with him, and he walked always with immense strides, head well thrown back, and hand
on the pommel of the huge sword he was never seen without.

As to Scapin, he looked more like a fox than anything else, and had a most villainous countenance;
yet he was a good enough fellow in reality.

The painter has a great advantage over the writer, in that he can so present the group on his
canvas that one glance suffices to take in the whole picture, with the lights and shadows,
attitudes, costumes, and details of every kind, which are sadly wanting in our description--too
long, though so imperfect--of the party gathered thus unexpectedly round our young baron's
table. The beginning of the repast was very silent, until the most urgent demands of hunger
had been satisfied. Poor de Sigognac, who had never perhaps at any one time had as much to
eat as he wanted since he was weaned, attacked the tempting viands with an appetite and ardour
quite new to him; and that too despite his great desire to appear interesting and romantic
in the eyes of the beautiful young women between whom he was seated. The pedant, very much
amused at the boyish eagerness and enjoyment of his youthful host, quietly heaped choice bits
upon his plate, and watched their rapid disappearance with beaming satisfaction. Beelzebub
had at last plucked up courage and crept softly under the table to his master, making his presence
known by a quick tapping with his fore-paws upon the baron's knees; his claims were at once
recognised, and he feasted to his heart's content on the savoury morsels quietly thrown down
to him. Poor old Miraut, who had followed Pierre into the room, was not neglected either, and
had his full share of the good things that found their way to his master's plate.

By this time there was a good deal of laughing and talking round the festive board. The baron,
though very timid, and much embarrassed, had ventured to enter into conversation with his fair
neighbours. The pedant and the tyrant were loudly discussing the respective merits of tragedy
and comedy. Leander, like Narcissus of old, was complacently admiring his own charms as reflected
in a little pocket mirror he always had about him. Strange to say he was not a suitor of either
Serafina's or Isabelle's; fortunately for them he aimed higher, and was always hoping that
some grand lady, who saw him on the stage, would fall violently in love with him, and shower
all sorts of favours upon him. He was in the habit of boasting that he had had many delightful
adventures of the kind, which Scapin persistently denied, declaring that to his certain knowledge
they had never taken place, save in the aspiring lover's own vivid imagination. The exasperating
valet, malicious as a monkey, took the greatest delight in tormenting poor Leander, and never
lost an opportunity; so now, seeing him absorbed in self-admiration, he immediately attacked
him, and soon had made him furious. The quarrel grew loud and violent, and Leander was heard
declaring that he could produce a large chest crammed full of love letters, written to him
by various high and titled ladies; whereupon everybody laughed uproariously, while Serafina
said to de Sigognac that she for one did not admire their taste, and Isabelle silently looked
her disgust. The baron meantime was more and more charmed with this sweet, dainty young girl,
and though he was too shy to address any high-flown compliments to her, according to the fashion
of the day, his eyes spoke eloquently for him. She was not at all displeased at his ardent
glances, and smiled radiantly and encouragingly upon him, thereby unconsciously making poor
Matamore, who was secretly enamoured of her, desperately unhappy, though he well knew that
his passion was an utterly hopeless one. A more skilful and audacious lover would have pushed
his advantage, but our poor young hero had not learned courtly manners nor assurance in his
isolated chateau, and, though he lacked neither wit nor learning, it must be confessed that
at this moment he did appear lamentably stupid.

All the bottles having been scrupulously emptied, the pedant turned the last one of the half
dozen upside down, so that every drop might run out; which significant action was noted and
understood by Matamore, who lost no time in bringing in a fresh supply from the chariot. The
baron began to feel the wine a little in his head, being entirely unaccustomed to it, yet he
could not resist drinking once again to the health of the ladies. The pedant and the tyrant
drank like old topers, who can absorb any amount of liquor--be it wine, or something stronger--without
becoming actually intoxicated. Matamore was very abstemious, both in eating and drinking, and
could have lived like the impoverished Spanish hidalgo, who dines on three olives and sups
on an air upon his mandoline. There was a reason for his extreme frugality; he feared that
if he ate and drank like other people he might lose his phenomenal thinness, which was of inestimable
value to him in a professional point of view. If he should be so unfortunate as to gain flesh,
his attractions would diminish in an inverse ratio, so he starved himself almost to death,
and was constantly seen anxiously examining the buckle of his belt, to make sure that he had
not increased in girth since his last meal. Voluntary Tantalus, he scarcely allowed himself
enough to keep life in his attenuated frame, and if he had but fasted as carefully from motives
of piety he would have been a full-fledged saint.

The portly duenna disposed of solids and fluids perseveringly, and in formidable quantities,
seeming to have an unlimited capacity; but Isabelle and Serafina had finished their supper
long ago, and were yawning wearily behind their pretty, outspread hands, having no fans within
reach, to conceal these pronounced symptoms of sleepiness.

The baron, becoming aware of this state of things, said to them, "Mesdemoiselles, I perceive
that you are very weary, and I wish with all my heart that I could offer you each a luxurious
bed-chamber; but my house, like my family, has fallen into decay, and I can only give to you
and Madame my own room. Fortunately the bed is very large, and you must make yourselves as
comfortable as you can--for a single night you will not mind. As to the gentlemen, I must ask
them to remain here with me, and try to sleep in the arm-chairs before the fire. I pray you,
ladies, do not allow yourselves to be startled by the waving of the tapestry-which is only
due to the strong draughts about the room on a stormy night like this--the moaning of the wind
in the chimney, or the wild scurrying and squeaking of the mice behind the wainscot. I can
guarantee that no ghosts will disturb you here, though this place does look dreary and dismal
enough to be haunted."

"I am not a bit of a coward," answered Serafina laughingly, "and will do my best to reassure
this timid little Isabelle. As to our duenna,--she is something of a sorceress herself, and
if the devil in person should make his appearance he would meet his match in her."

The baron then took a light in his hand and showed the three ladies the way into the bed-chamber,
which certainly did strike them rather unpleasantly at first sight, and looked very eerie in
the dim, flickering light of the one small lamp.

"What a capital scene it would make for the fifth act of a tragedy," said Serafina, as she
looked curiously about her, while poor little Isabelle shivered with cold and terror. They
all crept into bed without undressing, Isabelle begging to lie between Serafina and Mme. Leonarde,
for she felt nervous and frightened. The other two fell asleep at once, but the timid young
girl lay long awake, gazing with wide-open, straining eyes at the door that led into the shut-up
apartments beyond, as if she dreaded its opening to admit some unknown horror. But it remained
fast shut, and though all sorts of mysterious noises made her poor little heart flutter painfully,
her eyelids closed at last, and she forgot her weariness and her fears in profound slumber.

In the other room the pedant slept soundly, with his head on the table, and the tyrant opposite
to him snored like a giant. Matamore had rolled himself up in a cloak and made himself as comfortable
as possible under the circumstances in a large arm-chair, with his long, thin legs extended
at full length, and his feet on the fender. Leander slept sitting bolt upright, so as not to
disarrange his carefully brushed hair, and de Sigognac, who had taken possession of a vacant
arm-chair, was too much agitated and excited by the events of the evening to be able to close
his eyes. The coming of two beautiful, young women thus suddenly into his life--which had been
hitherto so isolated, sad and dreary, entirely devoid of all the usual pursuits and pleasures
of youth--could not fail to rouse him from his habitual apathy, and set his pulses beating
after a new fashion. Incredible as it may seem yet it was quite true that our young hero had
never had a single love affair. He was too proud, as we have already said, to take his rightful
place among his equals, without any of the appurtenances suitable to his rank, and also too
proud to associate familiarly with the surrounding peasantry, who accorded him as much respect
in his poverty as they had ever shown to his ancestors in their prosperity. He had no near
relatives to come to his assistance, and so lived on, neglected and forgotten, in his crumbling
chateau, with nothing to look forward to or hope for. In the course of his solitary wanderings
he had several times chanced to encounter the young and beautiful Yolande de Foix, following
the hounds on her snow-white palfrey, in company with her father and a number of the young
noblemen of the neighbourhood. This dazzling vision of beauty often haunted his dreams, but
what possible relations could there ever be hoped for between the rich, courted heiress, whose
suitors were legion, and his own poverty-stricken self? Far from seeking to attract her attention,
he always got out of her sight as quickly as possible, lest his ill-fitting, shabby garments
and miserable old pony should excite a laugh at his expense; for he was very sensitive, this
poor young nobleman, and could not have borne the least approach to ridicule from the fair
object of his secret and passionate admiration. He had tried his utmost to stifle the ardent
emotions that filled his heart whenever his thoughts strayed to the beautiful Yolande, realizing
how far above his reach she was, and he believed that he had succeeded; though there were times
even yet when it all rushed back upon him with overwhelming force, like a huge tidal wave that
sweeps everything before it.

The night passed quietly at the chateau, without other incident than the fright of poor Isabelle,
when Beelzebub, who had climbed up on the bed, as was his frequent custom, established himself
comfortably upon her bosom; finding it a deliciously soft, warm resting-place, and obstinately
resisting her frantic efforts to drive him away.

As to de Sigognac, he did not once close his eyes. A vague project was gradually shaping itself
in his mind, keeping him wakeful and perplexed. The advent of these strolling comedians appeared
to him like a stroke of fate, an ambassador of fortune, to invite him to go out into the great
world, away from this old feudal ruin, where his youth was passing in misery and inaction--to
quit this dreary shade, and emerge into the light and life of the outer world.

At last the gray light of the dawn came creeping in through the lattice windows, speedily followed
by the first bright rays from the rising sun. The storm was over, and the glorious god of day
rose triumphant in a perfectly clear sky. It was a strange group that he peeped in upon, where
the old family portraits seemed looking down with haughty contempt upon the slumbering invaders
of their dignified solitude. The soubrette was the first to awake, starting up as a warm sunbeam
shone caressingly full upon her face. She sprang to her feet, shook out her skirts, as a bird
does its plumage, passed the palms of her hands lightly over her glossy bands of jet-black
hair, and then seeing that the baron was quietly observing her, with eyes that showed no trace
of drowsiness, she smiled radiantly upon him as she made a low and most graceful curtsey.

"I am very sorry," said de Sigognac, as he rose to acknowledge her salute, "that the ruinous
condition of this chateau, which verily seems better fitted to receive phantoms than real living
guests, would not permit me to offer you more comfortable accommodations. If I had been able
to follow my inclinations, I should have lodged you in a luxurious chamber, where you could
have reposed between fine linen sheets, under silken curtains, instead of resting uneasily
in that worm-eaten old chair."

"Do not be sorry about anything, my lord, I pray you," answered the soubrette with another
brilliant smile; "but for your kindness we should have been in far worse plight; forced to
pass the night in the poor old chariot, stuck fast in the mud; exposed to the cutting wind
and pelting rain. We should assuredly have found ourselves in wretched case this morning. Besides,
this chateau which you speak of so disparagingly is magnificence itself in comparison with
the miserable barns, open to the weather, in which we have sometimes been forced to spend the
night, trying to sleep as best we might on bundles of straw, and making light of our misery
to keep our courage up."

While the baron and the actress were exchanging civilities the pedant's chair, unable to support
his weight any longer, suddenly gave way under him, and he fell to the floor with a tremendous
crash, which startled the whole company. In his fall he had mechanically seized hold of the
table-cloth, and so brought nearly all the things upon it clattering down with him. He lay
sprawling like a huge turtle in the midst of them until the tyrant, after rubbing his eyes
and stretching his burly limbs, came to the rescue, and held out a helping hand, by aid of
which the old actor managed with some difficulty to scramble to his feet.

"Such an accident as that could never happen to Matamore," said Herode, with his resounding
laugh; "he might fall into a spider's web without breaking through it."

"That's true," retorted the shadow of a man, in his turn stretching his long attenuated limbs
and yawning tremendously, "but then, you know, not everybody has the advantage of being a second
Polyphemus, a mountain of flesh and bones, like you, or a big wine-barrel, like our friend
Blazius there."

All this commotion had aroused Isabelle, Serafina and the duenna, who presently made their
appearance. The two younger women, though a little pale and weary, yet looked very charming
in the bright morning light. In de Sigognac's eyes they appeared radiant, in spite of the shabbiness
of their finery, which was far more apparent now than on the preceding evening. But what signify
faded ribbons and dingy gowns when the wearers are fresh, young and beautiful? Besides, the
baron's eyes were so accustomed to dinginess that they were not capable of detecting such slight
defects in the toilets of his fair guests, and he gazed with delight upon these bewitching
creatures, enraptured with their grace and beauty. As to the duenna, she was both old and ugly,
and had long ago accepted the inevitable with commendable resignation.

As the ladies entered by one door, Pierre came in by the other, bringing more wood for the
fire, and then proceeding to make the disordered room as tidy as he could. All the company
now gathered round the cheerful blaze that was roaring up the chimney and sending out a warm
glow that was an irresistible attraction in the chill of the early morning. Isabelle knelt
down and stretched out the rosy palms of her pretty little hands as near to the flames as she
dared, while Serafina stood behind and laid her hands caressingly on her shoulders, like an
elder sister taking tender care of a younger one. Matamore stood on one leg like a huge heron,
leaning against the corner of the carved chimney-piece, and seemed inclined to fall asleep
again, while the pedant was vainly searching for a swallow of wine among the empty bottles.

The baron meantime had held a hurried private consultation with Pierre as to the possibility
of procuring a few eggs, or a fowl or two, at the nearest hamlet, so that he might give the
travellers something to eat before their departure, and he bade the old servant be quick about
it, for the chariot was to make an early start, as they had a long day's journey before them.

"I cannot let you go away fasting, though you will have rather a scanty breakfast I fear,"
he said to his guests, "but it is better to have a poor one than none at all; and there is
not an inn within six leagues of this where you could be sure of getting anything to eat. I
will not make further apologies, for the condition of everything in this house shows you plainly
enough that I am not rich; but as my poverty is mainly owing to the great expenditures made
by my honoured ancestors in many wars for the defence of king and country, I do not need to
be ashamed of it."

"No indeed, my lord," answered Herode in his deep, bass voice, "and many there be in these
degenerate days who hold their heads very high because of their riches, who would not like
to have to confess how they came in possession of them."

"What astonishes me," interrupted Blazius, "is that such an accomplished young gentleman as
your lordship seems to be should be willing to remain here in this isolated spot, where Fortune
cannot reach you even if she would. You ought to go to Paris, the great capital of the world,
the rendezvous of brave and learned men, the El Dorado, the promised land, the Paradise of
all true Frenchmen. There you would be sure to make your way, either in attaching yourself
to the household of some great nobleman, a friend of your family, or in performing some brilliant
deed of valour, the opportunity for which will not be long to find." 

They may have recognized their kinship to him, for he could climb like any squirrel, and not
one of them could have clung more securely to this bough where he was swinging, rejoicing in the
strength of his lithe, compact little body. When he shouted in pure enjoyment of life, they chattered
in reply, and eyed him with a primeval curiosity that had no fear in it. This lad in short trousers,
torn shirt, and a frayed straw hat above his mobile and cheerful face, might be only another
sort of animal, a lover like themselves of the beech-nut and the hickory-nut.

It was a gay world up here among the tossing branches. Across the river, on the first terrace
of the hill, were weather-beaten farmhouses, amid apple orchards and cornfields. Above these rose
the wooded dome of Mount Peak, a thousand feet above the river, and beyond that to the left
the road wound up, through the scriptural land of Bozrah, to high and lonesome towns on a plateau
stretching to unknown regions in the south. There was no bar to the
imagination in that direction.

What a gracious valley, what graceful slopes, what a mass of color bathing this lovely summer
landscape! Down from the west, through hills that crowded on either side to divert it from its
course, ran the sparkling Deerfield, from among the springs and trout streams of the Hoosac, merrily
going on to the great Connecticut. Along the stream was the ancient highway, or lowway, where
in days before the railway came the stage-coach and the big transport-wagons used to sway and rattle
along on their adventurous voyage from the gate of the Sea at Boston to the gate of the West
at Albany.

Below, where the river spread wide among the rocks in shallows, or
eddies in deep, dark pools, was the ancient, long, covered, wooden
bridge, striding diagonally from rock to rock on stone columns, a
dusky tunnel through the air, a passage of gloom flecked with glints
of sunlight, that struggled in crosscurrents through the interstices
of the boards, and set dancing the motes and the dust in a golden
haze, a stuffy passage with odors a century old--who does not know
the pungent smell of an old bridge?--a structure that groaned in all
its big timbers when a wagon invaded it.

And then below the bridge the lad could see the historic meadow, which was a cornfield in the
eighteenth century, where Captain Moses Rice and Phineas Arms came suddenly one summer day
to the end of their planting and hoeing. The house at the foot of the hill where the boy was
cultivating his imagination had been built by Captain Rice, and in the family burying-ground
in the orchard above it lay the body of this mighty militia-man, and beside him that of Phineas
Arms, and on the headstone of each the legend familiar at that period of our national life,
"Killed by the Indians."

Happy Phineas Arms, at the age of seventeen to exchange in a moment the tedium of the cornfield
for immortality.

There was a tradition that years after, when the Indians had disappeared through a gradual process
of intoxication and pauperism, a red man had been seen skulking along the brow of this very
hill and peering down through the bushes where the boy was now perched on a tree, shaking his fist
at the hated civilization, and vengefully, some said pathetically, looking down into this valley
where his race had been so happy in the natural pursuits of fishing, hunting, and war. On
the opposite side of the river was still to be traced an Indian trail, running to the western mountains,
which the boy intended some time to follow; for this highway of warlike forays, of messengers
of defiance, along which white maidens had been led captive to Canada, appealed greatly to
his imagination.

The boy lived in these traditions quite as much as in those of the Revolutionary War into which
they invariably glided in his perspective of history, the redskins and the redcoats being both
enemies of his ancestors. There was the grave of the envied Phineas Arms--that ancient boy
not much older than he--and there were hanging in the kitchen the musket and powder-horn that his great-grandfather
had carried at Bunker Hill, and did he not know by heart the story of his great-grandmother,
who used to tell his father that she heard when she was a slip of a girl in Plymouth the cannonading
on that awful day when Gage met his victorious defeat?

In fact, according to his history-book there had been little but wars in this peaceful nation: the
War of 1812, the Mexican War, the incessant frontier wars with the Indians, the Kansas War, the
Mormon War, the War for the Union. The echoes of the latter had not yet died away. What a career
he might have had if he had not been born so late in the world! Swinging in this tree-top,
with a vivid consciousness of life, of his own capacity for action, it seemed a pity that he
could not follow the drum and the flag into such contests as he read about so eagerly.

And yet this was only a corner of the boy's imagination. He had many worlds and he lived in
each by turn.

There was the world of the Old Testament, of David and Samson, and of those dim figures in the
dawn of history, called the Patriarchs.

There was the world of Julius Caesar and the Latin grammar, though this was scarcely as real to
him as the Old Testament, which was brought to his notice every Sunday as a necessity of his life,
while Caesar and AEneas and the fourth declension were made to be
a task, for some mysterious reason, a part of his education.

He had not been told that they were really a part of the other world which occupied his mind
so much of the time, the world of the Arabian Nights and Robinson Crusoe, and Coleridge and Shelley
and Longfellow, and Washington Irving and Scott and Thackeray, and Pope's Iliad and Plutarch's
Lives. That this was a living world to the boy was scarcely his fault, for it must be confessed
that those were very antiquated book-shelves in the old farmhouse to which he had access, and the
news had not been apprehended in this remote valley that the classics
of literature were all as good as dead and buried, and that the human
mind had not really created anything worth modern notice before about
the middle of the nineteenth century.

It was not exactly an ignorant valley, for the daily newspapers were there, and the monthly magazine,
and the fashion-plate of Paris, and the illuminating sunshine of new science, and enough of the
uneasy throb of modern life. Yet somehow the books that were still books had not been sent
to the garret, to make room for the illustrated papers and the profound physiological studies
of sin and suffering that were produced by touching a scientific button. No, the boy was conscious
in a way of the mighty pulsation of American life, and he had also a dim notion that his dreams
in his various worlds would come to a brilliant fulfillment when he was big enough to go out
and win a name and fame. But somehow the old books, and the family life, and the sedate ways of
the community he knew, had given him a fundamental and not unarmed faith in the things that were
and had been.

Every Sunday the preacher denounced the glitter and frivolity and corruption of what he called Society,
until the boy longed to see this splendid panorama of cities and hasting populations, the seekers
of pleasure and money and fame, this gay world which was as fascinating as it was wicked. The preacher
said the world was wicked and vain.

It did not seem so to the boy this summer day, not at least the world he knew. Of course the
boy had no experience. He had never heard of Juvenal nor of Max Nordau. He had no philosophy
of life. He did not even know that when he became very old the world would seem to him good
or bad according to the degree in which he had become a good or a bad man.

In fact, he was not thinking much about being good or being bad, but of trying his powers in
a world which seemed to offer to him infinite opportunities. His name--Philip Burnett--with
which the world, at least the American world, is now tolerably familiar, and which he liked
to write with ornamental flourishes on the fly-leaves of his schoolbooks,
did not mean much to him, for he had never seen it in print, nor been
confronted with it as something apart from himself.

But the Philip that he was he felt sure would do something in the world. What that something
should be varied from day to day according to the book, the poem, the history or biography that
he was last reading. It would not be difficult to write a poem like "Thanatopsis" if he took
time enough, building up a line a day. And yet it would be better to be a soldier, a man who
could use the sword as well as the pen, a poet in uniform. This was a pleasing imagination.
Surely his aunt and his cousins in the farmhouse would have more respect for him if he wore a uniform,
and treat him with more consideration, and perhaps they would be very anxious about him when
he was away in battles, and very proud of him when he came home between battles, and went quite
modestly with the family into the village church, and felt rather than saw the slight flutter
in the pews as he walked down the aisle, and knew that the young ladies, the girl comrades of
the district school, were watching him from the organ gallery, curious to see Phil, who had gone
into the army. Perhaps the preacher would have a sermon against war, and the preacher should
see how soldierlike he would take this attack on him. Alas! is such vanity at the bottom of even
a reasonable ambition? Perhaps his town would be proud of him if he were a lawyer, a Representative
in Congress, come back to deliver the annual oration at the Agricultural Fair. He could see
the audience of familiar faces, and hear the applause at his witty satires and his praise of the nobility
of the farmer's life, and it would be sweet indeed to have the country people grasp him by the
hand and call him Phil, just as they used to before he was famous. What he would say, he was
not thinking of, but the position he would occupy before the audience. There were no misgivings
in any of these dreams of youth.

II

The musings of this dreamer in a tree-top were interrupted by the peremptory notes of a tin horn
from the farmhouse below. The boy recognized this not only as a signal of declining day and
the withdrawal of the sun behind the mountains, but as a personal
and urgent notification to him that a certain amount of disenchanting
drudgery called chores lay between him and supper and the lamp-illumined
pages of The Last of the Mohicans.

It was difficult, even in his own estimation, to continue to be a hero at the summons of a tin
horn--a silver clarion and castle walls would have been so different--and Phil slid swiftly
down from his perch, envying the squirrels who were under no such bondage of duty.

Recalled to the world that now is, the lad hastily gathered a bouquet of columbine and a bunch of
the tender leaves and the red berries of the wintergreen, called to "Turk," who had been all these
hours watching a woodchuck hole, and ran down the hill by leaps and circuits as fast as his little
legs could carry him, and, with every appearance of a lad who puts duty before pleasure, arrived
breathless at the kitchen door, where Alice stood waiting for him.

Alice, the somewhat feeble performer on the horn, who had been watching for the boy with her
hand shading her eyes, called out upon his approach:

"Why, Phil, what in the world--"

"Oh, Alice!" cried the boy, eagerly, having in a moment changed in his mind the destination
of the flowers; "I've found a place where the checker-berries are thick as spatter." And Phil put
the flowers and the berries in his cousin's hand. Alice looked very much pleased with this simple
tribute, but, as she admired it, unfortunately asked--women always ask such questions:

"And you picked them for me?"

This was a cruel dilemma.

Phil was more devoted to his sweet cousin than to any one else in the world, and he didn't
want to hurt her feelings, and he hated to tell a lie. So he only looked a lie, out of his
affectionate, truthful eyes, and said:

"I love to bring you flowers. Has uncle come home yet?"

"Yes, long ago. He called and looked all around for you to unharness the horse, and he wanted
you to go an errand over the river to Gibson's. I guess he was put out."

"Did he say anything?"

"He asked if you had weeded the beets. And he said that you were the master boy to dream and
moon around he ever saw." And she added, with a confidential and mischievous smile: "I think you'd
better brought a switch along; it would save time."

Phil had a great respect for his uncle Maitland, but he feared him almost more than he feared
the remote God of Abraham and Isaac.

Mr. Maitland was not only the most prosperous man in all that region, but the man of the finest appearance,
and a bearing that was equity itself. He was the first selectman of the town, and a deacon in
the church, and however much he prized mercy in the next world he did not intend to have that
quality interfere with justice in this world. Phil knew indeed that he was a man of God, that
fact was impressed upon him at least twice a day, but he sometimes used to think it must be
a severe God to have that sort of man. And he didn't like the curt way he pronounced the holy
name--he might as well have called Job "job."

Alice was as unlike her father, except in certain race qualities of integrity and common-sense,
as if she were of different blood. She was the youngest of five maiden sisters, and had arrived
at the mature age of eighteen. Slender in figure, with a grace that was half shyness, soft
brown hair, gray eyes that changed color and could as easily be sad as merry, a face marked
with a moving dimple that every one said was lovely, retiring in manner and yet not lacking spirit
nor a sly wit of her own. Now and then, yes, very often, out of some paradise, no doubt, strays
into New England conditions of reticence and self-denial such a sweet
spirit, to diffuse a breath of heaven in its atmosphere, and to wither
like a rose ungathered.

These are the New England nuns, not taking any vows, not self-consciously virtuous, apparently
untouched by the vanities of the world. Marriage? It is not in any girl's nature not to think of
that, not to be in a flutter of pleasure or apprehension at the attentions of the other sex.
Who has been able truly to read the thoughts of a shrinking maiden in the passing days of
her youth and beauty? In this harmonious and unselfish household, each with decided individual
character, no one ever intruded upon the inner life of the other. No confidences were given in
the deep matters of the heart, no sign except a blush over a sly allusion to some one who
had been "attentive." If you had stolen a look into the workbasket or the secret bureau-drawer,
you might have found a treasured note, a bit of ribbon, a rosebud, some token of tenderness or
of friendship that was growing old with the priestess who cherished it. Did they not love flowers,
and pets, and had they not a passion for children? Were there not moonlight evenings when they
sat silent and musing on the stone steps, watching the shadows and the dancing gleams on the
swift river, when the air was fragrant with the pink and the lilac?

Not melancholy this, nor poignantly sad, but having in it nevertheless something of the pathos
of life unfulfilled. And was there not sometimes, not yet habitually, coming upon these faces, faces
plain and faces attractive, the shade of renunciation?

Phil loved Alice devotedly. She was his confidante, his defender, but he feared more the disapproval
of her sweet eyes when he had done wrong than the threatened punishment of his uncle.

"I only meant to be gone just a little while," Phil went on to say.

"And you were away the whole afternoon. It is a pity the days are
so short. And you don't know what you lost."

"No great, I guess."

"Celia
and her mother were here. They stayed all the afternoon."

"Celia
Howard? Did she wonder where I was?"

"I don't know. She didn't say
anything about it. What a dear little thing she is!"

"And she can
say pretty cutting things."

"Oh, can she? Perhaps you'd better run
down to the village before dark and take her these flowers."

"I'm
not going. I'd rather you should have the flowers." And Phil spoke
the truth this time. You must stay and take care of the chateau
for me; I could not bear to think of it entirely abandoned, or in any other hands than yours,
my faithful friend! And besides, what would become of Bayard and Miraut and Beelzebub, if you
too deserted them?"

"You are right, master," answered Pierre, his eyes filling with tears as he bade him farewell
before he turned and led Bayard slowly back by the road they had come. The old pony whinnied
loudly as he left his master, and long after he was out of sight could be heard at short intervals
calling out his adieux.

The poor young baron, left quite alone, stood for a moment with downcast eyes, feeling very
desolate and sad; then roused himself with an effort, and hastened after the chariot. As he
walked along beside it with a sorrowful, preoccupied air, Isabelle complained of being tired
of her somewhat cramped position, and said that she would like to get down and walk a little
way for a change; her real motive being a kind wish to endeavour to cheer up poor de Sigognac
and make him forget his sad thoughts. The shadow that had overspread his countenance passed
away entirely as he assisted Isabelle to alight, and then offering his arm led her on in advance
of the lumbering chariot. They had walked some distance, and she was just reciting some verses,
from one of her parts, which she wished to have altered a little, when the sound of a horn
close at hand startled them, and from a by-path emerged a gay party returning from the chase.
The beautiful Yolande de Foix came first, radiant as Diana, with a brilliant colour in her
cheeks and eyes that shone like stars. Several long rents in the velvet skirt of her riding
habit showed that she had been following the hounds through the thickets of furze that abound
in the Landes, yet she did not look in the least fatigued, and as she came forward made her
spirited horse fret and prance under quick, light strokes of her riding-whip--in whose handle
shone a magnificent amethyst set in massive gold, and engraved with the de Foix arms. Three
or four young noblemen, splendidly dressed and mounted, were with her, and as she swept proudly
past our hero and his fair companion-upon whom she cast a glance of haughty disdain--she said
in clear ringing tones, "Do look at the Baron de Sigognac, dancing attendance upon a Bohemienne."
And the little company passed on with a shout of laughter.

The poor baron was furious, and instinctively grasped the handle of his sword with a quick,
angry movement; but as quickly released it--for he was on foot and those who had insulted him
were on horseback, so that he could not hope to overtake them; and besides, he could not challenge
a lady. But the angry flush soon faded from his cheek, and the remembrance of his displeasure
from his mind, under the gentle influence of Isabelle, who put forth all her powers of fascination
to make her companion forget the affront he had received because of her.

The day passed without any other incident worthy of being recorded, and our travellers arrived
in good season at the inn where they were to sup and sleep.

CHAPTER III. THE BLUE SUN INN

It was in front of the largest house in a wretched little hamlet that the weary oxen drawing
the chariot of Thespis stopped of their own accord. The wooden sign that creaked distractingly
as it swung to and fro at every breath of wind bore a large, blue sun, darting its rays, after
the most approved fashion, to the utmost dimensions of the board on which it was painted. Rather
an original idea, one would say, to have a blue orb of day instead of a golden one--such as
adorned so many other inns on the great post-road--but originality had had nothing whatever
to do with it. The wandering painter who produced this remarkable work of art happened to have
no vestige of any colour but blue left upon his palette, and he discoursed so eloquently of
the superiority of this tint to all others that he succeeded in persuading the worthy innkeeper
to have an azure sun depicted on his swinging sign. And not this one alone had yielded to his
specious arguments, for he had painted blue lions, blue cocks, blue horses, on various signs
in the country round, in a manner that would have delighted the Chinese--who esteem an artist
in proportion to the unnaturalness of his designs and colouring.

The few scrawny, unwholesome-looking children feebly playing in the muddy, filthy, little street,
and the prematurely old, ghastly women standing at the open doors of the miserable thatched
huts of which the hamlet was composed, were but too evidently the wretched victims of a severe
type of malarial fever that prevails in the Landes. They were truly piteous objects, and our
travellers were glad to take refuge in the inn--though it was anything but inviting--and so
get out of sight of them.

The landlord, a villainous looking fellow, with an ugly crimson scar across his forehead, who
rejoiced in the extraordinary name of Chirriguirri, received them with many low obeisances,
and led the way into his house, talking volubly of the excellent accommodations to be found
therein.

The Baron de Sigognac hesitated ere he crossed the threshold, though the comedians had all
drawn back respectfully to allow him to precede them. His pride revolted at going into such
a place in such company, but one glance from Isabelle put everything else out of his head,
and he entered the dirty little inn at her side with an air of joyful alacrity. In the happy
kingdom of France the fortunate man who escorted a pretty woman, no matter where, needed not
to fear ridicule or contumely, and was sure to be envied.

The large low room into which Maitre Chirriguirri ushered the party, with much ceremony and
many bows, was scarcely so magnificent as he had given them reason to expect, but our strolling
players had long ago learned to take whatever came in their way without grumbling, and they
seated themselves quietly on the rude wooden settles ranged round a rough, stone platform in
the centre of the apartment, upon which a few sticks of wood were blazing the smoke escaping
through an opening in the roof above. From an iron bar which crossed this opening a strong
chain was suspended, and fastened to it was the crane, so that it hung at the proper height
over the fire--for this was the kitchen as well as the reception room. The low ceiling was
blackened with the smoke that filled the upper part of the room and escaped slowly through
the hole over the fire, unless a puff of wind drove it back again. A row of bright copper casseroles
hanging against the wall--like the burnished shields along the sides of the ancient triremes,
if this comparison be not too noble for such a lowly subject--gleamed vaguely in the flashing
of the red fire-light, and a large, half-empty wine-skin lying on the floor in one corner looked
like a beheaded body carelessly flung down there. Certainly not a cheerful looking place, but,
the fire being newly replenished burned brightly, and our weary travellers were glad to bask
in its genial warmth.

At the end of one of the wooden benches a little girl was sitting, apparently sound asleep.
She was a poor, thin, little creature, with a mass of long, tangled, black hair, which hung
down over her face and almost concealed it, as she sat with her head drooping forward on her
breast. Her scanty clothing was tattered and dirty, her feet and poor, thin, little legs brown
and bare, and covered with scratches--some still bleeding which bore witness to much running
through the thorny furze thickets.

Isabelle, who chanced to sit down near her, cast many pitying glances upon this forlorn little
figure, but took care not to disturb the quiet sleep she seemed to be enjoying in her uncomfortable
resting-place. After a little, when she had turned to speak to Serafina, who sat beside her,
the child woke with a start, and pushing back the mass of dishevelled hair revealed a sad little
face, so thin that the cheek bones were painfully prominent, and pale to ghastliness. A pair
of magnificent, dark brown eyes, with heavy sweeping lashes, looked preternaturally large in
her woe-begone little countenance, and at this moment were filled with wondering admiration,
mingled with fierce covetousness, as she stared at Serafina's mock jewels--and more especially
at Isabelle's row of pearl beads. She seemed fairly dazzled by these latter, and gazed at them
fixedly in a sort of ecstasy--having evidently never seen anything like them before, and probably
thinking they must be of immense value. Occasionally her eyes wandered to the dresses of the
two ladies, and at last, unable to restrain her ardent curiosity any longer, she put out her
little brown hand and softly felt of Isabelle's gown, apparently finding exquisite delight
in the mere contact of her finger-tips with the smooth, glossy surface of the silk. Though
her touch was so light Isabelle immediately turned towards the child and smiled upon her encouragingly,
but the poor little vagabond, finding herself detected, in an instant had assumed a stupid,
almost idiotic look--with an instinctive amount of histrionic art that would have done honour
to a finished actress. Then dropping her eyelids and leaning her shoulders against the hard
back of the wooden settle she seemed to fall into a deep sleep, with her head bent down upon
her breast in the old attitude.

Meanwhile Maitre Chirriguirri had been talking long and loudly about the choice delicacies
he could have set before his guests if they had only come a day or two earlier, and enumerating
all sorts of fine dishes--which doubtless had existed only in his own very vivid imagination--though
he told a high-sounding story about the noblemen and grandees who had supped at his house and
devoured all these dainties only yesterday. When at length the flow of his eloquence was checked
by a display of ferocity on the part of the tyrant, and he was finally brought to the point,
he acknowledged that he could only give them some of the soup called garbure--with which we
have already made acquaintance at the Chateau de Sigognac, some salt codfish, and a dish of
bacon; with plenty of wine, which according to his account was fit for the gods. Our weary
travellers were so hungry by this time that they were glad of even this frugal fare, and when
Mionnette, a gaunt, morose-looking creature, the only servant that the inn could boast, announced
that their supper was ready in an adjoining room, they did not wait to be summoned a second time.

They were still at table when a great barking of dogs was heard without, together with the
noise of horses' feet, and in a moment three loud, impatient knocks upon the outer door resounded
through the house. Mionnette rushed to open it, whereupon a gentleman entered, followed by
a number of dogs, who nearly knocked the tall maid-servant over in their eagerness to get in,
and rushed into the dining-room where our friends were assembled, barking, jumping over each
other, and licking off the plates that had been used and removed to a low side table, before
their master could stop them. A few sharp cuts with the whip he held in his hand distributed
promiscuously among them, without distinction between the innocent and the guilty ones, quieted
this uproar as if by magic, and the aggressive hounds, taking refuge under the benches ranged
along the walls, curled themselves round on the floor and went comfortably to sleep, or lay
panting, with their red tongues hanging out of their mouths and heads reposing on their fore-paws--not
daring to stir.

The obstreperous dogs thus disposed of, the cavalier advanced into the room, with the calm
assurance of a man who feels perfectly at his ease; his spurs ringing against the stone floor
at every step. The landlord followed him obsequiously, cap in hand, cringing and bowing in
most humble fashion--having entirely laid aside his boasting air and evidently feeling very
ill at ease--this being a personage of whom he stood in awe. As the gentleman approached the
table he politely saluted the company, before turning to give his orders to Maitre Chirriguirri,
who stood silently awaiting them.

The newcomer was a handsome man of about thirty, with curly light hair, and a fair complexion,
somewhat reddened by exposure to the sun. His eyes were blue, and rather prominent, his nose
slightly retroussi; his small blond mustache was carefully turned up at the ends, and scarcely
shaded a well-formed but sensual mouth, below which was a small, pointed beard--called a royal
in those days, an imperial in these. As he took off his broad felt hat, richly ornamented with
long sweeping plumes, and threw it carelessly down on one of the benches, it was seen that
his smooth, broad forehead was snowy white, and the contrast with his sunburnt cheeks was not
by any means displeasing. Indeed it was a very handsome, attractive face, in which an expression
of frank gaiety and good humour tempered the air of pride that pervaded it.

The dress of this gay cavalier was extremely rich and elegant; almost too much so for the country.
But when we say that the marquis--for such was his title--had been following the hounds in
company with the beautiful Yolande de Foix, we feel that his costume, of blue velvet elaborately
decorated with silver braid, is fully accounted for. He was one of the gallants that shone
at court in Paris--where he was in the habit of spending a large portion of every year--and
he prided himself on being one of the best dressed noblemen in France.

His order to the obsequious landlord was in few words. "I want some broth for my dogs, some
oats for my horses, a piece of bread and a slice of ham for myself, and something or other
for my grooms"--and then he advanced smilingly to the table and sat down in a vacant place
beside the pretty soubrette, who, charmed with such a gay, handsome seignior, had been pleased
to bestow a languishing glance and a brilliant smile upon him.

Maitre Chirriguirri hastened to fetch what he had demanded, while the soubrette, with the grace
of a Hebe, filled his glass to the brim with wine; which he accepted with a smile, and drank
off at a single draught. For a few minutes he was fully occupied in satisfying his hunger--which
was veritably that of a hunter--and then looking about him at the party assembled round the
table, remarked the Baron de Sigognac, with whom he had a slight acquaintance, seated beside
the fair Isabelle--in whose company indeed he had seen him already once before that day. The
two young people were talking together in low tones, and quite absorbed in each other; but
the language of their eyes was unmistakable, and the marquis smiled to himself as he took note
of what he supposed to be a very promising intrigue--wherein he did the youthful pair great
injustice. As a thorough man of the world he was not at all surprised at finding de Sigognac
with this band of vagabond players, from such a motive, and the half-pitying contempt he had
formerly felt for the shabby, retiring young baron was straightway changed to a certain admiration
and respect by this evidence of his gallantry. When he caught his eye he made a little gesture
of recognition and approval--to show that he understood and appreciated his position--but paid
no further attention to him, evidently meaning to respect his incognito, and devoted himself
to the soubrette. She received his high-flown compliments with peals of laughter, and paid
him back in his own coin with considerable wit and much merriment, to the great delight of
the marquis--who was always delighted to meet with any adventure of this sort.

Wishing to pursue this one, which opened so well, he declared loudly that he was passionately
fond of the theatre, and complained pathetically of being deprived altogether of this, his
favourite amusement, in the country; then addressing himself to the tyrant he asked whether
the troupe had any pressing engagements that would prevent their turning aside a little from
the usual route to visit the Chateau de Bruyeres and give one of their best plays there--it
would be an easy matter to rig up a theatre for them in the great hall or the orangery.

The tyrant hastened to reply that nothing could be easier, and that the troupe, one of the
best that had ever travelled through the provinces, was entirely at his lordship's disposition--"from
the king to the soubrette"--he added, with a broad grin.

"That is capital," said the marquis, "and as to money matters, you can arrange them to suit
yourself. I should not think of bargaining with the votaries of Thalia--a muse so highly favoured
by Apollo, and as eagerly sought after, and enthusiastically applauded, at the court of his
most gracious majesty as in town and country everywhere."

After arranging the necessary preliminaries, the marquis, who had meantime surreptitiously
squeezed the soubrette's hand under the table, rose, called his dogs together, put on his hat,
waved his hand to the company in token of adieu, and took his departure amid much barking and
commotion--going directly home, in order to set on foot his preparations to receive the comedians
on the morrow at his chateau.

As it was growing late, and they were to make an early start the next morning, our tired travellers
lost no time in going to rest; the women in a sort of loft, where they had to make themselves
as comfortable as they could with the bundles of straw that were to serve them for beds, whilst
the men slept on the benches in the room where they had supped.

CHAPTER IV. AN ADVENTURE WITH BRIGANDS

Let us return now to the little girl we left feigning to sleep soundly upon a settle in the
kitchen. There was certainly something suspicious about the fierce way in which she eyed Isabelle's
pearl necklace, and her little bit of clever acting afterwards. As soon as the door had closed
upon the comedians she slowly opened her large, dark eyes, looked sharply round the great,
dim kitchen, and when she found that nobody was watching her, slipped quietly down from the
bench, threw back her hair with a quick movement of the head peculiar to her, crept softly
to the door, which she cautiously unlatched, and escaped into the open air without making any
more sound than a shadow, then walked slowly and listlessly away until she had turned a corner
and was out of sight of the house, when she set off running as fleetly as a deer pursued by
the hounds--jumping over the frequent obstacles in her path with wonderful agility, never stumbling,
and flying along, with her black hair streaming out behind her, like some wild creature of
the desolate pine barrens through which she was skilfully threading her way.

She reached at last a little knoll, crowned by a group of pine trees crowded closely together,
and dashing up the steep bank with undiminished speed came to a sudden stop in the very middle
of the grove. Here she stood still for a moment, peering anxiously about her, and then, putting
two fingers in her mouth, gave three shrill whistles, such as no traveller in those desolate
regions can hear without a shudder. In an instant what seemed to be a heap of pine twigs stirred,
and a man emerging from beneath them rose slowly to his feet at a little distance from the child.

"Is it you, Chiquita?" he asked. "What news do you bring? You are late. I had given over expecting
you to-night, and gone to sleep."

The speaker was a dark, fierce-looking fellow of about five and twenty, with a spare, wiry
frame, brilliant black eyes, and very white teeth--which were long and pointed like the fangs
of a young wolf. He looked as if he might be a brigand, poacher, smuggler, thief, or assassin--all
of which he had been indeed by turns. He was dressed like a Spanish peasant, and in the red
woollen girdle wound several times around his waist was stuck a formidable knife, called in
Spain a navaja. The desperadoes who make use of these terrible weapons usually display as many
red stripes, cut in the steel, upon their long pointed blades as they have committed murders,
and are esteemed by their companions in proportion to the number indicated by this horrible
record. We do not know exactly how many of these scarlet grooves adorned Agostino's navaja,
but judging by the savage expression of his countenance, and the fierce glitter of his eye,
we may safely suppose them to have been creditably numerous.

"Well, Chiquita," said he, laying his hand caressingly on the child's head, "and what did you
see at Maitre Chirriguirri's inn?"

"A great chariot full of people came there this afternoon," she answered. "I saw them carry
five large chests into the barn, and they must have been very heavy, for it took two men to
lift them."

"Hum!" said Agostino, "sometimes travellers put stones into their boxes to make them seem very
weighty and valuable, and deceive the inn-keepers."

"But," interrupted the child eagerly, "the three young ladies had trimmings of gold on their
clothes; and one of them, the prettiest, had round her neck a row of round, shining, white
things, and oh! they were so beautiful!" and she clasped her hands in an ecstasy of admiration,
her voice trembling with excitement.

"Those must be pearls," muttered Agostino to himself, "and they will be worth having--provided
they are real--but then they do make such perfect imitations now-a-days, and even rich people
are mean enough to wear them."

"My dear Agostino, my good Agostino," continued Chiquita, in her most coaxing tones, and without
paying any attention to his mutterings, "will you give me the beautiful, shining things if
you kill that lady?"

"They would go so well with your rags and tatters!" he answered mockingly.

"But I have so often kept watch for you while you slept, and I have run so far to tell you
when any one was coming, no matter how cold it was, nor how my poor, bare feet ached--and I
have never once kept you waiting for your food, when I used to carry it to you in your hiding
places, even when I was bad with the fever, or my teeth chattering with the chill, and I so
weak that I could hardly drag myself along. Oh Agostino! do remember what I have done for you,
and let me have the beautiful, shining things."

"Yes, you have been both brave and faithful, Chiquita, I admit; but we have not got the wonderful
necklace yet, you know. Now, tell me, how many men were there in the party."

"Oh! a great many. A big, tall man with a long beard; an old, fat man--one that looked like
a fox--two thin men, and one that looked like a gentleman, though his clothes were very old
and shabby."

"Six men," said Agostino, who had counted them on his fingers as she enumerated them, and his
face fell. "Alas! I am the only one left of our brave band now; when the others were with me
we would not have minded double the number. Have they arms, Chiquita?"

"The gentleman has a sword, and so has the tall, thin man--a very long one."

"No pistols or guns?"

"I didn't see any," answered Chiquita, "but they might have left them in the chariot, you know;
only Maitre Chirriguirri or Mionnette would have been sure to send you word if they had, and
they said nothing to me about them."

"Well, we will risk it then, and see what we can do," said Agostino resolutely. "Five large,
heavy chests, gold ornaments, a pearl necklace! they certainly are worth trying for."

The brigand and his little companion then went to a secret place in the thick pine grove, and
set to work industriously, removing a few large stones, a quantity of branches, and finally
the five or six boards they had concealed, disclosing a large hole that looked like a grave.
It was not very deep, and Agostino, jumping down into it, stooped and lifted out what seemed
to be a dead body--dressed in its usual every-day clothes--which he flung down upon the ground
beside the hole. Chiquita, who did not appear to be in the least agitated or alarmed by these
mysterious proceedings, seized the figure by the feet, with the utmost sang-froid, and dragged
it out of Agostino's way, with a much greater degree of strength than could have been expected
from such a slight, delicate little creature. Agostino continued his work of exhumation until
five other bodies lay beside the first one--all neatly arranged in a row by the little girl,
who seemed to actually enjoy her lugubrious task. It made a strange picture in the weird light
of the nearly full moon, half veiled by driving clouds--the open grave, the bodies lying side
by side under the dark pine trees, and the figures of Agostino and Chiquita bending over them.
But the tragic aspect of the affair soon changed to a comic one; for when Agostino placed the
first of the bodies in an upright position it became apparent that it was only a sort of a
scarecrow--a rude figure intended to frighten timid traveller--which being skilfully disposed
at the edge of the grove, partly hidden among the trees, looked at a little distance exactly
like a brigand--gun and all. Indeed it really was dressed in the garments of one of his old
comrades, who had paid the penalty of his crimes on the gallows. He apostrophized the figure
as he arranged it to his liking, calling it by name, relating some of the brave deeds of its
prototype, and bewailing the sad fate that had left him to ply his nefarious trade single-handed,
with a rude eloquence that was not wanting in pathos. Returning to where the others lay, he
lifted up one which he reminded Chiquita, represented her father--whose valour and skill he
eulogized warmly--whilst the child devoutly made the sign of the cross as she muttered a prayer.
This one being put in position, he carried the remaining figures, one by one, to the places
marked for them, keeping up a running commentary upon the ci-devant brigands whose representatives
they were, and calling them each repeatedly by name, as if there were a certain sad satisfaction
in addressing them in the old, familiar way.

When this queer task was completed, the bandit and his faithful little companion, taking advantage
of a flood of moonlight as the clouds drifted away before the wind, went and stood on the road--not
very far from their retreat--by which our travellers were to pass, to judge of the effect of
their group of brigands. It was really very formidable, and had often been of great service
to the bold originator of the plan; for on seeing so numerous a band apparently advancing upon
them, most travellers took to their heels, leaving the coveted spoils behind them for Agostino
to gather up at his leisure.

As they slowly returned to the pine grove he said to the child, who was clinging to his arm
affectionately as she walked beside him, "The first stage of their journey to-morrow is a long
one, and these people will be sure to start in good season, so that they will reach this spot
just at the right time for us--in the uncertain light of the dawn. In the darkness of night
our brigands yonder could not be seen, and in broad daylight the ruse would be apparent; so
we are in luck, Chiquita! But now for a nap--we have plenty of time for it, and the creaking
of the wheels will be sure to wake us." Accordingly Agostino threw himself down upon a little
heap of pine branches and heather, Chiquita crept close to him, so that the large cloak with
which he had covered himself might protect her also from the chilly night air, and both were
soon sound asleep.

It was so early when our travellers were roused from their slumbers and told that it was time
for them to resume their journey, by the treacherous landlord of the Blue Sun Inn, that it
seemed to them like the middle of the night; to they arranged themselves as comfortably as
they could in the great, roomy chariot, and despite the loud creaking and groaning that accompanied
its every movement as it went slowly lumbering along, and the shrill cries of the driver to
his oxen, they were all soon asleep again, excepting de Sigognac, who walked beside the chariot,
lost in thoughts of Isabelle's beauty, grace and modesty, and adorable goodness, which seemed
better suited to a young lady of noble birth than a wandering actress. He tormented himself
with trying to devise some means to induce her to reciprocate the ardent love that filled his
heart for her, not for an instant suspecting that it was already a fait accompli, and that
the sweet, pure maiden had given him, unasked, her gentle, faithful heart. The bashful young
baron imagined all sorts of romantic and perilous incidents in which he might constitute himself
her knight and protector, and show such brave and tender devotion to her as he had read of
in the old books of chivalry; and which might lead up to the avowal he was burning to make,
yet dared not. It never occurred to him that the look in his dark eyes whenever they rested
on her face, the tone of his voice when he addressed her, the deep sighs he vainly sought to
stifle, and the tender, eager care with which he strove to anticipate her every wish had spoken
for him, as plainly as any words could do; and that, though he had not dared to breathe one
syllable of his passionate love to Isabelle, she knew it, rejoiced in it, and was proud of
it, and that it filled her with a delicious, rapturous joy, such as she had never felt before,
or even dreamed of.

The morning began to break--the narrow band of pale light on the horizon, which was growing
rapidly brighter and assuming a rosy tinge, was reflected here and there in the little pools
of water that shone like bits of a broken mirror scattered over the ground--distant sounds
were heard, and columns of smoke rising into the still morning air proved that even in this
desolate, God-forsaken part of the Landes there were human habitations to be found. Stalking
along with giant strides on the highest part of some rising ground not very far off was a grotesque
figure, clearly defined against the bright eastern sky, which would have been a puzzle to a
stranger, but was a familiar sight to de Sigognac--a shepherd mounted on his high stilts, such
as are to be met with everywhere throughout the Landes.

But the young baron was too much absorbed in his own engrossing thoughts to take any note of
his surroundings as he kept pace with the slow-moving chariot, until his eye was caught and
his attention fixed by a strange little point of light, glittering among the sombre pines that
formed the dense grove where we left Agostino and Chiquita sleeping. He wondered what it could
be--certainly not a glow-worm, the season for them was past long ago--and he watched it as
he advanced towards it with a vague feeling of uneasiness. Approaching nearer he caught a glimpse
of the singular group of figures lurking among the trees, and at first feared an ambuscade;
but finding that they continued perfectly motionless he concluded that he must have been mistaken,
and that they were only old stumps after all; so he forbore to arouse the comedians, as he
had for a moment thought of doing.

A few steps farther and suddenly a loud report was heard from the grove, a bullet sped through
the air, and struck the oxen's yoke--happily without doing any damage, further than causing
the usually quiet, steady-going beasts to swerve violently to one side--when fortunately a
considerable heap of sand prevented the chariot's being overturned into the ditch beside the
road. The sharp report and violent shock startled the sleeping travellers in the chariot, and
the younger women shrieked wildly in their terror, whilst the duenna, who had met with such
adventures before, slipped the few gold pieces she had in her purse into her shoe. Beside the
chariot, from which the actors were struggling to extricate themselves, stood Agostino--his
cloak wrapped around his left arm and the formidable navaja in his right hand-and cried in
a voice of thunder, "Your money or your lives! Resistance is useless! At the first sign of
it my band will fire upon you."

Whilst the bandit was shouting out these terrible words, de Sigognac had quietly drawn his
sword, and as he finished attacked him furiously. Agostino skilfully parried his thrusts, with
the cloak on his left arm, which so disposed made an excellent shield, and watched his opportunity
to give a murderous stab with his navaja, which indeed he almost succeeded in doing; a quick
spring to one side alone saved the baron from a wound which must have been fatal, as the brigand
threw the knife at him with tremendous force, and it flew through the air and fell ringing
upon the ground at a marvellous distance, instead of piercing de Sigognac's heart. His antagonist
turned pale, for he was quite defenceless, having depended entirely upon his trusty navaja,
which had never failed him before, and he very well knew that his vaunted band could not come
to his rescue. However, he shouted to them to fire, counting upon the sudden terror that command
would inspire to deliver him from his dilemma; and, indeed, the comedians, expecting a broadside,
did take refuge behind the chariot, whilst even our brave hero involuntarily bent his head
a little, to avoid the shower of bullets.

Meantime Chiquita, who had breathlessly watched all that passed from her hiding place among
some furze bushes close at hand, when she saw her friend in peril, crept softly forth, glided
along on the ground like a snake until she reached the knife, lying unnoticed where it had
fallen, and, seizing it, in one instant had restored it to Agostino, She looked like a little
fury as she did so, and if her strength had been equal to her ferocity she would have been
a formidable foe.

Agostino again aimed his navaja at the baron, who was at that moment off his guard, and would
not perhaps have escaped the deadly weapon a second time if it had been hurled at him from
that skilful hand, but that a grasp of iron fastened upon the desperado's wrist, just in time
to defeat his purpose. He strove in vain to extricate his right arm from the powerful grip
that held it like a vice--struggling violently, and writhing with the pain it caused him--but
he dared not turn upon this new assailant, who was behind him, because de Sigognac would have
surely scored his back for him; and he was forced to continue parrying his thrusts with his
left arm, still protected by the ample cloak firmly wound around it. He soon discovered that
he could not possibly free his right hand, and the agony became so great that his fingers could
no longer keep their grasp of the knife, which fell a second time to the ground.

It was the tyrant who had come to de Sigognac's rescue, and now suddenly roared out in his
stentorian voice, "What the deuce is nipping me? Is it a viper? I felt two sharp fangs meet
in the calf of my leg."

It was Chiquita, who was biting his leg like a dog, in the vain hope of making him turn round
and loose his hold upon Agostino; but the tyrant shook her off with a quick movement, that
sent her rolling in the dust at some distance, without relinquishing his captive, whilst Matamore
dashed forward and picked up the navaja, which he shut together and put into his pocket.

Whilst this scene was enacting the sun had risen, and poured a flood of radiance upon the earth
in which the sham brigands lost much of their life-like effect. "Ha, ha!" laughed the peasant,
"it would appear that those gentlemen's guns take a long time to go off; they must be wet with
dew. But whatever may be the matter with them they are miserable cowards, to stand still there
at a safe distance and leave their chief to do all the fighting by himself."

"There is a good reason for that," answered Matamore, as he climbed up the steep bank to them,
"these are nothing but scarecrows." And with six vigorous kicks he sent the six absurd figures
rolling in every direction, making the most comical gestures as they fell.

"You may safely alight now, ladies," said the baron, reassuringly, to the trembling actresses,
"there's nothing more to fear; it was only a sham battle after all."

In despair at his overwhelming defeat, Agostino hung his head mournfully, and stood like a
statue of grief, dreading lest worse still should befall him, if the comedians, who were in
too great force for him to attempt to struggle any longer against them, decided to take him
on to the next town and deliver him over to the jailor to be locked up, as indeed he richly
deserved. His faithful little friend, Chiquita, stood motionless at his side, as downcast as
himself. But the farce of the false brigands so tickled the fancy of the players that it seemed
as if they never would have done laughing over it, and they were evidently inclined to deal
leniently with the ingenious rascal who had devised it. The tyrant, who had loosened, but not
quitted, his hold upon the bandit, assumed his most tragic air and voice, and said to him,
"You have frightened these ladies almost to death, you scoundrel, and you richly deserve to
be strung up for it; but if, as I believe, they will consent to pardon you--for they are very
kind and good---I will not take you to the lock-up. I confess that I do not care to furnish
a subject for the gallows. Besides, your stratagem is really very ingenious and amusing--a
capital farce to play at the expense of cowardly travellers--who have doubtless paid you well
for the entertainment, eh? As an actor, I appreciate the joke, and your ingenuity inclines
me to be indulgent. You are not simply and brutally a robber, and it would certainly be a pity
to cut short such a fine career."

"Alas!" answered Agostino mournfully, "no other career is open to me, and I am more to be pitied
than you suppose. I am the only one left of a band formerly as complete as yours; the executioner
has deprived me of my brave comrades one by one, and now I am obliged to carry on my operations
entirely alone--dressing up my scarecrows, as your friend calls them, and assuming different
voices to make believe that I am supported by a numerous company. Ah! mine is a sad fate; and
then my road is such a poor one--so few travellers come this way--and I have not the means
to purchase a better one. Every good road is owned by a band of brigands, you know. I wish
that I could get some honest work to do, but that is hopeless; who would employ such a looking
fellow as I am? all in rags and tatters, worse than the poorest beggar. I must surely have
been born under an unlucky star. And now this attempt has failed, from which I hoped to get
enough to keep us for two months, and buy a decent cloak for poor Chiquita besides; she needs
it badly enough, poor thing! Yesterday I had nothing to eat, and I had to tighten my belt to
sustain my empty stomach. Your unexpected resistance has taken the very bread out of my mouth;
and since you would not let me rob you, at least be generous and give me something."

"To be sure," said the tyrant, who was greatly amused; "as we have prevented your successfully
plying your trade we certainly do owe you an indemnity. Here, take these two pistoles to drink
our healths with."

Isabelle meantime sought in the chariot for a piece of new woollen stuff she happened to have
with her, which was soft and warm, and gave it to Chiquita, who exclaimed, "Oh! but it is the
necklace of shining white things that I want."

Kind Isabelle immediately unclasped it, and then fastened it round the slender neck of the
child, who was so overwhelmed with delight that she could not speak. She silently rolled the
smooth, white beads between her little brown fingers in a sort of mute ecstasy for a few moments,
then suddenly raising her head and tossing back her thick black hair, she fixed her sparkling
eyes on Isabelle, and said in a low, earnest voice, "Oh! you are very, very good, and I will
never, never kill you." Then she ran swiftly back to the pine grove, clambered up the steep
bank, and sat down to admire and enjoy her treasure. As to Agostino, after making his best
bow, and thanking the tyrant for his really princely munificence, he picked up his prostrate
comrades, and carried them back to be buried again until their services should be needed on
some, he hoped, more auspicious occasion.

The driver, who had deserted his oxen and run to hide himself among the furze bushes at the
beginning of the affray, returned to his post when he saw that all danger was over, and the
chariot once more started upon its way--the worthy duenna having taken her doubloons out of
her shoes and restored them to her purse, which was then deposited in the depths of a mysterious
pocket.

"You behaved like a real hero of romance," Isabelle said in an undertone to de Sigognac, "and
I feel that under your protection we can travel securely; how bravely you attacked that bandit
single-handedly when you had every reason to believe that he was supported by an armed band."

"You overestimate my little exploit," the baron replied modestly, "there was no danger worth
mentioning," then sinking his voice to a whisper, "but to protect you I would meet and conquer
giants, put to flight a whole host of Saracens, attack and destroy dragons and horrid monsters;
I would force my way through enchanted forests filled with snares and perils, such as we read
of, and even descend into hell itself, like Aeneas of old. In your dear service the most difficult
feats would be easy; your beautiful eyes inspire me with indomitable courage, and your sweet
presence, or even the bare thought of you, seems to endue me with a super-human strength."

This was, perhaps, rather exaggerated, but perfectly sincere, and Isabelle did not doubt for
a moment that de Sigognac would be able to accomplish fabulous deeds of prowess in her honour
and for her sake; and she was not so very far wrong, for he was becoming hourly more passionately
enamoured of her, and ardent young lovers are capable of prodigies of valour, inspired by the
fair objects of their adoration.

Serafina, who had overheard some of the baron's impassioned words, could not repress a scornful
smile; so many women are apt to find the fervid protestations of lovers, when addressed to
others than themselves, supremely ridiculous, yet they joyfully receive the very same protestations,
without detecting anything in the least absurd in them when whispered into their own ears.
For a moment she was tempted to try the power of her many charms, which she believed to be
irresistible, with the young baron, and win him away from Isabelle; but this idea was speedily
rejected, for Serafina held beauty to be a precious gem that should be richly set in gold--the
gem was hers, but the golden setting was lamentably wanting, and poor de Sigognac could not
possibly furnish it. So the accomplished coquette decided not to interfere with this newly-born
love affair, which was "all very well for a simple-minded young girl like Isabelle," she said
to herself, with a disdainful smile and toss of the head.

Profound silence had fallen upon the party after the late excitement, and some of them were
even growing sleepy again, when several hours later the driver suddenly called out, "There
is the Chateau de Bruyeres."

CHAPTER V. AT THE CHATEAU DE BRUYERES

The extensive domain of the Marquis de Bruyeres was situated just upon the edge of the Landes,
and consisted mostly of productive, highly-cultivated land--the barren sand reaching only to
the boundary wall of the great park that surrounded the chateau. An air of prosperity pervaded
the entire estate, in pleasing contrast with the desolate region of country close at hand.
Outside the park wall was a broad, deep ditch, filled with clear water and spanned by a handsome
stone bridge, wide enough for two carriages abreast, which led to the grand entrance gates.
These were of wrought iron, and quite a marvel of delicate workmanship and beauty. There was
a good deal of gilding about them, and the lofty apex bore a marquis's crown above a shield
supported by two naked savages, upon which the de Bruyeres arms were richly emblazoned--it
was an entrance worthy of a royal demesne. When our party paused before it, in the course of
the morning, a servant in a rich, showy livery was slowly opening the folding leaves of the
magnificent gates, so as to admit them into the park. The very oxen hesitated ere they took
their slow way through it, as if dazzled by so much splendour, and ashamed of their own homeliness--the
honest brutes little suspecting that the wealthy nobleman's pomp and glitter are derived from
the industry of the lowly tillers of the soil. It certainly would seem as if only fine carriages
and prancing horses should be permitted to pass through such a portal as this, but the chariot
of Thespis, no matter how humble, is privileged, and not only enters, but is welcome everywhere.

A broad avenue led from the bridge to the chateau, passing by carefully clipped shrubbery,
whence marble statues peeped out here and there, and a beautiful garden, with flower-beds ingeniously
laid out in geometrical patterns, and brilliant with well contrasted colours. The narrow walks
among them were bordered with box, and strewn with fine sand of various tints, and several
little fountains threw up their sparkling jets among the flowers. In the centre of the garden
was a magnificent fountain, with a large, oblong, marble basin, and a Triton, on a high pedestal,
pouring water from a shell. A row of yews, skilfully trimmed into pyramids, balls, and various
fanciful shapes, and placed at regular distances on each side of the grand avenue, extended
from the entrance gates to the chateau, their sombre hue contrasting well with the brighter
green of the foliage behind them. Everything was in the most perfect order; not a leaf out
of place, nor a particle of dust to be seen anywhere, as if the gardeners had just freshly
washed and trimmed every tree, shrub, and plant under their care.

All this magnificence astonished and delighted the poor comedians, who rarely gained admission
to such an abode as this. Serafina, affecting indifference, but noting everything carefully
from under her lowered eye-lashes, promised herself to supplant the soubrette in the marquis's
favour, feeling that this great seignior was her own legitimate prey, and ought to have devoted
himself to her in the first place, instead of weakly yielding to the vulgar blandishments of
the pretty waiting-maid, as he should no longer be permitted to do--if she had any power.

Meanwhile the soubrette, feeling sure of her conquest, had given herself up to castle-building
with all the fervour Of her ardent southern nature. Isabelle, who was not preoccupied by any
ambitious projects, turned her head now and then to glance and smile tenderly at de Sigognac,
who was sitting in the chariot behind her and who she knew must be feeling acutely the painful
contrast between this splendid estate and his own desolate, half-ruined chateau. Her loving
heart ached for him, and her eyes spoke sweetest sympathy to the poor young nobleman, reduced
so low a fortune, yet so worthy of a better fate.

The tyrant was deep in thought, trying to decide how, much he might venture to demand for the
services of his troupe, and mentally increasing the amount at every step, as new glories disclosed
themselves to his wondering eyes. The pedant was looking forward impatiently to the copious
draughts of generous wine he felt sure of enjoying in the splendid chateau that was now in
full view, and Leander, striving to smooth his slightly dishevelled locks with a dainty little
tortoise-shell pocket-comb, was wondering, with a fluttering heart, whether a fair marquise
dwelt within those walls, and would gaze down upon him from one of those windows as he alighted--indulging
in high hopes of the impression he should make upon her susceptible heart.

The Chateau de Bruyeres, which had been entirely rebuilt in the preceding reign, was a noble
structure, of immense size, three stories in height, and enclosing a large interior court.
It was built of red brick, with elaborate, white stone facings. There were many pretty balconies
with sculptured stone railings, and large, clear panes of glass--an unusual luxury at that
epoch--in the numerous lofty windows, through which the rich hangings within were visible;
and a projecting porch, reached by an imposing flight of broad stone steps, in the centre of
the facade, marked the main entrance. The high, steep roof was of slate, in several shades,
wrought into a quaint, pretty pattern, and the groups of tall chimneys were symmetrically disposed
and handsomely ornamented. There was a look of gaiety and luxury about this really beautiful
chateau which gave the idea of great prosperity, but not the slightest approach to vulgar pretension.
There was nothing meretricious or glaring; everything was substantial and in perfect taste,
and an indescribably majestic, dignified air, if we may be allowed the expression, pervaded
the whole establishment, which spoke of ancient wealth and nobility under all this modern splendour.

Behind the chateau, its gardens and terraces, was a veritable forest of lofty, venerable trees,
forming the magnificent park, which was of great extent, and for centuries had been the pride
of the Bruyeres.

Although our high-minded young hero had never been envious of any one in his life, he could
not altogether suppress the melancholy sigh with which he remembered that in former years the
de Sigognacs had stood higher than the de Bruyeres in the province, and had taken precedence
of them at court; nor could he help contrasting in his own mind this fresh, new chateau, replete
with every beauty and luxury that a cultivated taste could devise and plentiful wealth procure,
with his own desolate, dilapidated mansion--the home of owls and rats--which was gradually
but surely crumbling into dust, and a keen pang shot through his heart at the thought. He recalled
the dreary, solitary, hopeless life he had led there, and said to himself that the Marquis
de Bruyeres ought to be a very happy man, with so much to make his existence delightful. The
stopping of the chariot at the foot of the broad stone steps in the front of the chateau aroused
him from his reverie; he dismissed as quickly as he could the sad thoughts that had engrossed
him, endeavoured to dismiss also the dark shadow from his brow, and jumping lightly to the
ground turned and held out his hand to help Isabelle to descend, before any one else could
offer her that little service.

The Marquis de Bruyeres, who had seen the chariot advancing slowly up the avenue, stood in
the porch to receive them. He was superbly dressed, and looked very handsome, as both Serafina
and the soubrette secretly remarked. He descended two or three steps as the chariot stopped,
and welcomed his guests with a friendly wave of the hand--doing them as much honour as if they
had been of his own rank--which act of courtesy, let us hasten to explain, was because of the
Baron de Sigognac's presence among them; but for that they would not have been brought to the
main entrance at all.

At this moment the wily soubrette, seeing her opportunity for a bold stroke, prepared to alight;
and as de Sigognac was fully occupied with Isabelle, and nobody else thought of paying any
attention to her--for she always jumped to the ground as lightly as a bird, disdaining assistance--she
hesitated for a moment, with an adorable little air of timidity, and then raised an appealing
glance to the marquis. He could not resist it, and, rushing down the steps to her aid, held
out both hands to her. With wonderful art the clever little actress managed to slip and lose
her balance, so as to fall into his extended arms, clasping him around the neck as she did so.

"Pardon me, my lord," said she, breathlessly, to the marquis, feigning a confusion she was
far from really feeling, "I thought I was going to fall, and grasped your collar, just as a
drowning man clutches at the nearest object. A fall is a bad omen, you know, as well as a serious
matter, for a poor actress."

"Permit me to look upon this little accident as a favour," the marquis replied, giving her
a most significant glance, and lightly pressing her yielding form in his arms before he released
her.

Serafina had watched this little by-play out of the corner of her eye, though her face was
apparently turned away from them, and she bit her lip till it bled, with vexation; so after
all the soubrette had succeeded, by an abominably bold action, in compelling the marquis to
neglect her betters and give his warmest welcome to a low intrigante, said the "leading lady"
to herself, swelling with righteous indignation, and abusing the offender roundly in her thoughts--wishing
that she could do it aloud, and expose her outrageous, unmannerly artifice.

"Jean," said the marquis to a servant in livery who stood near, "have this chariot taken into
the court, and see that the decorations, scenery, etc., are carefully put in some convenient
place; have the luggage of these ladies and gentlemen carried to the rooms that I ordered to
be made ready for them, and take care that they have everything they want;" then in a lower
tone, but very emphatically, "I desire that they should be treated with the utmost courtesy
and respect."

These orders being given, the marquis gravely ascended the steps, followed by the comedians,
and having consigned them to his major-domo to show them to their respective rooms and make
them comfortable, he gracefully bowed and left them; darting an admiring glance at the soubrette
as he did so, which she acknowledged by a radiant smile, that Serafina, raging inwardly, pronounced
"abominably bold."

The chariot meantime had made its way into a back court, accompanied by the tyrant, the pedant
and Scapin, who superintended the unloading of the various articles that would be needed--a
strange medley, which the supercilious servants of the chateau, in their rich liveries, handled
with a very lofty air of contempt and condescension, feeling it quite beneath their dignity
to wait upon a band of strolling players. But they dared not rebel, for the marquis had ordered
it, and he was a severe master, as well as a very generous one.

The major-domo, however, conducted his charges to their appointed chambers with as profound
an air of respect as if they had been real princes and princesses; for the marquis himself
had visited the left wing of the chateau, where they were to be lodged, had specified the room
for each guest, and ordered that they should want for nothing--a very unusual proceeding on
his part, as he was in the habit of leaving all such minor details to his trusty major-domo.
A beautiful chamber, hung with tapestry which represented the loves of Cupid and Psyche, was
given to the soubrette, the pretty, dainty, blue one to Isabelle, and the luxurious red one
to Serafina, whilst the more sober brown one was assigned to the duenna. The Baron de Sigognac
was installed in a magnificent apartment, whose panelled walls were covered with richly embossed
Spanish leather. It was close to Isabelle's room--a delicate attention on the part of the marquis.
This superb chamber was always reserved for his most honoured guests, and in giving it to our
young hero he desired to testify that he recognised and appreciated his rank, though he religiously
respected his incognito.

When de Sigognac was left alone, and at liberty to think over quietly the odd situation in
which he found himself, he looked at his magnificent surroundings with surprise as well as
admiration--for he had never in his life seen, or even imagined, such splendour and luxury.
The rich glowing colours of the chimerical flowers and foliage embossed on a golden ground
of the Spanish leather on the walls, the corresponding tints in the frescoed ceiling and the
heavy, silken hangings at the windows and doors and round the bed, the elaborately carved and
gilded furniture, the luxurious easy-chairs and sofas, the large mirrors with bevelled edges,
and the dainty dressing-table, lavishly furnished with all the accessories of the toilet, with
its oval glass draped with lace which was tied back with knots of gay ribbon, certainly did
make up a charming whole, and the wood fire burning brightly in the open fireplace gave a cheerful,
cosy air to it all.

Our poor young baron blushed painfully as he caught sight of his own figure in one of the long
mirrors--his shabby, ill-fitting clothes looked so sadly out of place amidst all this magnificence--and
for the first time in his life he felt ashamed of his poverty. Highly unphilosophical this,
but surely excusable in so young a man as our hero. With a natural desire to improve his forlorn
appearance if he could, he unpacked the scanty supply of clothing that his faithful Pierre
had put up for him--hoping that he might come across something a little less thread-bare than
the suit he actually had on his back--but the inspection was not satisfactory, and he groaned
as he discarded one faded, shabby garment after another. The linen was not any better--worn
so that it was thin everywhere, with numerous darns and patches, and many holes, he could not
find a single shirt that was whole and in good condition. He was so absorbed in this melancholy
inspection that he did not hear a low knock at the door, nor notice that it was slowly pushed
open, having been already ajar, to admit the stout person of Blazius, who approached him with
many bows and flourishes, though entirely unobserved. When the pedant reached his side de Sigognac
was just holding up before him a shirt that had as many openings as the rose window of a cathedral,
and slowly shaking his head as he gazed at it, with an expression of utter discouragement.

"Body of Bacchus!" exclaimed the pedant--his voice, so close at hand, startling the astonished
baron, who had believed himself alone, and safe from intrusion--"that shirt has verily a valiant
and triumphant air. It looks as if it had been worn by Mars himself in battle, so riddled has
it been by lances, spears, darts, arrows, and I know not what besides. Don't be ashamed of
it, Baron!--these holes are honourable to you. Many a shirt of fine linen, ruffled and embroidered,
according to the latest fashion, disguises the graceless person of some rascally parvenu--and
usurer as well perhaps--who usurps the place of his betters. Several of the great heroes, of
immortal fame, had not a shirt to their backs--Ulysses, for example, that wise and valiant
man, who presented himself before the beautiful Princess Nausicaa, with no other covering than
a bunch of sea-weed--as we are told, in the Odyssey, by the grand old bard, Homer."

"Unfortunately," de Sigognac replied, "there is no point of resemblance, my dear Blazius, between
me and the brave King of Ithaca, save the lack of linen. I have done no deeds of valour to
shed a lustre over MY poverty. I have had no chance to make myself famous, and I fear that
the poets will never celebrate my praises in glowing hexameters. But, jesting aside, I must
confess that I do feel greatly annoyed at being forced to appear in this guise here. The Marquis
de Bruyeres recognised me, though he made no sign, and he may betray my secret."

"It is a pity," said the pedant in reply, "but there's a remedy for every ill under the sun,
save death, according to the old saying, and if you will permit me, I think that I can help
you out of this awkward dilemma. We, poor players, shadows of real men and women, phantoms
of personages of every degree, from the highest to the lowest, have the means necessary for
assuming almost any character, you know. As 'costumier' of the troupe I am accustomed to make
all sorts of transformations, and can turn a miserable vagabond into an Alexander, or a vulgar
wench into a princess. Now, if you are not too proud, I will exercise my poor skill in your
lordship's service. Since you have been willing to join our company for this journey, do not
disdain to make use of our resources, such as they are, and put aside these ill-fitting garments,
which disguise your natural advantages, and make you feel ill at ease. Most fortunately I happen
to have in reserve a handsome suit of black velvet, which has not the least of a theatrical
air about it, and has never been used; any gentleman could wear it, and unless I am much mistaken
it will fit you capitally. I have also the fine linen shirt, silk stockings, shoes--with broad
buckles, and cloak to go with it--there is nothing wanting, not even the sword."

"Oh! as to that," cried de Sigognac, with a gesture expressive of all that pride of birth which
no misfortunes could crush, "I have my father's sword."

"True," answered Blazius, "and guard it sacredly, my lord! for a sword is a faithful friend--defender
of its master's life and honour. IT does not abandon him in times of peril and disaster, like
the false friends who cling only to prosperity. Our stage swords have neither edge nor point,
for they are only intended for show; the wounds they make disappear suddenly when the curtain
falls, without the aid of the surgeon with his instruments and lint. That trusty sword of yours
you can depend upon in any emergency, and I have already seen it doing good service in our
behalf. But permit me to go and fetch the things I spoke of; I am impatient to see the butterfly
emerge from the chrysalis."

Having thus spoken, in the theatrical way that had become habitual with him, the worthy pedant
quitted the room, and soon reappeared, carrying a large package, which he deposited on the
table in the centre of the chamber.

"If your lordship will accept an old actor as valet-de-chambre," he said, rubbing his hands
joyfully together, "I will beautify you in no time. All the ladies will be sure to fall in
love with you, for--with no disrespect to the larder at the Chateau de Sigognac be it said--you
have fasted so much in your lonely life there that it has made you most interestingly slender
and pale--just what the dear creatures delight in. They would not listen to a word from a stout
lover, even if the diamonds and pearls of the fairy tale dropped from his lips whenever he
spoke. That is the sole reason for my want of success with the fair sex, and I long ago deserted
the shrine of Venus for the worship of Bacchus. A big paunch is not amiss among the devotees
of that merry god, for it bears witness to plentiful libations."

Thus running on gaily, the worthy pedant strove to amuse the melancholy young nobleman, while
he deftly performed his duties as valet; and they were very quickly completed, for the requirements
of the stage necessitate great dexterity on the part of the actors to make the metamorphoses
frequently needed with sufficient promptness and rapidity. Charmed with the result of his efforts
he led de Sigognac up to one of the large mirrors, wherein, upon raising his eyes, he saw a
figure which, at the first glance, he thought must be that of some person who had entered the
room without his knowledge, and turned to ask who the intruder was--but there was no stranger
there, and he discovered that it was his own reflection--so changed that he was mute with astonishment.
A young, handsome, richly-dressed de Sigognae stood before him, and a radiant smile parted
his lips and lighted up his face as he gazed at his own image, which perfected the really marvellous
transformation. Blazius, standing near, contemplated his work with undisguised pride and satisfaction,
changing his position several times so as to get different views, as a sculptor might who had
just put the finishing touches to his statue altogether to his liking.

"When you have made your way at court, my lord, and regained the position held by your ancestors,
as I hope and expect that you will do, I shall pray you to give me a refuge for my old age
in your household, and make me intendant of your lordship's wardrobe," said he, with a profound
bow to the baron.

"I will not forget your request, my good Blazius, even though I fear that I shall never be
able to comply with it," de Sigognae answered with a melancholy smile. "You, my kind friend,
are the first human being that has ever asked a favour of me."

"After our dinner, which we are to have very shortly, we are to consult with his lordship,
the marquis, as to what play shall be given this evening, and learn from him where we are to
rig our theatre. You will pass for the poet of the troupe; it is by no means an unheard-of
thing for men of learning and position to join a band of players thus--either for the fun of
the thing, and in hope of adventures, or for the love of a young and beautiful actress. I could
tell you of several notable instances; and it is thought to be rather to a man's credit than
otherwise in fashionable circles. Isabelle is a very good pretext for you; she is young, beautiful,
clever, modest, and virtuous. In fact many an actress who takes like her the role of the ingenuous
young girl is in reality all that she personates, though a frivolous and frequently licentious
public will not credit it for a moment."

Herewith the pedant discreetly retired, having accomplished, to his great satisfaction, what
he had really feared to propose to the young baron, for whom he had conceived a very warm affection.

Meanwhile the elegant Leander, indulging in delightful dreams of the possible fair chatelaine
who was to fall a victim to his charms, was making his careful toilet--arraying himself in
his most resplendent finery, scrupulously kept for grand occasions--convinced that great good
fortune awaited him, and determined to carry the noble lady's heart by storm.

As to the actresses, to whom the gallant marquis, with princely munificence, had sent several
pieces of rich stuffs and silks, it is needless to say that they spared no pains to make themselves
as charming as possible, and obeyed the summons to dinner radiant with smiles and in high good
humour--excepting indeed the fair Serafina, who was inwardly consumed with envy and spite,
but careful to conceal it from all beholders.

The marquis, who was of an ardent, impatient nature, made his appearance in the dining-room
before they had quite finished the sumptuous repast which had been served to them; he would
not allow them to rise, but seated himself at the table with them, and when the last course
had been removed, asked the tyrant to be good enough to give him a list of the plays they were
in the habit of acting, so that he might select one for the evening's entertainment. But so
many were enumerated that his lordship found it not easy to make a choice, and expressed his
desire to have the tyrant's ideas upon the subject.

"There is one piece we often play," Herode said, "which never fails to please, and is so full
of good-natured fun and nonsense that it keeps the audience in a roar of laughter from the
beginning to the end."

"Let us have that one, by all means," the marquis exclaimed; "and pray what is the name of
this delightful play?"

"The Rodomontades of Captain Matamore."

"A capital title, upon my word! and has the soubrette a good part in it?" asked his lordship,
with a languishing glance at her.

"The most racy, mischievous role imaginable," said Herode warmly, "and she plays it to perfection--it
is her chef d'oeuvre. She is always applauded to the echo in it."

At this high praise from the manager, Zerbine--for such was the soubrette's name--tried her
best to get up a becoming blush, but in vain. Modesty she had none, and the tint she would
fain have called into requisition at that moment was not contained in any of her numerous rouge-pots.
So she cast down her eyes, thereby displaying to advantage the length and thickness of her
jet-black lashes, and raised her hand with a deprecating gesture, which called attention to
its pretty, taper fingers and rosy nails. The marquis watched he admiringly, and she certainly
was very charming in her way. He did not vouchsafe even a glance to the other two young actresses--refraining
from testifying any marked admiration for Isabelle because of the prior claim of the Baron
de Sigognac--though he was secretly very much delighted with her sweet, refined style of beauty,
and the quiet dignity and grace of her deportment. Serafina, who was naturally indignant that
the marquis had not even asked if there was a part for her in the piece to be performed, accused
him in her heart of being no gentleman, and of having very low, vulgar tastes, but she was
the only one of the party that felt any dissatisfaction.

Before the marquis left them he said to Herode, "I have given orders to have the orangery cleared
so that our theatre can be arranged there; they are carrying planks, trestles, benches, hangings,
and all other needful articles in there now. Will you kindly superintend the workmen, who are
new to this sort of business? They will obey your orders as they would my own."

Accordingly the tyrant, Blazius and Scapin repaired to the orangery, which was at a little
distance from the chateau and admirably calculated for the purpose it was now to serve, and
where they found everything necessary to convert it into a temporary theatre.

Whilst this work is going forward we will make our amiable, indulgent readers acquainted with
the fair mistress of the chateau--having heretofore forgotten to mention that the Marquis de
Bruyeres was a married man; he thought of it so seldom himself that we may surely be pardoned
for this omission. As can be readily imagined, from our last remark, love had not been the
moving cause in this union. Adjoining estates, which, united in one, formed a noble domain,
and equality of rank had been the chief considerations. After a very brief honeymoon, during
which they had become painfully aware of a total want of congeniality, the marquis and marquise--like
well-bred people, making no outcry about their matrimonial failure--had tacitly agreed to live
amicably under the same roof, but entirely independent of each other--he to go his way and
she hers, with perfect freedom. They always treated each other in public, and indeed whenever
they chanced to meet, with the greatest courtesy, and might easily have been mistaken by a
casual observer for an unusually happy and united pair. Mme. la Marquise occupied a sumptuous
suite of apartments in the chateau, which her husband never thought of entering without first
sending to ascertain whether it would be convenient for madame to receive him, like a formal
visitor. But we will avail ourselves of the time-honoured privilege of authors, and make our
way into the noble chatelaine's bed-chamber, without any form or ceremony--feeling sure of
not disturbing its fair occupant, since the writer of a romance wears upon his finger the wonder-working
ring of Gyges, which renders him invisible.

It was a large, lofty room, hung with superb tapestry representing the adventures of Apollo,
and exhibiting every luxury that wealth could procure. Here also a bright wood fire was, burning
cheerily, and the Marquise de Bruyeres sat before her dressing table, with two maids in attendance
upon her, absorbed in the all-important business of putting the finishing touches to her extremely
becoming as well as effective toilet. Mme. la Marquise was a handsome brunette, whose embonpoint,
which had succeeded to the slender outline of early youth, had added to her beauty; her magnificent
black hair, which was one of her ladyship's greatest charms, was dressed in the most elaborate
fashion--an intricate mass of glossy braids, puffs and curls, forming a lofty structure, and
ornamented with a large bow of crimson ribbon, while one long curl fell upon her fair neck,
making it look all the whiter by contrast. Her dress of crimson silk, cut very low, displayed
to advantage--the plump, dimpled shoulders, and her snowy bosom, and from a band of black velvet
round her throat was suspended a heart-shaped locket, set with superb rubies and brilliants.
A white satin petticoat covered with priceless old lace, over which the crimson silk gown,
open in front, was looped high upon the hips, and then swept back in a long, ample, richly
trimmed train, completed the elegant toilet of Mme. la Marquise. Jeanne, the favourite maid
and confidante, held open the box of tiny black, "muoches"--without which no fashionable lady
of that epoch considered herself fully equipped--while the marquise placed one, with most happy
effect, near the corner of her rather pretty mouth, and then hesitated some time before she
could decide where to put the other, which she held ready on the tip of her forefinger. The
two maids stood motionless, breathlessly watching their mistress, as if fully impressed with
the importance of this grave question, until at last the little black star found a resting-place
just above the edge of the crimson silk bodice, to the left--indicating, in the accepted hieroglyphics
of that age of gallantry, that he who aspired to the lips of the fair wearer must first win
her heart.

After a last lingering look in the mirror Mme. la Marquise rose and walked slowly towards the
fire, but suddenly, remembering that there was yet one adornment wanting, turned back, and
took from a beautiful casket standing open on the toilet-table, a large, thick watch--called
in those days a Nuremberg egg--which was curiously enamelled in a variety of bright colours,
and set with brilliants. It hung from a short, broad chain of rich workmanship, which she hooked
into her girdle, near another chain of the same description, from which depended a small hand-mirror
in a pretty gold frame.

"Madame is looking her loveliest to-day," said Jeanne in flattering tones; "her hair is dressed
to perfection, and her gown fits like a glove."

"Do you really think so?" asked her mistress languidly, and with affected indifference. "It
seems to me, on the contrary, that I am positively hideous. My eyes are sunken, and this colour
makes me look immensely stout. I have half a mind to exchange this dress for a black one now.
What do you think, Jeanne? Black makes people look slender, they say."

"If madame insists upon it I can quickly make the exchange; but it would be a sad pity not
to wear such an elegant and becoming costume as madame has on now."

"Well, let it be then; but it will be all your fault, Jeanne, if I fail to receive as much
admiration as usual this evening. Do you know whether the marquis has invited many people to
come and see this play?"

"Yes, madame, several messengers have been sent off on horseback in different directions, and
there will be sure to be a large gathering--they will come from all the chateaux within driving
distance--for such an occasion as this is rare, here in the depths of the country."

"You are right," said Mme. la Marquise, with a deep sigh, which was almost a groan; "we are
buried alive in this dreary place. And what about these players?--have you seen them, Jeanne?--are
there any handsome young actors among them?"

"I have only had a glimpse of them, madame, and such people are so painted and fixed up, they
say, that it is hard to tell what they really do look like; but there was one slender young
man, with long, black curls and a very good figure, who had quite a grand air."

"That must be the lover, Jeanne, for it is always the best looking young actor in the troupe
who takes that part. It would be ridiculous, you know, to have a stout old codger, or a very
ugly man, or even an awkward one, making declarations of love, and going down on their knees,
and all that sort of thing--it would not do at all, Jeanne!"

"No, madame, it would not be very nice," said the maid with a merry laugh, adding shrewdly,
"and although it seems to make very little difference what husbands may be like, lovers should
always be everything that is charming."

"I confess that I have a weakness for those stage gallants," Mme. la Marquise said with a little
sigh, "they are so handsome, and so devoted--they always use such beautiful language, and make
such graceful gestures--they are really irresistible. I cannot help feeling vexed when their
impassioned appeals are received coldly, and they are driven to despair, as so often happens
in plays; I would like to call them to me and try to console them, the bewitching creatures!" 

As for Trees, Grain, Pults, Fruits, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, and Roots, I know of none in England
either for Pleasure or Use, but what are very common there, and thrive as well or better in
that Soil and Climate than this for the generality; for though they cannot brag of Gooseberries
and Currants, yet they may of Cherries, Strawberries, &c. in which
they excel: Besides they have the Advantage of several from other
Parts of America, there being Heat and Cold sufficient for any; except
such as require a continual Heat, as Lemons and Oranges, Pine-Apples,
and the like, which however may be raised there with Art and Care.

The worst Thing in their Gardens, that I know, is the Artichoak; but this I attribute to Want
of Skill and good Management.

Mulberry Trees and Silkworms thrive there to Admiration, and Experience has proved that the
Silk Manufacture might be carried on to great Advantage.

There is Coal enough in the Country, but good Fire-Wood being so plentiful that it encumbers the
Land, they have no Necessity for the Trouble and Expence of digging up the Bowels of the Earth,
and conveying them afterwards to their several Habitations.

There grows Plenty of Sumack, so very useful in the Dying Trade.

The Land is taken up in Tracts, and is Freehold by Patent under the King, paying two Shillings
as a yearly Quit-Rent for every hundred Acres.

Most Land has been long since taken up and seated, except it be high up in the Country.

For surveying of Land, when any is taken up, bought, exchanged, or the Right contested, there
is appointed a Surveyor in each County, nominated and examined by the Governors of the College, in
whose Gift those Places are under the Surveyor General.

But of this I may be more particular upon another Occasion; only I shall here observe, that every five
or seven Years all People are obliged to go a Procession round their own Bounds, and renew
their Landmarks by cutting fresh Notches in the boundary Trees.

Sometimes whole Plantations are sold, and at other Times small Habitations and Lands are let; but
this is not very common, most having Land of their own; and they that have not think to make
more Profit by turning Overseers, or by some other better Ways, than by Farming.

Though now Land sells well there, in a few Years it will be more valued, since the Number of Inhabitants
encreases so prodigiously; and the Tracts being divided every Age among several Children (not unlike
Gavel Kind in Kent and Urchinfield) into smaller Plantations; they at Length must be reduced
to a Necessity of making the most of, and valuing a little, which is now almost set at Nought.

In
general the Country of Virginia is plentiful, pleasant and healthy; especially to such as are not
too fond of the Customs and Way of living they have been used to elsewhere; and to such as will
endeavour at first to bear with some small Matters, and wean themselves, and make every Change
as agreeable as they can.

Without such Proceeding the best Country in the World would not please them; since wherever they
go from Home they must certainly find many Things different from what they have been accustomed
to.

As for Health, I think this Climate as good as any with Care, though some Constitutions can be
well in no Air, let them do what they will, and the stoutest cannot be always Proof against
Sickness, be they in never so healthy a Country; and in all Places with Care People may enjoy a good
Share of Health, if they have any tolerable good Constitution; if
they avoid Heats and Colds, Intemperance, and all Manner of Excesses.

In each Country is a great Number of disciplin'd and arm'd Militia, ready in Case of any sudden
Irruption of Indians or Insurrection of Negroes, from whom they are under but small Apprehension
of Danger.

Up James River is a Colony of French Refugees, who at the Mannacan
Town live happily under our Government, enjoying their own Language
and Customs.

The Gentlemen of the Country have no other distinguishing Titles of Honour, but Colonels and
Majors and Captains of the Militia, except the Honourable the Council,
and some commissioned in Posts by his Majesty or his Orders, who are
nominated Esquires: but there is one Baronet's Family there, viz.

Sir William Skipwith's.

The Taxes or Levies are either publick, County, or Parish; which are levied by the Justices or
Vestries, apportioning an equal Share to be paid by all Persons in every Family above Sixteen; except
the white Women, and some antiquated Persons, who are exempt.

The Payment is Tobacco, which is sold or applied in Specie to the Use intended.

The publick Levy is for the Service of the Colony in General, the County Levy is for the Use
of the County, collected by the Sheriff's and their Offices and Receivers; and the Parish
Levy is for its own particular Use, collected by the Church-Wardens for Payment of the Minister,
the Church, and Poor.

There are two Burgesses elected by the Free-holders, and sent from every County; and one for
James Town, and another for the College; these meet, choose a Speaker, &c. and proceed in most Respects
as the House of Commons in England, who with the Upper House, consisting of the Governor and Council,
make Laws exactly as the King and Parliament do; the Laws being passed there by the Governor, as
by the King here.

All the Laws and Statutes of England before Queen Elizabeth are there in Force, but none made since;
except those that mention the Plantations, which are always specified
in English Laws, when Occasion requires.

The General Assembly has Power to make Laws, or repeal such others, as they shall think most proper
for the Security and Good of the Country, provided they be not contradictory to the Laws of England,
nor interfering with the Interest of Great Britain; these Laws are immediately in Force there, and
are transmitted hither to the Lords of the Plantations and Trade for the Royal Assent; after which
they are as obligatory as any Laws can possibly be; but of late all Laws relating to Trade must
be sent Home before they be of any Validity; which makes some occasional Laws upon certain
Emergencies altogether useless; since the intended Opportunity may be pass'd, before they are
returned back to Virginia; and so signify nothing to the Purpose.

All Laws that the King dislikes upon the first Perusal, are immediately abrogated.

Thus in State Affairs Liberty is granted, and Care is taken to make such Laws from Time to Time,
as are different from the Laws in England, whenever the Interest or Necessity of the Country,
or the Nature of the Climate, and other Circumstances shall require it.

PART III.

Of the State of the Church and Clergy of Virginia.

Though Provision is made, and proper Measures are taken to make Allowances and Alterations
in Matters of Government, State and Trade; yet in Matters of Religion, there has not been the
Care and Provision that might be wished and expected.

For the Country requires particular Alterations and Allowances in some indifferent spiritual
Concernments, as well as in temporal Affairs, which might be done without deviating in the least
from the Principles and Practice of the Establish'd Church of England; and instead of encouraging
Dissentions, or Heresy, or Schism, or Irreligion, would be a sure Means always to prevent them,
were such small Alterations regularly established in some Things indifferent, as might best
agree with the Conveniency and Nature of the Colony: for it is impossible for a Clergyman to
perform this Duty according to the literal Direction of the Rubrick; for were he too rigorous
in these Respects by disobliging and quarrelling with his Parish, he would do more Mischief in
Religion, than all his fine Preaching and exemplary Life could retrieve;
A short Narrative of which Case of the Church I transmitted Home to
the late Bishop of London, by Order and Appointment of a late Convention,
in a Representation of some Ecclesiastical Affairs; but the Nature
of this may more fully appear by the following Account.

This, with all the other Plantations, is under the Care of the Bishop of London, who supplies
them with what Clergymen he can get from England, Scotland, Ireland, and France. The late Bishop appointed
the Reverend Mr. James Blair to be his Commissary, who is likewise President of the College,
and one of the Council. He by the Bishop's Order summoned the Clergy to Conventions, where he
sate as Chairman; but the Power of Conventions is very little, as is that of the Commissary at present.
Visitations have been in vain attempted; for the corrupt Abuses and Rigour of Ecclesiastical
Courts have so terrified the People, that they hate almost the very Name, and seem more inclinable
to be ruled by any other Method, rather than the present spiritual Courts. Differences and great
Disputes frequently arise between the Governor and the People, concerning the Presentation, Collation,
Institution, and Induction to Livings; and it is scarce yet decided distinctly who have the Right
of giving Parishes to Ministers, whether the Governors or the Vestries,
though the best of Council have been applied to for their Opinion;
for their Sentiments are not obligatory.

The Vestries consist of the Minister, and twelve of the most substantial and intelligent Persons
in each Parish. These at first were elected by the Parish by Pole, and upon Vacancies are supplied
by Vote of the Vestry; out of them a new Church-Warden is annually chosen, under (as it were)
the Instruction of the old one chosen the Year before. By the Vestry are all parochial Affairs
managed, such as the Church, Poor, and the Minister's Salary.

The Clerk in Case of the Minister's Death or Absence has great Business, and is a kind of Curate,
performing frequently all the Offices of the Church, except the two Sacraments and Matrimony;
but 'tis Pity but his Practices were better regulated, and Sets of Sermons also appointed for his
Purpose; for in several Places the Clerks are so ingenious or malicious, that they contrive to
be liked as well or better than the Minister, which creates Ill-Will and Disturbance, besides
other Harm. In some Places they read the Lessons, publish Banns, &c. when the Minister is present, for
his Ease; which first may not be improper in very hot Weather, or if the Minister be sick or
infirm, if the Clerk can read tolerably well. Likewise might they be allowed to bury when
a Minister cannot possibly be had before the Corpse would corrupt in hot Weather; but little
more should be granted them, since some Places long accustomed to hear only their Clerk read
Prayers and Sermons at Church, have no right Notions of the Office, Respect, and Dignity of
a Clergyman. For registering Births and Burials, there is a small Allowance which is generally given
to the Clerk, who takes that Trouble off the Minister's Hands. The Use of this is to know the
Number of Tythables, for laying of Levies, and for other Occasions, and Lists of these Registers
are delivered into the Hands of proper Officers. The Parishes being of great Extent (some
sixty Miles long and upwards) many dead Corpses cannot be conveyed to the Church to be buried:
So that it is customary to bury in Gardens or Orchards, where whole Families lye interred together,
in a Spot generally handsomly enclosed, planted with Evergreens, and the Graves kept decently:
Hence likewise arises the Occasion of preaching Funeral Sermons in Houses, where at Funerals
are assembled a great Congregation of Neighbours and Friends; and if you insist upon having
the Sermon and Ceremony at Church, they'll say they will be without it, unless performed after
their usual Custom. In Houses also there is Occasion, from Humour, Custom sometimes, from Necessity
most frequently, to baptize Children and church Women, otherwise some would go without it. In
Houses also they most commonly marry, without Regard to the Time of the Day or Season of the
Year. Though the Churches be not consecrated by Bishops, yet might there be some solemn Dedication
prescribed for setting them apart for sacred Uses; which would make People behave themselves
with greater Reverence than they usually do, and have a greater Value for the House of God
and holy Things.

Their Churches were formerly built of Timber, but now they build them of Brick, very strong
and handsome, and neatly adorned; and when any Church is gone to Decay, or removed to a more
convenient Place, they enclose the old one with a Ditch.

Though Persons are admitted to the Lord's Supper there, that never were confirmed by the Bishop,
yet might there be certain Examinations as preparatory Qualifications, which would lay the Sureties
and Parents of Children baptized, under a Necessity of taking Care of them, as to a pious Education,
and would make them be obliged to know more of their Duty than they generally do.

For this End I have composed (as I before hinted) an Accidence to Christianity, being a short
Introduction to the Principles and Practices of Christians, collected out of the Church Catechism,
the thirty nine Articles, Hammond's Practical Catechism, Grotius of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
and the whole Duty of Man.

Out of which may be extracted a brief Examination for Communicants before their first Admittance;
which may be done by the Minister, if he had Orders and Directions for it. By this Means the
People would attain to better Notions of Religion (and many more would be Communicants, who now
abstain totally through Fear or Ignorance) were the first true Principles timely instilled into
them in a brief Method; for any Thing tedious soon tires them, and will not obtain the desired
Effect. In several Respects the Clergy are obliged to omit or alter some minute Parts of the
Liturgy, and deviate from the strict Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church; to avoid giving Offence,
through Custom, or else to prevent Absurdities and Inconsistencies. Thus Surplices, disused there for
a long Time in most Churches, by bad Examples, Carelesness and Indulgence, are now beginning
to be brought in Fashion, not without Difficulty; and in some Parishes where the People have been
used to receive the Communion in their Seats (a Custom introduced for Opportunity for such as are
inclined to Presbytery to receive the Sacrament sitting) it is not an easy Matter to bring
them to the Lord's Table decently upon their Knees.

The last Injunction in the Form of Publick Baptism is most properly omitted there, wherein the
Godfathers and Godmothers are ordered to take Care that the Child be brought to the Bishop
to be confirmed, which for the most Part would prove impracticable.

It would be improper for the Chaplain of the Honourable the Assembly and others, to use the Prayers
for the High Court of Parliament verbatim, for they cannot know whether the Parliament sits in
England then; and their Intent is to pray for the Assembly and the
King's Dominions; so that the Prayer must be altered in several Respects.

'Tis

Pity but the Prayer was altered, and allowed for the Assembly, Governor and Council; of which we
have an Instance in Irish Common Prayer Books.

Every Minister is a kind of Independent in his own Parish, in Respect of some little particular
Circumstances and Customs, to which they are often occasionally obliged; but this Liberty without
Restraint may prove of bad Consequence hereafter; when the bad Tenets and Discipline of any heterodox,
libertine, or fantastical Persons may plead Prescription for their Establishment, and be difficult
to be eradicated.

In most Parishes are Schools (little Houses being built on Purpose) where are taught English
and Writing; but to prevent the sowing the Seeds of Dissention and Faction, it is to be wished that
the Masters or Mistresses should be such as are approved or licensed by the Minister, and Vestry
of the Parish, or Justices of the County; the Clerks of the Parishes being generally most proper
for this Purpose; or (in Case of their Incapacity or Refusal) such
others as can best be procured.

As for baptizing Indians and Negroes, several of the People disapprove of it; because they say
it often makes them proud, and not so good Servants: But these, and such Objections, are easily
refuted, if the Persons be sensible, good, and understand English, and have been taught (or
are willing to learn) the Principles of Christianity, and if they be kept to the Observance of
it afterwards; for Christianity encourages and orders them to become more humble and better
Servants, and not worse, than when they were Heathens.

But as for baptizing wild Indians and new Negroes, who have not the least Knowledge nor Inclination
to know and mind our Religion, Language and Customs, but will obstinately persist in their own
barbarous Ways; I question whether Baptism of such (till they be
a little weaned of their savage Barbarity) be not a Prostitution of
a Thing so sacred.

But as for the Children of Negroes and Indians, that are to live among Christians, undoubtedly
they ought all to be baptized; since it is not out of the Power of their Masters to take Care
that they have a Christian Education, learn their Prayers and Catechism, and go to Church,
and not accustom themselves to lie, swear and steal, tho' such (as the poorer Sort in England)
be not taught to read and write; which as yet has been found to be dangerous upon several
political Accounts, especially Self-Preservation.

In every Parish there is allotted for the Minister a convenient Dwelling-House and a Glebe of about
two hundred and fifty Acres of Land, with a small Stock of Cattle ready in some Places, as
James Town.

The Salary of the Minister is yearly 16000, and in some Parishes 20000 l. of Tobacco; out of which
there is a Deduction for Cask, prizing, collecting, &c. about which Allowance there are sometimes
Disputes, as are also Differences often about the Place, Time, and
Manner of delivering it; but all these Things might easily be regulated.

Tobacco

is more commonly at 20 s. per Cent. than at 10; so that certainly, (communibus annis) it will
bring 12 s. 8 d. a hundred, which will make 16000 (the least Salary) amount to 100 l. per Ann.
which it must certainly clear, allowing for all petty Charges, out of the Lowness of the Price
stated, which is less than the Medium between ten and twenty Shillings; whereas it might be stated
above the Medium, since it is oftener at twenty than ten Shillings.

Besides the Glebe and Salary, there is 20 s. for every Wedding by License, and 5 s. for every
Wedding by Banns, with 40 s. for a Funeral Sermon, which most of the middling People will have.

This
one would think should be sufficient Encouragement for Clergymen of good Lives and Learning
(that are not better provided for elsewhere) to go over and settle there; if they considered
rightly the little Danger and Fatigue they may expose themselves to, the great Good they may
do, and what Advantages they may reap with good Conduct and right
Management of their Fortunes and Conversations.

The Parishes are large, but then the Inhabitants are but thin; and there are Chapels of Ease in
large Parishes, at which there is divine Service in Turns with the Churches; and frequently upon
a Vacancy some neighbouring Clergyman does the Duty of another Parish
besides his own, on some Week-Day, for which he has the Salary, till
it can be better supplied.

Many Disputes and Differences arise between
some of the Clergy and People; but this generally proceeds from the
uncertain and precarious Footing of Livings, and some Disputes about
the Nature and Manner of the Payment of the established Salary; which
though it may be esteemed sufficient, yet is not so well regulated,
as might be wished and expected in such a great Colony of so long
a standing, and free from the Molestation of Church Faction, and Dissenters.

Besides
the Payment of the Salary, the Surplice Fees want a better Regulation
in the Payment; for though the Allowance be sufficient, yet Differences
often and Ill-Will arise about these Fees, whether they are to be
paid in Money or Tobacco, and when; whereas by a small Alteration
and Addition of a few Laws in these and the like Respects, the Clergy
might live more happy, peaceable, and better beloved; and the People
would be more easy, and pay never the more Dues.

The Establishment
is indeed Tobacco, but some Parts of the Country make but mean and
poor, so that Clergymen don't care to live in such Parishes; but there
the Payment might be made in Money, or in the Produce of those Places,
which might be equivalent to the Tobacco Payments; better for the
Minister, and as pleasing to the People.

Some Clergymen are indeed
unskilful in, and others are not studious of, reconciling their own
Interest and Duty with the Humour and Advantage of the People, especially
at their first coming, when many Things seem very odd to them; being
different to what they have been heretofore accustomed to.

These
Things often occasion Uneasiness to the Ministers themselves, and
the People; but for the Generality they that have a Mind to do their
Duty, and live happily (with some Caution and Care) may live with
as much Satisfaction, Respect, Comfort, and Love, as most Clergymen
in England.

'Tis to be hoped and wished, that as the Government of
England have of late taken it into their Consideration to encourage
more Clergymen to go over; so they may give Instructions and Directions
for the Advantage and Happiness of both the Clergy and Laity, by rectifying
and settling some Affairs belonging to the Church of Virginia; and
providing such Laws as are wanting or requisite to be altered in Respect
of the Clergy; a full and true Account of whom I have here given (as
much as the Scope of this Treatise would admit of) to the best of
my Knowledge.

This I have committed to Paper, for the better Information
of such as may in any Respect be concerned in Affairs relating to
Virginia, especially its Government, Religion, and Trade: For without
exact Notions of the Temper, Lives, and Manners of the People, and
the Nature and Produce of the Country, none can frame a correct Judgment
of what is most proper to be added, altered, or continued, nor know
what Steps are to be taken for the Advancement of either the publick
or private Good of that Colony, in Respect either of Church, State,
or Trade.

Another Inducement for my writing this, was for the Encouragement
and Intelligence of such good Clergymen and others, as are inclinable
to go and settle there; and for the Information of all that are desirous
of knowing how People live in other Countries, as well as their own;
together with an Intent to vindicate this Country from the unjust
Reflections which are vulgarly cast on it; and to wean the World from
the unworthy despicable Notions, which many entertain concerning his
Majesty's Dominions in North America; where is Room and Imployment
enough for all that want Business or a Maintenance at Home, of all
Occupations; and where, if they be not their own Enemies, they might
live much better than ever they did in England; which blessed Opportunity
of favourable Providence may give great Comfort to any good Folks
that are in poor unfortunate Circumstances. The Conclusion.

In the
Miscellanea Curiosa is publish'd Mr. Clayton's fine Description of
Virginia, and Col. Robert Beverley has wrote a good History of it;
but neither is so particular as this, as to its present Condition;
so that as they are Supplements to Captain Smith's History, this may
be an Abridgment and Appendix to them all. Is it thus
you reward me for having always tried to slake your insatiable thirst with the blood of the
bravest and noblest? I don't know why I have not already broken you into a thousand pieces,
as you so richly deserve--false, ungrateful weapon that you are! But stay--was it to teach
me that it is unworthy of the true warrior to desert his post?--or forget his sterner duties
in the soft delights of love?--was it for that you refused to leap from your scabbard as of
old? It is true, alas! that thus far this week I have not defeated a single army--I have killed
neither ogre nor dragon--I have not furnished his usual rations to Death--and in consequence
my trusty blade has rusted in the scabbard--that I should live to say it! rusted!--and I have
been forced to submit to insults, and even blows, before the very eyes of my mistress. What
a lesson! Henceforth I shall make it a rule to kill at least three men every morning before
I break my fast, so as to be sure that my good sword plays freely--keep me in mind, Scapin,
do you hear?"

"Perhaps Leander will return before long," says the valet; "suppose we all help you to draw
your 'TRUSTY BLADE,' so that you may be ready for him."

Matamore, accordingly, plants himself firmly, holding the scabbard in both hands, Scapin seizes
the handle of the sword, Pandolphe clasps him firmly round the waist, the notary tries to do
as much by Pandolphe's stout person, and they all pull and pull. For some time the rusty old
sword resists all their efforts, but at last yields suddenly, and the three fall in a confused
heap on the ground, with legs and arms waving wildly in the air, while Matamore tumbles the
other way, still clinging to the now empty scabbard. Picking himself up as quickly as possible
he seizes his big sword, which has dropped from the valet's hand, and waving it triumphantly
says with stem emphasis, "Now Leander's fate is sealed! There is but one way for him to escape
certain death. He must emigrate to some distant planet. If he be sufficiently fool-hardy to
remain on this globe I will find him, no matter in what distant land he strives to hide himself,
and transfix him with this good sword--unless indeed he be first turned to stone by the terrible
Medusa-like power of my eye."

In spite of all that he has witnessed, the obstinate old father still feels unbounded faith
in Matamore's valour, and persists in his lamentable intention to bestow the hand of his fair
daughter upon this magnificent hero. Poor Isabelle bursts into tears, and declares that she
prefers the convent to such a fate. Zerbine loudly swears that this marriage shall never take
place, and tries to console her weeping mistress. Matamore attributes this rather discouraging
demonstration on the part of Isabelle to an excess of maidenly modesty, not doubting her penchant
for himself, though he acknowledges that he has not yet properly paid his court, nor shown
himself in all his glory to her--this last from prudential motives, fearing lest she might
be dangerously dazzled and overwhelmed if he should burst upon her too suddenly in the full
splendour of his heroic character, remembering, and taking warning by, the sad and terrible
fate that befell Semele, when Jupiter, reluctantly yielding to her wishes, appeared before
her with all the insignia of his majesty.

Isabelle and her maid withdrew from the balcony, without taking any further notice of the valiant
Matamore; but he, undaunted, wishing to play the lover after the most approved fashion, plants
himself resolutely under her window and sends Scapin to fetch a guitar; upon which he thrums
awkwardly for a while, and then accompanies it with his voice, in an attempt at a Spanish love
song, which sounds much like the nocturnal caterwauling of a disconsolate tabby than anything
else we can compare it to. A dash of cold water, mischievously thrown down on him by Zerbine
under pretext of watering the plants in the balcony, does not extinguish his musical ardour.
"A gentle shower from the sweet eyes of my Isabelle, moved to tears by this plaintive melody,"
says he, "for it is universally conceded that I excel in music as in arms, and wield the lyre
as skilfully as the sword."

Unfortunately for him, Leander suddenly reappears, and highly indignant that this miserable
rascal should presume to serenade HIS mistress, snatches the guitar from his hands and begins
whacking him over the head with it, so furiously that it is quickly broken through, and slipping
over the unhappy serenader's head remains fixed round his neck, so that he is completely at
the mercy of his assailant. Holding fast to the handle of the guitar, Leander hauls him about
the stage, banging him against the side-scenes, dragging him forward to the footlights--making
the most absurd scene imaginable--and finally, letting go of him suddenly, sends him sprawling
on the ground. Fancy the ridiculous appearance of the unfortunate bully, who looked as if he
had put his head through a frying-pan!

But his miseries are not yet at an end. Leander's valet had been arranging a clever little
plot to prevent the fulfilment of the proposed marriage between Isabelle and Captain Matamore.
At his instigation, a certain Doralice, very pretty and coquettish, makes her appearance, accompanied
by a fierce-looking brother--represented by Herode--carrying two immensely long rapiers under
his arm, and evidently "spoiling for a fight." The young lady complains that she has been shamefully
jilted by Captain Matamore, who has deserted her for Isabelle, the daughter of a certain Pandolphe,
and demands instant reparation for this outrage, adding that her brother is ready to exact
it at the point of the sword, or avenge the insult by taking the life of the heartless villain
who has trifled with her youthful affections.

"Make haste to give this rascal his quietus," says Pandolphe to his future son-in-law; "it
will be only child's play for you, who have fearlessly encountered, single-handed, a whole
army of Saracens."

Very reluctantly, and after many most absurd grimaces, Matamore crosses swords with Doralice's
ferocious brother, but he trembles so that the latter, with one quick movement, sends his weapon
flying out of his hand, and chastises him with the flat of his sword until he roars for mercy.

To cap the climax, Mme. Leonarde comes upon the scene, mopping her streaming eyes with an enormous
pocket-handkerchief, sighing and sobbing, and bewailing herself. She goes straight to Pandolphe
and shows him a written promise of marriage, over Matamore's signature, cleverly counterfeited;
whereupon the poor wretch, convicted of such abominable and complicated perfidy, is assailed
with a new shower of blows and curses, and finally condemned, by the unanimous vote of all
present, to marry old Mme. Leonarde--who has made herself as hideous as possible--as a fitting
punishment for all his deviltries, rodomontades, and cowardice. Pandolphe, thoroughly disgusted
with Matamore at last, makes no further objections to Leander's suit, and the curtain falls
as he gives his consent to the marriage of the two young lovers.

This bouffonnade, being played with great spirit, was enthusiastically applauded. The gentlemen
were charmed with the mischievous, coquettish soubrette, who was fairly radiant with beauty
that evening; the ladies were greatly pleased with Isabelle's refinement and modesty; whilst
Matamore received the well merited encomiums of all. It would have been impossible to find,
even in the great Parisian theatres, an actor better fitted for the part he had played so admirably.
Leander was much admired by all the younger ladies, but the gentlemen agreed, without a dissenting
voice, that he was a horridly conceited coxcomb. Wherever he appeared indeed this was the universal
verdict, with which he was perfectly content--caring far more for his handsome person, and
the effect it produced upon the fair sex, than for his art; though, to do him justice, he was
a very good actor. Serafina's beauty did not fail to find admirers, and more than one young
gentleman swore by his mustache that she was an adorable creature--quite regardless of the
displeasure of the fair ladies within hearing.

During the play, de Sigognac, hidden in the coulisses, had enjoyed intensely Isabelle's charming
rendering of her part, though he was more than a little jealous of the favour she apparently
bestowed upon Leander--and especially at the tender tone of her voice whenever she spoke to
him--not being yet accustomed to the feigned love-making on the stage, which often covers profound
antipathies and real enmity. When the play was over, he complimented the young actress with
a constrained, embarrassed air, which she could not help remarking, and perfectly understood.

"You play that part admirably, Isabelle! so well that one might almost think there was some
truth in it."

"Is it not my duty to do so?" she asked smilingly, secretly pleased at his displeasure; "did
not the manager engage me for that?"

"Doubtless," de Sigognac replied, "but you seemed to be REALLY in love with that conceited
fellow, who never thinks of anything but his own good looks, and how to display them to the
best advantage."

"But the role required it. You surely would not have had me play it as if he disgusted me!
besides, did I not preserve throughout the quiet demeanour of a well-bred, respectable girl?
If I failed in that you must tell me how and where, so that I may endeavour to correct it in
future."

"Oh no! you appeared from the beginning to the end like a modest, retiring, young lady--no,
there is no fault to be found with you in that respect; your acting was inimitable--so graceful,
lady-like, and easy--but withal so true to nature that it was almost too real."

"My dear baron, they are putting out the lights; everybody has gone but ourselves, and we shall
be left in the dark if we don't make haste. Be good enough to throw this cloak around my shoulders
and accompany me to the chateau."

De Sigognac acquitted himself of this novel duty with less awkwardness than might have been
expected, though his hands trembled a little, and he felt an almost irresistible desire to
take her into his arms as he wrapped the mantle round her slender form; but he restrained himself,
and respectfully offering his arm led her out of the orangery, which by this time was entirely
deserted. It was, as we have said, at a little distance from the chateau, and on the level
of the park, lower than the mansion, which stood on a high terrace, with a handsome stone balustrade
at the edge, supporting at regular intervals large vases filled with blooming plants, in the
pretty Italian fashion. A broad, easy flight of stone steps led up to the terrace, affording
in their ascent a most imposing view of the chateau, which loomed up grandly against the evening
sky. Many of the windows on this side were lighted, whilst the others glistened brightly as
the silvery moon-beams struck upon them--as did also the dewdrops on the shrubbery and the
grass-plots--as if a shower of diamonds had fallen on this favoured spot. Looking towards the
park, the long vistas cut through the wood, losing themselves in the hazy blue of the distance,
called to mind Breughel's famous picture of Paradise, or else disclosed the far-away gleam
of a marble statue, or the spray of a misty fountain sparkling in the moonlight.

Isabelle and de Sigognac slowly ascended the broad steps, pausing frequently to turn and look
back at this enchanting scene, and charmed with the beauty of the night walked for a little
while to and fro upon the terrace before retiring to their rooms. As they were in full sight
of the windows, and it was not yet very late, the modest young girl felt that there could be
no impropriety in this little indulgence; and besides, the baron's extreme timidity was very
reassuring to her, and she knew that he would not presume upon the favour accorded to him.
He had not made a formal avowal of his love to her, but she was as well aware of it as if he
had, and also of his profound respect for her, which sentiment is indeed always an accompaniment
of a worthy passion. She knew herself beloved--the knowledge was very sweet to her--and she
felt herself safe from all fear of offence in the company of this honourable gentleman and
true lover. With the delicious embarrassment of nascent, unavowed love, this young couple wandering
by moonlight in a lonely garden, side by side, arm in arm, only exchanged the most insignificant,
commonplace remarks; but if no undercurrent was betrayed by actual words, the trembling, voices,
long pauses, stifled sighs, and low, confidential tones told of strong emotions beneath this
quiet surface.

The chamber assigned to the beautiful Yolande de Foix, near that of Mme. la Marquise, was on
this side of the chateau, overlooking the park, and after she had dismissed her maid, she went
to the window to look out once more upon the exceeding beauty of the night, and caught sight
of de Sigognac and Isabelle, pacing slowly back and forth on the terrace below, without any
other company than their own shadows. Assuredly the disdainful Yolande, haughty as a goddess,
could never have felt anything but scorn for our poor young baron, past whom she had sometimes
flashed in a whirlwind of light and noise in the chase, and whom she had so recently cruelly
insulted; but still it displeased her to see him devoting himself thus to a beautiful young
girl, to whom he was undoubtedly making love at that very moment. She had regarded him as her
own humble vassal--for she had not failed to read the passionate admiration in his eyes whenever
they met her own--and could not brook his shaking off his allegiance thus; her slaves ought
to live and die in her service, even though their fidelity were never rewarded by a single
smile. She watched them, with a frowning brow, until they disappeared, and then sought her
conch in anything but a tranquil mood, haunted by the lover-like pair that had so roused her
wrath, and still kept her long awake.

De Sigognac escorted Isabelle to the door of her chamber, where he bade her good-night, and
as he turned away towards his own, saw, at the end of the corridor, a mysterious looking individual
closely wrapped in a large cloak, with one end thrown over the shoulder in Spanish fashion,
and so drawn up round his face that only the eyes were visible; a slouch hat concealed his
forehead, so that he was completely disguised, yet he drew back hurriedly into a dark corner
when de Sigognac turned towards him, as if to avoid his notice. The baron knew that the comedians
had all gone to their rooms already, and besides, it could not be one of them, for the tyrant
was much larger and taller, the pedant a great deal stouter, Leander more slender, Matamore
much thinner, and Scapin of quite a different make. Not wishing to appear curious, or to annoy
the unknown in any way, de Sigognac hastened to enter his own room--not however without having
observed that the door of the tapestry-hung chamber stood ajar. When he had closed his, he
heard stealthy footsteps approaching, and presently a bolt shot home softly, then profound silence.

About an hour later, Leander opened his door as quietly as possible, looked carefully to see
if the corridor was empty, and then, stepping as lightly and cautiously as a gipsy performing
the famous egg-dance, traversed its whole length, reached the staircase, which he descended
as noiselessly as the phantoms in a haunted castle, and passed out into the moonlight; he crept
along in the shadow of the wall and of some thick shrubbery, went down the steps into the park,
and made his way to a sort of bower, where stood a charming statue of the mischievous little
god of love, with his finger on his lip--an appropriate presiding genius of a secret rendezvous,
as this evidently must be. Here he stopped and waited, anxiously watching the path by which
he had come, and listening intently to catch the first sound of approaching footsteps.

We have already related how Leander, encouraged by the smile with which Mme. la Marquise acknowledged
his salutation, and convinced that she was smitten with his beauty and grace, had made bold
to address a letter to her, which he bribed Jeanne to place secretly upon her mistress's toilet-table,
where she would be sure to see it. And during these four Years, at certain appointed Times they
should be taught to write as they now are in the Writing-School, or in such Methods as the President
and Masters may judge better: There also should the Writing Master
teach them the Grounds and Practice of Arithmetick, in order to qualify
such for Business, as intend to make no farther Progress in Learning.

Out of the Grammar School should be yearly elected by the President and Masters [or Professors]
five Scholars upon the Foundation, who should be allowed their Board, Education, and Lodging
in proper Apartments gratis; and should also be provided with Cloaths and Gowns, &c. after the
Charter-House Method.

These Scholars should continue three Years upon the Foundation; during which Time, at appointed
Terms they should be instructed in Languages, in Religion, in Mathematicks, in Philosophy, and
in History, by the five Masters or Professors appointed for that Purpose; who with the Grammar
Master make up the Number appointed by the Charter.

Besides the Scholars, the Professors should for a certain Sum instruct such others as may be
enter'd Commoners in the College out of the Grammar School, or from elsewhere, by the Approbation
of the President and Masters, who should be obliged to wear Gowns, and be subject to the same
Statutes and Rules as the Scholars; and as Commoners are in Oxford. These should maintain themselves,
and have a particular Table, and Chambers for their Accommodation.

For to wait at the four high Tables hereafter mentioned, there should be elected by the President
and Masters four Servitors, who should have their Education, and such Allowances, as the Servitors
in Oxford.

Such Scholars, Commoners, and Servitors, as have behaved themselves well, and minded their Studies
for three Years, and can pass proper Examination, and have performed certain Exercises, should
have the Degree of a Batchellor of Arts conferred upon them; should eat at a Table together,
and be distinguished by a peculiar Habit; maintain themselves, be subject to certain Rules,
and pursue proper Studies; being allowed the Use of the Library as well as the Masters, paying
proper Fees upon their Admission for the Good of the Library.

Out of these Batchellors should be yearly elected by the Presidents and Masters, one Fellow to
be allowed 20 l. for his Passage to England, and 20 l. per Ann. for three Years after his speedy
Entrance and Continuance in some certain College in Oxford or Cambridge; after which he should commence
Master of Arts; which Degree, with all others in our Universities, should be conferred in the same
Manner in this College by the President and Masters.

Out of the Graduates above Batchellors should the Masters or Professors be chosen by the Election
of the said Masters or Professors, with the President; who also every seven Years should chose
a new Chancellor, to whose Determination all Disputes and Differences should be referred.

And when the President's Place is vacant, it should be filled by such of the Masters as has belonged first
to the College.

A Testimonium from this College should be of the same Use and Force as from others in our Universities.

If
the present Fund be insufficient to defray the Expence, proper Improvement
should be made of the Revenue, and Application made for additional
Benefactions.

A Body of Statutes should be directly formed and establish'd by the
Visitors, President, and Masters; and a Transfer of the Trust should
be then made.

Such an Establishment would encourage the bright Youth of Virginia to apply to their Studies,
and in some Measure would compel them to improve themselves; whereas now being left to their
own Liberty, they proceed but superficially, and generally commence
Man before they have gone through the Schools in the College.

Here too would be great Inducements for their Friends to advise and persuade them to go through with
their Learning; when they are certain, that they will thus be regularly improved, and have
Prospect of a cheap Education, and Hopes of the best Preferment in their Country in Church and
State; and have equal (if not superior) Chance with others for Promotion abroad in the World; being
bred compleat Gentlemen and good Christians, and qualified for the Study of the Gospel, Law, or Physick;
and prepared for undertaking Trade, or any useful Projects and Inventions.

As for the Accomplishments of Musick, Dancing, and Fencing, they may be taught by such as the
President and Masters shall appoint at such certain Times, as they shall fix for those Purposes.

'Till
these Regulations (or the like) be made, Matters may be carried on as they are at present; only
to me there seems an absolute Necessity now for a Professor of Divinity, in order to instruct the
Indians and English Youth there in the Grounds of Religion, and read Lectures of Morality to the
senior Lads, and to read Prayers and preach in the College as Chaplain:
This I am certain is very much wanting, and what the present Income
of the College with good Management will easily allow of; therefore
I hope particular Notice will be taken hereof.

There is as yet no great Occasion for the Hall, so that it might be made a Chapel and Divinity-School,
for which Purpose it would serve nobly with little or no Alterations.

As there is lately built an Apartment for the Indian Boys and their Master, so likewise is there
very great Occasion for a Quarter for the Negroes and inferior Servants belonging to the College;
for these not only take up a great deal of Room and are noisy and nasty, but also have often
made President and others apprehensive of the great Danger of being burnt with the College,
thro' their Carelessness and Drowsiness.

Another thing prejudicial to the College, is the Liberty allowed the Scholars, and the negligent
Observance of College Hours, and the Opportunity they have of rambling Abroad.

To remedy this, there is wanting some Contrivance to secure the Youth within the College at certain
Hours; which has hitherto been in vain attempted, because of the many Servants lodged in the
College, and the several Doors and Ways to get out of it.

Likewise the Privileges and Apartments of the President and Masters, and House-Keeper, &c. ought
to be fix'd and ascertain'd; for these being precarious and doubtful, upon this Account has
arose much Difference and Ill-Will, to the great Scandal of the College, and Detriment of
Learning.

Little additional Charge would put the Government of the College upon a much better Footing;
whereas at present it scarcely merits the name of a College.

As for Election of a Burgess in Pursuance to a Clause in the Charter, he ought to be chosen by
the President and as many Masters as there shall actually be at any Time.

The Charter mentions six Masters or Professors, but does not specify
the Professions; it directs to the making of Statutes and founding
Scholarships, but the particulars are left to the Discretion of the
Managers; and some such Establishment as this here mentioned may not
be improper, especially if for greater Encouragement the Surveyors
of each County were to be appointed by the President and Masters,
out of such as have taken a Batchellor of Arts Degree there; and if
also the Governor and Council were to elect a certain Number of Batchellors
for Clerks into the Secretaries Office; out of which Clerks attending
and writing there at certain Times, the County Clerks should be appointed
by the Secretary.

The Office of the President would be to govern the College, be Treasurer, and Censor, and have
a casting Vote in all Debates.

The six Professors or Masters would be

{ Divinity, who should be Chaplain and Catechist. { Mathematicks. { Philosophy. one for { Languages.
{ History. { Humanity, who should be Grammar Master.

The under Masters would be the Usher, the Indian Master, and the Writing-Master.

The Town Masters must be such as occasion requires, for Fencing, Dancing, and Musick.

There would be three English Fellows.

There would be fifteen Scholars, and a sufficient Number of School-Boys for a constant Supply.

Besides a Number of Batchellors and Masters of Arts, who would wait till they came in Fellows or Professors,
or got to be made Surveyors or County Clerks.

For all this there might easily be contrived Room in the College, especially if a Hall was
built in the Place intended for the Chapel.

As also would there be Room enough for the House-Keeper, Officers, and Servants; especially if a
Quarter was built for the Negroes, &c.

The Tables might then be distinguish'd into four higher or four lower, viz.

The upper Table for the President and Masters. The second for the Masters of Arts, &c. The third
for the Batchellors of Arts. The fourth for the Scholars and Commoners. The four lower Tables
should be The first for the House-Keeper, and the upper School-Boys. The second for the Usher,
Writing-Master, and the lower School-Boys. The third for the Servitors and College Officers.
And the last for the Indian Master and his Scholars.

This Regularity might easily be effected, and would prove not only
decent and creditable, but also useful and advantageous to the Country
and the College.

The Library is better furnished of late than formerly, by the kind Gifts of several Gentlemen; but
yet the Number of Books is but very small, and the Sets upon each Branch of Learning are very
imperfect, and not the best of the Sort.

To remedy this Defect proper Application should be made to the Societies and to the superior Clergy
in England, who would give at least what Duplicates they have upon such an useful Occasion;
and what necessary Collection of Books cannot be obtain'd by begging,
they may buy as soon as they shall be able to stock their Library;
as a great Help to which I believe considerable Contributions would
be made by the Clergy, Burgesses, and Gentry of the Country, if upon
easy Terms they were allowed the Use of the Library at certain Hours,
at such Times as they shall be at Williamsburgh, either for Pleasure
or upon Business.

The Office of Librarian is given to Mr. John Harris the Usher, in order to make his Place more agreeable
to his Merit; and if the Gardener was made to execute the Office of Porter for his present Salary,
it would be no great Hardship upon him, and would be an Ease to the College; and for the Benefit
and Encouragement of the House-Keeper several small necessary Pensions and Privileges might be contrived
more than what are at present allowed; so that it might be made well worth the while of a Person
of Integrity, Knowledge, and Prudence, to undertake and carry on so troublesom an Office.

The greater the Number of Collegians, the greater would be the Gain of the House-Keeper; so
that when the College should be full and compleat as here directed and wished, the Collegians may
be boarded upon easier Terms; boarded I say; because if any but the President dieted themselves,
it would create Confusion; and if any belonging to the College but
such Masters as have Families were permitted to eat elsewhere, it
would not be worth any body's while to lay in Provision, when they
could not tell what Number they must provide for.

As for the English College Customs of Commons, &c. it is thought as yet more adviseable to board
in the College than to keep to those Methods, till the Country affords better Conveniencies and Opportunities
for so doing.

The Indians who are upon Mr. Boyle's Foundation have now a handsom Apartment for themselves and
their Master, built near the College, which useful Contrivance ought to be carried on to the
utmost Advantage in the real Education and Conversion of the Infidels; for hitherto but little
Good has been done therein, though abundance of Money has been laid out, and a great many Endeavours
have been used, and much Pains taken for that Purpose.

The young Indians, procured from the tributary or foreign Nations
with much Difficulty, were formerly boarded and lodged in the Town;
where abundance of them used to die, either thro' Sickness, change
of Provision, and way of Life; or as some will have it, often for
want of proper Necessaries and due Care taken with them.

Those of them that have escaped well, and been taught to read and write, have for the most Part
returned to their Home, some with and some without Baptism, where they follow their own savage
Customs and heathenish Rites.

A few of them have lived as Servants among the English, or loitered and idled away their Time
in Laziness and Mischief.

But 'tis great Pity that more Care is not taken about them, after
they are dismissed from School.

They have admirable Capacities when their Humours and Tempers are perfectly understood; and if
well taught, they might advance themselves and do great Good in the Service of Religion; whereas
now they are rather taught to become worse than better by falling into the worst Practices of vile nominal
Christians, which they add to their own Indian Manners and Notions.

To prevent this therefore, let there be chosen continually four Indian
Servitors out of the Indian School, as the other four out of the Grammar
School.

Let these be maintained in the Indian House, and wait upon the four lower Tables: Let them be
instructed as the other Servitors, or as their Genius most aptly may require, but particularly
in Religion; and when they are found qualified let them be sent to England, or placed out to
Captains of Ships or Trades, as the Mathematical Boys in Christ-Hospital,
for a few Years; then let them return and be allowed a small Exhibition,
and encouraged in their separate Callings and Occupations; and let
them settle some among the English, and others return to their own
Nations.

Undoubtedly many of them would become excellent Artists and Proficients
in Trade; and thus when Reason and Experience has convinced them of
the Preference of our Religion and Manners, certainly they may not
only save their own Souls; but also be extreamly instrumental in the
Conversion of their barbarous Friends and Relations.

In proceeding thus, any that seem capable or inclinable to study Divinity, should by all Means
be encouraged and forwarded in it, and sent over for a small Time to one of our Universities
with an Allowance of a Fellow; after which, if such were admitted into Orders, and then sent out
Missionaries among their own Country-Folks, what great Good might
we not expect from such, when throughly converted and instructed in
Christianity, and made truly sensible of the Advantages of Religion,
the deadly State of Infidelity, and the miserable Lives and Customs
of the Indians?

In a Work of this Kind undoubtedly several good Christians would contribute their charitable
Assistance; 'till which the present Fund should be applied in this Method, though the Managers
should be obliged to reduce the Number of Indian Scholars upon this Account; since this was
the main Intent of the Benefaction, and no other Method can well
answer this Design; which may be evidenced by Experience both from
the Colleges of Virginia and New England too, as I have been credibly
informed from good Authors, as well as my own Experience.

By such Methods in Process of Time might the Indian Obstinacy be mollified, their seeming Dulness
might be cleared from Rust; and the Gates of Heaven be opened for their Admission upon their perfect
Conversion to the Faith of Christ. In such glorious Designs as these neither should Humour, Interest,
nor Prejudice divert any from their charitable Assistance therein, especially such as are concerned
in Affairs of this Kind, and engaged by Duty to lend their best Aid in leading the Infidels into
the Pale of Christ's Church, and making them by mild and most gentle
Measures to accompany his Flock; since all the Force in the World
would rather drive them from, than guide them, to the Congregation
of the Faithful and Communion of Saints.

By some such prudent and mild Methods alone may they be made to live and die as true Christians,
and not like the most savage Brutes, as they generally do.

Thus far as to the Education of the young Men in Virginia, and the Instruction most proper for
the Indians; and as for the Negroes each Owner ought to take Care that the Children born his Property,
and all his intelligent adult Negroes be taught their Catechism and some short Prayers, be made
to frequent the Church and be baptized, and hindered as much as may be from Swearing, Lying,
Intemperance, Prophaneness, and Stealing and Cheating.

Finally, as to the Education of Girls, it is great Pity but that good
Boarding Schools were erected for them at Williamsburgh and other
Towns.

SCHEME II.

Of Religion in Virginia.

It is an Opinion as erroneous as common, that any sort of Clergymen will serve in Virginia; for Persons
of immoral Lives, or weak Parts and mean Learning, not only expose
themselves, but do great Prejudice to the Propagation of the Gospel
there; and by bad Arguments or worse Example, instead of promoting
Religion, become Encouragers of Vice, Profaneness, and Immorality.

Whereas were such confined to the narrow Limits of a Parish or two in England, where their Knowledge
and their Name would scarce extend farther than the Circumference
of their own Country; then neither could their bad Learning nor Example
propagate so much Mischief, as when sent Abroad into the World among
bright and observing People.

Neither do they want quarrelsom and litigious Ministers, who would differ with their Parishioners
about insignificant Trifles, who had better stay at Home and wrangle
with their own Parishes, which is not so great a Novelty here as there.

Neither would they have meer Scholars and Stoicks, or Zealots too
rigid in outward Appearance, as they would be without loose and licentious
Profligates; these do Damage to themselves, to others, and to Religion.

And

as in Words and Actions they should be neither too reserved nor too extravagant; so in Principles
should they be neither too high nor too low: The Virginians being
neither Favourers of Popery nor the Pretender on the one Side, nor
of Presbytery nor Anarchy on the other; but are firm Adherents to
the present Constitution in State, the Hanover Succession and the
Episcopal Church of England as by Law established; consequently then
if these are the Inclinations of the People, their Ministers ought
to be of the same Sentiments, equally averse to papistical and schismatical
Doctrines, and equally free from Jacobitish and Oliverian Tenets.

These I confess are my Principles, and such as the Virginians best relish, and what every good Clergyman
and true Englishman (I hope) will favour; for such will never refuse
to say with me

God bless the Church, and GEORGE its Defender, Convert
the Fanaticks, and baulk the Pretender.

For our Sovereign is undoubtedly the Defender and Head of our national
Church of England, in which Respect we may pray for the King and Church;
but Christ is the Head of the Universal or Catholick Church, in which
Respect we wish Prosperity to the Church and King.

Clergymen for Virginia should be of such Parts, Tempers, and Notions
as these.

They likewise should be Persons that have read and seen something more of the World, than what
is requisite for an English Parish; they must be such as can converse and know more than bare Philosophy
and speculative Ethicks, and have studied Men and Business in some measure as well as Books;
they may act like Gentlemen, and be facetious and good-humour'd,
without too much Freedom and Licentiousness; they may be good Scholars
without becoming Cynicks, as they may be good Christians without appearing
Stoicks. They should be such as will give up a small Matter rather
than create Disturbance and Mischief; for in all Parishes the Minister
as well as the People should pass by some little Things, or else by
being at Variance the best Preaching may have the worst Effect; yet
they must not condescend too far, nor part with a material Right,
but must be truly zealous and firm in every good Cause both publick
and private. There are many such worthy, prudent, and pious Clergymen
as these in Virginia, who meet with the Love, Reputation, Respect,
and Encouragement that such good Men may deserve and expect: However,
there have been some whose Learning, Actions, and Manners have not
been so good as might be wished; and others by their outward Behaviour
have been suspected to have been, some Jacobites, and others Presbyterians
inwardly in their Hearts.

In Virginia there is no Ecclesiastical
Court, so that Vice, Prophaneness, and Immorality are not suppressed
so much as might be: The People hate the very Name of the Bishop's
Court. There are no Visitations, so that the Churches are often not
in the best Repair, nor as decently adorned as might be; neither in
some Places can the Lord's Supper be administer'd with such holy Reverence
as it should be, for want of proper Materials and Utensils. The Churches
being not consecrated are not enter'd with such reverent Demeanour,
as ought to be used in God's holy Tabernacle.

For want of Confirmation
Persons are admitted to the holy Sacrament with mean and blind Knowledge,
and poor Notions of the divine Mysteries of the Supper of the Lord;
which is an Abuse of a thing so very sacred.

In North Carolina and
several Parts of Virginia Children are often neglected to be baptized
till they are grown up, and then perhaps may never know or never mind
that they want to be christen'd; and many esteem it unnecessary.

The
Clerks upon several Occasions performing too great a Share of divine
Services, expose the Church to Shame and Danger, and often bring Contempt
and Disdain upon the Persons and Function of the Ministers.

Ministers
are often obliged to bury in Orchards, and preach Funeral Sermons
in Houses, where they also generally marry and christen; and as for
Weddings there is no Regard to the Time of the Day nor the Season
of the Year; and in North Carolina the Justices marry. There are times when Opportunity offers itself suddenly for our
acceptance, and we must seize it without delay, or lose it altogether; he would be a fool who
let it slip through his fingers, for once relinquished it returns not again. The face of Fortune,
which until now has always frowned upon me, at last vouchsafes me a smile, and I am delighted
to enjoy its brightness, even though it may prove to be only fleeting. In my humble role of
soubrette, I could not aspire to, or expect to receive, the admiration of rich lords and gentlemen--that
is for my betters; and now that a happy chance has thrown such an unhoped-for piece of good
luck in my way, you will not blame me, I am confident, for gladly accepting it. Let me take
my belongings then--which are packed in the chariot with the others--and receive my adieux.
I shall be sure to rejoin you some day, sooner or later, at Paris, for I am a born actress;
the theatre was my first love, and I have never long been faithless to it."

The two men accordingly, aided by the comedians, took Zerbine's boxes out of the chariot, and
adjusted them carefully on the pack-mule. The soubrette made a sweeping curtsey to her friends
in the chariot, and threw a kiss to Isabelle from her finger tips, then, aided by one of the
equerries, sprang to her place behind him, on the back of the Colonelle, as lightly and gracefully
as if she had been taught the art of mounting in an equestrian academy, nodded a last farewell,
and striking the mule sharply with the high heel of her pretty little shoe, set off at a round
pace.

"Good-bye, and good luck to you, Zerbine," cried the comedians heartily, one and all; save
only Serafina, who was more furiously angry with her than ever.

"This is an unfortunate thing for us," said the tyrant regretfully, "a serious loss. I wish
with all my heart that we could have kept that capital little actress with us; we shall not
easily find any one to replace her, even in Paris; she is really incomparable in her own role--but
she was not in any way bound to stay with us a moment longer than she chose. We shall have
to substitute a duenna, or a chaperon, for the soubrette in our pieces for the present; it
will be less pleasing of course, but still Mme. Leonarde here is a host in herself, and we
shall manage to get on very nicely, I dare say."

The chariot started on its way again as he spoke, at rather a better pace than the lumbering
old ox-cart. They were travelling through a part of the country now which was a great contrast
to the desolate Landes. To the Baron de Sigognac, who had never been beyond their desolate
expanse before, it was a revelation, and he could not sufficiently admire the richness and
beauty of this region. The productive, red soil was highly cultivated--not an inch of ground
neglected--comfortable, often handsome, stone houses scattered along their route at frequent
intervals, and surrounded by large, luxuriant gardens, spoke of a well-to-do population. On
each side of the broad, smooth road was a row of fine trees, whose falling leaves lay piled
upon the ground in yellow heaps, or whirled in the wind before de Sigognac and Isabelle, as
they walked along beneath their spreading branches, finding the exercise a welcome relief after
sitting for a long time in the chariot in rather a cramped position. One day as they were walking
thus side by side, de Sigognac said to his fair companion, "I wish you would tell me, Isabelle,
how it has happened that you, with all the characteristics of a lady of lofty lineage in the
innate modesty and dignity of your manners, the refinement and purity of your language, the
incomparable grace of your carriage, the elevation of your sentiments upon all subjects, to
say nothing of the delicate, aristocratic type of your beauty--should have become a member
of a wandering band of players like this--good, honest people no doubt, but not of the same
rank or race as yourself."

"Don't fancy that I am a princess in disguise, or a great lady reduced to earn my living in
this way," she replied, with an adorable smile, "merely because of some good qualities you
think you have discovered in me. The history of my life is a very simple, uneventful one, but
since you show such kind interest in me I will gladly relate it to you. So far from being brought
down to the station I occupy by some grievous catastrophe or romantic combination of adverse
circumstances, I was born to the profession of an actress--the chariot of Thespis was, so to
say, my birthplace. My mother, who was a very beautiful woman and finished actress, played
the part of tragic princess. She did not confine her role to the theatre, but exacted as much
deference and respect from those around her when off the stage, as she received upon it, until
she came to consider herself a veritable princess. She had all the majesty and grace of one,
and was greatly admired and courted, but never would suffer any of the gallants, who flutter
about pretty actresses like moths around a candle, to approach her--holding herself entirely
above them, and keeping her good name unsullied through everything. An account of this unusual
conduct on the part of a beautiful young actress chanced to reach the ears of a certain rich
and powerful prince, who was very much struck and interested by it, and immediately sought
an introduction to my mother. As his actual rank and position equalled hers of imaginary princess,
she received his attentions with evident pleasure. He was young, handsome, eloquent, and very
much in love with her--what wonder then that she yielded at last to his impassioned entreaties,
and gave herself to him, though, because of his high station, he could not do as his heart
dictated, and make her his wife. They were very happy in each other's love, and after I was
born my young father was devoted to me."

"Ah!" interrupted de Sigognac, eagerly, "that explains it all; princely blood does flow in
your veins. I knew it--was sure of it!"

"Their happiness continued," resumed Isabelle, "until reasons of state made it necessary for
him to tear himself away from her, to go on a diplomatic mission to one of the great capitals
of Europe; and ere his return to France an illustrious marriage had been arranged for him by
his family, with the sanction of royalty, which he found it impossible to evade. In these cruel
circumstances he endeavoured to do everything in his power to soften the pain of this rupture
to my poor mother--himself almost broken-hearted at being forced to leave her--and made every
possible arrangement for her comfort and well-being; settling a generous income on her, and
providing lavishly for my maintenance and education. But she would accept nothing from him--she
could not receive his money without his love--'all or nothing' was her motto; and taking me
with her she fled from him, successfully concealing her place of refuge. She soon after joined
a band of players travelling through the provinces, and resumed her old role; but her heart
was broken, and she gradually faded away, dying at last when I was only about seven years old.
Even then I used to appear upon the stage in parts suitable to my age. I was a precocious little
thing in many ways. My mother's death caused me a grief far more acute than most children,
even a good deal older than I was then, are capable of feeling. How well I remember being punished
because I refused to act the part of one of Medea's children, the day after she died. But my
grief was not very long-lived--I was but a child after all, and the actors and actresses of
the troupe were so good to me, always petting me, and devising all sorts of ways to please
and divert me--theatrical people are proverbially kind to comrades in distress, you know. The
pedant, who belonged to our company, and looked just as old and wrinkled then as he does now,
took the greatest interest in me, constituted himself my master, and taught me thoroughly and
indefatigably all the secrets of the histrionic art--taking unwearied pains with me. I could
not have had a better teacher; perhaps you do not know that he has a great reputation, even
in Paris. You will wonder that a man of his fame and attainments should be found in a strolling
company of players like this, but his unfortunate habits of intemperance have been the cause
of all his troubles. He was professor of elocution in one of the celebrated colleges, holding
an enviable and lucrative position, but lost it because of his inveterate irregularities. He
is his own worst enemy, poor Blazius! In the midst of all the confusion and serious disadvantages
of a vagabond life, I have always been able to hold myself somewhat apart, and remain pure
and innocent. My companions, who have known me from babyhood, look upon me as a sister or daughter,
and treat me with invariable affection and respect; and as for the men of the outside world
who haunt the coulisses, and seem to think that an actress is public property, off the stage
as well as upon it, I have thus far managed to keep them at a distance--continuing in real
life my role of modest, ingenuous, young girl, without hypocrisy or false pretensions."

Thus, as they strolled along together, and could talk confidentially without fear of listeners,
Isabelle related the story of her life to de Sigognac, who was a most attentive and delighted
listener, and ever more and more charmed with his fair divinity.

"And the name of the prince," said he, after a short pause, "do you remember it?"

"I fear that it might be dangerous to my peace to disclose it," she replied; "but it is indelibly
engraven upon my memory."

"Are there any proofs remaining to you of his connection with your mother?"

"I have in my possession a seal-ring bearing his coat of arms" Isabelle answered; "it is the
only jewel of all he had lavished upon her that my mother kept, and that entirely on account
of the associations connected with it, not for its intrinsic value, which is small. If you
would like to see it I will be very glad to show it to you some day."

It would be too tedious to follow our travellers step by step on their long journey, so we
will skip over a few days--which passed quietly, without any incidents worth recording--and
rejoin them as they were drawing near to the ancient town of Poitiers. In the meantime their
receipts had not been large, and hard times had come to the wandering comedians. The money
received from the Marquis de Bruyeres had all been spent, as well as the modest sum in de Sigognac's
purse-who had contributed all that he possessed to the common fund, in spite of the protestations
of his comrades in distress. The chariot was drawn now by a single horse-instead of the four
with which they had set off so triumphantly from the Chateau de Bruyeres--and such a horse!
a miserable, old, broken-down hack, whose ribs were so prominent that he looked as if he lived
upon barrel-hoops instead of oats and hay; his lack-lustre eyes, drooping head, halting gait,
and panting breath combined to make him a most pitiable object, and he plodded on at a snail's
pace, looking as if he might drop down dead on the road at any moment. Only the three women
were in the chariot--the men all walking, so as to relieve their poor, jaded beast as much
as possible. The weather was bitterly cold, and they wrapped their cloaks about them and strode
on in silence, absorbed in their own melancholy thoughts.

Poor de Sigognac, well-nigh discouraged, asked himself despondingly whether it would not have
been better for him to have remained in the dilapidated home of his fathers, even at the risk
of starving to death there in silence and seclusion, than run the risk of such hardships in
company with these Bohemians. His thoughts flew back to his good old Pierre, to Bayard, Miraut,
and Beelzebub, the faithful companions of his solitude; his heart was heavy within him, and
at the sudden remembrance of his dear old friends and followers his throat contracted spasmodically,
and he almost sobbed aloud; but he looked back at Isabelle, wrapped in her cloak and sitting
serenely in the front of the chariot, and took fresh courage, feeling glad that he could be
near her in this dark hour, to do all that mortal man, struggling against such odds, could
compass for her comfort and protection. She responded to his appealing glance with a sweet
smile, that quickened his pulses and sent a thrill of joy through every nerve. She did not
seem at all disheartened or cast down by the greatness of their misery. Her heart was satisfied
and happy; why should she be crushed by mere physical suffering and discomforts? She was very
brave, although apparently so delicate and fragile, and inspired de Sigognac, who could have
fallen down and worshipped her as he gazed up into her beautiful eyes, with some of her own
undaunted courage.

The great, barren plain they were slowly traversing, with a few dreary skeletons of misshapen
old trees scattered here and there, and not a dwelling in sight, was not calculated to dissipate
the melancholy of the party. Save one or two aged peasants trudging listlessly along, bending
under the weight of the fagots they carried on their backs, they had not seen a human being
all day long. The spiteful magpies, that seemed to be the only inhabitants of this dreary waste,
danced about in front of them, chattering and almost laughing at them, as if rejoicing in and
making fun of their miseries. A searching north wind, that penetrated to the very marrow in
their bones, was blowing, and the few white flakes that flew before it now and then were the
avantcouriers of the steady fall of snow that began as nightfall approached.

"It would appear," said the pedant, who was walking behind the chariot trying to find shelter
from the icy wind, "that the celestial housewife up above has been plucking her geese, and
is shaking the feathers out of her apron down upon us. She might a great deal better send us
the geese themselves. I for one would be glad enough to eat 114 them, without being very particular
as to whether they were done to a turn, and without sauce or seasoning either."

"Yes, so would I, even without salt," added the tyrant, "for my stomach is empty. I could welcome
now an omelette such as they gave us this morning, and swallow it without winking, though the
eggs were so far gone that the little chicks were almost ready to peep."

By this time de Sigognac also had taken refuge behind the chariot--Isabelle having been driven
from her seat in front to a place in the interior by the increasing violence of the storm-and
Blazius said to him, "This is a trying time, my lord, and I regret very much that you should
have to share our bad fortune; but I trust it will be only of brief duration, and although
we do get on but slowly, still every step brings us nearer to Paris."

"I was not brought up in the lap of luxury," de Sigognac answered, "and I am not a man to be
frightened by a few snowflakes and a biting wind; but it is for these poor, suffering women
that I am troubled; they are exposed to such severe hardships--cold, privations, fatigue--and
we cannot adequately shelter and protect them, do what we will."

"But you must remember that they are accustomed to roughing it, my dear baron, and what would
be simply unendurable to many of their sex, who have never been subjected to such tests, they
meet bravely, and make light of, in a really remarkable manner."

The storm grew worse and worse; the snow, driven with great force by the wind, penetrated into
the chariot where Isabelle, Serafina, and Mme. Leonarde had taken refuge among the luggage,
in spite of all that could be done to keep it out, and had soon covered their wraps with a
coating of white. The poor horse was scarcely able to make any headway at all against the wind
and snow; his feet slipped at every step, and he panted painfully. Herode went to his head,
and took hold of the bridle with his strong hand to lead him and try to help him along, while
the pedant, de Sigognac, and Scapin put their shoulders to the wheels at every inequality in
the road and whenever he paused or stumbled badly, and Leander cracked the whip loudly to encourage
the poor beast; it would have been downright cruelty to strike him. As to Matamore, he had
lingered behind, and they were expecting every moment to see his tall, spare figure emerge
from the gloom with rapid strides and rejoin them. Finally the storm became so violent that
it was impossible to face it any longer; and though it was so important that they should reach
the next village before the daylight was all gone, they were forced to halt, and turn the chariot,
with its back to the wind. The poor old horse, utterly exhausted by this last effort, slipped
and fell, and without making any attempt to rise lay panting on the ground. Our unhappy travellers
found themselves in a sad predicament indeed--wet, cold, tired and hungry, all in the superlative
degree--blinded by the driving snow, and lost, without any means of getting on save their own
powers of locomotion, in the midst of a great desert--for the white covering which now lay
upon everything had obliterated almost all traces of the road; they did not know which way
to turn, or what to do. For the moment they all took refuge in the chariot, until the greatest
violence of the tempest should be over, huddled close together for warmth, and striving not
to lose heart entirely. Presently the wind quieted down all of a sudden, as if it had expended
its fury and wanted to rest; but the snow continued to fall industriously, though noiselessly,
and as far as the eye could reach through the gathering darkness the surface of the earth was
white, as if it had been wrapped in a winding sheet.

"What in the world has become of Matamore?" cried Blazius suddenly; "has the wind carried him
off to the moon I wonder?"

"Yes; where can he be?" said the tyrant, in an anxious tone; "I can't see him anywhere--I thought
he was among us; perhaps he is lying asleep among the stage properties at the back of the chariot;
I have known him curl himself down there for a nap before now. Holloa! Matamore! where are
you? wake up and answer us!" But no Matamore responded, and there was no movement under the
great heap of scenery, and decorations of all sorts, stowed away there.

"Holloa! Matamore!" roared Herode again, in his loudest tones, which might have waked the seven
sleepers in their cavern, and roused their dog too.

"We have not seen him here in the chariot at all today," said one of the actresses; "we thought
he was walking with the others."

"The deuce!" exclaimed Blazius, "this is very strange. I hope no accident has happened to the
poor fellow."

"Undoubtedly he has taken shelter in the worst of the storm on the lee side of the trunk of
a tree somewhere," said de Sigognac, "and will soon come up with us."

After a short discussion, it was decided to wait where they were a few minutes longer, and
then if he did not make his appearance go in search of him. They anxiously watched the way
by which they had come, but no human form appeared on the great expanse of white, and the darkness
was falling rapidly upon the earth, as it does after the short days of December. The distant
howling of a dog now came to their ears, to add to the lugubrious effect of their surroundings,
but they were all so troubled at the strange absence of their comrade that their own individual
miseries were for the moment forgotten. The doleful howling, so far away at first, gradually
became louder, until at last a large, black dog came in sight, and sitting down upon the snow,
still a long distance from them, raised his head so that his muzzle pointed upward to the sky
and howled, as if in the greatest distress.

"I'm afraid something terrible has happened to our poor Matamore," cried the tyrant, and his
voice trembled a little; "that dog howls as if for a death."

At this speech the two young women turned even paler than they had been before, if that were
possible, and made the sign of the cross devoutly, while Isabelle murmured a prayer.

"We must go in search of him without a moment's delay," said Blazius, "and take the lantern
with us; it will as a guiding star to him if he has wandered off from the road, as is very
probable, with everything covered with snow like this."

They accordingly lighted their horn lantern, and set off with all possible speed--the tyrant,
Blazius, and de Sigognac--whilst Scapin and Leander remained with the three women in the chariot.
The dog, meantime, kept up his dismal howling without a moment's intermission as the three
men hastened towards him. The darkness and the newfallen snow, which had completely obliterated
all traces of footsteps, made the task of looking for the missing actor a very difficult one,
and after walking nearly a mile without seeing a sign of him, they began to fear that their
search would prove fruitless. They kept calling, "Matamore! Matamore!" but there was no reply,
nothing to be heard but the howling of the large black dog, at intervals now, or the scream
of an owl, disturbed by the light of the lantern. At last de Sigognac, with his penetrating
vision, thought he could make out a recumbent figure at the foot of a tree, a little way off
from the road, and they all pressed forward to the spot he indicated.

It was indeed poor Matamore, sitting on the ground, with his back against the tree, and his
long legs, stretched out in front of him, quite buried under the snow; he did not stir at the
approach of his comrades, or answer their joyful shout of recognition, and when Blazius, alarmed
at this strange apathy, hastened forward and threw the light of the lantern upon his face,
he had nearly let it fall from fright at what it revealed. Poor Matamore was dead, stiff and
stark, with wide-open, sunken eyes staring out vaguely into the darkness, and his ghastly face
wearing that pinched, indescribable expression which the mortal puts on when the spirit that
dwelt within has fled. The three who had found him thus were inexpressibly shocked, and stood
for a moment speechless and motionless, in the presence of death. The tyrant was the first
to recover himself, and hoping that some sign of life might yet remain he stooped and took
the cold hand into his, and essayed to find a pulse at the wrist--in vain! it was still and
icy. Unwilling yet to admit that the vital spark was extinct, he asked Blazius for his gourd,
which he always carried with him, and endeavoured to pour a few drops of wine into his mouth--in
vain! the teeth were tightly locked together, and the wine trickled from between his pale lips,
and dropped slowly down upon his breast.

"Leave him in peace! do not disturb these poor remains!" said de Sigognac in trembling tones;
"don't you see that he is dead?" "Alas! you are right," Blazius added, "he is dead; dead as
Cheops in the great pyramid. Poor fellow! he must have been confused by the blinding snow,
and unable to make his way against that terrible wind, turned aside and sat down under this
tree, to wait until its violence should be spent; but he had not flesh enough on his bones
to keep them warm, and must have been quickly frozen through and through. He has starved himself
more than ever lately, in hopes of producing a sensation at Paris, and he was thinner than
any greyhound before. Poor Matamore! thou art out of the way of all trouble now; no more blows,
and kicks, and curses for thee, my friend, whether on or off the stage, and thou wilt be laughed
at no more forever."

"What shall we do about his body?" interrupted the more practical tyrant. "We cannot leave
it here for dogs, and wolves, and birds of prey to devour--though indeed I almost doubt whether
they would touch it, there is so little flesh upon his bones."

"No, certainly, we cannot leave him here," Blazius replied; "he was a good and loyal comrade;
he deserves better of us than that; we will not abandon him, poor Matamore! He is not heavy;
you take his head and I will take his feet, and we will carry him to the chariot. To-morrow
morning we will bury him as decently as we can in some quiet, retired spot, where he will not
be likely to be disturbed. Unfortunately we cannot do better for him than that, for we, poor
actors, are excluded by our hard-hearted and very unjust step-mother, the church, from her
cemeteries; she denies us the security and comfort of being laid to rest for our last long
sleep in consecrated ground. After having devoted our lives to the amusement of the human race--the
highest as well as the more lowly among them, and faithful sons and daughters of holy church
too--we must be thrown into the next ditch when the end comes, like dead dogs and horses. Now,
Herode, are you ready? and will you, my lord, lead the way with the lantern?"

The mournful little procession moved slowly forward; the howling dog was quiet at last, as
if his duty was done, and a deathlike stillness prevailed around them. It was well that there
were no passers-by at that hour; it would have been a strange sight, almost a frightful one,
for any such, for they might well have supposed that a hideous crime had been committed; the
two men bearing the dead body away at night, lighted by the third with his lantern, which threw
their shadows, long, black and misshapen, upon the startling whiteness of the snow, as they
advanced with measured tread. Those who had remained with the chariot saw from afar the glimmer
of de Sigognac's lantern, and wondered why they walked so slowly, not perceiving at that distance
their sad burden. Scapin and Leander hastened forward to meet them, and as soon as they got
near enough to see them distinctly the former shouted to them--"Well, what is the matter? why
are you carrying Matamore like that? is he ill, or has he hurt himself?"

"He is not ill," answered Blazius, quietly, as they met, "and nothing can ever hurt him again--he
is cured forever of the strange malady we call life, which always ends in death."

"Is he really dead?" Scapin asked, with a sob he did not even try to suppress, as he bent to
look at the face of the poor comic actor, for he had a tender heart under his rough exterior,
and had cherished a very sincere affection for poor Matamoie.

"Very dead indeed, for he is frozen as well," Blazius replied, in a voice that belied the levity
of his words.

"He has lived! as they always say at the end of a tragedy," said Herode; "but relieve us, please,
it is your turn now; we have carried the poor fellow a long way, and it is well for us that
he is no heavier."

Scapin took Herode's place, reverently and tenderly, while Leander relieved the pedant--though
this office was little to his taste--and they resumed their march, soon reaching the chariot.
In spite of the cold and snow, Isabelle and Serafina sprang to the ground to meet them, but
the duenna did not leave her seat--with age had come apathy, and selfishness had never been
wanting. When they saw poor Matamore stiff and motionless, and were told that he was dead,
the two young women were greatly shocked and moved, and Isabelle, bursting into tears, raised
her pure eyes to heaven and breathed a fervent prayer for the departed soul.

And now came the question, what was to be done? The village for which they were bound was still
a league away; but they could not stay where they were all night, and they decided to go on,
even if they had to abandon the chariot and walk--anything would be better than freezing to
death like poor Matamore. But after all, things were not at such a desperate pass as they supposed;
the long rest, and a good feed of oats that Scapin had been thoughtful enough to give their
tired horse, had so revived the poor old beast that he seemed to be ready and willing to go
forward again--so their most serious difficulty was removed. Matamore's body was laid in the
chariot, and carefully covered with a large piece of white linen they fortunately happened
to have among their heterogeneous belongings, the women resumed their seats, not without a
slight shudder as they thought of their ghastly companion, and the men walked--Scapin going
in front with the lantern, and Herode leading the horse. They could not make very rapid progress,
but at the end of two hours perceived--oh, welcome sight!--the first straggling houses of the
village where they were to spend the night. At the noise of the approaching vehicle the dogs
began to bark furiously, and more than one nightcapped head appeared at the windows as they
passed along through the deserted street--so the pedant was able to ask the way to the inn,
which proved to be at the other end of the hamlet--and the worn-out old horse had to make one
more effort; but he seemed to feel that the stable, where he should find shelter, rest and
food, was before him, and pushed on with astonishing alacrity.

They found it at last--the inn--with its bunch of holly for a sign. It looked a forlorn place,
for travellers did not usually stop over night in this small, unimportant village; but the
comedians were not in a mood to be fastidious, and would have been thankful for even a more
unpromising house of entertainment than this one. It was all shut up for the night, with not
a sign of life to be seen, so the tyrant applied himself diligently to pounding on the door
with his big fists, until the sound of footsteps within, descending the stairs, showed that
he had succeeded in rousing somebody. A ray of light shone through the cracks in the rickety
old door, then it was cautiously opened just a little, and an aged, withered crone, striving
to protect the flame of her flaring candle from the wind with one skinny hand, and to hold
the rags of her most extraordinary undress together with the other, peered out at them curiously.
She was evidently just as she had turned out of her bed, and a more revolting, witch-like old
hag it would be hard to find; but she bade the belated travellers enter, with a horrible grimace
that was intended for a smile, throwing the door wide open, and telling them they were welcome
to her house as she led the way into the kitchen. She kindled the smouldering embers on the
hearth into a blaze, threw on some fresh wood, and then withdrew to mount to her chamber and
make herself a little more presentable--having first roused a stout peasant lad, who served
as hostler, and sent him to take the chariot into the court, where he was heard directly unharnessing
the weary horse and leading him into the stable.

"We cannot leave poor Matamore's body in the chariot all night, like a dead deer brought home
from the chase," said Blazius; "the dogs out there in the court might find it out. Besides,
he had been baptized, and his remains ought to be watched with and cared for, like any other
good Christian's."

So they brought in the sad burden tenderly, laid it on the long table, and covered it again
carefully with the white linen cloth. When the old woman returned, and saw this strange and
terrible sight, she was frightened almost to death, and, throwing herself on her knees, began
begging volubly for mercy--evidently taking the troupe of comedians for a band of assassins,
and the dead man for their unfortunate victim. It was with the greatest difficulty that Isabelle
finally succeeded in calming and reassuring the poor, distracted, old creature, who was beside
herself with terror, and made her listen to the story of poor Matamore's death. When, at last,
she fully understood the true state of the case, she went and fetched more candles, which she
lighted and disposed symmetrically about the dead body, and kindly offered to sit up and watch
it with Mme. Leonarde--also to do all that was necessary and usual for it--adding that she
was always sent for in the village when there was a death, to perform those last, sad offices.
All this being satisfactorily arranged--whereat they were greatly relieved--the weary travellers
were conducted into another room, and food was placed before them; but the sad scenes just
enacted had taken away their appetites, though it was many long hours since they had eaten.
And be it here recorded that Blazius, for the first time in his life, forgot to drink his wine,
though it was excellent, and left his glass half full. He could not have given a more convincing
proof of the depth and sincerity of his grief.

Isabelle and Serafina spent the night in an adjoining chamber, sharing the one small bed it
contained, and the men lay down upon bundles of straw that the stable-boy brought in for them.
None of them slept much--being haunted by disturbing dreams inspired by the sad and trying
events of the previous day--and all were up and stirring at an early hour, for poor Matamore's
burial was to be attended to. For want of something more appropriate the aged hostess and Mme.
Leonarde had enveloped the body in an old piece of thick canvass--still bearing traces of the
foliage and garlands of flowers originally painted in bright colours upon it--in which they
had sewed it securely, so that it looked not unlike an Egyptian mummy. A board resting on two
cross pieces of wood served as a bier, and, the body being placed upon it, was carried by Herode,
Blazius, Scapin and Leander. A large, black velvet cloak, adorned with spangles, which was
used upon the stage by sovereign pontiffs or venerable necromancers, did duty as a pall--not
inappropriately surely. The little cortege left the inn by a small door in the rear that opened
upon a deserted common, so as to avoid passing through the street and rousing the curiosity
of the villagers, and set off towards a retired spot, indicated by the friendly old woman,
where no one would be likely to witness or interfere with their proceedings. The early morning
was gray and cold, the sky leaden--no one had ventured abroad yet save a few peasants searching
for dead wood and sticks, who looked with suspicious eyes upon the strange little procession
making its way slowly through the untrodden snow, but did not attempt to approach or molest
it. They reached at last the lonely spot where they were to leave the mortal remains of poor
Matamore, and the stable-boy, who had accompanied them carrying a spade, set to work to dig
the grave. Several carcasses of animals lay scattered about close at hand, partly hidden by
the snow--among them two or three skeletons of horses, picked clean by birds of prey; their
long heads, at the end of the slender vertebral columns, peering out horribly at them, and
their ribs, like the sticks of an open fan stripped of its covering, appearing above the smooth
white surface, bearing each one its little load of snow. The comedians observed these ghastly
surroundings with a shudder, as they laid their burden gently down upon the ground, and gathered
round the grave which the boy was industriously digging. He made but slow progress, however,
and the tyrant, taking the spade from him, went to work with a will, and had soon finished
the sad task. Just at the last a volley of stones suddenly startled the little group, who,
intent upon the mournful business in hand, had not noticed the stealthy approach of a considerable
number of peasants.

These last had been hastily summoned by their friends who had first perceived the mysterious
little funeral procession, without priest, crucifix, or lighted tapers, and taken it for granted
that there must be something uncanny about it.

They were about to follow up the shower of stones by a charge upon the group assembled round
the open grave, when de Sigognac, outraged at this brutal assault, whipped out his sword, and
rushed upon them impetuously, striking some with the flat of the blade, and threatening others
with the point; while the tyrant, who had leaped out of the grave at the first alarm, seized
one of the cross pieces of the improvised bier, and followed the baron into the thick of the
crowd, raining blows right and left among their cowardly assailants; who, though they far outnumbered
the little band of comedians, fled before the vigorous attack of de Sigognac and Herode, cursing
and swearing, and shouting out violent threats as they withdrew. Poor Matamore's humble obsequies
were completed without further hindrance. When the first spadeful of earth fell upon his body
the pedant, with great tears slowly rolling down his cheeks, bent reverently over the grave
and sighed out, "Alas! poor Matamore!" little thinking that he was, using the very words of
Hamlet, prince of Denmark, when he apostrophized the skull of Yorick, an ancient king's jester,
in the famous tragedy of one Shakespeare--a poet of great renown in England, and protege of
Queen Elizabeth.

The grave was filled up in silence, and the tyrant--after having trampled down the snow for
some distance around it, so that its exact whereabouts might not be easy to find in case the
angry peasants should come back to disturb it--said as they turned away, "Now let us get out
of this place as fast as we can; we have nothing more to do here, and the sooner we quit it
the better. Those brutes that attacked us may return with reinforcements--indeed I think it
more than likely that they will--in which case your sword, my dear baron, and my stick might
not be enough to scatter them again. We don't want to kill any of them, and have the cries
of widows and orphans resounding in our ears; and besides, it might be awkward for us if we
were obliged to do it in self-defence, and then were hauled up before the local justice of
peace to answer for it."

There was so much good sense in this advice that it was unanimously agreed to follow it, and
in less than an hour, after having settled their account at the inn, they, were once more upon
the road.

CHAPTER VII. CAPTAIN FRACASSE

The comedians pushed forward at first as rapidly as the strength of their horse--resuscitated
by a night's rest in a comfortable stable, and a generous feed of oats--would allow; it being
important to put a good distance between themselves and the infuriated peasants who had been
repulsed by de Sigognac and the tyrant. They plodded on for more than two leagues in profound
silence, for poor Matamore's sad fate weighed heavily upon their hearts, and each one thought,
with a shudder, that the day might come when he too would die, and be buried secretly and in
haste, in some lonely and neglected spot by the roadside, wherever they chanced to be, and
there abandoned by his comrades.

At last Blazius, whose tongue was scarcely ever at rest, save when he slept, could restrain
it no longer, and began to expatiate upon the mournful theme of which all were thinking, embellishing
his discourse with many apt quotations, apothegms and maxims, of which in his role of pedant
he had an ample store laid up in his memory. The tyrant listened in silence, but with such
a scowling, preoccupied air that Blazius finally observed it, and broke off his eloquent disquisition
abruptly to inquire what he was cogitating so intently.

"I am thinking about Milo, the celebrated Crotonian," he replied, "who killed a bullock with
one blow of his fist, and devoured it in a single day. I always have admired that exploit particularly,
and I feel as if I could do as much myself to-day."

"But as bad luck will have it," said Scapin, putting in his oar, "the bullock is wanting."

"Yes," rejoined the tyrant, "I, alas! have only the fist and the stomach. Oh! thrice happy
the ostrich, that, at a pinch, makes a meal of pebbles, bits of broken glass, shoe-buttons,
knife-handles, belt-buckles, or any such-like delicacies that come in its way, which the poor,
weak, human stomach cannot digest at all. At this moment I feel capable of swallowing whole
that great mass of scenery and decorations in the chariot yonder. I feel as if I had as big
a chasm in me as the grave I dug this morning for poor Matamore, and as if I never could get
enough to fill it. The ancients were wise old fellows; they knew what they were about when
they instituted the feasts that always followed their funerals, with abundance of meats and
all sorts of good things to eat, washed down with copious draughts of wine, to the honour of
the dead and the great good of the living. Ah! if we only had the wherewithal now to follow
their illustrious example, and accomplish worthily that philosophical rite, so admirably calculated
to stay the tears of mourners and raise their drooping spirits."

"In other words," said Blazius, "you are hankering after something to eat. Polyphemus, ogre,
Gargantua, monster that you are! you disgust me."

"And you," retorted the tyrant, "I know that you are hankering after something to drink. Silenus,
hogshead, wine-bottle, sponge that you are! you excite my pity."

"How delightful it would be for us all if you both could have your wish," interposed Scapin,
in a conciliatory tone.

"Look, yonder by the roadside is a little grove, capitally situated for a halting-place. We
might stop there for a little, ransack the chariot to find whatever fragments may yet remain
in it of our last stock of provisions, and gathering them all up take our breakfast, such as
it may be, comfortably sheltered from this cold north wind on the lee side of the thicket there.
The short halt will give the poor old horse a chance to rest, and we meantime, while we are
breakfasting, can discuss at our leisure some expedients for supplying our immediate needs,
and also talk over our future plans and prospects--which latter, it seems to me, look devilishly
dark and discouraging."

"Your words are golden, friend Scapin," the pedant said, "let us by all means gather up the
crumbs that are left of former plenty, though they will be but few and musty, I fear. There
are still, however, two or three bottles of wine remaining--the last of a goodly store--enough
for us each to have a glass. What a pity that the soil hereabouts is not of that peculiar kind
of clay upon which certain tribes of American savages are said to subsist, when they have been
unlucky in their hunting and fishing, and have nothing better to eat."

They accordingly turned the chariot off from the road into the edge of the thicket, unharnessed
the horse, and left him free to forage for himself; whereupon he began to nibble, with great
apparent relish, at the scattered spears of grass peeping up here and there through the snow.
A large rug was brought from the chariot and spread upon the ground in a sheltered spot, upon
which the comedians seated themselves, in Turkish fashion, in a circle, while Blazius distributed
among them the sorry rations he had managed to scrape together; laughing and jesting about
them in such an amusing manner that all were fain to join in his merriment, and general good
humour prevailed. The Baron de Sigognac, who had long, indeed always, been accustomed to extreme
frugality, in fact almost starvation, and found it easier to bear such trials with equanimity
than his companions, could not help admiring the wonderful way in which the pedant made the
best of a really desperate situation, and found something to laugh at and make merry over where
most people would have grumbled and groaned, and bewailed their hard lot, in a manner to make
themselves, and all their companions in misery, doubly unhappy. But his attention was quickly
absorbed in his anxiety about Isabelle, who was deathly pale, and shivering until her teeth
chattered, though she did her utmost to conceal her suffering condition, and to laugh with
the rest. Her wraps were sadly insufficient to protect her properly from such extreme cold
as they were exposed to then, and de Sigognac, who was sitting beside her, insisted upon sharing
his cloak with her--though she protested against his depriving himself of so much of it--and
beneath its friendly shelter gently drew her slender, shrinking form close to himself, so as
to impart some of his own vital warmth to her. She could feel the quickened beating of his
heart as he held her respectfully, yet firmly and tenderly, embraced, and he was soon rewarded
for his loving care by seeing the colour return to her pale lips, the happy light to her sweet
eyes, and even a faint flush appear on her delicate cheeks.

While they were eating--or rather making believe to eat their make-believe breakfast--a singular
noise was heard near by, to which at first they paid no particular attention, thinking it was
the wind whistling through the matted branches of the thicket, if they thought of it at all;
but presently it grew louder, and they could not imagine what it proceeded from. It was a sort
of hissing sound, at once shrill and hoarse, quite impossible to describe accurately.

As it grew louder and louder, and seemed to be approaching them, the women manifested some alarm.

"Oh!" shrieked Serafina "I hope it's not a snake; I shall die if it is; I am so terrified by
the horrid, crawling creatures."

"But it can't possibly be a snake," said Leander, reassuringly; "in such cold weather as this
the snakes are all torpid and lying in their holes underground, stiffer than so many sticks."

"Leander is right," added the pedant, "this cannot be a snake; and besides, snakes never make
such a sound as that at any time. It must proceed from some wild creature of the wood that
our invasion has disturbed; perhaps we may be lucky enough to capture it and find it edible;
that would be a piece of good fortune, indeed, quite like a fairy-tale."

Meantime Scapin was listening attentively to the strange, incomprehensible sound, and watching
keenly that part of the thicket from which it seemed to come. Presently a movement of the underbrush
became noticeable, and just as he motioned to the company to keep perfectly quiet a magnificent
big gander emerged from the bushes, stretching out his long neck, hissing with all his might,
and waddling along with a sort of stupid majesty that was most diverting--closely followed
by two geese, his good, simple-minded, confiding wives, in humble attendance upon their infuriated
lord and master.

"Don't stir, any of you," said Scapin, under his breath, and I will endeavour to capture this
splendid prize"--with which the clever scamp crept softly round behind his companions, who
were still seated in a circle on the rug, so lightly that he made not the slightest sound;
and while the gander--who with his two followers had stopped short at sight of the intruders--was
intently examining them, with some curiosity mingled with his angry defiance, and apparently
wondering in his stupid way how these mysterious figures came to be in that usually deserted
spot, Scapin succeeded, by making a wide detour, in getting behind the three geese unseen,
and noiselessly advancing upon them, with one rapid, dexterous movement, threw his large heavy
cloak over the coveted prize. In another instant he had the struggling gander, still enveloped
in the cloak, in his arms, and, by compressing his neck tightly, quickly put an end to his
resistance--and his existence at the same time; while his two wives, or rather widows, rushed
back into the thick underbrush to avoid a like fate, making a great cackling and ado over the
terrible catastrophe that had befallen their quondam lord and master.

"Bravo, Scapin! that was a clever trick indeed," cried Herode; "it throws those you are so
often applauded for on the stage quite into the shade--a masterpiece of strategy, friend Scapin!--for,
as is well known, geese are by nature very vigilant, and never caught off their guard--of which
history gives us a notable instance, in the watchfulness of the sacred geese of the Capitol,
whose loud cackling in the dead of night at the stealthy approach of the Gauls woke the sleeping
soldiers to a sense of their danger just in time to save Rome. This splendid big fellow here
saves us--after another fashion it is true, but one which is no less providential."

The goose was plucked and prepared for the spit by Mme. Leonarde, while Blazius, the tyrant,
and Leander busied themselves in gathering together a goodly quantity of dead wood and twigs,
and laying them ready to light in a tolerably dry spot. Scapin, with his large clasp-knife,
cut a straight, strong stick, stripped off the bark for a spit, and found two stout forked
branches, which he stuck firmly into the ground on each side of the fire so that they would
meet over it. A handful of dry straw from the chariot served as kindling, and they quickly
had a bright blaze, over which the goose was suspended, and being duly turned and tended by
Scapin, in a surprisingly short space of time began to assume a beautiful light brown hue,
and send out such a savoury delicious odour that the tyrant sprang up and strode away from
its immediate vicinity, declaring that if he remained near it the temptation to seize and swallow
it, spit and all, would surely be too strong for him. Blazius had fetched from the chariot
a huge tin platter that usually figured in theatrical feasts, upon which the goose, done to
a turn, was finally placed with all due ceremony, and a second breakfast was partaken of, which
was by no means a fallacious, chimerical repast like the first. The pedant, who was an accomplished
carver, officiated in that capacity on this auspicious occasion; begging the company, as he
did so, to be kind enough to excuse the unavoidable absence, which he deeply regretted, of
the slices of Seville oranges that should have formed a part of the dish--being an obligatory
accessory of roast goose--and they with charming courtesy smilingly expressed their willingness
to overlook for this once such a culinary solecism.

"Now," said Herode, when nothing remained of the goose but its well-picked bones, "we must
try to decide upon what is best to be done. Only three or four pistoles are left in the exchequer,
and my office as treasurer bids fair to become a sinecure. We have been so unfortunate as to
lose two valuable members of the troupe, Zerbine and poor Matamore, rendering many of our best
plays impossible for us, and at any rate we cannot give dramatic representations that would
bring in much money here in the fields, where our audience would be mainly composed of crows,
jackdaws, and magpies--who could scarcely be expected to pay us very liberally for our entertainment.
With that poor, miserable, old horse there, slowly dying between the shafts of our chariot,
hardly able to drag one foot after another, we cannot reasonably expect to reach Poitiers in
less than two days--if we do then--and our situation is an unpleasantly tragic one, for we
run the risk of being frozen or starved to death by the wayside; fat geese, already roasted,
do not emerge from every thicket you know."

"You state the case very clearly," the pedant said as he paused, "and make the evil very apparent,
but you don't say a word about the remedy."

"My idea is," rejoined Herode, "to stop at the first village we come to and give an entertainment.
All work in the fields is at a standstill now, and the peasants are idle in consequence; they
will be only too delighted at the prospect of a little amusement. Somebody will let us have
his barn for our theatre, and Scapin shall go round the town beating the drum, and announcing
our programme, adding this important clause, that all those who cannot pay for their places
in money may do so in provisions. A fowl, a ham, or a jug of wine, will secure a seat in the
first row; a pair of pigeons, a dozen eggs, or a loaf of bread, in the second, and so on down.
Peasants are proverbially stingy with their money, but will be liberal enough with their provisions;
and though our purse will not be replenished, our larder will, which is equally important,
since our very lives depend upon it. After that we can push on to Poitiers, and I know an inn-keeper
there who will give us credit until we have had time to fill our purse again, and get our finances
in good order."

"But what piece can we play, in case we find our village?" asked Scapin. "Our repertoire is
sadly reduced, you know. Tragedies, and even the better class of comedies, would be all Greek
to the stupid rustics, utterly ignorant as they are of history or fable, and scarcely even
understanding the French language. The only thing to give them would be a roaring farce, with
plenty of funny by-play, resounding blows, kicks and cuffs, ridiculous tumbles, and absurdities
within their limited comprehension. The Rodomontades of Captain Matamore would be the very
thing; but that is out of our power now that poor Matamore is dead."

When Scapin paused, de Sigognac made a sign with his hand that he wished to speak, and all
the company turned respectfully towards him to listen to what he had to say. A little flush
spread itself over his pale countenance, and it was only after a brief but sharp struggle with
himself that he opened his tightly compressed lips, and addressed his expectant audience, as
follows: "Although I do not possess poor Matamore's talent, I can almost rival him in thinness,
and I will take his role, and do the best I can with it. I am your comrade, and I want to do
my part in this strait we find ourselves in. I should be ashamed to share your prosperity,
as I have done, and not aid you, so far as lies in my power, in your adversity, and this is
the only way in which I can assist you. There is no one in the whole world to care what may
become of the de Sigognacs; my house is crumbling into dust over the tombs of my ancestors;
oblivion covers my once glorious name, and the arms of my family are almost entirely obliterated
above the deserted entrance to the Chateau de Sigognac. Perhaps I may yet see the three golden
storks shine out brilliantly upon my shield, and life, prosperity, and happiness return to
the desolate abode where my sad, hopeless youth was spent. But in the meantime, since to you
I owe my escape from that dreary seclusion, I beg you to accept me freely as your comrade,
and my poor services as such; to you I am no longer de Sigognac."

Isabelle had laid her hand on his arm at his first sentence, as soon as she comprehended what
he meant to say, to try to stop him, and here she made another effort to interrupt; but for
once he would not heed her, and continued, "I renounce my title of baron for the present; I
fold it up and put it away at the bottom of my portmanteau, like a garment that is laid aside.
Do not make use of it again, I pray you; we will see whether under a new name I may not succeed
in escaping from the ill fortune that has thus far pursued me as the Baron de Sigognac. Henceforth
then I take poor Matamore's place, and my name is Captain Fracasse."

"Bravo! Vive Captain Fracasse!" cried they all, with enthusiasm, "may applause greet and follow
him wherever he goes."

This sudden move on de Sigognac's part, at which the comedians were greatly astonished, as
well as deeply touched, was not so unpremeditated as it seemed; he had been thinking about
it for some time. He blushed at the idea of being a mere parasite, living upon the bounty of
these honest players--who shared all they had with him so generously, and without ever making
him feel, for a moment, that he was under any obligation to them, but--rather that he was conferring
an honour upon them--he deemed it less unworthy a gentleman to appear upon the stage and do
his part towards filling the common purse than to be their pensioner in idleness; and after
all, there was no disgrace in becoming an actor. The idea of quitting them and going back to
Sigognac had indeed presented itself to his mind, but he had instantly repulsed it as base
and cowardly--it is not in the hour of danger and disaster that the true soldier retires from
the ranks. Besides, if he had wished to go ever so much, his love for Isabelle would have kept
him near her; and then, though he was not given to day-dreams, he yet fancied that wonderful
adventures, sudden changes, and strokes of good fortune might possibly be awaiting him in the
mysterious future, into which he fain would peer, and he would inevitably lose the chance of
them all if he returned to his ruinous chateau.

Everything being thus satisfactorily arranged, the old horse was harnessed up again, and the
chariot moved slowly forward on its way. Their good meal had revived everybody's drooping spirits,
and they all, excepting the duenna and Serafina, who never walked if they could possibly help
it, trudged cheerily along, laughing and talking as they went.

Isabelle had taken de Sigognac's offered arm, and leaned on it proudly, glancing furtively
up into his face, whenever he was looking away from her, with eyes full of tenderness and loving
admiration, never suspecting, in her modesty, that it was for love of her that he had decided
to turn actor--a thing so revolting, as she knew, to his pride as a gentleman. He was a hero
in her eyes, and though she wished to reproach him for his hasty action, which she would have
prevented if she could, she had not the heart to find fault with him for his noble devotion
to the common cause after all. Yet she would have done anything, suffered everything herself,
to have saved him this humiliation; hers being one of those true, loyal hearts that forget
themselves in their love, and think only of the interests and happiness of the being beloved.
She walked on beside him until her strength was exhausted, and then returned to her place in
the chariot, giving him a look so eloquent of love and admiration, as he carefully drew her
wraps about her, that his heart bounded with joy, and he felt that no sacrifice could be too
great which was made for her sweet sake.

In every direction around them, as far as the eye could reach, the snow-covered country was
utterly devoid of town, village, or hamlet; not a sign of life was anywhere to be seen.

"A sorry prospect for our fine plan," said the pedant, after a searching examination of their
surroundings, "and I very much fear that the plentiful store of provisions Herode promised
us will not be forthcoming. I cannot see the smoke of a single chimney, strain my eyes as I
will, nor the weather-cock on any village spire."

"Have a little patience, Blazius!" the tyrant replied. "Where people live too much crowded
together the air becomes vitiated, you know, and it is very salubrious to have the villages
situated a good distance apart."

"What a healthy part of the country this must be then the inhabitants need not to fear epidemics--for
to begin with there are no inhabitants. At this rate our Captain Fracasse will not have a chance
very soon to make his debut."

By this time it was nearly dark, the sky was overcast with heavy leaden clouds, and only a
faint lurid glow on the horizon in the west showed where the sun had gone down. An icy wind,
blowing full in their faces, and the hard, frozen surface of the snow, made their progress
both difficult and painful. The poor old horse slipped at every step, though Scapin was carefully
leading him, and staggered along like a drunken man, striking first against one shaft and then
against the other, growing perceptibly weaker at every turn of the wheels behind him. Now and
again he shook his head slowly up and down, and cast appealing glances at those around him,
as his trembling legs seemed about to give way under him. His hour had come--the poor, old
horse! and he was dying in harness like a brave beast, as he was. At last he could no more,
and falling heavily to the ground gave one feeble kick as he stretched himself out on his side,
and yielded up the ghost. Frightened by the sudden shock, the women shrieked loudly, and the
men, running to their assistance, helped them to clamber out of the chariot. Mme. Leonarde
and Serafina were none the worse for the fright, but Isabelle had fainted quite away, and de
Sigognac, lifting her light weight easily, carried her in his arms to the bank at the side
of the road, followed by the duenna, while Scapin bent down over the prostrate horse and carefully
examined his ears.

"He is stone dead," said he in despairing tones; "his ears are cold, and there is no pulsation
in the auricular artery."

"Then I suppose we shall have to harness ourselves to the chariot in his place," broke in Leander
dolefully, almost weeping. "Oh! cursed be the mad folly that led me to choose an actor's career."

"Is this a time to groan and bewail yourself?" roared the tyrant savagely, entirely out of
patience with Leander's everlasting jeremiads; "for heaven's sake pluck up a little courage,
and be a man! And now to consider what is to be done; but first let us see how our good little
Isabelle is getting on; is she still unconscious? No; she opens her eyes, and there is the
colour coming back to her lips; she will do now, thanks to the baron and Mme. Leonarde. We
must divide ourselves into two bands; one will stay with the women and the chariot, the other
will scour the country in search of aid. We cannot think of remaining here all night, for we
should be frozen stiff long before morning. Come, Captain Fracasse, Leander, and Scapin, you
three being the youngest, and also the fleetest of foot, off with you. Run like greyhounds,
and bring us succour as speedily as may be. Blazius and I will meantime do duty as guardians
of the chariot and its contents."

The three men designated signified their readiness to obey the tyrant, and set off across country,
though not feeling at all sanguine as to the results of their search, for the night was intensely
dark; but that very darkness had its advantages, and came to their aid in an unexpected manner,
for though it effectually concealed all surrounding objects, it made visible a tiny point of
light shining at the foot of a little hill some distance from the road.

"Behold," cried the pedant, "our guiding star! as welcome to us weary travellers, lost in the
desert, as the polar star to the distressed mariner 'in periculo maris.' That blessed star
yonder, whose rays shine far out into the darkness, is a light burning in some warm, comfortable
room, which forms--Heaven be praised!--part of the habitation of human and civilized beings--not
Laestrygon savages. Without doubt there is a bright fire blazing on the hearth in that cosy
room, and over it hangs a famous big pot, from which issue puffs of a delicious odour--oh,
delightful thought!--round which my imagination holds high revel, and in fancy I wash down
with generous wine the savoury morsels from that glorious pot-au-feu."

"You rave, my good Blazius," said the tyrant, "the frost must have gotten into your brain--that
makes men mad, they say, or silly. Yet there is some method in your madness, some truth in
your ravings, for yonder light must indicate an inhabited dwelling. This renders a change in
the plans for our campaign advisable. We will all go forward together towards the promised
refuge, and leave the chariot where it is; no robbers will be abroad on such a night as this
to interfere with its contents. We will take our few valuables--they are not so numerous or
weighty but that we can carry them with us; for once it is an advantage that our possessions
are few. To-morrow morning we will come back to fetch the chariot: now, forward, march!--and
it is time, for I am nearly frozen to death."

The comedians accordingly started across the fields, towards the friendly light that promised
them so much--Isabelle supported by de Sigognac, Serafina by Leander, and the duenna dragged
along by Scapin; while Blazius and the tyrant formed the advance guard. It was not easy work;
sometimes plunging into deep snow, more than knee high, as they came upon a ditch, hidden completely
under the treacherously smooth white surface, or stumbling, and even falling more than once,
over some unseen obstacle; but at length they came up to what seemed to be a large, low building,
probably a farm-house, surrounded by stone walls, with a big gate for carts to enter. In the
expanse of dark wall before them shone the light which had guided their steps, and upon approaching
they found that it proceeded from a small window, whose shutters--most fortunately for them,
poor, lost wanderers--had not yet been closed. The dogs within the enclosure, perceiving the
approach of strangers, began to bark loudly and rush about the yard; they could hear them jumping
up at the walls in vain efforts to get at the intruders. Presently the sound of a man's voice
and footsteps mingled with their barking, and in a moment the whole establishment seemed to
be on the alert.

"Stay here, all of you," said the pedant, halting at a little distance from the gate, "and
let me go forward alone to knock for admission. Our numbers might alarm the good people of
the farm, and lead them to fancy us a band of robbers, with designs upon their rustic Penates;
as I am old, and inoffensive looking, they will not be afraid of me."

This advice was approved by all, and Blazius, going forward by himself, knocked gently at the
great gate, which was first opened cautiously just a very little, then flung impetuously back;
and then the comedians, from their outpost in the snow, saw a most extraordinary and inexplicable
scene enacted before their astonished eyes. The pedant and the farmer who had opened the gate,
after gazing at each other a moment intently, by the light of the lantern which the latter
held up to see what manner of man his nocturnal visitor might be, and after exchanging rapidly
a few words, that the others could not hear, accompanied by wild gesticulations, rushed into
each other's arms, and began pounding each other heartily upon the back--mutually bestowing
resounding accolades--as is the manner upon the stage of expressing joy at meeting a dear friend.
Emboldened by this cordial reception, which yet was a mystery to them, the rest of the troupe
ventured to approach, though slowly and timidly.

"Halloa! all of you there," cried the pedant suddenly, in a joyful voice, "come on without
fear, you will be made welcome by a friend and a brother, a world-famed member of our profession,
the darling of Thespis, the favourite of Thalia, no less a personage than the celebrated Bellombre--you
all know his glorious record. Blessed is the happy chance that has directed our steps hither,
to the philosophic retreat where this histrionic hero reposes tranquilly upon his laurels."

"Come in, I pray you, ladies and gentlemen," said Bellombre, advancing to meet them, with a
graceful courtesy which proved that the ci-devant actor had not put aside his elegant, courtly
manners when he donned his peasant dress.

"Come in quickly out of this biting wind; my dwelling is rude and homely, but you will be better
off within it than here in the open air."

They needed no urging, and joyfully accepting his kind invitation followed their host into
the house, charmed with this unhoped-for good fortune. Blazius and Bellombre were old acquaintances,
and had formerly been members Of the same troupe; as their respective roles did not clash there
was no rivalry between them, and they had become fast friends--being fellow worshippers at
the shrine of the merry god of wine. Bellombre had retired from the stage some years before,
when at his father's death he inherited this farm and a small fortune. The parts that he excelled
in required a certain degree of youth, and he was not sorry to withdraw before wrinkles and
whitening locks should make it necessary for him to abandon his favourite roles. In the world
he was believed to be dead, but his splendid acting was often quoted by his former admirers--who
were wont to declare that there had been nothing to equal it seen on the stage since he had
made his last bow to the public.

The room into which he led his guests was very spacious, and served both as kitchen and sitting-room--there
was also a large curtained bed standing in an alcove at the end farthest from the fire, as
was not unusual in ancient farm-houses. The blaze from the four or five immense logs of wood
heaped up on the huge andirons was roaring up the broad chimney flue, and filling the room
with a bright, ruddy glow--a most welcome sight to the poor half-frozen travellers, who gathered
around it and luxuriated in its genial warmth. The large apartment was plainly and substantially
furnished, just as any well-to-do farmer's house might be, but near one of the windows stood
a round table heaped up with books, some of them lying open as if but just put down, which
showed that the owner of the establishment had not lost his taste for literary pursuits, but
devoted to them his long winter evenings.

The cordiality of their welcome and the deliciously warm atmosphere in which they found themselves
had combined to raise the spirits of the comedians--colour returned to pate faces, light to
heavy eyes, and smiles to anxious lips--their gaiety was in proportion to the misery and peril
from which they had just happily escaped, their hardships were all forgotten, and they gave
themselves up entirely to the enjoyment of the hour. Their host had called up his servants,
who bustled about, setting the table and making other preparations for supper, to the undisguised
delight of Blazius, who said triumphantly to the tyrant, "You see now, Herode, and must acknowledge,
that my predictions, inspired by the little glimmer of light we saw from afar, are completely
verified--they have all come literally true. Fragrant puffs are issuing even now from the mammoth
pot-au-feu there over the fire, and we shall presently wash down its savoury contents with
draughts of generous wine, which I see already awaiting us on the table yonder. It is warm
and bright and cosy in this room, and we appreciate and enjoy it all doubly, after the darkness
and the cold and the danger from which we have escaped into the grateful shelter of this hospitable
roof; and to crown the whole, our host is the grand, illustrious, incomparable Bellombre--flower
and cream of all comedians, past, present and future, and best of good fellows."

"Our happiness would be complete if only poor Matamore were here," said Isabelle with a sigh.

"Pray what has happened to him?" asked Bellombre, who knew him by reputation.

The tyrant told him the tragic story of the snow-storm, and its fatal consequences. "But for
this thrice-blessed meeting with my old and faithful friend here," Blazius added, "the same
fate would probably have overtaken us ere morning--we should all have been found, frozen stiff
and stark, by the next party of travellers on the post road."

"That would have been a pity indeed," Bellombre rejoined, and glancing admiringly at Isabelle
and Serafina, added gallantly, "but surely these young goddesses would have melted the snow,
and thawed the ice, with the fire I see shining in their sparkling eyes."

"You attribute too much power to our eyes," Scrafina made answer; "they could not even have
made any impression upon a heart, in the thick, impenetrable darkness that enveloped us; the
tears that the icy cold forced from them would have extinguished the flames of the most ardent
love."

While they sat at supper, Blazius told their host of the sad condition of their affairs, at
which he seemed no way surprised.

"There are always plenty of ups and downs in a theatrical career," he said--"the wheel of Fortune
turns very fast in that profession; but if misfortunes come suddenly, so also does prosperity
follow quickly in their train. Don't be discouraged!--things are brightening with you now.
Tomorrow morning I will send one of my stout farm-horses to bring your chariot on here, and
we will rig up a theatre in my big barn; there is a large town not far from this which will
send us plenty of spectators. If the entertainment does not fetch as good a sum as I think
it will, I have a little fund of pistoles lying idle here that will be entirely at your service,
for, by Apollo! I would not leave my good Blazius and his friends in distress so long as I
had a copper in my purse."

"I see that you are always the same warm-hearted, openhanded Bellombre as of old," cried the
pedant, grasping the other's outstretched hand warmly; "you have not grown rusty and hard in
consequence of your bucolic occupations."

"No," Bellombre replied, with a smile; "I do not let my brain lie fallow while I cultivate
my fields. I make a point of reading over frequently the good old authors, seated comfortably
by the fire with my feet on the fender, and I read also such new works as I am able to procure,
from time to time, here in the depths of the country. I often go carefully over my own old
parts, and I see plainly what a self-satisfied fool I was in the old days, when I was applauded
to the echo every time I appeared upon the stage, simply because I happened to be blessed with
a sonorous voice, a graceful carriage, and a fine leg; the doting stupidity of the public,
with which I chanced to be a favourite, was the true cause of my success."

"Only the great Bellombre himself would ever be suffered to say such things as these of that
most illustrious ornament of our profession," said the tyrant, courteously.

"Art is long, but life is short," continued the ci-devant actor, "and I should have arrived
at a certain degree of proficiency at last perhaps, but--I was beginning to grow stout; and
I would not allow myself to cling to the stage until two footmen should have to come and help
me up from my rheumatic old knees every time I had a declaration of love to make, so I gladly
seized the opportunity afforded me by my little inheritance, and retired in the height of my
glory."

"And you were wise, Bellombre," said Blazius, "though your retreat was premature; you might
have given ten years more to the theatre, and then have retired full early."

In effect he was still a very handsome, vigorous man, about whom no signs of age were apparent,
save an occasional thread of silver amid the rich masses of dark hair that fell upon his shoulders.

The younger men, as well as the three actresses, were glad to retire to rest early; but Blazius
and the tyrant, with their host, sat up drinking the latter's capital wine until far into the
night. At length they, too, succumbed to their fatigue; and while they are sleeping we will
return to the abandoned chariot to see what was going on there. In the gray light of the early
morning it could be perceived that the poor old horse still lay just as he had fallen; several
crows were flitting about, not yet venturing to attack the miserable carcass, peering at it
suspiciously from a respectful distance, as if they feared some hidden snare. At last one,
bolder than its fellows, alighted upon the poor beast's head, and was just bending over that
coveted dainty, the eye--which was open and staring--when a heavy step, coming over the snow,
startled him. Looking from one to another of these toil-worn faces, he remembered the pledge he
had made them, and he made it anew: "I'm going to stand by you! I'm going on with the fight,
boys!"

There came more disturbance at the door, and suddenly Jeff Cotton appeared, with a couple of
additional guards, shoving their way into the room, breathless and red in the face from running.

"Ah,
there's the marshal!" cried Hal. "You needn't push, Cotton, there's not going to be any trouble.
We are union men here, we know how to control ourselves. Now, boys, we're not giving up, we're
not beaten, we're only waiting for the men in the other camps! We have a union, and we mean to
keep it! Three cheers for the union!"

The cheers rang out with a will: cheers for the union, cheers for Joe Smith, cheers for the widow
and her weeds!

"You belong to the union! You stand by it, no matter what happens! If they fire you, you take
it on to the next place! You teach it to the new men, you never let
it die in your hearts!

In union there is strength, in union there is hope! Never forget it, men--Union!"

The voice of the camp-marshal rang out.

"If you're coming, young woman, come now!"

Hal dropped a shy curtsey. "Oh, Mr. Cotton! This is so sudden!" The crowd howled; and Hal descended
from his platform. With coquettish gesturing he replaced the widow's veils about his face, and
tripped mincingly across the dining-room. When he reached the camp-marshal, he daintily took that
worthy's arm, and with the "breaker of teeth" on the other side, and Bud Adams bringing up
the rear, he toddled out of the dining-room and down the street.

Hungry men gave up their suppers to behold that sight.

They poured out of the building, they followed, laughing, shouting, jeering. Others came from
every direction--by the time the party had reached the depot, a good
part of the population of the village was on hand; and everywhere
went the word, "It's Joe Smith!

Come back with a message from the union!" Big, coal-grimed miners laughed till the tears made
streaks on their faces; they fell on one another's necks for delight at this trick which had
been played upon their oppressors.

Even Jeff Cotton could not withhold his tribute. "By God, you're the limit!" he muttered. He
accepted the "tea-party" aspect of the affair, as the easiest way to get rid of his recurrent
guest, and avert the possibilities of danger. He escorted the widow to the train and helped
her up the steps, posting escorts at the doors of her car; nor did the attentions of these gallants
cease until the train had moved down the canyon and passed the limits
of the North Valley stockade!

SECTION 26.

Hal took off his widow's weeds; and with them he shed
the merriment he had worn for the benefit of the men. There came a
sudden reaction; he realised that he was tired.

For ten days he had
lived in a whirl of excitement, scarcely stopping to sleep. Now he
lay back in the car-seat, pale, exhausted; his head ached, and he
realised that the sum-total of his North Valley experience was failure.
There was left in him no trace of that spirit of adventure with which
he had set out upon his "summer course in practical sociology." He
had studied his lessons, tried to recite them, and been "flunked."

The
train arrived in Pedro, and Hal took a hack at the station and drove
to the hotel. He still carried the widow's weeds rolled into a bundle.
He might have left them in the train, but the impulse to economy which
he had acquired during the last ten weeks had become a habit. He would
return them to Mrs. Zamboni. The money he had promised her might better
be used to feed her young ones. The two pillows he would leave in
the car; the hotel might endure the loss! In spite of his iron will
and constitution he began to feel an insidious drowsiness creeping over him, which he did not
find it easy to shake off; several times his eyelids closed, and he lifted them resolutely,
only to have them fall again in another instant. In fact he was just dropping into a doze,
when he felt, as in a dream, a hot breath on his face, and suddenly waked to see two gleaming
eyeballs close to his. With a movement more rapid than thought itself, he seized the wolf by
the throat with his left hand, and picking up his navaja with the other, plunged it up to the
hilt into the animal's breast. It must have gone through the heart, for he dropped down dead
in the road, without a struggle.

Although he had gained the victory so easily over his fierce assailant, Agostino concluded
that this was not a good place for them to tarry in, and called to Chiquita, who jumped up
instantly, wide awake, and manifested no alarm at sight of the dead wolf lying beside the chariot.

"We had better move on," said he, "that carcass of the horse there draws the wolves; they are
often mad with hunger in the winter time you know, and especially when there is snow on the
ground. I could easily kill a pretty good number of them, but they might come down upon us
by scores, and if I should happen to fall asleep again it would not be pleasant to wake up
and find myself in the stomach of one of those confounded brutes. When I was disposed of they
would make only a mouthful of you, little one! So come along, we must scamper off as fast as
ever we can. That fellow there was only the advance guard, the others will not be far behind
him--this carcass will keep them busy for a while, and give us time to get the start of them.
You can walk now, Chiquita, can't you?"

"Yes, indeed," she replied cheerily, "that little nap has done me so much good. Poor Agostino!
you shall not have to carry me again, like a great clumsy parcel. And Agostino," she added
with a fierce energy, "when my feet refuse to walk or run in your service you must just cut
my throat with your big knife there, and throw me into the next ditch. I will thank you for
it, Agostino, for I could not bear to have your precious life in danger for the sake of poor,
miserable little me." Thereupon this strange pair, both very fleet of foot, set off running,
side by side, the brigand holding Chiquita by the hand, so as to give her all the aid and support
he could, and they quickly passed out of sight. No sooner had they departed than the crows
came swooping down from their perch in the nearest tree, and fell to fiercely upon their horrible
feast, in which they were almost directly joined by several ravenous wolves--and they made
such good use of their time, that in a few hours nothing remained of the poor old horse but
his bones, his tail, and his shoes. When somewhat later the tyrant arrived, accompanied by
one of Bellombre's farm-hands, leading the horse that was to take the chariot back with them,
he was naturally astonished to find only the skeleton, with the harness and trappings, still
intact, about it, for neither birds nor beasts had interfered with them, and his surprise was
increased when he discovered the half-devoured carcass of the wolf lying under the chariot
wheels. There also, scattered on the road, were the sham louis-d'or that did duty upon the
stage when largesses were to be distributed; and upon the snow were the traces, clearly defined,
of the footsteps of a man, approaching the chariot from the way it had come, and of those of
the same man, and also of a child, going on beyond it.

"It would appear," said Herode to himself, "that the chariot of Thespis has received visitors,
since we abandoned it, of more than one sort, and for my part I am very thankful to have missed
them all. Oh, happy accident! that, when it happened, seemed to us so great a misfortune, yet
is proven now to have been a blessing in disguise. And you, my poor old horse, you could not
have done us a greater service than to die just when and where you did. Thanks to you we have
escaped the wolves--two-legged ones, which are perhaps the most to be dreaded of all, as well
as the ravenous brethren of this worthy lying here. What a dainty feast the sweet, tender flesh
of those plump little pullets, Isabelle and Serafina, would have been for them, to say nothing
of the tougher stuff the rest of us are made of. What a bountiful meal we should have furnished
them--the murderous brutes!" While the tyrant was indulging in this soliloquy Bellombre's servant
had detached the chariot from the skeleton of the poor old horse, and had harnessed to it,
with considerable difficulty, the animal he had been leading, which was terrified at sight
of the bleeding, mutilated carcass of the wolf lying on the snow, and the ghastly skeleton
of its predecessor. Arrived at the farm, the chariot was safely stowed away under a shed, and
upon examination it was found that nothing was missing. Indeed, something had been left there,
for a small clasp-knife was picked up in it, which had fallen out of Chiquita's pocket, and
excited a great deal of curiosity and conjecture. It was of Spanish make, and bore upon its
sharp, pointed blade, a sinister inscription in that language, to this effect--

     "When this viper bites you, make sure
     That you must die--for there is no cure."

No one could imagine how it had come there, and the tyrant was especially anxious to clear
up the mystery that puzzled them all. Isabelle, who was a little inclined to be superstitious,
and attach importance to omens, signs of evil, and such-like, felt troubled about it. She spoke
Spanish perfectly, and understood the full force and significance of the strange inscription
upon the wicked-looking blade of the tiny weapon.

Meantime, Scapin, dressed in his freshest and most gaudy costume, had marched into the neighbouring
town, carrying his drum; he stationed himself in the large, public square, and made such good
play with his drum-sticks that he soon had a curious crowd around him, to whom he made an eloquent
address, setting forth in glowing terms the great attractions offered by "the illustrious comedians
of Herode's celebrated troupe," who, "for this night only," would delight the public by the
representation of that screaming farce, the Rodomontades of Captain Fracasse; to be followed
by a "bewitching Moorish dance," performed by the "incomparable Mlle. Serafina." After enlarging
brilliantly upon this theme, he added, that as they were "more desirous of glory than profit,"
they would be willing to accept provisions of all kinds, instead of coin of the realm, in payment
of places, from those who had not the money to spare, and asked them to let all their friends
know. This closing announcement made a great sensation among his attentive listeners, and he
marched back to the farm, confident that they would have a goodly number of spectators. There
he found the stage already erected in the barn, and a rehearsal in progress, which was necessary
on de Sigognac's account.

Bellombre was instructing him in various minor details as the play went on, and for a novice
he did wonderfully well--acting with much spirit and grace, showing decided talent, and remarkable
aptitude. But it was very evident that he was greatly annoyed by some portions of the piece,
and an angry flush mounted to the roots of his hair at the whacks and cuffs so liberally bestowed
upon the doughty captain.

His comrades spared him as much as possible--feeling that it must be intensely repugnant to
him--but he grew furious in spite of all his efforts to control his temper, and at each fresh
attack upon him his flashing eyes and knitted brows betrayed the fierce rage he was in; then,
suddenly remembering that his role required a very different expression of countenance, he
would pull himself up, and endeavour to imitate that which Matamore had been wont to assume
in this character. Bellombre, who was watching him critically, stopped him a moment, to say:
"You make a great mistake in attempting to suppress your natural emotions; you should take
care not to do it, for they produce a capital effect, and you can create a new type of stage
bully; when you have gotten accustomed to this sort of thing, and no longer feel this burning
indignation, you must feign it. Strike out in a path of your own, and you will be sure to attain
success--far more so than if you attempt to follow in another's footsteps. Fracasse, as you
represent him, loves and admires courage, and would fain be able to manifest it--he is angry
with himself for being such an arrant coward. When free from danger, he dreams of nothing but
heroic exploits and superhuman enterprises; but when any actual peril threatens him, his too
vivid imagination conjures up such terrible visions of bleeding wounds and violent death that
his heart fails him. Yet his pride revolts at the idea of being beaten; for a moment he is
filled with rage, but his courage all disappears with the first blows he receives, and he finally
shows himself to be the poltroon that he himself despises. This method it appears to me is
far superior to the absurd grimaces, trembling legs, and exaggerated gestures, by which indifferent
actors endeavour to excite the laughter of their audience--but meantime lose sight entirely
of their art."

The baron gratefully accepted the veteran actor's advice, and played his part after the fashion
indicated by him with so much spirit that all present applauded his acting enthusiastically,
and prophesied its success. The performances were to begin at an early hour, and as the time
approached, de Sigognac put on poor Matamore's costume, to which he had fallen heir, and which
Mme. Leonarde had taken in hand and cleverly altered for him, so that he could get into it.
He had a sharp struggle with his pride as be donned this absurd dress, and made himself ready
for his debut as an actor, but resolutely repressed all rising regrets, and determined faithfully
to do his best in the new role he had undertaken.

A large audience had gathered in the big barn, which was brilliantly lighted, and the representation
began before a full house. At the end farthest from the stage, and behind the spectators, were
some cattle in their stalls, that stared at the unwonted scene with an expression of stupid
wonder in their great, soft eyes--the eyes that Homer, the grand old Greek poet, deemed worthy
to supply an epithet for the beauteous orbs of majestic Juno herself--and in the midst of one
of the most exciting parts of the play, a calf among them was moved to express its emotions
by an unearthly groan, which did not in the least disconcert the audience, but had nearly been
too much for the gravity of the actors upon the stage.

Captain Fracasse won much applause, and indeed acted his part admirably, being under no constraint;
for he did not need to fear the criticism of this rustic audience as he would have done that
of a more cultivated and experienced one; and, too, he felt sure that there could be nobody
among the spectators that knew him, or anything about him. The other actors were also vigorously
clapped by the toil-hardened hands of these lowly tillers of the soil--whose applause throughout
was bestowed, Bellombre declared, judiciously and intelligently. Serafina executed her Moorish
dance with a degree of agility and voluptuous grace that would have done honour to a professional
ballet-dancer, or to a Spanish gipsy, and literally brought down the house.

But while de Sigognac was thus employed, far from his ancient chateau, the portraits of his
ancestors that hung upon its walls were frowning darkly at the degeneracy of this last scion
of their noble race, and a sigh, almost a groan, that issued from their faded lips, echoed
dismally through the deserted house. In the kitchen, Pierre, with Miraut and Beelzebub on either
side of him--all three looking melancholy and forlorn--sat thinking of his absent lord, and
said aloud, "Oh, where is my poor, dear master now?" a big tear rolling down his withered cheek
as he stooped to caress his dumb companions.

CHAPTER VIII. THE DUKE OF VALLOMBREUSE

The next morning Bellombre drew Blazius aside, and untying the strings of a long leathern purse
emptied out of it into the palm of his hand a hundred pistoles, which he piled up neatly on
the table by which they were standing; to the great admiration of the pedant, who thought to
himself that his friend was a lucky fellow to be in possession of so large a sum--absolute
wealth in his eyes. But what was his surprise when Bellombre swept them all up and put them
into his own hands.

"You must have understood," he said, "that I did not bring out this money in order to torment
you in like manner with Tantalus, and I want you to take it, without any scruples, as freely
as it is given--or loaned, if you are too proud to accept a gift from an old friend. These
pieces were made to circulate--they are round, you see--and by this time they must be tired
of lying tied up in my old purse there. I have no use for them; there's nothing to spend them
on here; the farm produces everything that is needed in my household, so I shall not miss them,
and it is much better in every way that they should be in your hands."

Not finding any adequate reply to make to this astonishing speech, Blazius put the money into
his pocket, and, after first administering to his friend a cordial accolade, grasped and wrung
his hand with grateful fervour, while an inconvenient tear, that he had tried in vain to wink
away, ran down his jolly red nose. As Bellombre had said the night before, affairs were brightening
with the troupe; good fortune had come at last, and the hard times they had met and struggled
against so bravely and uncomplainingly were among the things of the past. The receipts of the
previous evening--for there had been some money taken in, as well as plentiful stores of edibles--added
to Bellombre's pistoles, made a good round sum, and the chariot of Thespis, so deplorably bare
of late, was now amply provisioned. Not to do things by halves, their generous host lent to
the comedians two stout farm horses, with a man to drive them into Poitiers, and bring them
back home again. They had on their gala-day harness, and from their gaudily-painted, high-peaked
collars hung strings of tiny bells, that jingled cheerily at every firm, regular step of the
great, gentle creatures. So our travellers set out in high feather, and their entry into Poitiers,
though not so magnificent as Alexander's into Babylon, was still in very fine style indeed.
As they threaded their way through the narrow, tortuous streets of that ancient town, the noise
of their horses' iron shoes ringing out against the rough stone pavement, and the clatter of
their wheels drew many inmates of the houses they passed to the windows, and a little crowd
collected around them as they stood waiting for admission before the great entrance door of
the Armes de France; the driver, meanwhile, cracking his whip till it sounded like a volley
of musketry, to which the horses responded by shaking their heads, and making all the little
bells about them jingle sharply and merrily. There was a wonderful difference between this
and their arrival at the last inn they had stopped at--the night of the snow-storm--and the
landlord, hearing such welcome sounds without, ran himself to admit his guests, and opened
the two leaves of the great door, so that the chariot could pass into the interior court. This
hotel was the finest in Poitiers, where all the rich and noble travellers were in the habit
of alighting, and there was an air of gaiety and prosperity about it very pleasing to our comedians,
in contrast with all the comfortless, miserable lodgings they had been obliged to put up with
for a long time past. The landlord, whose double, or rather triple chin testified to bountiful
fare, and the ruddy tints of his face to the excellence of his wines, seemed to be the incarnation
of good humour.

He was so plump, so fresh, so rosy and so smiling, that it was a pleasure only to look at him.
When he saw the tyrant, he fairly bubbled over with delight. A troupe of comedians always attracted
people to his house, and brought him in a great deal of money; for the young men of leisure
of the town sought their company, and were constantly drinking wine with the actors, and giving
dainty little suppers, and treats of various kinds, to the actresses.

"You are heartily welcome, Seignior Herode! What happy chance brings you this way?" said the
landlord, smilingly. "It is a long time since we have had the pleasure of seeing you at the
Armes de France."

"So it is, Maitre Bilot," the tyrant answered; "but we cannot be giving our poor little performances
always in the same place, you see; the spectators would become so familiar with all our tricks
that they could do them themselves, so we are forced to absent ourselves for a while. And how
are things going on here, now? Have you many of the nobility and gentry in town at present?"

"A great many, Seignior Herode, for the hunting is over, so they have come in from the chateaux.
But they don't know what to do with themselves, for it is so dull and quiet here. People can't
be eating and drinking all the time, and they are dying for want of a little amusement. You
will have full houses."

"Well," rejoined the tyrant, "then please give us seven or eight good rooms, have three or
four fat capons put down to roast, bring up, from that famous cellar of yours, a dozen of the
capital wine I used to drink here--you know which I mean--and spread abroad the news of the
arrival of Herode's celebrated troupe at the Armes de France, with a new and extensive repertoire,
to give a few representations in Poitiers."

While this conversation was going on the rest of the comedians had alighted, and were already
being conducted to their respective rooms by several servants. The one given to Isabelle was
a little apart from the others--those in their immediate vicinity being occupied--which was
not displeasing to the modest young girl, who was often greatly annoyed and embarrassed by
the promiscuous, free-and-easy way of getting on, inseparable from such a Bohemian life. She
always accepted the inevitable with a good grace, and never complained of the vexation she
felt at being obliged to share her bed-chamber with Serafina or the duenna, or perhaps both;
but it was a luxury she had scarcely dared to hope for to have her room entirely to herself,
and moreover sufficiently distant from her companions to insure her a good deal of privacy.

In a marvellously short space of time the whole town had become acquainted with the news of
the arrival of the comedians, and the young men of wealth and fashion began flocking to the
hotel, to drink a bottle of Maitre Bilot's wine, and question him about the beauty and charms
of the actresses; curling up the points of their mustaches as they did so with such an absurdly
conceited, insolent air of imaginary triumph, that the worthy landlord could not help laughing
in his sleeve at them as he gave his discreet, mysterious answers, accompanied by significant
gestures calculated to turn the silly heads of these dandified young calves, and make them
wild with curiosity and impatience.

Isabelle, when left alone, had first unpacked a portion of her clothing, and arranged it neatly
on the shelves of the wardrobe in her room, and then proceeded to indulge in the luxury of
a bath and complete change of linen. She took down her long, fine, silky hair, combed it carefully,
and arranged it tastefully, with a pale blue ribbon entwined artistically in it; which delicate
tint was very becoming to her, with her fair, diaphanous complexion, and lovely flush, like
a rose-leaf, on her cheek. When she had put on the silvery gray dress, with its pretty blue
trimmings, which completed her simple toilet, she smiled at her own charming reflection in
the glass, and thought of a pair of dark, speaking eyes that she knew would find her fair,
and pleasant to look upon. As she turned away from the mirror a sunbeam streamed in through
her window, and she could not resist the temptation to open the casement and put her pretty
head out, to see what view there might be from it. She looked down into a narrow, deserted
alley, with the wall of the hotel on one side and that of the garden opposite on the other,
so high that it reached above the tops of the trees within. From her window she could look
down into this garden, and see, quite at the other end of it, the large mansion it belonged
to, whose lofty, blackened walls testified to its antiquity. Two gentlemen were walking slowly,
arm in arm, along one of the broad paths leading towards the house, engrossed in conversation;
both were young and handsome, but they were scarcely of equal rank, judging by the marked deference
paid by one, the elder, to the other.

We will call this friendly pair Orestes and Pylades for the present, until we ascertain their
real names. The former was about one or two and twenty, and remarkably handsome and distinguished--strikingly
so--with a very white skin, intensely black hair and eyes, a tall, slender, lithe figure, shown
to advantage by the rich costume of tan-coloured velvet he wore; and well-formed feet, with
high, arched insteps, small and delicate enough for a woman's--that more than one woman had
envied him--encased in dainty, perfectly fitting boots, made of white Russia leather. * * *
* *

Arts, Sciences, Trades, and useful Inventions are now planted there in some Measure, and with due
Cultivation may thrive wonderfully.

* * * * *

Providence has furnish'd this Province with all Necessaries of Life, and Industry may supply it
with all Conveniences and Advantages, for Profit, Ease, and Pleasure.

* * * * *

The best Measures have been concerted and proposed, and Schemes have been nicely drawn for the
Encouragement of useful Discoveries and laudable Undertakings, both for the Security and Benefit
of the Publick.

* * * * *

And as in Blessings temporal, so in spiritual Concernments, might the Virginians abound, were
the Attempts that have been, or may be, made for the due Regulation of the Church, as well
as State, brought to Maturity: Were the Laws more plain and particular in Relation to Livings;
so that the Labours of the Clergy might be rewarded with less Trouble
and Ill-Will in their Preferment to Parishes, and collecting their
Dues and Salaries; and were the Principles and Practice of Religion
more firmly establish'd, which might easily be done without interfering
with the Interest of the People, or Constitution of the Government;
with but few Corrections and Alterations, and but little additional
Expence.

* * * * *

More especially at this eminent Juncture of his Majesty's most Christian Goodness, in converting
his Palace at Whitehall into a College of Preachers; and founding in the Universities Courts of
Statesmen perfectly instructed in modern Languages and History.

* * * * *

For if at Home he has in this Respect, as well as others, excelled
his Royal Predecessors, why may we not hope that his charitable Benefactions
may likewise be extended Abroad to the Church and College of the most
antient and loyal Colony of Virginia?

Through the Means of such great and good Governors in Church, as his Grace the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and his Lordship the Bishop of London; the first of which eminent Patrons of
Religion and Learning is Chancellor of the College of William and
Mary at Williamsburgh in Virginia; and to the other belongs the weighty
Care and Charge of the Church and Clergy of all that and the other
English Plantations.

* * * * *

Why may we not hope that the College founded and endowed there by King William and Queen Mary
of ever blessed Memory, may partake of the royal Favours of our present most gracious Sovereign?
Why may we not hope that the Church confirmed there in each Reign since Queen Elizabeth's, may
be duly regulated by the pious Directions of his present Majesty?

* * * * *

These are Actions suitable to the Genius of our mighty Monarch: These are Undertakings worthy
of the Negotiation of such pious and learned Bishops; to whose Consideration
the following Sheets are in the most submissive Manner offered, humbly
requesting their Lordship's Excuse for this presumptive Freedom; occasioned
by the zealous Affection which I have for the Colony, which principally
induced me to this Work, in order to vindicate the Place and People
from undeserved Calumny, to make publick true Informations of them,
to proclaim to the World their just Praises, and to prove as instrumental
as possible in the Service of Religion, Learning, Arts, advantageous
Undertakings, and the Trade of that Plantation; to do which, I think
my self strictly obliged by Gratitude and Conscience.

* * * * *

There are several Books upon this Subject, but none descends to the present State and Circumstances
of this Colony, nor proposes what Methods may seem most conducive to the Promotion of its best
Interest in all Respects; but without particular Knowledge of these Things no useful Designs
can be carried to the best Advantage, neither by the Government, Societies, Companies, nor by private
Persons.

* * * * *

Wherefore I composed this as a Supplement to those other Books; treating herein for the most Part
of such Heads, as are altogether omitted, or but slightly accounted for, or described by others.

*
* * * *

For though some may have perfect Information and true Notions of these Things; yet the generality
of Mankind are utter Strangers to what I here specify, and entertain commonly very erroneous
and monstrous Thoughts concerning the Country, Lives, Religion and Government of the Virginians;
so that there seemed a great Necessity for a Book of this kind; which I have made as plain and
intelligible as I possibly could, and composed in the best Method that I could devise for the
Service of the Plantations, more particularly Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina, where I have
been.

* * * * *

I have industriously avoided the ornamental Dress of Rhetorical Flourishes,
esteeming them unfit for the naked Truth of historical Relations,
and improper for the Purpose of general Propositions.

* * * * *

Besides its Truth and my real Design of publick Service, this mean
Piece has little to recommend it to the Approbation of Mankind, and
to introduce it to a candid Reception in the World.

Nevertheless I venture to present it with the greatest Submission to the Candour of the Reader,
with Hopes that it may meet with a kind Acceptance; humbly requesting the following Favours
of the Readers, viz.

* * * * *

That they would be pleased to excuse and correct the Errors of the Press.

* * * * *

That if any material Alterations have happened to be made that I know not of, since I left
Virginia (which is above two Years) they will give favourable Allowances
for my Accounts of such Things, and not censure me as if I endeavoured
to impose Falshoods upon the World; and I hope the same will be granted
for any trivial Mistakes which I may have made through Forgetfulness,
or for want of Opportunity of Consultation and Advice in any small
circumstantial Point, or in any proper Name.

* * * * *

And lastly, since Improvement might be made for the joint Advantage of Virginia and Great Britain
in so many particular Respects; therefore I hope what I have instanced in the following State
and Schemes will be look'd upon as sufficient for my Purpose, without making Mention of several
other beneficial Things of the Nature and Use of which I have but
little Knowledge; such as Cotton, Pepper, with the large thick Husks
of Acorns for the Diers Use, with the like.

THE STATE OF VIRGINIA.

PART I.

CHAP. I.

Of the Original of the Indians, Europeans, and Negroes.

One main Cause, why the Gospel is not propagated with better Success
among the Infidels, and why it is not more strictly followed by such
Europeans as inhabit the American Plantations, is the little right
Knowledge that Superintendants of the Church have of them, from imperfect
Accounts and false Information; for before we can entertain any tolerable
Idea of the Tenents, and Inclinations of any People; it is requisite
we should know something of their Original, Temper, and Government;
for want of which much Cost and Labour have been in vain expended,
and many pious Designs and Projects frustrated.

And as the Progress of Religion, so for the same Causes, and in the same Manner, is the Improvement
of Arts, Sciences, and Trade, much retarded.

I shall therefore exhibit a short View of the present Inhabitants of Virginia; which are Indians,
English, and Negroes, with a Description of the Country: After which their Morals and Manners
may more plainly and briefly be described; from whence may easily be inferred an Account of
Maryland and North Carolina, nearly agreeing with Virginia in many Respects.

The Indians may be term'd Aborigines; for to pretend to determine their Pedigree exactly, with
the Time and Manner of seating this unknown World, to me seems as morally impossible, as it
is naturally to account for the Complexion of their Bodies, and the
Temper of their Minds.

So that the best History of them till late Years is but meer Guess-work, of which my Sentiments
are these:

We know that all Nations of the World are the Descendants of Noah's
three Sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: From the youngest (from some promised
Blessings) may we suppose the Europeans and Western Asiaticks to be
descended.

From Canaan the Son of the middlemost issued the Canaanites, and from some of his Sons might
spring the Egyptians, Moors, Negroes, and other Inhabitants of Africa.

From

Shem sprung Eber, and from Eber's eldest Son Peleg sprung the Hebrews, and from Eber's younger Son
Joktan are derived the East, and (I suppose) their Cousins the West-Indians of America. For
in Peleg's Days the Earth was divided, Gen. x. 25. and his Brother Jocktan's Dwelling was from
Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar, a Mount of the East, v. 30. By these were the Nations divided
in the Earth after the Flood, v. 32.

To me the Indians of America seem to be some of the Posterity of Shem,
driven thither by Providence, for Causes unknown to us, which might
easily be done (in large Boats or Canoes and Periaguas) from the Eastern
Parts of Asia, their Grandfather Jocktan's Country; which is not improbable:
Since a Storm might drive them off from the Shore, and the trade Winds,
which blow constantly one Way half the Year, might carry them directly
to America, over the vast South Sea Ocean; in which Passage their
greatest Danger of Death might be Hunger and Thirst; but they, that
know the Indians, know also, that they can bear Want a prodigious
while; and what might they not bear, when the Divine Power was miraculously
concerned in it, for Purposes known to the Almighty only?

Indeed for what we have yet discovered, we don't know, but the Continent of America may be
join'd to Tartary; from whence (if so) they might have an easy, though tedious Conveyance.
Be it how it will, I am of Opinion, that they are descended from
Asia, and not Africa; because in their copper Colour, long black Hair,
strait proper Shape, and haughty Carriage, they are somewhat like
the East-Indians; whereas they seem to be of a different Breed from
the Negroes, who are blacker, have uglier Faces and Bodies, and are
of a more servile Carriage, and slavish Temper: Besides, the Africans
circumcise, which with other Jewish Customs, I imagine, they may derive
from Egypt; whereas the Indians use no such Practices: Moreover they
hate, and despise the very Sight of a Negroe; but they seem to like
an East-Indian, and fear and revere the Whites.

What some may object in Contradiction to the Universality of the Deluge; that the Communication
between Asia and America was washed away by it; thence inferring
that the Americans are of Antidiluvian Families, may (I presume) be
exploded, when we remark, that in most Places, at a great Depth, and
far distant from the Sea, are many great Beds of strange Shells, and
Bones, and Teeth of Fish and Beasts vastly different from any Land
or Water-Animals now found in those, or any other Parts of the World;
so that notwithstanding all the curious Speculations of Philosophers
to reconcile this with Reason, and ascribe for it natural Causes;
yet to me it appears evidently to be a Token, and Relict of the general
Flood of Noah.

For these Shells and Bones might be easily preserved from Corruption, and mouldering so long
a Time, whilst covered with a great Thickness of dry Earth, and kept from Air; to which when
they are exposed they soon decay.

The best true Account that we have of the Primitive wild Inhabitants of the Earth, not civilized
by Government, nor assisted by Learning, Arts and Communication with Strangers, is of the Canaanites;
whose State of Nature the Indians still retain, resembling them in
most Respects, who may be their Cousins descended from Joktan, and
may be some cursed Generations, for Reasons hidden from us.

For which Causes they might be separated from the rest of Mankind, and be debarred the Light of Grace,
and kept in their barbarous Ignorance, for their obstinate Rebellion against God; till of his
gracious Goodness and Mercy he be pleased in his appointed Time to compleat their Conversion,
and be more favourable to them.

I have a much truer and clearer Notion of the Canaanites, Hebrews, &c. since I have seen the Indians,
than I could have before, who afford living Examples of the primitive Savages, and Idolaters.

To confirm this, observe; that as the Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, who were vanquished
by the Israelites, and were principally descended from Canaan the
fourth Son of accursed Ham, being a Mixture of several remarkable
Nations that were great and idolatrous, and in an especial Manner
hateful to God, with frequent Wars and Barbarities among themselves;
in like Manner are the American Indians, as savage, idolatrous, unbelieving,
numerous, monstrous, idle and delighting in War and Cruelty as their
antient Relations the Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan; and have
as many different Nations, Languages, and strange Names and Customs
as the Canaanites, the Jebusites, the Hittites, the Hivites, the Perizites,
and the Gergisites.

The Indians being subdivided into as many Branches and Sovereignties as they, intermixt with as
hideous Neighbours, as the Gigantick Philistines of the Race of Misraim; with the Moabites and
Amorites, Descendants of Lot by his own Daughters; with the Midianites and Edomites, the Posterity
of Midian and Esau.

The Senecaa Indians in their War Dress may appear as terrible as any of the Sons of Anak. The
Usherees, Shuterees, and Cherackees are full as formidable as the Hittites, Jebusites, and Amalakites;
and a Tuskaroodau is as savage and strange as any Canaanite, that dwelt by the Sea; and a Pomunkee,
Sapony, or Sugarr is as fierce and frightful as any Amorite that dwelt upon or beyond the Mountains;
and Powhatan, Oppechancanough and Wickmaunatauchee have fought many
Battles not unlike Og, Sihon, and Chederlaomer.

In my mean Judgment it seems not improbable that when Noah had cursed the Posterity of Ham,
and reserved different blessings for Shem and Japheth, God set a distinguishing Colour upon
their Bodies, and ingrafted in their Nature various Tempers, and endowed them with separate
Talents. From whence their Posterity are of three different Complexions and Countenances, as
is apparent in White, Black, and Brown People, which by Mixtures,
or from Climates or otherwise are subdivided: Particularly the brown
Children of Shem have two peculiar Aspects different from each other,
and distinct from all the rest; one proper to the Jews, the Sons of
Peleg, and the other belonging to the East and West-Indies, the Sons
of Joktan, Peleg's younger Brother.

To the white Posterity of Japheth, viz. to the Europeans in particular are Noah's Words (Gen. ix.

For
the Negroes seem evidently to be Descendants from some of the Sons of Canaan. For it is not
to be supposed that the Jews destroyed them all, for the Families of the Canaanites were spread
abroad, Gen. x. 18. so that probably in process of Time they possessed Africa. As for the Blessing
upon Shem in the 26{th} Verse, and Canaan being his Servant; this
appears to be fulfilled in the Jews in Part, descended from Peleg,
Heber's eldest Son; from whom sprung Abraham the Father of the Faithful,
in whose Seed the Lord God of Shem may be said to be blessed according
to Noah's Prophecy, who made Part of Canaan Slaves, and took them
Captive.

And as for the other Branches of Shem's Posterity by Joktan (which Sound is not quite lost in either
of the Indies) I take them to be the East and West-Indians, Chinese, and Tartars; and it may
be the Persians, for whom with their Cousins the Jews, none but God knows what Blessings may
still be reserved in Store, it being to be hoped that they and all the Ends of the World may be converted,
and see and partake of the Salvation of our God; so that by all may the Lord God of Shem at length
be blessed.

Thus far, as to my Notions of the Original of the Indians, whom I imagine to be descended from
some of the Sons of Joktan, second Son of Eber, sprung from Shem, Noah's eldest Son: With a
Derivation of the Whites from Japheth the youngest, and the Negroes from some of the Sons of Canaan,
Descendant of Ham, Noah's second Son.

CHAP. II.

Of the Government, Religion, Habit, Wars, Lives, Customs, &c. of the Indians of North America,
and of Christanna.

As to the Government and Life of the Indians, they live in a kind
of patriarchal Manner, variously diversify'd, not unlike the Tribes
and Families mentioned in the Old Testament.

Every small Town is a petty Kingdom govern'd by an absolute Monarch, assisted and advised by
his great Men, selected out of the gravest, oldest, bravest, and richest; if I may allow their
Dear-Skins, Peak and Roenoak (black and white Shells with Holes, which they wear on Strings about
their Arms and Necks) to be Wealth.

Sometimes there are general Emperors, who have several petty Kingdoms in some Measure under their
Protection and Power.

They dwell in Towns some twenty, some a hundred Miles, and some farther from one another, each
Town having a particular Jargon and peculiar Customs; though for the most Part they agree in certain
Signs, Expressions, and Manners.

They are frequently at War with all their Neighbours, or most of them, and treat their Captive Prisoners
very barbarously; either by scalping them (which I have seen) by ripping off the Crown of the
Head, which they wear on a Thong by their Side as a signal Trophee
and Token of Victory and Bravery.

Or sometimes they tie their Prisoners, and lead them bound to their Town, where with the most
joyful Solemnity they kill them, often by thrusting in several Parts of their Bodies scewers of Light-wood
which burn like Torches. The poor Victim all the while (which is sometimes two or three Days)
not shewing the least Symptom of Grief, nor Sign of Pain, but bearing it with a scornful Sullenness.

In
their Rejoicings and Wardances they with the most antick Gestures, in the most frightful Dress,
with a hideous Noise, enumerate the Enemies, that they have murder'd, and such like Exploits.

They
attack always by Surprize, and will never stand their Ground when discovered; but fly to Ambush,
whither the Enemy may pursue with Peril of his Life.

They are made for running very swiftly, and are nicely dextrous at fishing, hunting, and fowling;
whereby they support themselves and Families with Venison, Fish, wild Turkies, &c.

The Women do all the hard Labour, such as cutting down the Trees, planting Corn, &c. carrying
Burthens and all their other Work; the Men only hunting, fishing
and fowling, eating, drinking, dancing and sleeping.

The Boys still use Bows and Arrows for Exercise, with which they are very dextrous; but the
Men always use Fire-Arms, which with Ammunition they buy of us with their Dear-Skins, going
rarely out unarmed.

They are so wonderfully quick-sighted, that they will swiftly pursue by Eye the Track of any Thing among
the Trees, in the Leaves and Grass, as an Hound does by the Scent, where we can't perceive
the least Mark or Footstep.

They cohabit in some hundreds of Families, and fix upon the richest Ground to build their wooden
Houses, which they place in a circular Form, meanly defended with Pales, and covered with
Bark; the middle Area (or Forum) being for common Uses and publick Occasions. The Women in order to
plant their Indian Corn and Tobacco (to clear the Ground of Trees) cut the Bark round; so that
they die and don't shade the Ground, and decay in Time.

Wherever we meet with an old Indian Field, or Place where they have
lived, we are sure of the best Ground.

They all remove their Habitation for fear of their Enemies, or for the Sake of Game and Provision.

They
have small Sweating Houses like Ovens; out of which when they are
almost smothered with Heat, they run into a River, which they always
contrive to build their Towns near.

This Practice in all Distempers often kills vast Numbers in Sicknesses,
which are new to them.

They have no Notion of providing for Futurity;
for they eat Night and Day whilst their Provision lasts, falling to
as soon as they awake, and falling asleep again as soon as they are
well crammed.

Their Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, they either barbacue on
an high Gridiron, or broil on sharp Sticks before a Fire, which they
always keep in the Middle of their Cabbin; and they lie upon Boards
and Skins raised like Benches round about their Room.

Their Drink
is Water, unless they can get Rum; with which they make themselves
the greatest Beasts, never ceasing as long as they have Liquor to
drink, and can keep awake.

I have known, when Cows have been given
them, that they let them go dry for Laziness in neglecting to milk
them, and die in the Winter for want of Fodder.

They commonly wear
a Dear-Skin, putting their Arms thro' the Holes of the Shoulder, with
a Flap ty'd before and behind to cover their Nakedness; though they
buy often Matchcoats or Blankets now, to defend them from the Wet
and Cold, and think themselves very fine in such Coats as our common
Soldiers wear, or of any taudry Colours: Besides this, some pin Pieces
of red or blue Cloth about their Legs, and make Moccasons or leather
Purses for their Feet, with which they can travel in the Woods, without
Danger of Thorns or Stumps. For all the Country is but one continued
Forest, with Patches of some hundred Acres here and there cleared;
either being formerly seated by Indians, or the Trees being burnt
in Fire-Hunting, or cut down for Plantations.

Their Children almost
as soon as born, are ty'd flat on their Backs to a Board; and so may
be flung on the Ground, or put to lean against any Thing, or be flung
over their Neck in Travelling, or hung upon a Bough, as Occasion requires.

This
occasions them to be exactly strait; so that it is a Miracle to see
a crooked or deformed Indian.

Their Hair is very black, coarse and
long; and they are all over daubed frequently with Bear's Oil.

This command, for such it was in reality, was instantly obeyed, and after emptying his glass
at a single draught, the well-pleased landlord stood, with one hand resting on the table and
his eyes fixed on the duke, waiting to see, what was wanted of him.

"Have you many strangers in your house now?" asked Vallombreuse, "and who and what are they?"
Bilot was about to reply, but the young duke interrupted him, and continued, "But what's the
use of beating about the bush with such a wily old miscreant as you are, Maitre Bilot? Who
is the lady that has the room with a window, the third one from the corner, looking into my
garden? Answer to the point, and you shall have a gold piece for every syllable."

"Under those conditions," said Bilot, with a broad grin, "one must be very virtuous indeed
to make use of the laconic style so highly esteemed by the ancients. However, as I am devoted
to your lordship, I will answer in a single word--Isabelle."

"Isabelle! a charming and romantic name. But do not confine yourself to such Lacedaemonian
brevity, Maitre Bilot; be prolix! and relate to me, minutely, everything that you know about
the lovely Isabelle."

"I am proud and happy to obey your lordship's commands," the worthy landlord answered, with
a low bow; "my cellar, my kitchen, my tongue and myself are all at your lordship's disposition.
Isabelle is an actress, belonging to the celebrated troupe of Seignior Herode, stopping at
present at the Armes de France."

"An actress!" exclaimed the young duke, with an air of disappointment. "I should have taken
her for a lady of rank, from her quiet, dignified mien, or at least a well-bred bourgeoise,
rather than a member of a band of strolling players."

"Yes, your lordship is right; any one might think so, for her manners and appearance are very
lady-like, and she has an untarnished reputation, despite the difficulties of her position.
No one understands better how to keep all the gallants that hover about her at a respectful
distance; she treats these would-be suitors for her favour with a cold, reserved, yet perfect
politeness that there is no getting over."

"What you say pleases me," interrupted Vallombreuse, "for there is nothing I so thoroughly
despise as a fortress that is ready to capitulate before the first assault has been made."

"It would need more than one to conquer this fair citadel, my lord, though you are a bold and
successful captain, not used to encountering any serious resistance, and sweeping everything
before you; and, moreover, it is guarded by the vigilant sentinel of a pure and devoted love."

"Oh ho! she has a lover then, this modest Isabelle!" cried the young duke, in a tone at once
triumphant and annoyed, for though on the one side he had no faith in the steadfast virtue
of any woman, on the other he was vexed to learn that he had a successful rival.

"I said love, not lover," continued the landlord with respectful persistency, "which is by
no means the same thing. Your lordship is too well versed in such matters not to appreciate
the difference. A woman that has one lover may have two, as the old song says; but a woman
who loves, with a pure love, and has that love returned in every sense, it is impossible, or
at least very difficult, to win away from it. She possesses already everything that you, my
lord, or any one, could offer for her acceptance."

"You talk as if you had been studying the subject of love diligently--and Petrarch's sonnets
as well; but notwithstanding all that, Maitre Bilot, I don't believe you thoroughly understand
anything outside of your own wines and sauces, which, I am bound to admit, are always excellent.
And pray, who is the favoured object of this Platonic attachment?"

"One of the members of the troupe," Bilot replied, "and it is not to be wondered at, for he's
a handsome young fellow, and very different from the rest of them; far superior, more like
a gentleman than an actor; and I shrewdly suspect he is one," added the landlord, with a knowing
look.

"Well, now you must be happy!" said the Chevalier de Vidalinc to his friend. "Here are unexpected
obstacles in plenty, and a perfect none-such of a prize. A virtuous actress is a rare phenomenon,
not to be found every day in the week. You are in luck!"

"Are you sure," continued the young duke, still addressing the landlord, and without paying
any attention to the last remark, "that this chaste Isabelle does not accord any privileges
secretly to that conceited young jackanapes? I despise the fellow thoroughly, and detest him
as well."

"Your lordship does not know her," answered Maitre Bilot, "or I should not need to declare,
as I do, that she is as spotless as the ermine. She would rather die than suffer a stain upon
her purity. It is impossible to see much of her without perceiving that; it shines out in everything
that she says and does."

Hereupon a long discussion followed as to the best manner of conducting the attack upon this
fair citadel, which the young nobleman became more and more determined to conquer, as new difficulties
were suggested. The worthy landlord, who was a shrewd fellow and had made a just estimate of
Isabelle's character, finished by advising his noble interlocutor to turn his attention to
Serafina, "who was very charming, and not less beautiful than Isabelle, and who would be greatly
pleased and flattered by his lordship's notice." This, because he felt sure that the duke would
not succeed with Isabelle, in spite of his exalted rank, handsome person, and immense wealth,
and he wished to spare him an inevitable disappointment.

"It is Isabelle that I admire, and will have," said Vallombreuse, in a dry tone that put an
end to the discussion. "Isabelle, and no other, Maitre Bilot."

Then plunging his hand into his pocket, he drew forth a goodly number of gold pieces, and throwing
them down carelessly on the table, said, "Pay yourself for the bottle of wine out of this,
and keep the balance."

The landlord gathered up the louis with a deprecating air, and dropped them one by one into
his purse. The two gentlemen rose, without another word, put on their broad, plumed hats, threw
their cloaks on their shoulders, and quitted the hotel. Vallombreuse took several turns up
and down the narrow alley between the Armes de France and his own garden wall, looking up searchingly
at Isabelle's window every time he passed under it; but it was all for naught. Isabelle, now
on her guard, did not approach the window again; the curtain was drawn closely over it, and
not a sign visible from without that the room was occupied. Tired at last of this dull work,
the duke slowly withdrew to his own mansion, feeling highly indignant that this inappreciative
little actress should presume to slight the attentions of a great and powerful noble like himself;
but he found some comfort in the thought that when she came to see and know him she could not
long hold out against his numerous attractions. As to his rival--if the fellow ventured to
interfere with him too much, he would quietly suppress him, by means of certain stout ruffians--professional
cut-throats--he had in his employ, to do all that sort of work for him; his own dignity not
allowing him to come into personal contact with such cattle as actors. Though Vallombreuse
had not seen anything of Isabelle at her window, he himself had been closely watched, by jealous
eyes, from a neighbouring casement that commanded the same view. They belonged to de Sigognac,
who was greatly annoyed and incensed by the manoeuvres of this mysterious personage under Isabelle's
window. A dozen times he was on the point of rushing down, sword in hand, to attack and drive
away the impertinent unknown; but he controlled himself by a strong effort; for there was after
all nothing in the mere fact of a man's promenading back and forth in a deserted alley to justify
him in such an onslaught, and he would only bring down ridicule on himself; besides, the name
of Isabelle might be dragged in--sweet Isabelle, who was all unconscious of the ardent glances
directed at her window from below, as well as of the burning indignation, because of them,
of her own true lover close at hand. But he promised himself to keep a watchful eye for the
future upon this young gallant, and studied his features carefully, every time his face was
raised towards Isabelle's window, so that he should be sure to recognise him when he saw him again.

Herode had selected for their first representation in Poitiers a new play, which all the comedians
were very much occupied in learning and rehearsing, to be followed by the Rodomontades of Captain
Fracasse, in which de Sigognac was to make his real debut before a real public having only
acted as yet to an audience of calves, horned cattle, and peasants in Bellombre's barn. He
was studying diligently under the direction of Blazius, who was more devoted to him than ever,
and who had proposed something which was a most welcome suggestion to the sensitive young baron.
This was for him to wear what is called a half-mask, which covers only the forehead and nose,
but if arranged with skill alters entirely the wearer's appearance--so that his nearest friend
would not recognise him--without interfering materially with his comfort. This idea de Sigognac
hailed with delight, for it insured his preserving his incognito; the light pasteboard screen
seemed to him like the closed visor of a helmet, behind which he need not shrink from facing
the enemy--that is to stay the gazing crowd on the other side of the foot-lights. With it he
would take merely the part of the unknown, concealed intelligence that directs the movements
of the marionette, and the voice that makes it speak; only he should be within it, instead
of behind the scenes pulling the strings--his dignity would have nothing to suffer in playing
the game in that manner, and for this relief from a dreaded ordeal he was unspeakably thankful.
Biatius, who never could take too much pains in the service of his dear baron, himself modelled
and fashioned the little mask, very deftly, so as to make his stage physiognomy as unlike his
real, every-day countenance as possible. A prominent nose, very red at the point, bushy, high-arched
eyebrows, and an immensely heavy mustache drooping over his mouth, completely disguised the
well-cut, regular features of the handsome young nobleman, and although in reality it only
concealed the forehead and nose, yet it transfigured the whole face.

There was to be a dress rehearsal the evening before the first representation, so that they
might judge of the general effect in their improvised theatre, and test its capabilities; and
as the actresses could not very well go through the streets in full costume, they were to finish
their toilets in the green-room, while the actor themselves ready for the stage in the small
dressing-closets set aside for that purpose. All the gentlemen in Poitiers, young and old,
were wild to penetrate into this temple, or rather sacristy, of Thalia, where the priestesses
of that widely worshipped muse adorned themselves to celebrate her mysterious rites, and a
great number of them had succeeded in gaining admittance. They crowded round the actresses,
offering advice as to the placing of a flower or a jewel, handing the powder-box or the rouge-pot,
presenting the little hand-mirror, taking upon themselves all such small offices with the greatest
"empressement," and vying with each other in their gallant attendance upon the fair objects
of their admiration; the younger and more timid among them holding a little aloof and sitting
on the large chests scattered about, swinging their feet and twisting their mustaches, while
they watched the proceedings of their bolder companions with envious eyes. Each actress had
her own circle of admiring cavaliers about her, paying her high-flown compliments in the exaggerated
language of the day, and doing their best to make themselves agreeable in every way they could
think of. Zerbine laughed at them all, and made fun of them unmercifully, turning everything
they said into ridicule; yet so coquettishly that they thought her bewitching, in spite of
her sharp tongue, which was like a two-edged sword. Serafina, whose vanity was overweening,
delighted in the fulsome homage paid to her charms, and smiled encouragingly upon her throng
of admirers, but Isabelle, who was intensely annoyed at the whole thing, did not pay the slightest
attention to them, nor even once raise her eyes to look at them; being apparently absorbed
in the duties of her toilet, which she accomplished as quietly and modestly as possible--having
left only the finishing touches to be given in that public place.

The Duke of Vallombreuse was careful, of course, not to miss this excellent opportunity, of
which he had been informed by Maitre Bilot, to see Isabelle again, and entering the green-room
in good season, followed by his friend Vidalinc, marched straight up to her toilet-table. He
was enchanted to find that, on this close inspection, she was even more beautiful than he had
supposed, and in his enthusiastic delight at this discovery could scarcely refrain from seizing
her in his arms and declaring his passion there and then; only the presence of the crowd of
lookers-on saved Isabelle from what would have been a most trying and painful scene.

The young duke was superbly dressed. He had spared no pains, for he wanted to dazzle Isabelle,
and he certainly did look splendidly handsome. He wore a magnificent costume of rich white
satin, slashed and trimmed with crimson, with many knots of ribbon about it fastened with diamond
clasps, with broad ruffles of exquisitely fine lace at throat and wrists, with a wide belt
of cloth of silver supporting his sword, and with perfumed gloves on the hands that held his
white felt hat, with its long crimson feather. His wavy black hair fell around the perfect
oval of his face, enhancing its smooth whiteness; a delicate mustache shaded, not concealed,
his full red lips; his splendid, great black eyes flashed through their thick, silky fringes,
and his neck, white and round as a marble column, rose from amid its surrounding of soft, priceless
lace, proudly supporting his haughty, handsome head. Yet with all this perfection of outline
and colouring, his appearance was not entirely pleasing; a repelling haughtiness shone out
through the perfectly modelled features, and it was but too evident that the joys and sorrows
of his fellow mortals would awaken no sympathy in the owner of that surpassingly handsome face
and form. He believed that he was not made of common clay like other men, but was a being of
a higher order, who condescended to mingle with his inferiors--a piece of fine porcelain amid
homely vessels of coarser earthenware.

Vallombreuse stationed himself silently close beside the mirror on Isabelle's dressing-table,
leaning one elbow on its frame all the other gallants respectfully making way for him--just
where she could not possibly help seeing him whenever she looked in the glass; a skilful manoeuvre,
which would surely have succeeded with any other than this modest young girl. He wished to
produce an impression, before addressing a word to her, by his personal beauty, his lordly
mien, and his magnificence of apparel. Isabelle, who had instantly recognised the audacious
gallant of the garden, and who was displeased by the imperious ardour of his gaze, redoubled
her reserve of manner, and did not lift her eyes to the mirror in front of her at all; she
did not even seem to be aware that one of the handsomest young noblemen in all France was standing
there before her, trying to win a glance from her lovely eyes--but then, she was a singular
girl, this sweet Isabelle! At length, exasperated by her utter indifference, Vallombreuse suddenly
took the initiative, and said to her, "Mademoiselle, you take the part of Sylvia in this new
play, do you not?"

"Yes, sir," Isabelle answered curtly, without looking at him--not able to evade this direct
question.

"Then never will a part have been so admirably played," continued the duke. "If it is poor
your acting will make it excellent, if it is fine you will make it peerless. Ah! happy indeed
the poet whose verses are intrusted to those lovely lips of yours."

These vague compliments were only such as admiring gallants were in the habit of lavishing
upon pretty actresses, and Isabelle could not with any show of reason resent it openly, but
she acknowledged it only by a very slight bend of the head, and still without looking up. At
this moment de Sigognac entered the green-room; he was masked and in full costume, just buckling
around his waist the belt of the big sword he had inherited from Matamore, with the cobweb
dangling from the scabbard. He also marched straight up to Isabelle, and was received with
a radiant smile.

"You are capitally gotten up," she said to him in a low, tone, so low that he had to bend down
nearer her to hear, "and I am sure that no fierce Spanish captain ever had a more superbly
arrogant air than you."

The Duke of Vallombreuse drew himself up to his full height, and looked this unwelcome new-comer
over from head to foot, with an air of the coolest, most haughty disdain. "This must be the
contemptible scoundrel they say she's in love with," he said to himself, swelling with indignation
and spite--filled with amazement too--for he could not conceive of a woman's hesitating for
an instant between the magnificent young Duke of Vallombreuse and this ridiculous play-actor.
After the first rapid glance he made as if he did not perceive de Sigognac at all, no more
than if he had been a piece of furniture standing there; for him Captain Fracasse was not a
MAN, but a THING, and he continued to gaze fixedly at poor Isabelle--his eyes fairly blazing
with passion--exactly as though no one was near. She, confused at last, and alarmed, blushed
painfully, in spite of all her efforts to appear calm and unmoved, and hastened to finish what
little remained to be done, so that she might make her escape, for she could see de Sigognac's
hand close spasmodically on the handle of his sword, and, realizing how he must be feeling,
feared an outbreak on his part. With trembling fingers she adjusted a little black "mouche"
near the corner of her pretty mouth, and pushed back her chair preparatory to rising from it--having
a legitimate cause for haste, as the tyrant had already more than once roared out from the
stage door, "Mesdemoiselles, are you ready?"

"Permit me, mademoiselle," said the duke starting forward, "you have forgotten to put on an
'assassine,'" and touching the tip of his forefinger to his lips he plunged it into the box
of patches standing open on the dressing-table, and brought one out on it. "Permit me to put
it on for you--here, just above your snowy bosom; it will enhance its exquisite whiteness."

The action followed so quickly upon the words that Isabelle, terrified at this cruel effrontery,
had scarcely time to start to one side, and so escape his profane touch; but the duke was not
one to be easily balked in anything he particularly desired to do, and pressing nearer he again
extended his hand towards Isabelle's white neck, and had almost succeeded in accomplishing
his object, when his arm was seized from behind, and held firmly in a grasp of iron.

Furiously angry, he turned his head to see who had dared to lay hands upon his sacred person,
and perceived that it was the odious Captain Fracasse.

"My lord duke," said he calmly, still holding his wrist firmly, "Mademoiselle is in need of
no assistance from you, or any one else, in this matter." Then his grasp relaxed and he let
go of the duke's arm.

Vallombreuse, who looked positively hideous at that moment, his face pale to ghastliness and
disfigured by the rage he felt, grasped the hilt of his sword with the hand released by de
Sigognac, and drew it partly out of its scabbard, as if he meant to attack him, his eyes flashing
fire and every feature working in its frenzy--the baron meanwhile standing perfectly motionless,
quietly awaiting the onset.

But ere he had touched him the duke stopped short; a sudden thought had extinguished his blazing
fury like a douche of cold water; his self-control returned, his face resumed its wonted expression,
the colour came to his lips, and his eyes showed the most icy disdain, the most supreme contempt
that it could be possible for one human being to manifest for another. He had remembered just
in time that he must not so greatly demean himself as to cross swords with a person of no birth,
and an actor besides; all his pride revolted at the bare idea of such a thing. An insult coming
from a creature so low in the social scale could not reach him. Does a gentleman declare war
upon the mud that bespatters him? However, it was not in his character to leave an offence
unpunished, no matter whence it proceeded, and stepping nearer to de Sigognac he said, "You
impertinent scoundrel, I will have every bone in your body broken for you with cudgels, by
my lackeys."

"You'd better take care what you do, my lord," answered the baron, in the most tranquil tone
and with the most careless air imaginable, "you'd much better take care what you do! My bones
are not so easily broken, but cudgels may be. I do not put up with blows anywhere but on the
stage."

"However insolent you may choose to be, you graceless rascal, you cannot provoke me to do you
so much honour as to attack you myself; that is too high an ambition for such as you to realize,"
said Vallombreuse, scornfully.

"We will see about that, my lord duke," de Sigognac replied; "it may happen that I, having
less pride than yourself, will fight you, and conquer you, with my own hands."

"I do not dispute with a masker," said the duke shortly, taking Vidalinc's arm as if to depart.

"I will show you my face, duke, at a more fitting time and place," de Sigognac continued composedly,
"and I think it will be still more distasteful to you than my false nose. But enough for the
present. I hear the bell that summons me, and if I wait any longer here with you I shall miss
my entry at the proper moment."

He turned on his heel and leisurely walked off, with admirable nonchalance, leaving the haughty
duke very much disconcerted, and at a disadvantage, as indeed de Sigognac had cleverly managed
that he should be throughout the brief interview.

The comedians were charmed with his courage and coolness, but, knowing his real rank, were
not so much astonished as the other spectators of this extraordinary scene, who were both shocked
and amazed at such temerity.

Isabelle was so terrified and excited by this fierce altercation that a deathly pallor had
overspread her troubled face, and Zerbine, who had flown to her assistance, had to fetch some
of her own rouge and bestow it plentifully upon the colourless lips and cheeks before she could
obey the tyrant's impatient call, again resounding through the green-room.

When she tried to rise her trembling knees had nearly given way under her, and but for the
soubrette's kind support she must have fallen to the floor. To have been the cause, though
innocently, of a quarrel like this was a terrible blow to poor Isabelle sweet, pure, modest
child that she was--for she knew that it is a dreadful thing for any woman to have her name
mixed up in such an affair, and shrank from the publicity that could not fail to be given to
it; besides, she loved de Sigognac with fervour and devotion, though she had never acknowledged
it to him, and the thought of the danger to which he was exposed, of a secret attack by the
duke's hired ruffians, or even of a duel with his lordship himself, drove her well-nigh frantic
with grief and terror.

In spite of this untoward incident, the rehearsal went on, and very smoothly; the theatre was
found to be all that they could desire, and everybody acted with much spirit. Even poor, trembling
Isabelle did herself credit, though her heart was heavy within her; but for de Sigognac's dear
sake, whose anxious glances she strove to meet with a reassuring smile, she succeeded in controlling
her emotion, and felt inspired to do her very best. As to Captain Fracasse, excited by the
quarrel, he acted superbly. Zerbine surpassed herself. Shouts of laughter and storms of clapping
followed her animated words and gestures. From one corner, near the orchestra, came such vigorous
bursts of applause, leading all the rest and lasting longer than any, that at last Zerbine's
attention was attracted and her curiosity excited.

Approaching the foot-lights, in such a way as to make it appear part of her usual by-play,
she peered over them and caught sight of her marquis, beaming with smiles and flushed from
his violent efforts in her behalf.

"The marquis is here," she managed to whisper to Blazius, who was playing Pandolphe; "just
look at him! how delighted he is, and how he applauds me--till he is actually red in the face,
the dear man! So he admires my acting, does he? Well, he shall have a spicy specimen of it, then."

Zerbine kept her word, and, from that on to the end of the piece, played with redoubled spirit.
She was never so sparkling, so bewitchingly coquettish, so charmingly mischievous before, and
the delighted marquis was more fascinated than ever. The new play, entitled "Lygdamon et Lydias,"
and written by a certain Georges de Scudery (a gentleman who, after having served with honour
in the French Guards, quitted the sword for the pen, which he wielded with equal success),
was next rehearsed, and highly approved by all--without a single dissenting voice. Leander,
who played the leading part of Lygdamon, was really admirable in it, and entertained high hopes
of the effect he should produce upon the fair ladies of Poitiers and its environs.

But we will leave our comedians now, and follow the Duke of Vallombreuse and his devoted friend
Vidalinc.

Quite beside himself with rage, the young duke, after the scene in the green-room in which
he had played so unsatisfactory a part to himself, returned to his own home and there raved
to Vidalinc about his revenge, threatening the insolent captain with all manner of punishments,
and going on like a madman. His friend tried in vain to soothe him.

He rushed wildly around the room, wringing his hands, kicking the furniture about right and
left, upsetting tables and arm-chairs, and finally, seizing a large Japanese vase, very curious
and costly, threw it violently on the floor, where it broke into a thousand pieces.

"Oh!" he shrieked, "if I could only smash that abominable blackguard like this vase, trample
him under foot as I do this debris, and then have the remains of him swept up and thrown out
into the dust-heap, where he belongs. A miserable scoundrel, that dares to interpose between
me, the Duke of Vallombreuse, and the object of my desires! If he were only a gentleman I would
fight him, on foot or on horseback, with swords, daggers, pistols, anything in the shape of
a weapon, until I had him down, with my foot on his breast, and could spit into the face of
his corpse."

"Perhaps he is one," said Vidalinc; "his audacious defiance looks like it. You remember what
Maitre Bilot told you about Isabelle's favoured lover? This must be the one, judging by his
jealousy of you, and the agitation of the girl."

"Do you really mean what you say?" cried Vallombreuse, contemptuously. "What! a man of birth
and condition mingle voluntarily and on terms of equality with these low buffoons of actors,
paint his nose red, and strut about the stage, receiving cuffs and kicks from everybody? Oh
no, Vidalinc, the thing is impossible."

"But just remember," persisted the chevalier, "that mighty Jove himself resorted to the expedient
of adopting the shapes of various beasts, as well as birds, in his terrestrial love affairs,
which was surely much more derogatory to the majesty of the king of the gods than to play in
a comedy is to the dignity of a gentleman."

"Never mind," said the duke, as he rang a small hand bell sharply; "be he what he may, I intend
first to have the scamp well punished in his character of play-actor; even though I should
be obliged to chastise the gentleman afterward, if there prove to be one hidden behind that
ridiculous mask--which idea I cannot credit."

"If there be one! There's no doubt of it, I tell you," rejoined his friend, with an air of
conviction. "The more I think of it, the more positive I am of it. Why, his eyes shone like
stars under his overhanging false eye-brows, and in spite of his absurd pasteboard nose he
had a grand, majestic air about him that was very imposing, and would be utterly impossible
to a low-born man."

"Well, so much the better," said Vallombreuse; "for if you are right, I can make his punishment
twofold."

Meantime a servant, in rich livery, had entered, and after bowing low stood as motionless as
a statue, with one hand on the knob of the door, awaiting his master's orders; which were presently
given, as follows: "Go and call up Basque, Azolan, Merindol, and Labriche, if they have gone
to bed; tell them to arm themselves with stout cudgels and go down to the tennis-court, find
a dark corner near by and wait there, until the players come out, for a certain Captain Fracasse.
They are to fall upon him and beat him until they leave him for dead upon the pavement, but
to be careful not to kill him outright--it might be thought that I was afraid of him if they
did, you know," in an aside to Vidalinc.

"I will be responsible for the consequences; and with every blow they are to cry, 'This is
from the Duke of Vallombreuse,' so that he may understand plainly what it means."

This order, though of so savage and fierce a nature, did not seem to surprise the lackey, who,
as he retired, assured his lordship, with an unmoved countenance and another low bow, that
his commands should be immediately obeyed.

"I am sorry," said Vidalinc, after the servant had closed the door behind him, "that you mean
to treat this man so roughly, for after all he showed a spirit superior to his position, and
becoming a gentleman. Suppose you let me go and pick a quarrel with him, and kill him for you
in a duel. All blood is red when it is shed, the lowly as well as the lofty, though they do
pretend that the blood of the nobles is blue. I come of a good and ancient family, if not so
high in rank as yours, and I have no fear of belittling myself in this affair. Only say the
word, and I will go this instant, for this histrionic captain is, it seems to me, more worthy
of the sword of a gentleman than the cudgels of your hired ruffians."

"I thank you heartily for this offer," answered the duke, "which proves your faithful devotion
to me and my interests, but I cannot accept it. That low scoundrel has dared to lay hands upon
me, and he must expiate his crime in the most ignominious way. Should he prove to be a gentleman,
he will be able to find redress. I never fail to respond, as you know, when there is question
of settling a matter by the sword."

"As you please, my lord duke," said Vidalinc, stretching out his legs lazily and putting his
feet on the fender, with the air of a man who can do no more, but must stand aside and let
things take their own course. "By the way, do you know that that Serafina is charming? I paid
her several compliments, which were very graciously received; and more than that, she has promised
to allow me to call upon her, and appointed the time. She is a very amiable as well as beautiful
young woman. Maitre Bilot was perfectly correct in his statements to us."

After which the two gentlemen awaited, in almost unbroken silence, the return of the FOUR ruffians
who had gone forth to chastise de Sigognac.

CHAPTER IX. A MELEE AND A DUEL

The rehearsal was over, and the comedians were preparing to return to their hotel; de Sigognac,
expecting some sort of an assault on his way through the deserted streets, did not lay aside
Matamore's big sword with the rest of his costume. It was an excellent Spanish blade, very
long, and with a large basket hilt, which made a perfect protection for the hand--altogether
a weapon which, wielded by a brave man, was by no means to be despised, and which could give,
as well as parry, good hard thrusts. Though scarcely able to inflict a mortal wound, as the
point and edge had been blunted, according to the usual custom of theatrical sword owners,
it would be, however, all that was requisite to defend its wearer against the cudgels of the
ruffians that the Duke of Vallombreuse had despatched to administer his promised punishment.
Herode, who also anticipated an attack upon de Sigognac, and was not one to desert a friend
when danger threatened, took the precaution to arm himself with the big heavy club that was
used to give the signal--three loud raps--for the rising of the curtain, which made a very
formidable weapon, and would do good service in his strong hands.

"Captain," said he to the baron as they quitted the tennis-court, "we will let the women go
on a little way in advance of us, under the escort of Blazius and Leander, one of whom is too
old, the other too cowardly, to be of any service to us in case of need. And we don't want
to have their fair charges terrified, and deafening us with their shrieks. Scapin shall accompany
us, for he knows a clever trick or two for tripping a man up, that I have seen him perform
admirably in several wrestling bouts. He will lay one or two of our assailants flat on their
backs for us before they can turn round. In any event here is my good club, to supplement your
good sword."

"Thanks, my brave friend Herode," answered de Sigognac, "your kind offer is not one to be refused;
but let us take our precautions not to be surprised, though we are in force. We will march
along in single file, through the very middle of the street, so that these rogues, lurking
in dark corners, will have to emerge from their hiding places to come out to us, and we shall
be able to see them before they can strike us. I will draw my sword, you brandish your club,
and Scapin must cut a pigeon wing, so as to make sure that his legs are supple and in good
working order. Now, forward march!"

He put himself at the head of the little column, and advanced cautiously into the narrow street
that led from the tennis-court to the hotel of the Armes de France, which was very crooked,
badly paved, devoid of lamps, and capitally well calculated for an ambuscade. The overhanging
gable-ends on either side of the way made the darkness in the street below them still more
dense--a most favourable circumstance for the ruffians lying in wait there. Not a single ray
of light streamed forth from the shut-up house whose inmates were presumably all sleeping soundly
in their comfortable beds, and there was no moon that night. Basque, Azolan, Labriche and Merindol
had been waiting more than half an hour for Captain Fracasse in this street, which they knew
he was obliged to pass through in returning to his hotel. They had disposed themselves in pairs
on opposite sides of the way, so that when he was between them their clubs could all play upon
him together, like the hammers of the Cyclops on their great anvil. The passing of the group
of women, escorted by Blazius and Leander, none of whom perceived them, had warned them of
the approach of their victim, and they stood awaiting his appearance, firmly grasping their
cudgels in readiness to pounce upon him; little dreaming of the reception in store for them--for
ordinarily, indeed one may say invariably, the poets, actors, bourgeois, and such-like, whom
the nobles condescended to have cudgeled by their hired ruffians, employed expressly for that
purpose, took their chastisement meekly, and without attempting to make any resistance. Despite
the extreme darkness of the night, the baron, with his penetrating eyes, made out the forms
of the four villains lying in wait for him, at some distance, and before he came up with them
stopped and made as if he meant to turn back--which ruse deceived them completely--and fearing
that their prey was about to escape them, they rushed impetuously forth from their hiding places
towards him. Azolan was the first, closely followed by the others, and all crying at the tops
of their voices, "Kill! Kill! this for Captain Fracasse, from the Duke of Vallombreuse." Meantime
de Sigognac had wound his large cloak several times round his left arm for a shield, and receiving
upon it the first blow from Azolan's cudgel, returned it with such a violent lunge, full in
his antagonist's breast, that the miserable fellow went over backward, with great force, right
into the gutter running down the middle of the street, with his head in the mud and his heels
in the air. If the point of the sword had not been blunted, it would infallibly have gone through
his body, and come out between his shoulder-blades, leaving a dead man, instead of only a stunned
one, on the ground. Basque, in spite of his comrade's disaster, advanced to the charge bravely,
but a furious blow on his head, with the flat of the blade, sent him down like a shot, and
made him see scores of stars, though there was not one visible in the sky that night. The tyrant's
club encountering Merindol's cudgel broke it short off, and the latter finding himself disarmed,
took to his heels; not however without receiving a tremendous blow on the shoulder before he
could get out of Herode's reach. Scapin, for his part, had seized Labriche suddenly round the
waist from behind, pinning down his arms so that he could not use his club at all, and raising
him from the ground quickly, with one dexterous movement tripped him up, and sent him rolling
on the pavement ten paces off, so violently that he was knocked senseless--the back of his
neck coming in contact with a projecting stone--and lay apparently lifeless where he fell.

So the way was cleared, and the victory in this fierce encounter was honourably gained by our
hero and his two companions over the four sturdy ruffians, who had never been defeated before.
They were in a sorry plight--Azolan and Basque creeping stealthily away, on their hands and
knees, trying under cover of the darkness to put themselves beyond the reach of further danger;
Labriche lying motionless, like a drunken man, across the gutter, and Merindol, less badly
hurt, flying towards home as fast as his legs could carry him. As he drew near the house, however,
he slackened his pace, for he dreaded the duke's anger more than Herode's club, and almost
forgot, for the moment, the terrible agony from his dislocated shoulder, from which the arm
hung down helpless and inert. Scarcely had he entered the outer door ere he was summoned to
the presence of the duke, who was all impatient to learn the details of the tremendous thrashing
that, he took it for granted, they had given to Captain Fracasse. When Merindol was ushered
in, frightened and embarrassed, trembling in every limb, not knowing what to say or do, and
suffering fearfully from his injured shoulder, he paused at the threshold, and stood speechless
and motionless, waiting breathlessly for a word or gesture of encouragement from the duke,
who glared at him in silence.

"Well," at length said the Chevalier de Vidalinc to the discomfited Merindol, seeing that Vallombreuse
only stared at him savagely and did not seem inclined to speak, "what news do you bring us?
Bad, I am sure, for you have by no means a triumphant air--very much the reverse, indeed, I
should say."

"My lord, the duke, of course cannot doubt our zeal in striving to execute his orders, to the
best of our ability," said Merindol, cringingly, "but this time we have had very bad luck."

"What do you mean by that?" asked the duke sharply, with an angry frown and flashing eyes,
before which the stout ruffian quailed. "There were four of you! do you mean to tell me that,
among you, you could not succeed in thrashing this miserable play-actor?"

"That miserable play-actor, my lord," Merindol replied, plucking up a little courage, "far
exceeds in vigour and bravery the great Hercules they tell us of. He fell upon us with such
fury that in one instant he had knocked Azolan and Basque down into the gutter. They fell under
his blows like pasteboard puppets--yet they are both strong men, and used to hard knocks. Labriche
was tripped up and cleverly thrown by another actor, and fell with such force that he was completely
stunned; the back of his head has found out that the stones of Poitiers pavements are harder
than it is, poor fellow! As for me, my thick club was broken short off by an immense stick
in the hands of that giant they call Herode, and my shoulder so badly hurt that I sha'n't have
the use of my arm here for a fortnight."

"You are no better than so many calves, you pitiful, cowardly knaves!" cried the Duke of Vallombreuse,
in a perfect frenzy of rage. "Why, any old woman could put you to rout with her distaff, and
not half try. I made a horrid mistake when I rescued you from the galleys and the gallows,
and took you into my service, believing that you were brave rascals, and not afraid of anything
or anybody on the face of the globe. And now, answer me this: When you found that clubs would
not do, why didn't you whip out your swords and have at him?"

"My lord had given us orders for a beating, not an assassination, and we would not have dared
to go beyond his commands."

"Behold," cried Vidalinc, laughing contemptuously, "behold a faithful, exact and conscientious
scoundrel whose obedience does not deviate so much as a hair's breadth from his lord's commands.
How delightful and refreshing to find such purity and fidelity, combined with such rare courage,
in the character of a professional cut-throat! But now, Vallombreuse, what do you think of
all this? This chase of yours opens well, and romantically, in a manner that must be immensely
pleasing to you, since you find the pursuit agreeable in proportion to its difficulty, and
the obstacles in the way constitute its greatest charms for you. I ought to congratulate you,
it seems to me. This Isabelle, for an actress, is not easy of access; she dwells in a fortress,
without drawbridge or other means of entrance, and guarded, as we read of in the history of
ancient chivalry, by dragons breathing out flames of fire and smoke. But here comes our routed
army."

Azolan, Basque, and Labriche, who had recovered from his swoon, now presented themselves reluctantly
at the door, and stood extending their hands supplicatingly towards their master. They were
a miserable-looking set of wretches enough--very pale, fairly livid indeed, haggard, dirty
and blood-stained; for although they had only contused wounds, the force of the blows had set
the blood flowing from their noses, and great red stains disfigured their hideous countenances.

"Get to your kennel, ye hounds!" cried the duke, in a terrible voice, being moved only to anger
by the sight of this forlorn group of supplicants. "I'm sure I don't know why I have not ordered
you all soundly thrashed for your imbecility and cowardice. I shall send you my surgeon to
examine your wounds, and see whether the thumps you make such a babyish outcry about really
were as violent and overpowering as you represent. If they were not, I will have you skinned
alive, every mother's son of you, like the eels at Melun; and now, begone! out of my sight,
quick, you vile canaille!" The discomfited ruffians turned and fled, thankful to make their
escape, and forgetful for the moment of their painful wounds and bruises; such abject terror
did the young duke's anger inspire in the breasts of those hardened villains. When the poor
devils had disappeared, Vallombreuse threw himself down on a heap of cushions, piled up on
a low, broad divan beside the fire, and fell into a revery that Vidalinc was careful not to
break in upon. They evidently were not pleasant thoughts that occupied him; dark, tempestuous
ones rather, judging by the expression of his handsome face, as he lay back idly among the
soft pillows, looking very picturesque in the rich showy costume he still wore. He did not
remain there long. Only a short time had elapsed when he suddenly started up, with a smothered
imprecation, and bidding his friend an abrupt good-night, retired to his own chamber, without
touching the dainty little supper that had just been brought in. Vidalinc sat down and enjoyed
it by himself, with perfect good humour, thinking meanwhile of Serafina's remarkable beauty
and amiability, with which he was highly charmed, and not neglecting to drink her health in
the duke's choice wine ere he quitted the table, and, following his example, retired to his
own room, where he slept soundly, dreaming of Serafina, until morning; while Vallombreuse,
less fortunate, and still haunted by disturbing thoughts, tossed restlessly, and turned from
side to side, courting sleep in vain, under the rich silken hangings drawn round his luxurious bed.

When de Sigognac, the tyrant and Scapin reached the Armes de France, after having overcome
the serious obstacles in their way, they found the others in a terrible state of alarm about
them. In the stillness of the night they had distinctly heard the loud cries of the duke's
ruffians, and the noise of the fierce combat, and feared that their poor friends were being
murdered. Isabelle, nearly frantic in her terror lest her lover should be overpowered and slain,
tried to rush back to him, never remembering that she would be more of a hindrance than a help;
but at the first step she had again almost fainted away, and would have fallen upon the rough
pavement but for Blazius and Zerbine, who, each taking an arm, supported her between them the
rest of the way to the hotel When they reached it at last, she refused to go to her own room,
but waited with the others at the outer door for news of their comrades, fearing the worst,
yet prayerfully striving to hope for the best. At sight of de Sigognac--who, alarmed at her
extreme pallor, hastened anxiously to her side--she impetuously raised her arms to heaven,
as a low cry of thanksgiving escaped her lips, and letting them fall around his neck, for one
moment hid her streaming eyes against his shoulder; but quickly regaining her self-control,
she withdrew herself gently from the detaining arm that had fondly encircled her slender, yielding
form, and stepping back from him a little, resumed with a strong effort her usual reserve and
quiet dignity.

"And you are not wounded or hurt?" she asked, in her sweetest tones, her face glowing with
happiness as she caught his reassuring gesture; he could not speak yet for emotion. The clasp
of her arms round his neck had been like a glimpse of heaven to him a moment of divine ecstasy.
"Ah! if he could only snatch her to his breast and hold her there forever," he was thinking,
"close to the heart that beat for her alone," as she continued: "If the slightest harm had
befallen you, because of me, I should have died of grief. But, oh! how imprudent you were,
to defy that handsome, wicked duke, who has the assurance and the pride of Lucifer himself,
for the sake of a poor, insignificant girl like me. You were not reasonable, de Sigognac! Now
that you are a comedian, like the rest of us, you must learn to put up with certain impertinences
and annoyances, without attempting to resent them."

"I never will," said de Sigognac, finding his voice at last, "I swear it, I never will permit
an affront to be offered to the adorable Isabelle in my presence even when I have on my player's
mask."

"Well spoken, captain," cried Herode, "well spoken, and bravely. I would not like to be the
man to incur your wrath. By the powers above! what a fierce reception you gave those rascals
yonder. It was lucky for them that poor Matamore's sword had no edge. If it had been sharp
and pointed, you would have cleft them from head to heels, clean in two, as the ancient knight-errants
did the Saracens, and wicked enchanters."

"Your club did as much execution as my sword, Herode, and your conscience need not reproach
you, for they were not innocents that you slaughtered this time."

"No, indeed!" the tyrant rejoined, with a mighty laugh, "the flower of the galleys these--the
cream of gallows-birds."

"Such jobs would scarcely be undertaken by any other class of fellows you know," de Sigognac
said; "but we must not neglect to make Scapin's valiant deeds known, and praise them as they
deserve. He fought and conquered without the aid of any other arms than those that nature gave
him."

Scapin, who was a natural buffoon, acknowledged this encomium with a very low obeisance--his
eyes cast down, his hand on his heart--and with such an irresistibly comical affectation of
modesty and embarrassment that they all burst into a hearty laugh, which did them much good
after the intense excitement and alarm.

After this, as it was late, the comedians bade each other good-night, and retired to their
respective rooms; excepting de Sigognac, who remained for a while in the court, walking slowly
back and forth, cogitating deeply. The actor was avenged, but the gentleman was not. Must he
then throw aside the mask that concealed his identity, proclaim his real name, make a commotion,
and run the risk of drawing down upon his comrades the anger of a powerful nobleman? Prudence
said no, but honour said yes. The baron could not resist its imperious voice, and the moment
that he decided to obey it he directed his steps towards Zerbine's room.

He knocked gently at the door, which was opened cautiously, a very little way at first, by
a servant, who instantly admitted the unexpected guest when he saw who it was.

The large room was brilliantly lighted, with many rose-coloured wax candles in two handsome
candelabra on a table covered with fine damask, on which smoked a dainty supper. Game and various
other delicacies were there, most temptingly served. One crystal decanter, with sprigs of gold
scattered over its shining surface, was filled with wine rivalling the ruby in depth and brilliancy
of hue, while that in the other was clear and yellow as a topaz. Only two places had been laid
on this festive board, and opposite Zerbine sat the Marquis de Bruyeres, of whom de Sigognac
was in search. The soubrette welcomed him warmly, with a graceful mingling of the actress's
familiarity with her comrade with her respect for the gentleman.

"It is very charming of you to come and join us here, in our cosy little nest," said the marquis
to de Sigognac, with much cordiality, "and we are right glad to welcome you. Jacques, lay a
place for this gentleman--you will sup with us?"

"I will accept your kind invitation," de Sigognac replied; "but not for the sake of the supper.
I do not wish to interfere with your enjoyment, and nothing is so disagreeable for those at
table as a looker-on who is not eating with them."

The baron accordingly sat down in the arm-chair rolled up for him by the servant, beside Zerbine
and opposite the marquis, who helped him to some of the partridge he had been carving, and
filled his wine-glass for him; all without asking any questions as to what brought him there,
or even hinting at it. But he felt sure that it must be something of importance that had caused
the usually reserved and retiring young nobleman to take such a step as this.

"Do you like this red wine best or the other?" asked the marquis. "As for me, I drink some
of both, so that there may be no jealous feeling between them."

"I prefer the red wine, thank you," de Sigognac said, with a smile, "and will add a little
water to it. I am very temperate by nature and habit, and mingle a certain devotion to the
nymphs with my worship at the shrine of Bacchus, as the ancients had it. But it was not for
feasting and drinking that I was guilty of the indiscretion of intruding upon you at this unseemly
hour. Marquis, I have come to ask of you a service that one gentleman never refuses to another.
Mlle. Zerbine has probably related to you something of what took place in the green-room this
evening. The Duke of Vallombreuse made an attempt to lay hands upon Isabelle, under pretext
of placing an assassine for her, and was guilty of an insolent, outrageous, and brutal action,
unworthy of a gentleman, which was not justified by any coquetry or advances on the part of
that young girl, who is as pure as she is modest and for whom I feel the highest respect and
esteem."

"And she deserves it," said Zerbine heartily, "every word you say of her, as I, who know her
thoroughly, can testify. I could not say anything but good of her, even if I would."

"I seized the duke's arm, and stopped him before he had succeeded in what he meant to do,"
continued de Sigognac, after a grateful glance at the soubrette; "he was furiously angry, and
assailed me with threats and invectives, to which I replied with a mocking sang-froid, from
behind my stage mask. He declared he would have me thrashed by his lackeys, and in effect,
as I was coming back to this house, a little while ago, four ruffians fell upon me in the dark,
narrow street. A couple of blows with the flat of my sword did for two of the rascals, while
Herode and Scapin put the other two hors-de-combat in fine style. Although the duke imagined
that only a poor actor was concerned, yet as there is also a gentleman in that actor's skin,
such an outrage cannot be committed with impunity. You know me, marquis, though up to the present
moment you have kindly and delicately respected my incognito, for which I thank you. You know
who and what my ancestors were, and can certify that the family of de Sigognac has been noble
for more than a thousand years, and that not one who has borne the name has ever had a blot
on his scutcheon."

"Baron de Sigognac," said the marquis, addressing him for the first time by his own name, "I
will bear witness, upon my honour, before whomsoever you may choose to name, to the antiquity
and nobility of your family. Palamede de Sigognac distinguished himself by wonderful deeds
of valour in the first crusade, to which he led a hundred lances, equipped, and transported
thither, at his own expense. That was at an epoch when the ancestors of some of the proudest
nobles of France to-day were not even squires. He and Hugues de Bruyeres, my own ancestor,
were warm friends, and slept in the same tent as brothers in arms."

At these glorious reminiscences de Sigognac raised his head proudly, and held it high; he felt
the pure blood of his ancestors throbbing in his veins, and his heart beat tumultuously. Zerbine,
who was watching him, was surprised at the strange inward beauty--if the expression may be
allowed--that seemed to shine through the young baron's ordinarily sad countenance, and illuminate
it. "These nobles," she said to herself, "are certainly a race by themselves; they look as
if they had sprung from the side of Jupiter, not been born into the world like ordinary mortals.
At the least word their pride is up in arms, and transforms them, as it does the Baron de Sigognae
now. If he should make love to me, with eyes like those, I simply could not resist him; I should
have to throw over my marquis. Why, he fairly glows with heroism; he is god-like."

Meantime de Sigognac, in blissful ignorance of this ardent admiration, which would have been
so distasteful to him, was saying to the marquis, "Such being your opinion of my family, you
will not, I fancy, object to carry a challenge from me to the Duke of Vallombreuse."

"Assuredly I will do it for you," answered the marquis, in a grave, measured way, widely different
from his habitual good-natured, easy carelessness of manner and speech; "and, moreover, I offer
my own services as your second. To-morrow morning I will present myself at the duke's night
in your behalf; there is one thing to be said in his favour--that although he may be, in fact
is, very insolent, he is no coward, and he will no longer intrench himself behind his dignity
when he is made acquainted with your real rank. But enough of this subject for the present;
I will see you to-morrow morning in good season, and we will not weary poor Zerbine any longer
with our man's talk of affairs of honour. I can plainly see that she is doing her best to suppress
a yawn, and we would a great deal rather that a smile should part her pretty red lips, and
disclose to us the rows of pearls within. Come, Zerbine, fill the Baron de Sigognac's glass,
and let us be merry again."

The soubrette obeyed, and with as much grace and dexterity as if she had been Hebe in person;
everything that she attempted to do she did well, this clever little actress.

The conversation became animated, and did not touch upon any other grave subject, but was mainly
about Zerbine's own acting--the marquis overwhelming her with compliments upon it, in which
de Sigognac could truthfully and sincerely join him, for the soubrette had really shown incomparable
spirit, grace, and talent. They also talked of the productions of M. de Scudery--who was one
of the most brilliant writers of the day--which the marquis declared that he considered perfect,
but slightly soporific; adding that he, for his part, decidedly preferred the Rodomontades
of Captain Fracasse to Lygdamon et Lydias--he was a gentleman of taste, the marquis!

As soon as he could do so without an actual breach of politeness, de Sigognac took his leave,
and retiring to his own chamber locked himself in; then took an ancient sword out of the woollen
case in which he kept it to preserve it from rust--his father's sword--which he had brought
with him from home, as a faithful friend and ally. He drew it slowly out of the scabbard, kissing
the hilt with fervent affection and respect as he did so, for to him it was sacred. It was
a handsome weapon, richly, but not too profusely, ornamented--a sword for service, not for
show; its blade of bluish steel, upon which a few delicate lines of gold were traced, bore
the well-known mark of one of the most celebrated armourers of Toledo. The young baron examined
the edge critically, drawing his fingers lightly over it, and then, resting the point against
the door, bent it nearly double to test its elasticity. The noble blade stood the trial right
valiantly, and there was no fear of its betraying its master in the hour of need. Delighted
to have it in his hand again, and excited by the thought of what was in store for it and himself,
de Sigognac began to fence vigorously against the wall, and to practise the varius thrusts
and passes that his faithful old Pierre, who was a famous swordsman, had taught him at Castle
Misery. They had been in the habit of spending hours every day in these lessons, glad of some
active occupation, and the exercise had developed the young baron's frame, strengthened his
muscles, and greatly augmented his natural suppleness and agility. He was passionately fond
of and had thoroughly studied the noble art of fencing, and, while he believed himself to be
still only a scholar, had long been a master in it--a proficient, such as is rarely to be found,
even in the great cities. A better instructor than old Pierre he could not have had--not in
Paris itself--and buried though he had been in the depths of the country, entirely isolated,
and deprived of all the usual advantages enjoyed by young men of his rank, he yet had become,
though perfectly unconscious of it, a match for the most celebrated swordsmen in France--that
is to say, in the world--able to measure blades with the best of them. He may not have had
all the elegant finish, and the many little airs and graces affected by the young sprigs of
nobility and polished men of fashion in their sword-play, but skilful indeed must be the blade
that could penetrate within the narrow circle of flashing steel in which he intrenched himself.
Finding, after a long combat with an imaginary foe, that his hand had not lost its cunning,
and satisfied at length both with himself and with his sword, which he placed near his bedside,
de Sigognac was soon sleeping soundly, and as quietly as if he had never even dreamed of sending
a challenge to that lofty and puissant nobleman, the Duke of Vallombreuse.

Isabelle meanwhile could not close her eyes, because of her anxiety about the young baron.
She knew that he would not allow the matter to rest where it was, and she dreaded inexpressibly
the consequences of a quarrel with the duke; but the idea of endeavouring to prevent a duel
never even occurred to her. In those days affairs of honour were regarded as sacred things,
that women did not dream of interfering with, or rendering more trying to their near and dear
ones by tears and lamentations, in anticipation of the danger to be incurred by them.

At nine o'clock the next morning, the Marquis de Bruyeres was astir, and went to look up de
Sigognae, whom he found in his own room, in order to regulate with him the conditions of the
duel. The baron asked him to take with him, in case of incredulity, or refusal of his challenge,
on the duke's part, the old deeds and ancient parchments, to which large seals were suspended,
the commissions of various sorts with royal signatures in faded ink, the genealogical tree
of the de Sigognacs, and in fact all his credentials, which he had brought away from the chateau
with him as his most precious treasures; for they were indisputable witnesses to the nobility
and antiquity of his house. Then the two gentlemen had become a little angry with each other. Morton
was the last man in the world to have been aggressive on such a matter; but with the Senator
it was necessary either to be prostrate or to fight.

But with Mr. Gotobed such fighting never produced ill blood. It was the condition of his life, and
it must be supposed that he liked it. On the next morning he did not scruple to ask his host's
advice as to what he had better do, and they agreed to walk across to Goarly's house and to ascertain
from the man himself what he thought or might have to say about his
own case.

On their way they passed up the road leading to Chowton Farm, and at the gate leading into the garden
they found Larry Twentyman standing. Morton shook hands with the
young farmer and introduced the Senator.

Larry was still woe-begone though he endeavoured to shake off his sorrows and to appear to be
gay. "I never see much of the man," he said when they told him that they were going across to
call upon his neighbour, "and I don't know that I want to."

"He doesn't seem to have much friendship among you all," said the Senator.

"Quite as much as he deserves, Mr. Gotobed," replied Larry.

The Senator's name had lately become familiar as a household word in Dillsborough, and was,
to tell the truth, odious to such men as Larry Twentyman. "He's a thundering rascal, and the
only place fit for him in the county is Rufford gaol. He's like to be there soon, I think."

"That's
what provokes me," said the Senator. "You think he's a rascal, Mister."

"I do."

"And because you take upon yourself to think so you'd send him to Rufford gaol! There was one
gentleman somewhere about here told me he ought to be hung, and because I would not agree with
him he got up and walked away from me at table, carrying his provisions
with him.

Another man in the next field to this insulted me because I said I was going to see Goarly. The
clergyman in Dillsborough and the hotelkeepers were just as hard upon me. But you see, Mister,
that what we want to find out is whether Goarly or the Lord has the
right of it in this particular case."

"I know which has the right without any more finding out," said Larry.

"The shortest way to his house is by the ride through the wood, Mr. Morton. It takes you out
on his land on the other side. But I don't think you'll find him there. One of my men told me
that he had made himself scarce." Then he added as the two were going on, "I should like to
have just a word with you, Mr. Morton.

I've been thinking of what you said, and I know it was kind. I'll take a month over it. I won't
talk of selling Chowton till the end of February;--but if I feel about it then as I do now I can't
stay."

"That's right, Mr. Twentyman;--and work hard, like a man, through the month. Go out hunting, and
don't allow yourself a moment for moping."

"I will," said Larry, as he retreated to the house, and then he gave
directions that his horse might be ready for the morrow.

They went in through the wood, and the Senator pointed out the spot at which Bean the gamekeeper
had been so insolent to him. He could not understand, he said, why he should be treated so
roughly, as these men must be aware that he had nothing to gain himself. "If I were to go into Mickewa,"
said Morton, "and interfere there with the peculiarities of the people
as you have done here, it's my belief that they'd have had the eyes
out of my head long before this."

"That only shows that you don't know Mickewa," said the Senator.
"Its people are the most law-abiding population on the face of the
earth."

They passed through the wood, and a couple of fields brought
them to Goarly's house. As they approached it by the back the only
live thing they saw was the old goose which had been so cruelly deprived
of her companions and progeny. The goose was waddling round the dirty
pool, and there were to be seen sundry ugly signs of a poor man's
habitation, but it was not till they had knocked at the window as
well as the door that Mrs. Goarly showed herself. She remembered the
Senator at once and curtseyed to him; and when Morton introduced himself
she curtseyed again to the Squire of Bragton. When Goarly was asked
for she shook her head and declared that she knew nothing about him.
He had been gone, she said, for the last week, and had left no word
as to whither he was going;-- nor had he told her why. "Has he given
up his action against Lord Rufford?" asked the Senator.

"Indeed then,
sir, I can't tell you a word about it."

"I've been told that he has
taken Lord Rufford's money."

"He ain't 'a taken no money as I've
seed, sir. I wish he had, for money's sore wanted here, and if the
gen'leman has a mind to be kind-hearted--" Perhaps
he imagines that I want to steal his dear Zerbine's heart away from him; lovers are always
fancying that everybody else is enamoured of their own particular favourites. Here, Picard,
give me my dressing-gown, and draw those curtains round the bed, so as to hide its disorder;
make haste about it, do you hear? we must not keep the worthy marquis waiting another minute."

Picard bustled about, and brought to his master a magnificent dressing-gown-made, after the
Venetian fashion, of rich stuff, with arabesques of black velvet on a gold ground--which he
slipped on, and tied round the waist with a superb cord and tassels; then, seating himself
in an easychair, told Picard to admit his early visitor.

"Good morning, my dear marquis," said the young duke smilingly, half rising to salute his guest
as he entered. "I am very glad to see you, whatever your errand may be. Picard, a chair for
his lordship! Excuse me, I pray you, for receiving you so unceremoniously here in my bedroom,
which is still in disorder, and do not look upon it as a lack of civility, but rather as a
mark of my regard for you. Picard said that you wished to see me immediately."

"I must beg you to pardon me, my dear duke," the marquis hastened to reply, "for insisting
so strenuously upon disturbing your repose, and cutting short perhaps some delicious dream;
but I am charged to see you upon a mission, which, among gentlemen, will not brook delay."

"You excite my curiosity to the highest degree," said Vallombreuse, "and I cannot even imagine
what this urgent business may be about."

"I suppose it is not unlikely, my lord," rejoined the marquis, "that you have forgotten certain
occurrences that took place last evening. Such trifling matters are not apt to make a very
deep impression, so with your permission I will recall them to your mind. In the so-called
green-room, down at the tennis-court, you deigned to honour with your particular notice a young
person, Isabelle by name, and with a playfulness that I, for my part, do not consider criminal,
you endeavoured to place an assassine for her, just above her white bosom, complimenting her
upon its fairness as you did so. This proceeding, which I do not criticise, greatly shocked
and incensed a certain actor standing by, called Captain Fracasse, who rushed forward and seized
your arm."

"Marquis, you are the most faithful and conscientious of historiographers," interrupted Vallombreuse.
"That is all true, every word of it, and to finish the narrative I will add that I promised
the rascal, who was as insolent as a noble, a sound thrashing at the hands of my lackeys; the
most appropriate chastisement I could think of, for a low fellow of that sort."

"No one can blame you for that, my dear duke, for there is certainly no very great harm in
having a play-actor--or writer either, for that matter--thoroughly thrashed, if he has had
the presumption to offend," said the marquis, with a contemptuous shrug; "such cattle are not
worth the value of the sticks broken over their backs. But this is a different case altogether.
Under the mask of Captain Fracasse--who, by the way, routed your ruffians in superb style--is
the Baron de Sigognac; a nobleman of the old school, the head of one of the best families we
have in Gascony; one that has been above reproach for many centuries."

"What the devil is he doing in this troupe of strolling players, pray?" asked the Duke of Vallombreuse,
with some heat, toying nervously with the cord and tassels of his dressing-gown as he spoke.
"Could I be expected to divine that there was a de Sigognac hidden under that grotesque costume,
and behind that absurd false nose?"

"As to your first question," the marquis replied, "I can answer it in one word--Isabelle. Between
ourselves, I believe that the young baron is desperately in love with her. Indeed, he makes
no secret of that fact; and, not having been able to induce her to remain with him in his chateau,
he has joined the troupe of which she is a member, in order to pursue his love affair. You
certainly ought not to find this gallant proceeding in bad taste, since you also admire the
fair object of his pursuit."

"No; I admit all that you say. But you, in your turn, must acknowledge that I could not be
cognisant of this extraordinary romance by inspiration, and that the action of Captain Fracasse
was impertinent."

"Impertinent for an actor, I grant you," said the marquis, "but perfectly natural, indeed inevitable,
for a gentleman, resenting unauthorized attentions to his mistress, and angry at an affront
offered to her. Now Captain Fracasse throws aside his mask, and as Baron de Sigognac sends
you by me his challenge to fight a duel, and demands redress in that way for the insult you
have offered him."

"But who is to guarantee me that this pretended Baron de Sigognac, who actually appears on
the stage before the public with a company of low buffoons as one of themselves, is not a vulgar,
intriguing rascal, usurping an honourable name, in the hope of obtaining the honour of crossing
swords with the Duke of Vallombreuse?"

"Duke," said the Marquis de Bruyeres, with much dignity, and some severity of tone, "I would
not serve as second to any man who was not of noble birth, and of honourable character. I know
the Baron de Sigognac well. His chateau is only a few leagues from my estate. I will be his
guarantee. Besides, if you still persist in entertaining any doubts with regard to his real
rank, I have here with me all the proofs necessary to convince you of his right to the ancient
and distinguished name of Sigognac. Will you permit me to call in my servant, who is waiting
in the antechamber? He will give you all those documents, for which I am personally responsible."

"There is no need," Vallombreuse replied courteously; "your word is sufficient. I accept his
challenge. My friend, the Chevalier de Vidalinc, who is my guest at present, will be my second;
will you be good enough to consult with him as to the necessary arrangements? I will agree
to anything you may propose--fight him when and where you please, and with any weapons he likes
best; though I will confess that I should like to see whether the Baron de Sigognac can defend
himself against a gentleman's sword as successfully as Captain Fracasse did against my lackeys'
cudgels. The charming Isabelle shall crown the conqueror in this tournament, as the fair ladies
crowned the victorious knights in the grand old days of chivalry. But now allow me to retire
and finish my toilet. The Chevalier de Vidalinc will be with you directly. I kiss your hand,
valiant marquis, as our Spanish neighbours say."

With these courteous words the Duke of Vallombreuse bowed with studied deference and politeness
to his noble guest, and lifting the heavy portiere of tapestry that hung over the door opening
into his dressing-room, passed through it and vanished. But a very few moments had elapsed
when the Chevalier de Vidalinc joined the marquis, and they lost no time in coming to an understanding
as to the conditions of the duel. As a matter of course, they selected swords--the gentleman's
natural weapon--and the meeting was fixed for the following morning, early; as de Sigognac,
with his wonted consideration for his humble comrades, did not wish to fight that same day,
and run the risk of interfering with the programme Herode had announced for the evening, in
case of his being killed or wounded. The rendezvous was at a certain spot in a field outside
the walls of the town, which was level, smooth, well sheltered from observation, and advantageous
in every way--being the favourite place of resort for such hostile meetings among the duellists
of Poitiers.

The Marquis de Bruyeres returned straightway to the Armes de France, and rendered an account
of the success of his mission to de Sigognac; who thanked him warmly for his services, and
felt greatly relieved, now that he was assured of having the opportunity to resent, as a gentleman
should do, the affront offered to his adored Isabelle.

The representation was to begin very early that evening, and all day the town crier went about
through the streets, beating his drum lustily, and, whenever he had gathered a curious crowd
around him, stopping and announcing the "great attractions--offered for that evening by Herode's
celebrated troupe." Immense placards were posted upon the walls of the tennis-court and at
the entrance of the Armes de France, also announcing, in huge, bright-coloured capitals, which
reflected great credit on Scapin, who was the calligraphist of the troupe, the new play of
"Lygdamon et Lydias," and the Rodomontades of Captain Fracasse. Long before the hour designated
an eager crowd had assembled in the street in front of the theatre, and when the doors were
opened poured in, like a torrent that has burst its bounds, and threatened to sweep everything
before them. Order was quickly restored, however, within, and "the nobility and gentry of Poitiers"
soon began to arrive in rapid succession. Titled dames, in their sedan chairs, carried by liveried
servants, alighted amid much bowing and flourishing of attendant gallants. Gentlemen from the
environs came riding in, followed by mounted grooms who led away their masters' horses or mules.
Grand, clumsy old carriages, vast and roomy, with much tarnished gildings and many faded decorations
about them, and with coats-of-arms emblazoned on their panels, rolled slowly up, and out of
them, as out of Noah's ark, issued all sorts of odd-looking pairs, and curious specimens of
provincial grandeur; most of them resplendent in the strange fashions of a bygone day, yet
apparently well satisfied with the elegance of their appearance. The house was literally packed,
until there was not room left for another human being, be he never so slender. On each side
of the stage was a row of arm-chairs, intended for distinguished spectators, according to the
custom of the times, and there sat the young Duke of Vallombreuse, looking exceedingly handsome,
in a very becoming suit of black velvet, elaborately trimmed with jet, and with a great deal
of exquisite lace about it. Beside him was his faithful friend, the Chevalier de Vidalinc,
who wore a superb costume of dark green satin, richly ornamented with gold. As to the Marquis
de Bruyeres, he had not claimed his seat among the notables, but was snugly ensconced in his
usual place--a retired corner near the orchestra--whence he could applaud his charming Zerbine
to his heart's content, without making himself too conspicuous. In the boxes were the fine
ladies, in full dress, settling themselves to their satisfaction with much rustling of silks,
fluttering of fans, whispering and laughing. Although their finery was rather old-fashioned,
the general effect was exceedingly brilliant, and the display of magnificent jewels--family
heirlooms--was fairly dazzling. Such flashing of superb diamonds on white bosoms and in dark
tresses; such strings of large, lustrous pearls round fair necks, and twined amid sunny curls;
such rubies and sapphires, with their radiant surroundings of brilliants; such thick, heavy
chains of virgin gold, of curious and beautiful workmanship; such priceless laces, yellow with
age, of just that much-desired tint which is creamy at night; such superb old brocades, stiff
and rich enough to stand alone; and best of all, such sweet, sparkling, young faces, as were
to be seen here and there in this aristocratic circle. A few of the ladies, not wishing to
be known had kept on their little black velvet masks, though they did not prevent their being
recognised, spoken of by name, and commented on with great freedom by the plebeian crowd in
the pit. One lady, however, who was very carefully masked, and attended only by a maid, baffled
the curiosity of all observers. She sat a little back in her box, so that the full blaze of
light should not fall upon her, and a large black lace veil, which was loosely fastened under
her chin, covered her head so effectually that it was impossible to make out even the colour
of her hair. Her dress was rich and elegant in the extreme, but sombre in hue, and in her hand
she held a handsome fan made of black feathers, with a tiny looking-glass in the centre. A
great many curious glances were directed at her, which manifestly made her uneasy, and she
shrank still farther back in her box to avoid them; but the orchestra soon struck up a merry
tune, and attracted all eyes and thoughts to the curtain, which was about to rise, so that
the mysterious fair one was left to her enjoyment of the animated scene in peace. They began
with "Lygdamon et Lydias," in which Leander, who played the principal part, and wore a most
becoming new costume, was quite overwhelmingly handsome. His appearance was greeted by a murmur
of admiration and a great whispering among the ladies, while one unsophisticated young creature,
just emancipated from her convent-school, exclaimed rapturously, aloud, "Oh! how charming he
is!" for which shocking indiscretion she received a severe reprimand from her horrified mama,
that made her retire into the darkest corner of the box, covered with blushes and confusion.
Yet the poor girl had only innocently given expression to the secret thought of every woman
in the audience, her own dignified mother included; for, really, Leander was delightfully,
irresistibly handsome as Lygdamon--a perfect Apollo, in the eyes of those provincial dames.
But by far the most agitated of them all was the masked beauty; whose heaving bosom, trembling
hand--betrayed by the fan it held--and eager attitude--leaning breathlessly forward and intently
watching Leander's every movement--would inevitably have borne witness to her great and absorbing
interest in him, if anybody had been observing her to mark her emotion; but fortunately for
her all eyes were turned upon the stage, so she had time to recover her composure. Leander
was surpassing himself in his acting that night, yet even then he did not neglect to gaze searchingly
round the circle of his fair admirers, trying to select the titled dames, and decide which
one among them he should favour with his most languishing glances. As he scrutinized one after
another, his eyes finally reached the masked lady, and at once his curiosity was on the qui
vive--here was assuredly something promising at last; he was convinced that the richly dressed,
graceful incognita was a victim to his own irresistible charms, and he directed a long, eloquent,
passionate look full at her, to indicate that she was understood. To his delight--his rapturous,
ecstatic delight--she answered his appealing glance by a very slight bend of the head, which
was full of significance, as if she would thank him for his penetration. Being thus happily
brought en rapport, frequent glances were exchanged throughout the play, and even little signals
also, between the hero on the stage and the lady in her box.

Leander was an adept in that sort of thing, and could so modulate his voice and use his really
fine eyes in making an impassioned declaration of love to the heroine of the play, that the
fair object of his admiration in the audience would believe that it was addressed exclusively
to herself. Inspired by this new flame, he acted with so much spirit and animation that he
was rewarded with round after round of applause; which he had the art to make the masked lady
understand he valued less than the faintest mark of approbation and favour from her.

After "Lygdamon et Lydias" came the Rodomontades of Captain Fracasse, which met with its accustomed
success. Isabelle was rendered very uneasy by the close proximity of the Duke of Vallombreuse,
dreading some act of insolence on his part; but her fears were needless, for he studiously
refrained from annoying her in any way--even by staring at her too fixedly. He was moderate
in his applause, and quietly attentive, as he sat in a careless attitude in his arm-chair on
the stage throughout the piece. His lip curled scornfully sometimes when Captain Fracasse was
receiving the shower of blows and abuse that fell to his share, and his whole countenance was
expressive of the most lofty disdain, but that was all; for though violent and impetuous by
nature, the young duke was too much of a gentleman--once his first fury passed--to transgress
the rules of courtesy in any way; and more especially towards an adversary with whom he was
to fight on the morrow--until then hostilities were suspended, and he religiously observed
the truce.

The masked lady quietly withdrew a little before the end of the second piece, in order to avoid
mingling with the crowd, and also to be able to regain her chair, which awaited her close at
hand, unobserved; her disappearance mightily disturbed Leander, who was furtively watching
the movements of the mysterious unknown. The moment he was free, almost before the curtain
had fallen, he threw a large cloak around him to conceal his theatrical costume, and rushed
towards the outer door in pursuit of her. The slender thread that bound them together would
be broken past mending he feared if he did not find her, and it would be too horrible to lose
sight of this radiant creature--as he styled her to himself--before he had been able to profit
by the pronounced marks of favour she had bestowed upon him so lavishly during the evening.
But when he reached the street, all out of breath from his frantic efforts in dashing through
the crowd, and bustling people right and left regardless of everything but the object he had
in view, there was nothing to be seen of her; she had vanished, and left not a trace behind.
Leander reproached himself bitterly with his own folly in not having endeavoured to exchange
a few words with his lost divinity in the brief interval between the two plays, and called
himself every hard name he could think of; as we are all apt to do in moments of vexation.

But while he still stood gazing disconsolately in the direction that she must have taken, a
little page, dressed in a dark brown livery, and with his cap pulled down over his eyes, suddenly
appeared beside him, and accosted him politely in a high childish treble, which he vainly strove
to render more manly. "Are you M. Leander? the one who played Lygdamon a while ago?"

"Yes, I am," answered Leander, amused at the pretentious airs of his small interlocutor, "and
pray what can I do for you, my little man?"

"Oh! nothing for me, thank you," said the page, with a significant smile, "only I am charged
to deliver a message to you--if you are disposed to hear it--from the lady of the mask."

"From the lady of the mask!" cried Leander. "Oh I tell me quickly what it is; I am dying to
hear it."

"Well, here it is, then, word for word," said the tiny page jauntily. "If Lygdamon is as brave
as he is gallant, he will go at midnight to the open square in front of the church, where he
will find a carriage awaiting him; he will enter it without question, as without fear, and
go whither it will take him."

Before the astonished Leander had time to answer, the page had disappeared in the crowd, leaving
him in great perplexity, for if his heart beat high with joy at the idea of a romantic adventure,
his shoulders still reminded him painfully of the beating he had received in a certain park
at dead of night, and he remembered with a groan how he had been lured on to his own undoing.
Was this another snare spread for him by some envious wretch who begrudged him his brilliant
success that evening, and was jealous of the marked favour he had found in the eyes of the
fair ladies of Poitiers? Should he encounter some furious husband at the rendezvous, sword
in hand, ready to fall upon him and run him through the body? These thoughts chilled his ardour,
and had nearly caused him to disregard entirely the page's mysterious message. Yet, if he did
not profit by this tempting opportunity, which looked so promising, he might make a terrible
mistake; and, if he failed to go, would not the lady of the mask suspect him of cowardice,
and be justified in so doing? This thought was insupportable to the gallant Leander, and he
decided to venture, though low be it spoken--in fear and trembling. He hastened back to the
hotel, scarcely touched the substantial supper provided for the comedians--his appetite lost
in his intense excitement--and retiring to his own chamber made an elaborate toilet; curling
and perfuming his hair and mustache, and sparing no pains to make himself acceptable to the
lovely lady of the mask. He armed himself with a dagger and a sword, though he did not know
how to use either; but he thought that the mere sight of them might inspire awe.

When he was all ready at last, he drew his broad felt hat well down over his eyes, threw the
corner of his cloak over his shoulder, in Spanish fashion, so as to conceal the lower part
of his face, and crept stealthily out of the hotel--for once being lucky enough to escape the
observation of his wily tormentor, Scapin, who was at that moment snoring his loudest in his
own room at the other end of the house.

The streets had long been empty and deserted, for the good people of the ancient and respectable
town of Poitiers go early to bed. Leander did not meet a living creature, excepting a few forlorn,
homeless cats, prowling about and bewailing themselves in a melancholy way, that fled before
him, and vanished round dark corners or in shadowy doorways. Our gallant reached the open square
designated by the little page just as the last stroke of twelve was vibrating in the still
night air. It gave him a shudder; a superstitious sensation of horror took possession of him,
and he felt as if he had heard the tolling of his own funeral bell. For an instant he was on
the point of rushing back, and seeking quiet, safe repose in his comfortable bed at the Armes
de France, but was arrested by the sight of the carriage standing there waiting for him, with
the tiny page himself in attendance, perched on the step and holding the door open for him. The
Buildings upon the Glebes being Timber soon decay, especially upon Vacancies; but these should
be kept in due Repair continually by the Vestry: Likewise should the Dimensions and Form of
the Dwelling-Houses and Out-Houses be more particularly determined, and made such as might
conveniently and handsomly receive the Ministers and their Families; which would be very great
Inducements for them to relinquish England for the Certainty of good Livings, good Glebes,
good Accommodations, and a kind Reception. The Expence of building and repairing where most of
the Materials are only an Incumbrance, would be but a Trifle to a Parish; whereas 'tis a great
Expence and Trouble to a Stranger to fit up the Apartments that he finds, which are generally
too small and often very ruinous. Besides this a small Stock of Hogs and Cattle upon the Glebes
would be of excellent Service to Newcomers, till they can be better furnished; they being obliged
to leave behind them the same Number of the same Animals. Some Glebes, as that at James Town, have
this Convenience, and 'tis Pity but more Parishes followed such Examples: The prime Cost in stocking
their Glebes by Degrees would be insignificant; and the chief Trouble would be for the Church-Wardens
to receive the Stock from the Executors of one Incumbent, and deliver them again when there comes
another.

Other Difficulties that the Clergy meet with there are the Methods of Payment, the Laws and Customs
being not particular enough in this Respect; so that sometimes Tobacco cannot be got in Time convenient
for the Minister, or is not delivered at a proper Place for his Interest, or is not at all
good of its Kind, or not of the right Sort, or but very indifferent, such as the Receivers might
have refused, or else is not pressed hard enough, which is a very
great Detriment; and sometimes they will make the Ministers pay for
their Cask, or for collecting, pressing, rolling their Tobacco, and
making it heavy and convenient, and that at an extravagant Rate; and
if a Stranger, fearful of being imposed upon, takes the Management
of his Tobacco into his own Hands, he is at a Loss how to order it
aright, being unacquainted with the Nature of the Commodity, and the
Customs of the Country; and if one Difference arises, it frequently
begets wider, though about those Things which might easily be settled,
and are of but little Value in respect of their Inconveniency; so
that the best way to get sweet-scented Tobacco has been declared by
some to use sweet-scented Words.

Now all this should be determined, to avoid future Quarrels of this kind, which too frequently
proceed from such Causes, by fixing the Times, Places, and Manner of Payment; together with
a Regulation of the Allowances for collecting, pressing, and making Tobacco heavy and convenient;
with an Injunction for the Payment of none but good and vendible Tobacco for parochial Dues.
Whether the Parish or the Minister be to allow the Expence thereof, it might easily be determined;
and if both are to join in it, this might easily be settled, by which Means abundance of Variance
would be prevented, and the Incomes would be more certain, and of a good deal greater Value
if the Parish did deliver good heavy Tobacco with Cask to the Minister, at Places most suitable
to his own Conveniency, which I take to be the Intent of the Law, which was made for the good
Payment of the Ministers. The Charge of this would be but small to a whole Parish, tho' it often
falls heavy upon the Minister, especially when he meets with sharp or cross People; but in abundance
of Parishes the Inhabitants are so good that they never make any Dispute about these Things,
especially when they like their Minister; for that he may have any Favour of them that he
in Reason may desire.

The Payment of the Surplus Fees also wants a Regulation; for when Tobacco is dear, some will
pay them in Money, but when cheap they will pay Tobacco, which does not seem equitable; so
that in my Opinion these Payments should always be made at certain appointed Times and in
proper Methods, either in one or the other, and not left to the Humor or Discretion of the Debtor,
since sometimes there is half in half Difference.

A Settlement of these Things should be made, either for the Advantage of the Clergy or People,
or else a middle Expedient should be found out; since the Consequences of Disputes and Variance
between Ministers and their Congregations are generally very pernicious to the Welfare, Happiness,
and Tranquility of both Parties; wherefore Remedies should be applied in Time, especially in such
Cases where Delays encrease the Danger; when ill Customs in Time pleading Prescription are
established as firm as Median Laws, and propagate such ill Habits in the Constitution, as are
most difficult to be extirpated.

As for the Establishment of Episcopacy in Virginia, it would be of excellent Service, if Caution
was taken not to transplant with it the corrupt Abuses of Spiritual Courts, which the People dread
almost as much as an Inquisition; but these their Fears would soon be dissipated, when by blessed
Experience they might feel the happy Influence of that holy Order among them, free from the terrible
Notions that Misrepresentations of regular Church Government have made them conceive.

I have often heard that there have been Intentions of this Kind; and that the main Obstacle was
the Difficulty of raising a Salary sufficient to support the Dignity,
and recompense the Labours of a Bishop.

But this Impediment may (I presume) with good Contrivance be easily removed; for I don't at all
question that the superior Clergy and Collegians in the Universities would refuse to contribute
half a Crown a Year for this glorious Undertaking, or that the Inferiors would join their Shillings.
This might be collected into the Treasury gratis, by the Officers of the Taxes, and might be
taken off in a few Years, when upon Tryal the Usefulness of a Bishop upon the Continent of North America
was confirmed by Experience; for then a Maintenance might be contrived by other Means very easily,
there being spare Land enough to be appropriated for a Barony. And one skilled in Political
Arithmetick may readily compute what a handsom Income this would amount to with Care in collecting.

A
large Tract of Land claimed by Virginia and North Carolina, and under the Government of neither,
rightly called the disputed Bounds, is a kind of American Mint, whither several wicked and profligate
Persons retire, being out of the certain Jurisdiction of either Government, where they may pursue any
immoral or vicious Practices without Censure and with Impunity.

But to end Disputes about it, why might not this be granted to a Bishop of Virginia and North
Carolina?

The Occasion of these Disputes about the Bounds depends upon a Mistake
or Difference in two Grants, one fixing the Bounds according to a
certain Latitude, and the other specifying the Bounds (as I take it)
to run Westward from Roon-oak Inlet, which proves in a Latitude different
from that before mentioned; so that the List between these Parallels
of Latitude, which is about fifteen Miles broad, and indefinitely
long is disputed, the Governments of Virginia and North Carolina each
pretending a Right to it; but this might easily be settled, either
by finding out the true Meaning of the Grants, or what was the Occasion
of the Error, and then determining the Bounds from thence; or if this
(or what is before-mentioned) cannot be done, the Mathematical Professor,
or some other, should be imployed to split the Difference between
them, rather than have continual Disputes between the two Governments,
to the great Detriment of the Religion and Trade of both of them.

No regular Church Government or Salaries have been yet made for the Clergy in North Carolina; but
to bring this about, Representations should be made to the Proprietors; their Directions obtained
to the Governor and Assembly there for their Assistance for this Purpose, in Conjunction with
the Missions, that, by proper Applications, I presume may be continued
from the Society, especially when they are assured that Measures will
be taken to prevent their pious Endeavours to be any more frustrated
there; and besides this I don't think it impracticable for them to
obtain the Impropriation of the two travelling Fellowships, for Clergymen
of a certain College in Oxford, to be confined to their Government
for some Years; since at present they have such great Necessity for
Christian Help of this Sort.

Besides, the continual Progress of such a Person as the Dean before-mentioned for some Years,
would be of extraordinary Service in the present deplorable Circumstances of the Church of
Christ in the Government of North Carolina.

SCHEME III.

Of Arts, Projects, Inventions, and Manufactures in Virginia.

It is an undoubted Truth, that in the Multitude of Inhabitants consists the Welfare, Riches,
and Power of any People; especially when all center in Obedience to the same civil Power, and
unanimously join in the Encouragement of Trade, and industriously unite in the Improvement of their
Manufactures; for then the greater Consumption will be made of such Things as tend to the publick
Good, and the grander Figure will the Community make, and the greater will be the Exports and Imports
of such Commodities as tend to the Increase of the publick Wealth,
and private Advantage of each particular Member of the Society.

A remarkable Instance of this we have in the Dutch, whose Riches and Grandeur arose from the
Increase of their Inhabitants, from their industrious Improvement of Projects, Inventions, and Manufactures
at Home and Abroad, and carrying on the greatest Trade with indefatigable Application.

For these Reasons should Virginia be better stocked with Inhabitants, and more useful Arts
and Projects be promoted there, than hitherto have been. Not that this would be in order for
the publick Good of Virginia alone, but of all the British Empire in general; in that there might
be imployed all the idle and superfluous Persons, who for want of Employment or Aversion to
Business, prove as dead Members of the whole Body; or else by Immorality and Villany prove noxious
to others, destructive to themselves, and a Scandal to Mankind.

What Shoals of Beggars are allowed in Great Britain to suffer their Bodies to rust and consume
with Laziness and Want? And besides Strowlers what Number of Poor are burdensom to most Parishes?
How do our Streets and Highways swarm with Rogues, and how are we over-stocked (as they say)
with vast Numbers of People of all Trades and Professions?

But for all and more than these might Work enough be found in our Plantations, where they might be
imployed in the Benefit of their Country, for the Advantage both of the temporal and spiritual
Concernments, by being kept to Business, and getting Money in an honest Way.

It is a monkish Opinion too prevalent with many still, that there is no good Living without the
Bounds of their own Cloyster. And Abundance of English entertain the Chinese Notion, that they
are all Fools and Beggars that live in any Country but theirs. This home Fondness has been very
prejudicial to the common Sort of English, and has in a great Measure retarded the Plantations
from being stock'd with such Inhabitants as are skilful, industrious,
and laborious.

For these Reasons, such Persons of Sense and Resolution as have entered
into Projects for Improvements in the Plantations (who have evinced
us, that all Schemes are not Bubbles) have been obliged for the generality
to make Use of the worst and vilest of Mankind, for the Execution
of the noblest and most useful Undertakings; tho' indeed continually
several People of Sense, Vertue, and Fortune, entertaining tolerable
good Notions of these Affairs, have embarked themselves and Families
in such laudable and useful Designs: But for the generality, the Servants
and inferior Sort of People, who have either been sent over to Virginia,
or have transported themselves thither, have been, and are, the poorest,
idlest, and worst of Mankind, the Refuse of Great Britain and Ireland,
and the Outcast of the People.

These Servants are but an insignificant Number, when compared with the vast Shoals of Negroes who
are imployed as Slaves there to do the hardest and most Part of the Work; the most laborious of
which is the felling of Trees and the like, to which kind of Slavery (if it must be so called)
our Wood-Cutters in England are exposed; only with this Difference, that the Negroes eat wholsomer
Bread and better Pork with more Plenty and Ease; and when they are Sick, their Owners Interest
and Purse are deeply engaged in their Recovery, who likewise are obliged to take all the Care
imaginable of the Children of their Slaves for their own great Profit; so that the Negroes,
though they work moderately, yet live plentifully, have no Families to provide for, no Danger
of Beggary, no Care for the Morrow.

But to me it seems to be more Prudence and Charity for our own Poor and Vagabonds to be there
imployed and provided for, than for us to maintain and use such great Numbers of Africans. If
we can do better without them certainly we should forbear importing so many (though this may
interfere with the Interest of some), since it would advance the Good of the Publick; and that
we may be without them is plain, since we have Rogues and Idlers
enough of our own to do the same Work, to which if they were compelled
by mild Methods, it would ease the Publick of a great deal of Charge,
Trouble, and Loss, and would highly tend to the Advancement of the
temporal and spiritual Happiness of our Poor, and be very instrumental
in the Suppression of Theft and Villany, and for the Reformation of
the most Profligate.

Thousands of poor, honest, unfortunate People of all Trades and Occupations
might be there imployed for the Support of themselves and Interest
of Trade, that can find neither Work nor Maintenance for themselves
and Families at Home; and such as had rather stroll or steal here,
might be confined by mild Force to moderate Labour there, sufficient
to support themselves, and benefit their Imployers.

The British Trade may easily vend their Effects and Manufactures; and Virginia, with the neighbouring
Plantations, is capacious enough for their Reception, plentiful for their Maintenance, and abound
with most Conveniences and Materials for most Kinds of Imployments; where several Things, upon
Account of the Goodness of the Climate, and Fertility of the Country, may be produced with
less Labour and more Plenty than in Great Britain; and innumerable Commodities might there be made
by our own People, that are now imported at extravagant Prices, and excessive Toil and Danger from
other Nations: Nay, we might supply other Nations with most of those Things which we now fetch
from Abroad; so that though our Imports might decrease a little, yet would our Exports be abundantly
augmented, which undoubtedly would tend much more to the Advantage of our Country: Even our own home
Consumption in most Respects might be raised much cheaper and better in the Plantations than
here; especially such Things as are with great Toil and Cost forc'd (as it were) unnaturally out
of barren Ground, improper Soil, or a disagreeable Climate; and the Land and People in such
Places might be occupied in more proper Business, and for more useful Purposes.

But the common People here have such a vain Fondness for their own Country, and such despicable
Notions of Virginia, &c. and are under such dreadful Apprehensions of the imaginary Slavery
of the Plantations, that they choose for the most Part rather to steal, beg, or starve, than
go Abroad to work; and in the mean Time the Magistrates and our Laws are so mild to them, that like
as Pharaoh's lean Kine devoured the fat ones, they grievously oppress
and molest the Rich and the Honest.

But certainly Means might be invented and practised for easing our Nations of these Burdens,
for promoting our Trade and Plantations by their Industry; and not
for the Oppression (whatever some may imagine) of the Poor and Needy,
but for their Maintenance and Felicity.

And I believe this may be done without putting any Stop to the Importation
of Negroes, rather than fail, since they might be kept on in their
present Course of Life and Business; only they must raise more Stock
and Grain for the Support of the additional English, who should stick
solely to the Arts and Employments to which they were bred, or in
which they are most expert.

Indeed while Tobacco is the only Staple Commodity of any Consequence to Virginia, the Country
may be easily over-stock'd with Negroes, because the Trade can't find Vent for near all the Tobacco
that so many Hands will make; so that the Market being over-charged, is thus spoiled; for too
much of any Commodity is as bad, if not worse, for the Planter, the Merchant, and the Publick, than
too little. For which Reason the Honourable the Assembly of Virginia has from Time to Time endeavoured
to make prudent Provision against raising too much Tobacco.

For this Cause they lately had a Duty of 5 l. a Head for every new Negroe, which Law in a great
Measure is now revived; and though this Addition in the Price of a Negroe made no sensible Decrease
in the Number imported; yet it did this good, viz. it brought a great
Sum into the Treasury of the Country, which they have ready to disburse
upon any noble Occasion; such as their late Donation to the College,
to Williamsburgh, and their additional Reward for the Apprehension
of Pyrates.

Besides their Attempts for the Prevention of too many Negroes, they have a Law against Seconds,
which is most serviceable in confining the Quantity of Tobacco to its proper Bulk. The Intent
of this Law is to prohibit all Persons from manufacturing a second Crop from the Leaves that sprout
out from the Stalk after the first Leaves are cut off; with a Penalty
upon the Offender, and a Reward for the Informer.

The Tobacco and the Negroe Trades might be carried on after the present Methods, or with any such
Regulations as may seem more proper to those concerned in these Affairs; without any Hindrance
to Arts, Handicrafts, useful Inventions and Cultivations in Virginia, for the Interest and present Trade
of the Plantations and Great Britain would not interfere with such Projects; but on the contrary
they would highly contribute to the mutual Support of each other, with prudent Management and Care.

The
main Difficulty, Trouble, and Expence will chiefly consist in sending over such Persons as are
before-mentioned, and afterwards in finding them Habitations, Maintenance,
and Work when they are settled in Virginia, during the Term of their
Service; and after they are free, with a Livelihood and Imployment
for their Posterity.

 The Chevalier de
Vidalinc sat in a low chair beside his friend, and gave him from time to time a spoonful of
the tonic prescribed by the surgeon, but refrained from breaking the silence into which he
had fallen. Vallombreuse lay perfectly still for a while; but it was easy to see, in spite
of his affected calmness, that his blood was boiling with suppressed rage. At last he could
restrain himself no longer, and burst out violently: "Oh! Vidalinc, this is too outrageously
aggravating! to think that that contemptible, lean stork, who has flown forth from his ruined
chateau so as not to die of starvation in it, should have dared to stick his long bill into
me! I have encountered, and conquered, the best swordsmen in France, and never returned from
the field before with so much as a scratch, or without leaving my adversary stretched lifeless
on the ground, or wounded and bleeding in the arms of his friends."

"But you must remember that the most favoured and the bravest of mortals have their unlucky
days, Vallombreuse," answered the chevalier sententiously, "and Dame Fortune does not ALWAYS
smile, even upon her prime favourites. Until now you have never had to complain of her frowns,
for you have been her pampered darling all your life long."

"Isn't it too disgraceful," continued Vallombreuse, growing more and more heated, "that this
ridiculous buffoon--this grotesque country clown--who takes such abominable drubbings on the
stage, and has never in his life known what it was to associate with gentlemen, should have
managed to get the best of the Duke of Vallombreuse, hitherto by common accord pronounced invincible?
He must be a professional prize-fighter, disguised as a strolling mountebank."

"There can be no doubt about his real rank," said Vidalinc, "for the Marquis de Bruyeres guarantees
it; but I must confess that his unequalled performance to-day filled me with astonishment;
it was simply marvellous. Neither Girolamo nor Paraguante, those two world-renowned swordsmen,
could have surpassed it. I watched him closely, and I tell you that even they could not have
withstood him. It took all your remarkable skill--which has been so greatly enhanced by the
Neapolitan's instructions--to avoid being mortally wounded; why your defeat was a victory in
my eyes, in that it was not a more overwhelming one."

"I don't know how I am to wait for this wound to heal," the duke said, after a short pause,
"I am so impatient to provoke him again, and have the opportunity to revenge myself."

"That would be a very hazardous proceeding, and one that I should strongly advise you not to
attempt," Vidalinc replied in an earnest tone. "Your sword-arm will scarcely be as strong as
before for a long time I fear, and that would seriously diminish your chances of success. This
Baron de Sigognac is a very formidable antagonist, and will be still more so, for you, now
that he knows your tactics; and besides, the confidence in himself which his first victory
naturally gives him would be another thing in his favour. Honour is satisfied, and the encounter
was a serious one for you. Let the matter rest here, I beseech you!"

Vallombreuse could not help being secretly convinced of the justice of these remarks, but was
not willing to avow it openly, even to his most intimate friend. He was a sufficiently accomplished
swordsman himself to appreciate de Sigognac's wonderful prowess, and he knew that it far surpassed
his own much vaunted skill, though it enraged him to have to recognise this humiliating fact.
He was even obliged to acknowledge, in his inmost heart, that he owed his life to the generous
forbearance of his hated enemy; who might have taken it just as well as not, but had spared
him, and been content with giving him only a flesh wound, just severe enough to put him hors-de-combat,
without doing him any serious injury. This magnanimous conduct, by which a less haughty nature
would have been deeply touched, only served to irritate the young duke's pride, and increase
his resentment. To think that he, the valiant and puissant Duke of Vallombreuse, had been conquered,
humiliated, wounded! the bare idea made him frantic. Although he said nothing further to his
companion about his revenge, his mind was filled with fierce projects whereby to obtain it,
and he swore to himself to be even yet with the author of his present mortification--if not
in one way, then in another; for injuries there be that are far worse than mere physical wounds
and hurts.

"I shall cut a sorry figure enough now in the eyes of the fair Isabelle," said he at last,
with a forced laugh, "with my arm here run through and rendered useless by the sword of her
devoted gallant. Cupid, weak and disabled, never did find much favour with the Graces, you
know. But oh! how charming and adorable she seems to me, this sweet, disdainful Isabelle! I
am actually almost grateful to her for resisting me so; for, if she had yielded, I should have
been tired of her by this time, I fancy. Her nature certainly cannot be a base, ordinary one,
or she would never have refused thus the advances of a wealthy and powerful nobleman, who is
ready to lavish upon her everything that heart could desire, and whose own personal attractions
are not to be despised; if the universal verdict of the fair sex of all ranks can be relied
upon. There is a certain respect and esteem mingled with my passionate admiration for her,
that I have never felt before for any woman, and it is very sweet to me. But how in the world
are we to get rid of this confounded young sprig of nobility, her self-constituted champion?
May the devil fly away with him!"

"It will not be an easy matter," the chevalier replied, and especially now that he is upon
his guard. "But even if you did succeed in getting rid of him, Isabelle's love for him would
still be in your way, and you ought to know, better than most men, how obstinate a woman can
be in her devoted attachment to a man."

"Oh! if I could only kill this miserable baron," continued Vallombreuse, not at all impressed
by the chevalier's last remark, "I could soon win the favour of this virtuous young person,
in spite of all her little prudish airs and graces. Nothing is so quickly forgotten as a defunct
suitor."

These were by no means the chevalier's sentiments, but he refrained from pursuing the subject
then, wishing to soothe, rather than irritate, his suffering friend.

"You must first get well as fast as you can," he said, "and it will be time enough then for
us to discuss the matter. All this talking wearies you, and does you no good. Try to get a
little nap now, and not excite yourself so. The surgeon will tax me with imprudence, and call
me a bad nurse, I'm afraid, if I don't manage to keep you more quiet--mentally as well as physically."

His patient, yielding with rather an ill grace to this sensible advice, sank back wearily upon
his pillows, closed his eyes, and soon fell asleep--where we will leave him, enjoying his much
needed repose.

Meantime the Marquis de Bruyeres and de Sigognac had quietly returned to their hotel, where,
like well-bred gentlemen, they did not breathe even a hint of what had taken place. But walls
have ears they say, and eyes as well it would appear, for they certainly see as much as they
ever hear. In the neighbourhood of the apparently solitary, deserted spot where the duel had
taken place, more than one inquisitive, hidden observer had closely watched the progress of
the combat, and had not lost a moment after it was over in spreading the news of it; so that
by breakfast-time all Poitiers was in a flutter of excitement over the intelligence that the
Duke of Vallombreuse had been wounded in a duel with an unknown adversary, and was exhausting
itself in vain conjectures as to who the valiant stranger could possibly be. No one thought
of de Sigognac, who had led the most retired life imaginable ever since his arrival; remaining
quietly at the hotel all day, and showing only his stage mask, not his own face, at the theatre
in the evening.

Several gentlemen of his acquaintance sent to inquire ceremoniously after the Duke of Vallombreuse,
giving their messengers instructions to endeavour to get some information from his servants
about the mysterious duel, but they were as taciturn as the mutes of a seraglio, for the very
excellent and sufficient reason that they knew nothing what ever about it. The young duke,
by his great wealth, his overweening pride, his uncommon good looks, and his triumphant success
among fair ladies everywhere, habitually excited much secret jealousy and hatred among his
associates, which not one of them dared to manifest openly--but they were mightily pleased
by his present discomfiture.

It was the first check he had ever experienced, and all those who had been hurt or offended
by his arrogance--and they were legion--now rejoiced in his mortification. They could not say
enough in praise of his successful antagonist, though they had never seen him, nor had any
idea as to what manner of than he might be. The ladies, who nearly all had some cause of complaint
against the haughty young noble man, as he was wont to boast loudly of his triumphs, and basely
betray the favours that had been accorded to him in secret, were full of enthusiastic and tender
admiration for this victorious champion of a woman's virtue, who, they felt, had unconsciously
avenged for them many scornful slights, and they would have gladly crowned him with laurel
and myrtle, and rewarded him with their sweetest smiles and most distinguished favour.

However, as nothing on this terraqueous and sublunary globe can long remain a secret, it soon
transpired through Maitre Bilot, who had it direct from Jacques, the valet of the Marquis de
Bruyeres, who had been present during the momentous interview between his master and the Baron
de Sigognac, that the duke's brave antagonist was no other than the redoubtable Captain Fracasse;
or rather, a young nobleman in disguise, who for the sake of a love affair had become a member
of Herode's troupe of travelling comedians. As to his real name, Jacques had unfortunately
forgotten it, further than that it ended in "gnac," as is not uncommon in Gascony, but on the
point of his rank he was positive. This delightfully romantic and "ower-true tale" was received
with acclamations by the good folk of Poitiers. They were fairly overflowing with admiration
for and interest in the valiant gentleman who wielded such a powerful blade, and the devoted
lover who had left everything to follow his mistress, and when Captain Fracasse appeared upon
the stage that evening, the prolonged and enthusiastic applause that greeted him, and was renewed
over and over again before he was allowed to speak a single word, bore witness unmistakably
to the favour with which he was regarded; while the ladies rose in their boxes and waved their
handkerchiefs, even the grandest and most dignified among them, and brought the palms of their
gloved hands daintily together in his honour. It was a real ovation, and best of all a spontaneous
one. Isabelle also received a perfect storm of applause, which alarmed and had nearly overcome
the retiring young actress, who blushed crimson in her embarrassment, as she made a modest
curtsey in acknowledgment of the compliment.

Herode was overjoyed, and his face shone like the full moon as he rubbed his hands together
and grinned broadly in his exuberant delight; for the receipts were immense, and the cash-box
was full to bursting. Everybody had rushed to the theatre to see and applaud the now famous
Captain Fracasse--the capital actor and high-spirited gentleman--who feared neither cudgels
nor swords; and had not shrunk from encountering the dreaded Duke of Vallombreuse, the terror
of all the country round, in mortal combat, as the champion of offended beauty. Blazius, however,
did not share the tyrant's raptures, but on the contrary foreboded no good from all this, for
he feared, and not without reason, the vindictive character of the Duke of Vallombreuse, and
was apprehensive that he would find some means of revenging himself for his defeat at de Sigognac's
hands that would be detrimental to the troupe. "Earthen vessels," said he, "should be very
careful how they get in the way of metal ones, lest, if they rashly encounter them, they be
ignominiously smashed in the shock." But Herode, relying upon the support and countenance of
the Baron de Sigognac and the Marquis de Bruyeres, laughed at his fears, and called him faint-heart,
a coward, and a croaker.

When the comedians returned to their hotel, after the play was over, de Sigognac accompanied
Isabelle to the door of her room, and, contrary to her usual custom, the young actress invited
him to enter it with her. When they found themselves quite alone, and safe from all curious
eyes, Isabelle turned to de Sigognac, took his hand in both of hers, and pressing it warmly
said to him in a voice trembling with emotion,

"Promise me never to run such a fearful risk for my sake again, de Sigognac; promise me! Swear
it, if you really do love me as you say."

"That is a thing I cannot do," the baron replied, "even to please you, sweet Isabelle! If ever
any insolent fellow dares to show a want of proper respect for you, I shall surely chastise
him for it, as I ought, be he what he may--duke, or even prince."

"But remember, de Sigognac, that I am nothing but an actress, inevitably exposed to affronts
from the men that haunt the coulisses. It is the generally received opinion, which alas! is
but too well justified by the usual ways of the members of my profession, that an actress is
no better than she should be; in fine, not a proper character nor worthy of respect. From the
moment that a woman steps upon the stage she becomes public property, and even if she be really
pure and virtuous it is universally believed that she only affects it for a purpose. These
things are hard and bitter, but they must be borne, since it is impossible to change them.
In future trust to me, I pray you, to repel those who would force their unwelcome attentions
upon me in the green-room, or endeavour to make their way into my dressing-room. A sharp rap
over the knuckles with a corset board from me will be quite as efficacious as for you to draw
your sword in my behalf."

"But I am not convinced," said de Sigognac, with a smile; "I must still believe, sweet Isabelle,
that the sword of a chivalrous ally would be your best weapon of defence, and I beg you not
to deprive me of the precious privilege of being your devoted knight and champion."

Isabelle was still holding de Sigognac's hand, and she now raised her lovely eyes, full of
mute supplication, to meet his adoring gaze, hoping yet to draw from him, the much desired
promise. But the baron was incorrigible; where honour was concerned he was as firm and unyielding
as a Spanish hidalgo, and he would have braved a thousand deaths rather than have allowed an
affront to the lady of his love to pass unpunished; he wished that the same deference and respect
should be accorded to Isabelle upon the stage, as to a duchess in her drawing-room.

"Come, de Sigognac, be reasonable," pleaded the young actress, "and promise me not to expose
yourself to such danger again for so frivolous a cause. Oh! what anxiety and anguish I endured
as I awaited your return this morning. I knew that you had gone out to fight with that dreadful
duke, who is held in such universal terror here; Zerbine told me all about it. Cruel that you
are to torture my poor heart so! That is always the way with men; they never stop to think
of what we poor, loving women must suffer when their pride is once aroused! off they go, as
fierce as lions, deaf to our sobs and blind to our tears. Do you know, that if you had been
killed I should have died too?"

The tears that filled Isabelle's eyes, and the excessive trembling of her voice, showed that
she was in earnest, and that she had not even yet recovered her usual calmness and composure.
More deeply touched than words can express by her emotion, and the love for himself it bore
witness to, de Sigognac, encircling her slender form with the arm that was free, drew her gently
to him, and softly kissed her fair forehead, whilst he could feel, as he pressed her to his
breast, how she was panting and trembling. He held her thus tenderly embraced for a blissful
few seconds of silent ecstasy, which a less respectful lover would doubtless have presumed
upon; but he would have scorned to take advantage of the unreserved confidence bestowed upon
him in a moment of such agitation and sorrowful excitement.

"Be comforted, dear Isabelle," said he at last, tenderly. "I was not killed you see, nor even
hurt; and I actually wounded my adversary, though he does pass for a tolerably good swordsman
hereabouts, I believe."

"Yes, I well know what a strong hand is yours, and what a brave, noble heart," Isabelle replied;
"and I do not scruple to acknowledge that I love you for it with all my heart; feeling sure
that you will respect my frank avowal, and not endeavour to take advantage of it. When I first
saw you, de Sigognac, dispirited and desolate, in that dreary, half-ruined chateau, where your
youth was passing in sadness and solitude, I felt a tender interest in you suddenly spring
into being in my heart; had you been happy and prosperous I should have been afraid of you,
and have shrunk timidly from your notice. When we walked together in that neglected garden,
where you held aside the brambles so carefully for me to pass unscathed, you gathered and presented
to me a little wild rose--the only thing you had to give me. As I raised it to my lips, before
putting it in my bosom, and kissed it furtively under pretence of inhaling its fragrance, I
could not keep back a tear that dropped upon it, and secretly and in silence I gave you my
heart in exchange for it."

As these entrancing words fell upon his ear, de Sigognac impulsively tried to kiss the sweet
lips so temptingly near his own, but Isabelle withdrew herself gently from his embrace; not
with any show of excessive prudery, but with a modest timidity that no really gallant lover
would endeavour to overcome by force.

"Yes, I love you, de Sigognac," she continued, in a voice that was heavenly sweet, "and with
all my heart, but not as other women love; your glory is my aim, not my own pleasure. I am
perfectly willing to be looked upon as your mistress; it is the only thing that would account
satisfactorily to the world at large for your presence in this troupe of strolling players.
And why should I care for slanderous reports, so long as I keep my own self-esteem, and know
myself to be virtuous and true? If there were really a stain upon my purity it would kill me;
I could not survive it. It is the princely blood in my veins doubtless that gives rise to such
pride in me; very ridiculous, perhaps, in an actress, but such is my nature."

This enchanting avowal, which would not have taught anything new to a more conceited or bolder
suitor, but was a wonderful revelation to de Sigognac, who had scarcely dared to hope that
his passionate, devoted love might some day be returned, filled him with such rapturous, overwhelming
delight, that he was almost beside himself. A burning flush overspread his usually pale face;
he seemed to see flames before his eyes; there was a strange ringing in his ears, and his heart
throbbed so violently that he felt half suffocated. Losing control of himself in this moment
of ecstasy, so intense that it was not unmixed with pain, he suddenly seized Isabelle passionately
in his arms, strained her trembling form convulsively to his heaving breast, and covered her
face and neck with burning kisses. She did not even try to struggle against this fierce embrace,
but, throwing her head back, looked fixedly at him, with eyes full of sorrow and reproach.
From those lovely eyes, clear and pure as an angel's, great tears welled forth and rolled down
over her blanched cheeks, and a suppressed sob shook her quivering frame as a sudden faintness
seemed to come over her. The young baron, distracted at the sight of her grief, and full of
keen self-reproach, put her gently down into a low, easy-chair standing near, and kneeling
before her, took in both his own the hands that she abandoned to him, and passionately implored
her pardon; pleading that a momentary madness had taken possession of him, that he repented
of it bitterly, and was ready to atone for his offence by the most perfect submission to her
wishes.

"You have hurt me sadly, my friend!" said Isabelle at last, with a deep-drawn sigh. "I had
such perfect confidence in your delicacy and respect. The frank, unreserved avowal of my love
for you ought to have been enough, and have shown you clearly, by its very openness, that I
trusted you entirely. I believed that you would understand me and let me love you in my own
way, without troubling my tenderness for you by vulgar transports. Now, you have robbed me
of my feeling of security. I do not doubt your words, but I shall no longer dare to yield to
the impulses of my own heart. And yet it was so sweet to me to be with you, to watch you, to
listen to your dear voice, and to follow the course of your thoughts as I saw them written
in your eyes. I wished to share your troubles and anxieties, de Sigognac, leaving your pleasures
to others. I said to myself, among all these coarse, dissolute, presuming men that hover about
us, there is one who is different--one who believes in purity, and knows how to respect it
in the woman he honours with his love. I dared to indulge in a sweet dream--even I, Isabelle
the actress, pursued as I am constantly by a gallantry that is odious to me--I dared to indulge
in the too sweet dream of enjoying with you a pure mutual love. I only asked to be your faithful
companion, to cheer and comfort you in your struggles with an adverse fate until you had reached
the beginning of happiness and prosperity, and then to retire into obscurity again, when you
had plenty of new friends and followers, and no longer needed me. You see that I was not very
exacting."

"Isabelle, my adored Isabelle," cried de Sigognac, "every word that you speak makes me reproach
myself more and more keenly for my fault, and the pain I have given you. Rest assured, my own
darling, that you have nothing further to fear from me. I am not worthy to kiss the traces
of your footprints in the dust; but yet, I pray you, listen to me! Perhaps you do not fully
understand all my thoughts and intentions, and will forgive me when you do. I have nothing
but my name, which is as pure and spotless as your sweet self, and I offer it to you, my own
beloved Isabelle, if you will deign to accept it."

He was still kneeling at her feet, and at these ardently spoken words she leaned towards him,
took his upraised face between her hands with a quick, passionate movement, and kissed him
fervently on the lips; then she sprang to her feet and began, hurriedly and excitedly, pacing
back and forth in the chamber.

"You will be my wife, Isabelle?" cried de Sigognac in agitated tones, thrilling in every nerve
from the sweet contact of her pure, lovely mouth--fresh as a flower, ardent as a flame.

"Never, never," answered Isabelle, with a clear ring of rapture in her voice. "I will show
myself worthy of such an honour by refusing it. I did mistake you for a moment, my dearest
friend; I did mistake you; forgive me. Oh! how happy you have made me; what celestial joy fills
my soul! You do respect and esteem me, then, to the utmost? Ah! de Sigognac, you would really
lead me, as your wife, into the hall where all the portraits of your honoured ancestors would
look down upon us? and into the chapel, where your dead mother lies at rest? I could meet fearlessly,
my beloved, the searching gaze of the dead, from whom nothing is hidden; the crown of purity
would not be wanting on my brow."

"But what!" exclaimed the young baron, "you say that you love me, Isabelle, with all that true,
faithful heart of yours, yet you will not accept me! either as lover or husband?"

"You have offered me your name, de Sigognac, your noble, honoured name, and that is enough
for me. I give it back to you now, after having cherished it for one moment in my inmost heart.
For one instant I was your wife, and I will never, never be another's. While my lips were on
yours I was saying yes to myself, and oh! I did not deserve such happiness. For you, my beloved,
it would be a sad mistake to burden yourself with a poor little actress like me, who would
always be taunted with her theatrical career, however pure and honourable it may have been.
The cold, disdainful mien with which great ladies would be sure to regard me would cause you
keen suffering, and you could not challenge THEM, you know, my own brave champion! You are
the last of a noble race, de Sigognac, and it is your duty to build up your fallen house. When,
by a tender glance, I induced you to quit your desolate home and follow me, you doubtless dreamed
of a love affair of the usual sort, which was but natural; but I, looking into the future,
thought of far other things. I saw you returning, in rich attire, from the court of your gracious
sovereign, who had reinstated you in your rights, and given you an honourable office, suitable
to your exalted rank. The chateau had resumed its ancient splendour. In fancy I tore the clinging
ivy from its crumbling walls, put the fallen stones back in their places, restored the dilapidated
roof and shattered window-panes, regilded the three storks on your escutcheon over the great
entrance door, and in the grand old portico; then, having installed you in the renovated home
of your honoured ancestors, I retired into obscurity, stifling a sigh as I bade you adieu,
though sincerely rejoicing in your well merited good fortune."

"And your dream shall be accomplished, my noble Isabelle; I feel sure of it--but not altogether
as you relate it to me; such an ending would be too sad and grievous. You shall be the first,
you, my own darling, with this dear hand clasped in mine, as now, to cross the threshold of
that blessed abode, whence ruin and desolation shall have disappeared, and have been replaced
by prosperity and happiness."

"No, no, de Sigognac, it will be some great, and noble, and beautiful heiress, worthy of you
in every way, who will accompany you then; one that you can present with just pride to all
your friends, and of whom none can say, with a malicious smile, I hissed or applauded her at
such a time and place."

"It is downright cruelty on your part to show your self so adorable, so worthy of all love
and admiration, my sweet Isabelle, and at the same time to deprive me of every hope," said
de Sigognac, ruefully; "to give one glimpse of heaven and then shut me out again; nothing could
be more cruel. But I will not despair; I shall make you yield to me yet."

"Do not try, I beseech you," continued Isabelle, with gentle firmness, "for I never shall;
I should despise myself if I did. Strive to be content, de Sigognac, with the purest, truest,
most devoted love that ever filled a woman's heart, and do not ask for more. Is it such an
unsatisfactory thing to you," she added, with a bright smile, "to be adored by a girl that
several men have had the bad taste to declare charming? Why, even the Duke of Vallombreuse
himself professes that he would be proud of it."

"But to give yourself to me so absolutely, and to refuse yourself to me as absolutely! to mingle
such sweet and bitter drops in the same cup--honey and wormwood--and present it to my lips!
only you, Isabelle, could be capable of such strange contradictions."

"Yes, I AM an odd girl," she replied, "and therein I resemble my poor mother; but such as I
am you must put up with me. If you should persist in persecuting me, I know well how I could
elude and escape you, and where I could hide myself from you so that you would never be able
to find me. But there will be no need of that, we will not talk of it; our compact is made.
Let it be as I say, de Sigognac, and let us be happy together while we may. It grows late now,
and you must go to your own room; will you take with you these verses, of a part that does
not suit me at all, and remodel them for me? they belong to a piece that we are to play very
soon. Let me be your faithful little friend, de Sigognac, and you shall be my great, and well-beloved
poet."

Isabelle, as she spoke, drew forth from a bureau a roll of manuscript, tied with a rose-coloured
ribbon, which she gave to the baron with a radiant smile.

"Now kiss me, and go," she said, holding up her cheek for his caress. "You are going to work
for me, and this is your reward. Good-night, my beloved, good-night."

It was long after he had regained the quiet of his own room ere de Sigognac could compose himself
sufficiently to set about the light task imposed upon him by Isabelle. He was at once enchanted
and cast down; radiant with joy, and filled with sorrow; in a seventh heaven of ecstasy, and
in the depths of despair. He laughed and he wept alternately, swayed by the most tumultuous
and contradictory emotions. The intense happiness of at last knowing himself beloved by his
adored Isabelle made him exultant and joyful, while the terrible thought that she never would
be his made his heart sink within him. Little by little, however, he grew calmer, as his mind
dwelt lovingly upon the picture Isabelle had drawn of the Chateau de Sigognac restored to its
ancient splendour, and as he sat musing he had a wonderful vision of it--so glowing and vivid
that it was like reality. He saw before him the facade of the chateau, with its large windows
shining in the sunlight, and its many weather-cocks, all freshly gilded, glistening against
the bright blue sky, whilst the columns of smoke rising from every chimney, so long cold and
unused, told of plenty and prosperity within, and his good faithful Pierre, in a rich new suit
of livery, stood between Miraut and Beelzebub at the great entrance door awaiting him. He saw
himself, in sumptuous attire, proudly leading his fair Isabelle by the hand towards the grand
old home of his forefathers; his beautiful Isabelle, dressed like a princess, wearing ornaments
bearing a device which seemed to be that of one of the greatest, most illustrious families
of France, and with a ducal coronet upon her shapely head. But with it all she did not appear
to be proud or haughty--she was just her own sweet, modest self--and in the hand that was free
she carried the little wild rose, fresh as when it was first plucked, that he had given her,
and from time to time raised and pressed it tenderly to her lips as she inhaled its fragrance;
it seemed more precious to her than all the superb jewels that she wore. As they approached
the chateau a most stately and majestic old man, whose breast was covered with orders, and
whose face seemed not entirely unfamiliar to de Sigognac, stepped forth from the portico to
meet and welcome them. But what greatly surprised him was that a remarkably handsome young
man, of most proud and lofty bearing, accompanied the old prince, who closely resembled the
Duke of Vallombreuse, and who smilingly advanced and offered a cordial salutation and welcome
to Isabelle and himself. A great crowd of tenantry stationed near at hand hailed them with
lusty cheers, making many demonstrations of hearty joy and delight, and his own happiness seemed
to be complete. Suddenly the sound of a horn was heard, and at a little distance he saw the
beautiful Yolande de Foix, radiant and charming as ever, riding slowly by--apparently returning
from the chase. He followed her with his eyes admiringly, but felt no regret as her figure
was lost to view amid the thick gorse bushes bordering the road down which she was going, and
turned with ever increasing love and adoration to the sweet being at his side. The memory of
the fair Yolande, whom he had once worshipped in a vague, boyish way, faded before the delicious
reality of his passionate love for Isabelle; who satisfied so fully every requirement of his
nature, and had so thoroughly healed the wound made by the scorn and ridicule of the other,
that it seemed to be entirely forgotten then.

It was not easy for de Sigognac to rouse himself after this entrancing vision, which had been
so startlingly real, and fix his attention upon the verses he had promised to revise and alter
for Isabelle, but when at last he had succeeded, he threw himself into his task with enthusiasm,
and wrote far into the night--inspired by the thought of the sweet lips that had called him
her poet, and that were to pronounce the words he penned; and he was rewarded for his exertions
by Isabelle's sweetest smile, and warmest praise and gratitude.

At the theatre the next evening the crowd was even greater than before, and the crush unprecedented.
The reputation of Captain Fracasse, the valiant conqueror of the Duke of Vallombreuse; increased
hourly, and began to assume a chimerical and fabulous character. If the labours of Hercules
had been ascribed to him, there would have been some credulous ones to believe the tale, and
he was endowed by his admirers with the prowess of a dozen good knights and brave, of the ancient
times of chivalrous deeds. Some of the young noblemen of the place talked of seeking his acquaintance,
and giving a grand banquet in his honour; more than one fair lady was desperately in love with
him, and had serious thoughts of writing a billet-doux to tell him so. In short, he was the
fashion, and everybody swore by him. As for the hero of a this commotion, he was greatly annoyed
at being thus forcibly dragged forth from the obscurity in which he had desired to remain,
but it was not possible to avoid it, and he could only submit. For a few moments he did think
of bolting, and not making his appearance again upon the stage in Poitiers; but the remembrance
of the disappointment it would be to the worthy tyrant, who was in an ecstasy of delight over
the riches pouring into the treasury, prevented his carrying out this design. And, indeed,
as he reminded himself, were not these honest comedians, who had rescued him from his misery
and despair, entitled in all fairness to profit, so far as they could, by this unexpected and
overwhelming favour which he had all unwittingly gained? So, resigning himself as philosophically
as he could to his fate, he buckled his sword-belt, draped his cloak over his shoulder, put
on his mask and calmly awaited his call to the stage.

As the receipts were so large, Herode, like a generous manager, had doubled the usual number
of lights, so that the theatre was almost as radiant as if a flood of sunshine had been poured
into it. The fair portion of the audience, hoping to attract the attention of the valiant Captain
Fracasse, had arrayed themselves in all their splendour; not a diamond was left in its casket;
they sparkled and flashed, every one, on necks and arms more or less white and round, and on
heads more or less shapely, but all filled with an ardent desire to please the hero of the
hour; so the scene was a brilliant one in every way. Only one box yet remained unoccupied,
the best situated and most conspicuous in the whole house; every eye was turned upon it, and
much wonder expressed at the apathy manifested by those who had secured it, for all the rest
of the spectators had been long settled in their places. At length, just as the curtain was
rising, a young lady entered and took her seat in the much observed box, accompanied by a gentleman
of venerable and patriarchal appearance; apparently an indulgent old uncle, a slave to the
caprices of his pretty niece, who had renounced his comfortable after-dinner nap by the fire,
in order to obey her behest and escort her to the theatre. She, slender and erect as Diana,
was very richly and elegantly dressed, in that peculiar and exquisite shade of delicate sea
green which can be worn only by the purest blondes, and which seemed to enhance the dazzling
whiteness of her uncovered shoulders, and the rounded, slender neck, diaphanous as alabaster,
that proudly sustained her small, exquisitely poised head. Her hair, clustering in sunny ringlets
round her brow, was like living gold, it made a glory round her head, and the whole audience
was enraptured with her beauty, though an envious mask concealed so much of it; all, indeed,
save the snow-white forehead, the round dimpled chin, the ripe red lips, whose tint was rendered
yet more vivid by the contrast with the black velvet that shaded them, the perfect oval of
the face, and a dainty little ear, pink as a sea-shell--a combination of charms worthy of a
goddess, and which made every one impatient to see the radiant, beauteous whole. They were
soon gratified; for the young deity, either incommoded by the heat, or else wishing to show
a queenly generosity to the gazing throng, took off the odious mask, and disclosed to view
a pair of brilliant eyes, dark and blue as lapis lazuli, shaded with rich golden fringes, a
piquant, perfectly cut little nose, half Grecian, half aquiline, and cheeks tinged with a delicate
flush that would have put a rose-leaf to shame. In fine, it was Yolande de Foix, more radiantly
beautiful than ever, who, leaning forward in a negligent, graceful pose, looked nonchalantly
about the house, not in the least discomposed by the many eyes fixed boldly and admiringly
upon her. A loud burst of applause, that greeted the first appearance of the favourite actor,
drew attention from her for a moment, as de Sigognac stalked forward upon the stage in the
character of Captain Fracasse. As he paused, to wait until his admirers would allow him to
begin his first tirade, he looked negligently round the eager audience, and when his eyes fell
upon Yolande de Foix, sitting tranquil and radiant in her box, calmly surveying him with her
glorious eyes, he suddenly turned dizzy and faint; the lights appeared first to blaze like
suns, and then sink into darkness; the heads of the spectators seemed sinking into a dense
fog; a cold perspiration started out on him from head to foot; he trembled violently, and felt
as if his legs were giving way under him; composure, memory, courage, all seemed to have failed
him, as utterly as if he had been struck by lightning.

Oh, shame! oh, rage! oh, too cruel stroke of fate! for him, a de Sigognac, to be seen by her--the
haughty beauty that he used to worship from afar--in this grotesque array, filling so unworthy,
so ridiculous a part, for the amusement of the gaping multitude! and he could not hide himself,
he could not sink into the earth, away from her contemptuous, mocking gaze. He felt that he
could not, would not bear it, and for a moment was upon the point of flying; but there seemed
to be leaden soles to his shoes, which he could by no means raise from the ground. He was powerless
to move hand or foot, and stood there in a sort of stupefaction; to the great astonishment
of Scapin, who, thinking that he must have forgotten his part, whispered to him the opening
phrases of his tirade. The public thought that their favourite actor desired another round
of applause, and broke out afresh, clapping, stamping, crying bravo, making a tremendous racket,
which little respite gave poor de Sigognac time to collect his scattered senses, and, with
a mighty effort, he broke the spell that had bound him, and threw himself into his part with
such desperation that his acting was more extravagant and telling than ever. It fairly brought
down the house. The haughty Yolande herself could not forbear to smile, and her old uncle,
thoroughly aroused, laughed heartily, and applauded with all his might. No one but Isabelle
had the slightest idea of the reason of Captain Fracasse's unwonted fury--but she saw at once
who was looking on, and knowing how sensitive he was, realized the effect it must infallibly
produce upon him. She furtively watched the proud beauty as she modestly played her own part,
and thought, not without a keen pang through her faithful, loving heart, that here would be
a worthy mate for the Baron de Sigognac, when he had succeeded in re-establishing the lost
splendour of his house. As to the poor young nobleman, he resolved not to glance once again
at Yolande, lest he should be seized by a sudden transport of rage and do something utterly
rash and disgraceful, but kept his eyes fixed, whenever he could, upon his sweet, lovely Isabelle.
The sight of her dear face was balm to his wounded spirit--her love, of which he was now so
blissfully sure, consoled him for the openly manifested scorn of the other, and from her he
drew strength to go on bravely with his detested part.

It was over at last--the piece was finished--and when de Sigognac tore off his mask, like a
man who is suffocating, his companions were alarmed at his altered looks. He was fairly livid,
and let himself fall upon a bench standing near like a lifeless body. Seeing that he was very
faint, Blazius hastened to fetch some wine--his sovereign remedy for every ill--but de Sigognac
rejected it, and signed that he wanted water instead.

"A great mistake," said the pedant, shaking his head disapprovingly, "a sad mistake--water
is only fit for frogs, and fish, and such-like cold-blooded creatures--it does not do for human
beings at all. Every water-bottle should be labelled,'For external use only.' Why, I should
die instantly if so much as a drop of the vile stuff found its way down my throat. Take my
advice, Captain Fracasse, and let it alone. Here, have some of this good strong wine; it will
set you right in a jiffy."

But de Sigognac would not be persuaded, and persisted in motioning for water. When it was brought,
cool and fresh, he eagerly swallowed a large draught of the despised liquid, and found himself
almost immediately revived by it--his face resuming a more natural hue, and the light returning
to his eyes. When he was able to sit up and look about him again, Herode approached, in his
turn, and said, "You played admirably this evening, and with wonderful spirit, Captain Fracasse,
but it does not do to take too much out of yourself in this way--such violent exertions would
quickly do for you. The comedian's art consists in sparing himself as much as possible, whilst
producing striking effects; he should be calm amidst all his simulated fury, and cool in his
apparently most burning rage. Never did actor play this part as superbly as you have done to-night--THAT
I am bound to acknowledge--but this is too dear a price to pay for it."

"Yes, wasn't I absurd in it?" answered the baron bitterly. "I felt myself supremely ridiculous
throughout--but especially when my head went through the guitar with which Leander was belabouring
me." 

"And told me that more should be coming as it was wanted. Do you think I should have gone on
for such a man as Goarly,--a fellow without a shilling,--unless he had some one like you to
back him? It isn't likely. Now, Mr. Morton, I appeal to you."

"It was a great honour for me assuredly," cried de Sigognac, with flaming cheeks, "to have
been able to divert so great a lady."

"Pardon me, my lord," said the tyrant, who perceived the painful flush that covered the baron's
face, "I should have remembered that the success which is so prized by us poor comedians, actors
by profession, cannot but be a matter of indifference to one of your lordship's rank."

"You have not offended me, my good Herode," de Sigognac hastened to reply, holding out his
hand to the honest tyrant with a genial smile, "whatever is worth doing is worth doing well.
But I could not help remembering that I had dreamed of and hoped for very different triumphs
from this."

Isabelle, who meantime had been dressing for the other piece, passed near de Sigognac just
then, and gave him such an angelic look--so full of tenderness, sympathy, and passionate love--that
he quite forgot the haughty Yolande, and felt really happy again. It was a divine balm, that
healed his wounded pride--for the moment at least; but such wounds are all too apt to open
and bleed again and again.

The Marquis de Bruyeres was at his post as usual, and though very much occupied in applauding
Zerbine, yet found time to go and pay his respects to Mlle. Yolande de Foix. He related to
her, without mentioning the baron's name, the affair of the duel between Captain Fracasse and
the Duke of Vallombreuse saying that he ought to be able to give all the details of that famous
encounter better than anybody else, since he had been present as one of the seconds.

"You need not be so mysterious about it," answered Yolande, "for it is not difficult to divine
that your Captain Fracasse is no other than the Baron de Sigognac. Didn't I myself see him
leaving his old owl-haunted towers in company with this little Bohemienne, who plays her part
of ingenuous young girl with such a precious affectation of modesty?" she added, with a forced
laugh. "And wasn't he at your chateau with these very players? Judging from his usual stupid,
silly air, I would not have believed him capable of making such a clever mountebank, and such
a faithful gallant."

As he conversed with Yolande, the marquis was looking about the house, of which he had a much
better view than from his own place near the stage, and his attention was caught and fixed
by the masked lady, whom he had not seen before, as his back was always turned to her box.
Although her head and figure were much enveloped and disguised in a profusion of black laces,
the attitude and general contour of this mysterious beauty seemed strangely familiar to him,
and there was something about her that reminded him forcibly of the marquise, his own wife.
"Bah!" said he to himself, "how foolish I am; she must be all safe at the Chateau de Bruyeres,
where I left her." But at that very moment he caught sight of a diamond ring--a large solitaire,
peculiarly set--sparkling on her finger, which was precisely like one that the Marquise de
Bruyeres always wore.

A little troubled by this strange coincidence, he took leave abruptly of the fair Yolande and
her devoted old uncle, and hastened to the masked lady's box. But, prompt as his movements
had been, he was too late--the nest was empty--the bird had flown. The lady, whoever she might
be, had vanished, and the suspicious husband was left in considerable vexation and perplexity.
"Could it be possible," he murmured, as his doubts became almost certainty, "that she was sufficiently
infatuated to fall in love with that miserable Leander, and follow him here? Fortunately I
had the rascal thoroughly thrashed, so I am even with him, how ever it may be." This thought
restored his ruffled serenity, and he made his way as fast as he could to the green-room, to
rejoin the soubrette, who had been impatiently expecting him, and did not hesitate to rate
him soundly for his unwonted delay.

When all was over, and Leander--who had been feeling excessively anxious about the sudden disappearance
of his marquise--was free, he immediately repaired to the open square where he had been first
bidden to meet the carriage sent to fetch him, and where he had found it awaiting him nightly
ever since. The little page, who was there alone, put a letter and a small package into his
hand, without a word, and then running swiftly away, before Leander had time to question him,
vanished in the darkness. The note, which was signed simply Marie, was from the marquise, who
said that she feared her husband's suspicions had been excited, and that it would no longer
be safe for them to meet just then, bade him an affectionate farewell until it might be their
good fortune to see each other again, expressed much regret at this unlucky contretemps, and
begged him to accept the gold chain she sent therewith as a little souvenir, to remind him
of the many happy hours they had spent together. Leander was at first very much vexed and disappointed,
but was somewhat reconciled and consoled when he felt the weight of his golden treasure, and
saw its length and thickness; and, on the whole, was rather glad to come off with such flying
colours from an adventure that might have brought down a yet more severe punishment than that
he had already received upon his devoted head.

When Isabelle regained her own room she found a very rich and elegant casket awaiting her there,
which had been placed conspicuously on the dressing-table, where it could not fail to meet
her eye the moment she entered the chamber. A folded paper was lying under one corner of the
casket, which must have contained some very precious gems, for it was a real marvel of beauty
itself. The paper was not sealed, and bore only these two words, evidently written by a weak
and trembling hand, "For Isabelle." A bright flush of indignation overspread her sweet face
when she perceived it, and without even yielding to her feminine curiosity so far as to open
the richly carved and inlaid casket for a peep at its contents, she called for Maitre Bilot,
and ordered him peremptorily to take it immediately out of her room, and give it back to whomsoever
owned it, for she would not suffer it to remain where it was another minute. The landlord affected
astonishment, and swore by all he held sacred that he did not know who had put the casket there,
nor whose it was; though it must be confessed that he had his suspicions, and felt very sure
that they were correct. In truth, the obnoxious jewel-case had been secretly placed upon Isabelle's
table by old Mme. Leonarde, to whom the Duke of Vallombreuse had had recourse, in the hope
that she might be able to aid him, and in the full belief, shared by her, that the superb diamonds
which the beautiful casket contained would accomplish all that he desired with Isabelle. But
his offering only served to rouse her indignation, and she spoke very severely to Maitre Bilot,
commanding him to remove it instantly from her sight, and to be careful not to mention this
fresh affront to Captain Fracasse. The worthy landlord could not help feeling enthusiastic
admiration for the conduct of the young actress, who rejected jewels that would have made a
duchess envious, and as he retired bowed to her as respectfully and profoundly as he would
have done to a queen. After he had withdrawn and she was left alone, Isabelle, feeling agitated
and feverish, opened her window for a breath of fresh air, and to cool her burning cheeks and
brow. She saw a bright light issuing from a couple of windows in the mansion of the Duke of
Vallombreuse--doubtless in the room where the wounded young nobleman lay--but the garden and
the little alley beneath her seemed absolutely deserted. In a moment, however, she caught a
low whisper from the latter, not intended for her ears, which said, "She has not gone to bed
yet." She softly leaned out of her window--the room within was not lighted, so she could not
be seen--and peering anxiously into the darkness thought she could distinguish two cloaked
figures lurking in the alley, and farther away, near one end of it, a third one, apparently
on the watch. They seemed to feel that they were observed, and all three presently slunk away
and vanished, leaving Isabelle half in doubt as to whether they were the creatures of her excited
imagination, or had been real men prowling there. Tired at last of watching, without hearing
or seeing anything more, she withdrew from the window, closed and secured it softly, procured
a light, saw that the great, clumsy bolt on her door was property adjusted, and made her preparations
for bed; lying down at last and trying to sleep, for she was very tired, but haunted by vague
fears and doubts that made her anxious and uneasy. She did not extinguish her light, but placed
it near the bed, and strove to reassure herself and reason away her nameless terror; but all
in vain. At every little noise--the cracking of the furniture or the falling of a cinder in
the fire-place, she started up in fresh alarm, and could not close her eyes. High up in the
wall of one side of her room was a small round window--a bull's eye--evidently intended to
give light and air to some dark inner chamber or closet, which looked like a great black eye
in the gray wall, keeping an unwinking watch upon her, and Isabelle found herself again and
again glancing up at it with a shudder. It was crossed by two strong iron bars, leaving four
small apertures, so that there could not possibly be any danger of intrusion from that quarter,
yet she could not avoid feeling nervous about it, and at times fancied that she could see two
gleaming eye-balls in its black depths. She lay for a long time perfectly motionless gazing
at it, like one under a spell, and at last was paralyzed with horror when a head actually appeared
at one of the four openings--a small, dark head, with wild, tangled elf-locks hanging about
it; next came a long, thin arm with a claw-like hand, then the shoulder followed, and finally
the whole body of a slender, emaciated little girl wriggled dexterously, though with much difficulty,
through the narrow aperture, and the child dropped down upon the floor as lightly and noiselessly
as a feather, a snow-flake, or a waft of thistle-down. She had been deceived by Isabelle's
remaining so long perfectly quiet, and believed her asleep; but when she softly approached
the bed, to make sure that her victim's slumber had not been disturbed by her own advent, an
expression of extreme surprise was depicted on her face, as she got a full view of the head
lying upon the pillow and the eyes fixed upon her in speechless terror. "The lady of the necklace!"
she exclaimed aloud. "Yes, the lady of the necklace!" putting one hand, as she spoke, caressingly
upon the string of pearl beads round her little, thin, brown neck. Isabelle, for her part,
though half dead with fright, had recognised the little girl she had first seen at the Blue
Sun inn, and afterwards on the road to the Chateau de Bruyeres, in company with Agostino, the
brigand. She tried to cry out for help, but the child put her hand quickly and firmly over
her mouth.

"Don't scream," she said reassuringly, "nothing shall hurt you. Chiquita promised that she
would never kill nor harm the good, sweet lady, who gave her the pearls that she meant to steal."

"But what have you come in here for, my poor child?" asked Isabelle, gradually recovering her
composure, but filled with surprise at this strange intrusion.

"To open the great bolt on your door there that you are so careful to close every night," answered
Chiquita, in the most matter-of-fact way. "They chose me for it because I am such a good climber,
and as thin and supple as a snake; there are not many holes that I cannot manage to crawl through."

"And why were you to open my door, Chiquita? so that thieves could come in and steal what few
things I have here? There is nothing of value among them, I assure you."

"Oh, no!" Chiquita replied disdainfully, "it was to let the men in who were to carry you off."

"My God! I am lost!" cried poor Isabelle, wringing her hands in despair.

"Not at all," said Chiquita, "and you need not be so frightened. I shall just leave the bolt
as it is, and they would not dare to force the door; it would make too much noise, and they
would be caught at it; they're not so silly as that, never fear."

"But I should have shrieked at the top of my voice, and clung to the bedstead with all my might,
if they had tried to take me," exclaimed Isabelle excitedly, "so that I would have been heard
by the people in the neighbouring rooms, and I'm sure they would have come to my rescue."

"A good gag will stifle any shrieks," said Chiquita sententiously, with a lofty contempt for
Isabelle's ignorance that was very amusing, "and a blanket rolled tightly about the body prevents
any movements; that is an easy matter you see. They would have carried you off without the
slightest difficulty, for the stable boy was bribed, and was to open the back door for them."

"Who has laid this wicked plot?" asked the poor, frightened, young girl, with a trembling voice,
horror-stricken at the danger she had escaped.

"The great lord who has given them all such heaps of money; oh! such quantities of big gold
pieces--by the handful," said Chiquita, her great dark eyes glittering with a fierce, covetous
expression, strange and horrible to see in one so young. "But all the same, YOU gave me the
pearls, and he shall not hurt you; he shall not have you if you don't want to go. I will tell
them that you were awake, and there was a man in the room, so that I could not get in and open
the door for them; they will all go away quietly enough; you need not be afraid. Now let me
have one good look at you before I go--oh, how sweet and pretty you are--and I love you, yes,
I do, ever so much; almost as much as Agostino. But what is this?" cried she suddenly, pouncing
upon a knife that was lying on the table near the bed. "Why, you have got the very knife I
lost; it was my father's knife. Well, you may keep it--it's a good one."

     'When this viper bites you, make sure
     That you must die, for there's no cure.'

"See, this is the way to open it, and then you use it like this: strike from below upwards--the
blade goes in better that way--and it's so sharp it will go through anything. Carry it in the
bosom of your dress, and it is always ready; then if anybody bothers you, out with it, and
paf! you have them ripped up in no time," and the strange, eerie little creature accompanied
her words with appropriate gestures, by way of illustration. This extraordinary lesson in the
art of using a knife, given in the dead of night, and under such peculiar circumstances, seemed
like a nightmare to Isabelle.

"Be sure you hold the knife like this, do you see? tightly clasped in your fingers--as long
as you have it no one can harm you, but you can hurt them. Now, I must go--adieu, and don't
forget Chiquita."

So saying, the queer little elf pushed a table up to the wall under the bull's eye, mounted
it, sprang up and caught hold of the iron bar with the agility of a monkey, swung herself up
in some extraordinary fashion, wriggled through the small opening and disappeared, chanting
in a rude measure, "Chiquita whisks through key-holes, and dances on the sharp points of spear-heads
and the broken glass on garden walls, without ever hurting herself one bit--and nobody can
catch her."

Isabelle, left alone, awaited the break of day with trembling impatience, unable to sleep after
the fright and agitation she had experienced, and momentarily dreading some fresh cause of
alarm; but nothing else happened to disturb her. When she joined her companions at breakfast,
they were all struck with her extreme pallor, and the distressed expression of her countenance.
To their anxious questions she replied by giving an account of her nocturnal adventure, and
de Sigognac, furious at this fresh outrage, could scarcely be restrained from going at once
to demand, satisfaction for it from the Duke of Vallombreuse, to whom he did not hesitate to
attribute this villainous scheme.

"I think," said Blazius, when he could make himself heard, "that we had better pack up, and
be off as soon as we can for Paris; the air is becoming decidedly unwholesome for us in this
place."

After a short discussion all the others agreed with him, and it was decided that they should
take their departure from Poitiers the very next day.

CHAPTER XI. THE PONT-NEUF

It would be too long and tedious to follow our comedians, step by step, on their way up to
Paris, the great capital. No adventures worthy of being recorded here befell them; as they
were in good circumstances financially, they could travel rapidly and comfortably, and were
not again subjected to such hardships and annoyances as they had endured in the earlier stages
of their long journey. At Tours and Orleans they stopped to give a few representations, which
were eminently successful, and very satisfactory to the troupe as well as the public. No attempt
being made to molest them in any way, Blazius after a time forgot his fears, which had been
excited by the vindictive character of the Duke of Vallombreuse, but Isabelle could not banish
from her memory the wicked plot to abduct her, and many times saw again in her dreams Chiquita's
wild, weird face, with the long, tangled elf-locks hanging around it, just as it had appeared
to her that dreadful night at the Armes de Frame, glaring at her with fierce, wolfish eyes.
Then she would start up, sobbing and trembling, in violent agitation, and it required the most
tender soothing from her companion, Zerbine, whose room she had shared ever since they quitted
Poitiers, to quiet and reassure her. The soubrette, thoroughly enamoured of Isabelle as of
old, was devoted to her, and took great delight in watching over and ministering to her; an
own sister could not have been kinder or more affectionately considerate.

The only evidence that de Sigognac gave of the anxiety which he secretly felt, was his always
insisting upon occupying the room nearest Isabelle's, and he used to lie down in his clothes,
with his drawn sword on the bed beside him, so as to be ready in case of any sudden alarm.
By day he generally walked on in advance of the chariot, taking upon himself the duty of a
scout; redoubling his vigilance wherever there happened to be bushes, thickets, high walls,
or lurking places of any kind, favourable to an ambuscade, near the roadside. If he perceived
from afar a group of travellers approaching, whose appearance seemed to him in the least suspicious,
he would instantly draw his sword and fall back upon the chariot, around which the tyrant,
Scapin, Blazius and Leander formed an apparently strong guard; though, of the last two mentioned,
one was incapacitated for active service by age, and the other was as timid as a hare. Some
times, varying his tactics like a good general, who thinks of and provides against every emergency,
the baron would constitute himself a rear guard, and follow the chariot at a little distance,
keeping watch over the road behind them. But all his precautions were needless, for no attack
was made upon the travellers, or any attempt to interfere with them, and they proceeded tranquilly
on their way, "without let or hindrance." Although it was winter, the season was not a rigorous
one, and our comedians, well fortified against the cold by plenty of warm clothing and good
nourishing food, did not mind their exposure to the weather, and found their journey a very
enjoyable affair. To be sure, the sharp, frosty air brought a more brilliant colour than usual
into the cheeks of the fair members of the troupe, but no one could say that it detracted from
their charms; and even when it extended, as it did sometimes, to their pretty little noses,
it could not be found serious fault with, for everything is becoming to a young and beautiful
woman.

At last they drew near to the capital--following the windings of the Seine, whose waters flow
past royal palaces, and many another edifice of world-wide renown--and at four o'clock of a
bright winter afternoon came in sight of its spires and domes. The smoke rising from its forest
of chimneys hung over it in a semi-transparent cloud, through which the sun shone, round and
red, like a ball of fire. As they entered the city by the Porte Saint Bernard, a glorious spectacle
greeted their wondering eyes. In front of them Notre Dame stood out in bold relief, with its
magnificent flying buttresses, its two stately towers, massive and majestic, and its slender,
graceful spire, springing from the lofty roof at the point of intersection of the nave and
transepts. Many other lesser towers and spires rose above churches and chapels that were lost
amid the densely crowded houses all about them, but de Sigognac had eyes only for the grand
old cathedral, which overwhelmed him with astonishment and delight. He would have liked to
linger for hours and gaze upon that splendid triumph of architecture, but he needs must go
forward with the rest, however reluctantly. The wonderful and unceasing whirl and confusion
in the narrow, crowded streets, through which they made their way slowly, and not without difficulty,
perplexed and distracted him, accustomed as he had been all his life to the vast solitude of
the Landes, and the deathly stillness that reigned almost unbroken in his own desolate old
chateau; it seemed to him as if a mill-wheel were running round and round in his head, and
he could feel himself staggering like a drunken man. Near the Middle stands the Church, which is
a large strong Piece of Brickwork in the Form of a Cross, nicely regular and convenient, and
adorned as the best Churches in London. This from the Parish is called Bruton Church, where I had
the Favour of being Lecturer.

Near this is a large Octogon Tower, which is the Magazine or Repository of Arms and Ammunition,
landing far from any House except James Town Court-House; for the Town is half in James Town
County, and half in York County.

Not far from hence is a large Area for a Market Place; near which is a Play House and good Bowling
Green.

From the Church runs a Street Northward called Palace Street; at the other End of which stands
the Palace or Governor's House, a magnificent Structure, built at
the publick Expence, finished and beautified with Gates, fine Gardens,
Offices, Walks, a fine Canal, Orchards, &c. with a great Number of
the best Arms nicely posited, by the ingenious Contrivance of the
most accomplished Colonel Spotswood.

This likewise has the ornamental Addition of a good Cupola or Lanthorn, illuminated with most of
the Town, upon Birth-Nights, and other Nights of occasional Rejoicings.

At the Capitol, at publick Times, may be seen a great Number of handsom, well-dress'd, compleat
Gentlemen. And at the Governor's House upon Birth-Nights, and at Balls and Assemblies, I have
seen as fine an Appearance, as good Diversion, and as splendid Entertainments in Governor Spotswood's
Time, as I have seen any where else.

These Buildings here described are justly reputed the best in all the English America, and are exceeded
by few of their Kind in England.

In every Part of this Town are excellent Springs of good Water, or else may be made good Wells;
and the Ground falling on both Sides, conveys the Water and Rain by small Channels into the
Creeks; but to make the main Street exactly level, the Assembly lately gave a considerable Sum,
which was expended in removing Earth in some Places, and building a Bridge over a low Channel;
so that it is now a pleasant, long dry Walk, broad, and almost level from the College to the
Capitol.

Williamsburgh is now incorporated and made a Market Town, and governed by a Mayor and Aldermen;
and is well stock'd with rich Stores, of all Sorts of Goods, and well furnished with the best
Provisions and Liquors.

Here dwell several very good Families, and more reside here in their own Houses at publick Times.

The
Number of Artificers is here daily augmented; as are the convenient Ordinaries or Inns for Accommodation
of Strangers.

The Servants here, as in other Parts of the Country, are English, Scotch, Irish, or Negroes.

The Town is laid out regularly in Lots or square Portions, sufficient each for a House and
Garden; so that they don't build contiguous, whereby may be prevented the spreading Danger
of Fire; and this also affords a free Passage for the Air, which is very grateful in violent
hot Weather.

Here, as in other Parts, they build with Brick, but most commonly with Timber lined with Cieling,
and cased with feather-edged Plank, painted with white Lead and Oil, covered with Shingles
of Cedar, &c. tarr'd over at first; with a Passage generally through the Middle of the House for
an Air-Draught in Summer.

Thus their Houses are lasting, dry, and warm in Winter, and cool in Summer; especially if there
be Windows enough to draw the Air.

Thus they dwell comfortably, genteely, pleasantly, and plentifully in this delightful, healthful,
and (I hope) thriving City of Williamsburgh.

CHAP. III.

Of the Situation and Nature of the Country of Virginia, and its Coasts, &c.

Under the Meridian is extended the Expanse Bay of Chesapeak, esteemed one of the noblest and
safest Bays in the World.

The Land on the East Side of it is called the Eastern Shore, the Northern Part of it belonging
to Maryland, and the Southern containing Accomack and Northampton Counties belonging to Virginia;
at the extreme Point of which lies one of the Capes of Virginia,
the other being opposite to it, one called Cape Henry, and the other
Cape Charles; without these runs a bold Shore Southward, being the
Coast of North Carolina.

After Ships are clear of England, they need go near neither Land, Rocks, nor Shoals, but in a
direct Course might cross the vast Atlantick Ocean about a thousand Leagues nearly W. S. W. till
they make Land somewhat to the Southward of the Capes; then knowing (by their Latitude, or Landmarks,
or by certain Trees) what Land they are near, they may easily get within the Capes, unless they
happen to be kept off to Sea for some Time by blustering Northwesters; or unless they carelessly
fall upon Cape Hatteras, or other Shoals on that Coast, in known
Latitudes; so that this may be esteemed as easy a Voyage as any.

There are belonging to Virginia four principal Rivers (neither of them inferior upon many Accounts
to the Thames or Severn) that empty themselves into the Bay after they have glided some Hundreds
of Miles fromwards the Mountains, the Western Bounds of Virginia.

The most Southerly of these Rivers is called James River, and the next York River, the Land in
the Latitude between these Rivers seeming most nicely adapted for sweet scented, or the finest
Tobacco; for 'tis observed that the goodness decreaseth the farther you go to the Northward
of the one, and the Southward of the other; but this may be (I believe) attributed in some
Measure to the Seed and Management, as well as to the Land and Latitude: For on York River in
a small Tract of Land called Digges's Neck, which is poorer than a great deal of other Land
in the same Latitude, by a particular Seed and Management, is made
the famous Crop known by the Name of the E Dees, remarkable for its
mild taste and fine Smell.

The next great River is Rappahannock, and the fourth is Potowmack, which divides Virginia from
the Province of Maryland.

These are supplied by several lesser Rivers, such as Chickahommony
and others, navigable for Vessels of great Burthen.

Into these Rivers run abundance of great Creeks or short Rivers, navigable for Sloops, Shallops,
Long-Boats, Flats, Canoes and Periaguas.

Because of this Convenience, and for the Goodness of the Land, and for the sake of Fish, Fowl,
&c. Gentlemen and Planters love to build near the Water; though it be not altogether so healthy
as the Uplands and Barrens, which serve for Ranges for Stock.

In the Uplands near the Ridge generally run the main Roads, in a pleasant, dry, sandy Soil,
free from Stones and Dirt, and shaded and sheltered chiefly by Trees; in some Places being not
unlike the Walks in Greenwich Park.

Thus neither the Interest nor Inclinations of the Virginians induce them to cohabit in Towns;
so that they are not forward in contributing their Assistance towards the making of particular
Places, every Plantation affording the Owner the Provision of a little Market; wherefore they
most commonly build upon some convenient Spot or Neck of Land in their own Plantation, though
Towns are laid out and establish'd in each County; the best of which (next Williamsburgh) are
York, Glocester, Hampton, Elizabeth Town, and Urbanna.

The Colony now is encreased to twenty nine Counties, naturally bounded (near as much as may be)
one with another about as big as Kent; but the frontier Counties are of vast Extent, though
not thick seated as yet.

The whole Country is a perfect Forest, except where the Woods are cleared for Plantations, and
old Fields, and where have been formerly Indian Towns, and poisoned Fields and Meadows, where
the Timber has been burnt down in Fire-Hunting or otherwise; and about the Creeks and Rivers
are large rank Morasses or Marshes, and up the Country are poor Savannahs.

The Negroes are very numerous, some Gentlemen having Hundreds of them of all Sorts, to whom
they bring great Profit; for the Sake of which they are obliged to keep them well, and not
over-work, starve, or famish them, besides other Inducements to favour them; which is done in a
great Degree, to such especially that are laborious, careful, and honest; tho' indeed some Masters,
careless of their own Interest or Reputation, are too cruel and negligent.

The Negroes are not only encreased by fresh Supplies from Africa and the West India Islands, but
also are very prolifick among themselves; and they that are born there talk good English,
and affect our Language, Habits, and Customs; and tho' they be naturally
of a barbarous and cruel Temper, yet are they kept under by severe
Discipline upon Occasion, and by good Laws are prevented from running
away, injuring the English, or neglecting their Business.

Their Work (or Chimerical hard Slavery) is not very laborious; their greatest Hardship consisting
in that they and their Posterity are not at their own Liberty or Disposal, but are the Property
of their Owners; and when they are free, they know not how to provide so well for themselves generally;
neither did they live so plentifully nor (many of them) so easily in their own Country, where they
are made Slaves to one another, or taken Captive by their Enemies.

The Children belong to the Master of the Woman that bears them; and such as are born of a Negroe
and an European are called Molattoes; but such as are born of an Indian and Negroe are called
Mustees.

Their Work is to take Care of the Stock, and plant Corn, Tobacco, Fruits, &c. which is not harder
than Thrashing, Hedging, or Ditching; besides, tho' they are out in the violent Heat, wherein
they delight, yet in wet or cold Weather there is little Occasion for their working in the Fields,
in which few will let them be abroad, lest by this means they might get sick or die, which would prove a
great Loss to their Owners, a good Negroe being sometimes worth three (nay four) Score Pounds
Sterling, if he be a Tradesman; so that upon this (if upon no other Account) they are obliged
not to overwork them, but to cloath and feed them sufficiently, and take Care of their Health.

The
Languages of the new Negroes are various harsh Jargons, and their Religions and Customs such
as are best described by Mr. Bosman in his Book intitled (I think) A Description of the Coasts
of Africa.

The Virginia Planters readily learn to become good Mechanicks in Building, wherein most are capable
of directing their Servants and Slaves.

As for Timber they abound with excellent good; having about eight Sorts of Oak, several Kinds of Walnut-Tree,
and Hickory and Pignut, Pine, Cedar, and Cypress for Shingles; which Covering is lighter than Tiles,
and being nailed down, are not easily blown off in any Tempest or Gust.

The Oak, &c. is of quick Growth, consequently will not last so long as ours; though it has a
good Grain, and is freer from Knots, and will last long enough for Shipping, and ordinary Uses.

When
a Tract of Land is seated, they clear it by felling the Trees about
a Yard from the Ground, lest they should shoot again. What Wood they
have Occasion for they carry off, and burn the rest, or let it lie
and rot upon the Ground.

The Land between the Logs and Stumps they
how up, planting Tobacco there in the Spring, inclosing it with a
slight Fence of cleft Rails. This will last for Tobacco some Years,
if the Land be good; as it is where fine Timber, or Grape Vines grow.

Land
when tired is forced to bear Tobacco by penning their Cattle upon
it; but Cowpen Tobacco tastes strong, and that planted in wet marshy
Land is called Nonburning Tobacco, which smoaks in the Pipe like Leather,
unless it be of a good Age.

When Land is tired of Tobacco, it will
bear Indian Corn or English Wheat, or any other European Grain or
Seed, with wonderful Increase.

Tobacco and Indian Corn are planted
in Hills as Hops, and secured by Wormfences, which are made of Rails
supporting one another very firmly in a particular Manner.

Tobacco
requires a great deal of Skill and Trouble in the right Management
of it.

They raise the Plants in Beds, as we do Cabbage Plants; which
they transplant and replant upon Occasion after a Shower of Rain,
which they call a Season.

When it is grown up they top it, or nip
off the Head, succour it, or cut off the Ground Leaves, weed it, hill
it; and when ripe, they cut it down about six or eight Leaves on a
Stalk, which they carry into airy Tobacco Houses; after it is withered
a little in the Sun, there it is hung to dry on Sticks, as Paper at
the Paper-Mills; when it is in proper Case, (as they call it) and
the Air neither too moist, nor too dry, they strike it, or take it
down, then cover it up in Bulk, or a great Heap, where it lies till
they have Leisure or Occasion to stem it (that is pull the Leaves
from the Stalk) or strip it (that is take out the great Fibres) and
tie it up in Hands, or streight lay it; and so by Degrees prize or
press it with proper Engines into great Hogsheads, containing from
about six to eleven hundred Pounds; four of which Hogsheads make a
Tun, by Dimension, not by Weight; then it is ready for Sale or Shipping.

There
are two Sorts of Tobacco, viz. Oroonoko the stronger, and Sweetscented
the milder; the first with a sharper Leaf like a Fox's Ear, and the
other rounder and with finer Fibres: But each of these are varied
into several Sorts, much as Apples and Pears are; and I have been
informed by the Indian Traders, that the Inland Indians have Sorts
of Tobacco much differing from any planted or used by the Europeans.

The
Indian Corn is planted in Hills, and weeded much as Tobacco.

This
Grain is of great Increase and most general Use; for with this is
made good Bread, Cakes, Mush, and Hommony for the Negroes, which with
good Pork and Potatoes (red and white, very nice and different from
ours) with other Roots and Pulse, are their general Food.

Indian
Corn is the best Food for Cattle, Hogs, Sheep and Horses; and the
Blades and Tops are excellent Fodder, when well cured, which is commonly
used, though many raise good Clover and Oats; and some have planted
Sanfoin, &c.

In the Marshes, and Woods, and old Fields is good Range
for Stock in the Spring, Summer, and Fall; and the Hogs will run fat
with certain Roots of Flags and Reeds, which abounding in the Marshes
they root up and eat.

Besides, at the Plantations are standard Peach-Trees,
and Apple-Trees, planted out in Orchards, on Purpose almost for the
Hogs.

The Peaches abound, and are of a delicious Taste, and Apple-Trees
are raised from the Seeds very soon, which kind of Kernel Fruit needs
no grafting, and is diversify'd into numberless Sorts, and makes,
with good Management, an excellent Cyder, not much inferior to that
of Herefordshire, when kept to a good Age; which is rarely done, the
Planters being good Companions and Guests whilst the Cyder lasts.
Here Cherries thrive much better (I think) than in England; tho' the
Fruit-Trees soon decay, yet they are soon raised to great Perfection.

As
for Wool, I have had near as good as any near Leominster; and it might
be much improved if the Sheep were housed every Night, and foddered
and littered as in Urchinfield, where they have by such Means the
finest Wool; but to do this, would be of little Use, since it is contrary
to the Interest of Great Britain to allow them Exportation of their
Woollen Manufactures; and what little Woollen is there made might
be nearly had as cheap, and better from England. He waited some time without hearing
or seeing anything. Two o'clock had rung out from a neighbouring church tower when a slight
rustling caught his listening ear, and presently one of the four rascals--the very man he had
first seen--emerged from the shadow into the bright light streaming out into the passage from
his open door. The baron had sprung to his feet at the first sound, and stood erect on the
threshold, sword in hand, with such a lofty, heroic, and triumphant air, that Merindol--for
it was he--passed quickly by, without offering to molest him, with a most deprecating, crestfallen
expression; a laughable contrast to his habitual fierce insolence. His three doughty comrades
followed in quick succession--but not one of them dared to attack de Sigognac, and they slunk
out of sight as rapidly as possible. He saluted each one with a mocking gesture as he passed,
and stood tranquilly watching them as long as he could see them. In a few minutes he had the
satisfaction of hearing the stamping of horses' feet in the court-yard below, then the opening
of the outer door to let them pass out into the street, and finally a great clattering of hoofs
as they galloped off down the Rue Dauphine.

At breakfast the next morning the tyrant said to de Sigognac, "Captain, doesn't your curiosity
prompt you to go out and look about you a little in this great city--one of the finest in the
world, and of such high renown in history? If it is agreeable to you I will be your guide and
pilot, for I have been familiar from my youth up with the rocks and reefs, the straits and
shallows, the scyllas and charybdises of this seething ocean, which are often so dangerous--sometimes
so fatal--to strangers, and more especially to inexperienced country people. I will be your
Palinurus--but I promise you that I shall not allow myself to be caught napping, and so fall
overboard, like him that Virgil tells us about. We are admirably located here for sight-seeing;
the Pont-Neuf, which is close at hand, you know, is to Paris what the Sacra Via was to ancient
Rome--the great resort and rallying place of high and low, great and small, noble men, gentlemen,
bourgeois, working men, rogues and vagabonds. Men of every rank and profession under the sun
are to be found gathered together at this general rendezvous."

"Your kind proposition pleases me greatly, my good Herode," de Sigognac replied, "and I accept
it with thanks; but be sure to tell Scapin that he must remain here, and keep a sharp watch
over all who come and go; and, above all, that he must not let any one gain access to Isabelle.
The Duke of Vallombreuse has not given up his designs against her and me--I feel very anxious
about her safety," and therewith he recounted the occurrences of the preceding night.

"I don't believe they would dare to attempt anything in broad daylight," said the tyrant; "still
it is best to err on the safe side, and we will leave Scapin, Blazius and Leander to keep guard
over Isabelle while we are out. And, by the way, I will take my sword with me, too, so that
I can be of some assistance in case they should find an opportunity to fall upon you in the
streets."

After having made every arrangement for Isabelle's safety, de Sigognac and his companion sallied
forth into the Rue Dauphine, and turned towards the Pont-Neuf. It was quickly reached, and
when they had taken a few steps upon it a magnificent view suddenly burst upon them, which
held the young baron enthralled. In the immediate foreground, on the bridge itself, which was
not encumbered with a double row of houses, like the Pont au Change and the Pont Saint Michel,
was the fine equestrian statue of that great and good king, Henri IV, rivalling in its calm
majesty the famous one of Marcus Aurelius, on the Capitoline Hill at Rome. A high railing,
richly gilded, protected its pedestal from injury by mischievous street arabs, and the deep,
strong tints of the bronze horse and rider stood out vigorously against the appropriate background
formed by the distant hill-sides beyond the Pont Rouge. On the left bank of the river the spire
of the venerable old church of Saint Germain des Pres pointed upwards from amid the houses
that completely hemmed it in, and the lofty roof of the unfinished Hotel de Nevers towered
conspicuously above all its surroundings. A little farther on was the only tower still standing
of the famous, and infamous, Hotel de Nesle, its base bathed by the river, and though it was
in a ruinous condition it still lifted itself up proudly above the adjacent buildings. Beyond
it lay the marshy Grenouillere, and in the blue, hazy distance could be distinguished the three
crosses on the heights of Calvary, or Mont-Valerien. The palace of the Louvre occupied the
other bank right royally, lighted up by the brilliant winter sunshine, which brought out finely
all the marvellous details of its rich and elaborate ornamentation. The long gallery connecting
it with the Tuileries, which enabled the monarch to pass freely from his city palace to his
country house, especially challenged their admiration; with its magnificent sculptures, its
historical bas-reliefs and ornamented cornices, its fretted stonework, fine columns and pilasters,
it rivalled the renowned triumphs of the best Greek and Roman architects. Beyond the gardens
of the Tuileries, where the city ended, stood the Porte de la Conference, and along the river
bank, outside of it, were the trees of Cours-la-Reine, the favourite promenade of the fashionable
world, which was thronged of an afternoon with gay and luxurious equipages. The two banks,
which we have thus hastily sketched, framed in the most animated scene imaginable; the river
being covered with boats of all sorts and descriptions, coming and going, crossing and recrossing,
while at the quay, beside the Louvre, lay the royal barges, rich with carving and gilding,
and gay with bright-coloured awnings, and near at hand rose the historic towers of Saint Germain
l'Auxerrois.

After gazing silently for a long time at this splendid view, de Sigognac turned away reluctantly
at his companion's instance, and joined the little crowd already gathered round the "Samaritan,"
waiting to see the bronze figure surmounting the odd little hydraulic edifice strike the hour
with his hammer on the bell of the clock. Meanwhile they examined the gilt bronze statue of
Christ, standing beside the Samaritan, who was leaning on the curb of the well, the astronomic
dial with its zodiac, the grotesque stone mask pouring out the water drawn up from the river
below, the stout figure of Hercules supporting the whole thing, and the hollow statue, perched
on the topmost pinnacle, that served as a weathercock, like the Fortune on the Dogana at Venice
and the Giralda at Seville. As the hands on the clock-face at last pointed to ten and twelve
respectively, the little chime of bells struck up a merry tune, while the bronze man with the
hammer raised his ponderous arm and deliberately struck ten mighty blows, to the great delight
of the spectators. This curious and ingenious piece of mechanism, which had been cunningly
devised by one Lintlaer, a Fleming, highly amused and interested de Sigognac, to whom everything
of the kind was absolutely new and surprising.

"Now," said Herode, "we will glance at the view from the other side of the bridge, though it
is not so magnificent as the one you have already seen, and is very much shut in by the buildings
on the Pont au Change yonder. However, there is the tower of Saint Jacques, the spire of Saint
Mederic, and others too numerous to mention; and that is the Sainte Chapelle--a marvel of beauty,
so celebrated, you know, for its treasures and relics. All the houses in that direction are
new and handsome, as you see; when I was a boy I used to play at hop-scotch where they now
stand. Thanks to the munificence of our kings, Paris is being constantly improved and beautified,
to the great admiration and delight of everybody; more especially of foreigners, who take home
wondrous tales of its splendour."

"But what astonishes me," said de Sigognac, "more even than the grandeur and sumptuousness
of the buildings, both public and private, is the infinite number of people swarming everywhere--in
the streets and open squares, and on the bridges--like ants when one has broken into an ant
hill; they are all rushing distractedly about, up and down, back and forth, as if life and
death depended upon their speed. How strange it is to think that every individual in this immense
crowd must be lodged and fed--and what a prodigious amount of food and wine it must take to
satisfy them all."

And indeed, it was not surprising that the great numbers of people, moving in every direction,
should strike one unaccustomed to the crowded thoroughfares of large cities as extraordinary.
On the Pont-Neuf an unceasing stream of vehicles rolled in each direction--fine carriages,
richly decorated and gilded, drawn by two or four prancing horses, with lackeys in brilliant
liveries clinging on behind, and stately coachmen on the box; less pretentious carriages with
more quiet steeds and fewer servants; heavy carts laden with stone, wood, or wine-barrels,
whose drivers swore loudly at the detentions they were frequently obliged to submit to, and
which were unavoidable in such a crush of vehicles; and among them all, gentlemen on horseback,
threading their way carefully in and out among the press of carts and carriages, and endeavouring
to avoid coming in contact with their muddy wheels--not always successfully; while here and
there a sedan chair crept slowly along, keeping upon the edge of the stream, so as not to be
crushed; and the narrow, raised walk on either side was thronged with pedestrians. Presently
a drove of cattle made its appearance on the bridge, and then the uproar and confusion became
terrible indeed; horses, as well as foot-passengers, were frightened, and tried to run away
from danger, requiring all the strength of their drivers to restrain them. Soon after that
excitement was over a detachment of soldiers came marching along, with drums beating and colours
flying, and everybody had to make way for the valiant sons of Mars, no matter at what inconvenience
to themselves. And so it went on, one thing after another--a constant scene of bustle, hurry,
and commotion. As de Sigognac and the tyrant strolled slowly along they were beset by beggars,
more or less impudent and pertinacious, and by all sorts of odd characters, plying various
extraordinary vocations for the amusement of the passers-by, for which they seemed to be liberally
enough remunerated. Here was an improvisatore, singing, not unmelodiously, his rather clever
verses; there a blind man, led by a stout, jolly-looking old woman, who recited his dolorous
history in a whining voice, and appealed to the charity of the ever-changing multitude; farther
on a charlatan, loudly claiming to be able to cure "all the ills that flesh is heir to" by
his magical compound--and finding plenty of dupes; and next to him a man with a monkey, whose
funny tricks caused much merriment. Suddenly a great tumult arose near the other end of the
bridge, and in a moment a compact crowd had gathered around four men, who, with loud cries
and imprecations, were fighting with swords--apparently with great fury, though in reality
it was only a mock combat, probably intended to give a good chance to the thieves and pickpockets
in the throng, with whom they were in league; such tactics being very common, as well as successful.
By Herode's advice, de Sigognac refrained from mingling with the crowd immediately around the
combatants, so he could not get a very good view of them; but he was almost sure that they
were the very men he had met first in the streets of Poitiers, to their great discomfiture,
and had seen again the previous night at the hotel in the Rue Dauphine, where they certainly
had gained no advantage to make up for their former defeat. He communicated his suspicions
to the tyrant, but the rascals had already slipped away, and it would have been as useless
to attempt to find them in the throng as to look for a needle in a haystack.

"It certainly is possible," said Herode, thoughtfully, "that this quarrel was gotten up with
a view to involving you in it, by some means or other, for we are undoubtedly followed and
watched by the emissaries of the Duke of Vallombreuse. One of the scoundrels might have made
believe that you were in the way, or that you had struck him, and falling upon you suddenly,
before you had time to draw your sword, have given you a thrust that would have done for you;
and if he failed to wound you mortally; the others could have pretended to come to their comrade's
aid, and have completed the job--nothing would have been easier. Then they would have separated,
and slipped away through the crowd, before any one could interfere with them, or else have
stood their ground, and declared unanimously that they had been obliged to attack you in self
defence. It is next to impossible in such cases to prove that the act was premeditated, and
there is no redress for the unhappy victim of such a conspiracy."

"But I am loath to believe," said the brave, generous young baron, "that any gentleman could
be capable of such an utterly base and unworthy act as this--what, send a set of hired ruffians
to foully assassinate his rival! If he is not satisfied with the result of our first encounter,
I am willing and ready to cross swords with him again and again, until one or the other of
us is slain. That is the way that such matters are arranged among men of honour, my good Herode!"

"Doubtless," replied the tyrant, dryly, "but the duke well knows--despite his cursed pride--that
the result of another meeting with you could not but be disastrous to himself. He has tried
the strength of your blade, and learned by bitter experience that its point is sharp. You may
be sure that he hates you like the very devil, and will not scruple to make use of any means
whatever to revenge himself for his defeat at your hands."

"Well, if he does not care to try my sword again, we could fight on horseback with pistols.
He could not accuse me of having any advantage of him there."

Talking thus the two had reached the Quai de l'Ecole, and there a carriage just missed running
over de Sigognac, though he did his best to get out of its way. As it was, only his extremely
slender figure saved him from being crushed between it and the wall, so close did it come to
him--notwithstanding the fact that there was plenty of room on the other side, and that the
coachman could easily have avoided the foot passenger he actually seemed to pursue. The windows
of the carriage were all closed, and the curtains drawn down, so that it was impossible to
tell whether it had any inmates or not--but if de Sigognac could have peeped within he would
have seen, reclining languidly upon the luxurious cushions, a handsome young nobleman, richly
dressed, whose right arm was supported by a black silk scarf, arranged as a sling. In spite
of the warm red glow from the crimson silk curtains, he was very pale, and, though so remarkably
handsome, his face wore such an expression of hatred and cruelty, that he would have inspired
dislike, rather than admiration--as he sat there with a fierce frown contracting his brow,
and savagely gnawing his under lip with his gleaming white teeth. In fine, the occupant of
the carriage that had so nearly run over the Baron de Sigognac was no other than the young
Duke of Vallombreuse.

"Another failure!" said he to himself, with an oath, as he rolled along up the broad quay past
the Tuileries. "And yet I promised that stupid rascal of a coachman of mine twenty-five louis
if he could be adroit enough to run afoul of that confounded de Sigognac--who is the bane of
my life--and drive over him, as if by accident. Decidedly the star of my destiny is not in
the ascendant--this miserable little rustic lordling gets the better of me in everything. Isabelle,
sweet Isabelle, adores HIM, and detests me--he has beaten my lackeys, and dared to wound ME.
But there shall be an end of this sort of thing, and that speedily--even though he be invulnerable,
and bear a charmed life, he must and shall be put out of my way--I swear it! though I should
be forced to risk my name and my title to compass it."

"Humph!" said Herode, drawing a long breath; "why those brutes must be of the same breed as
the famous horses of that Diomedes, King of Thrace, we read of, that pursued men to tear them
asunder, and fed upon their flesh. But at least you are not hurt, my lord, I trust! That coachman
saw you perfectly well, and I would be willing to wager all I possess in the world that he
purposely tried to run over you--he deliberately turned his horses towards you--I am sure of
it, for I saw the whole thing. Did you observe whether there was a coat of arms on the panel?
As you are a nobleman yourself I suppose you must be familiar with the devices of the leading
families in France."

"Yes, I am of course," answered de Sigognac, "but I was too much occupied in getting out of
the way of the swift rolling carriage to notice whether there was anything of that kind on
it or not."

"That's a pity," rejoined the tyrant regretfully, "for if we only knew that, we should have
a clew that might lead to our discovering the truth about this most suspicious affair. It is
only too evident that some one is trying to put you out of the way, quibuscumque viis, as the
pedant would say. Although we unfortunately have no proof of it, I am very much inclined to
think that this same carriage belongs to his lordship, the Duke of Vallombreuse, who wished
to indulge himself in the pleasure of driving over the body of his enemy in his chariot, in
true classical and imperial style."

"What extraordinary idea have you got into your head now, Sir Herode?" said de Sigognac, rather
indignantly. "Come, that would be too infamous and villainous a proceeding for any gentleman
to be guilty of, and you must remember that after all the Duke of Vallombreuse is one, and
that he belongs to a very high and noble family. Besides, did not we leave him in Poitiers,
laid up with his wound? How then could he possibly be in Paris, when we have only just arrived
here ourselves?"

"But didn't we stop several days at Tours? and again at Orleans? And even if his wound were
not entirely healed he could easily travel in his luxurious carriage, by easy stages, from
Poitiers to Paris. His hurt was not of a dangerous character, you know, and he is young and
vigorous. You must be on your guard, my dear captain, unceasingly; never relax your vigilance
for one moment, for I tell you there are those about who seek your life. You once out of the
way, Isabelle would, be in the duke's power--for what could we, poor players, do against such
a great and powerful nobleman? Even if Vallombreuse himself be not in Paris--though I am almost
positive that he is--his emissaries are, as you know, and but for your own courage and watchfulness
you would have been assassinated in your bed by them last night."

This de Sigognac could not dispute, and he only nodded in token of assent, as he grasped the
hilt of his sword, so as to be ready to draw it at the slightest cause for suspicion or alarm.
Meantime they had walked on as far as the Porte de la Conference, and now saw ahead of them
a great cloud of dust, and through it the glitter of bayonets. They stepped aside to let the
cavalcade pass, and saw that the soldiers preceded the carriage of the king, who was returning
from Saint Germain to the Louvre. The curtains of the royal vehicle were raised, and the glasses
let down, so that the people could distinctly see their sovereign, Louis XIII, who, pale as
a ghost and dressed all in black, sat as motionless as an effigy in wax. Long, dark brown hair
fell about his mournful, ghastly countenance, upon which was depicted the same terrible ennui
that drove Philip II of Spain, to seclude himself so much, during the later years of his life,
in the silence and solitude of the dreary Escorial. His eyes were fixed on vacancy, and seemed
utterly lifeless--no desire, no thought, no will lent them light or expression. A profound
disgust for and weariness of everything in this life had relaxed his lower lip, which fell
sullenly, in a morose, pouting way. His hands, excessively thin and white, lay listlessly upon
his knees, like those of certain Egyptian idols. And yet, for all, there was a truly royal
majesty about this mournful figure, which personified France, and in whose veins flowed sluggishly
the generous blood of Henri IV.

The young baron had always thought of the king as a sort of supernatural being, exalted above
all other men. Glorious and majestic in his person, and resplendent in sumptuous raiment, enriched
with gold and precious stones; and now he saw only this sad, motionless figure, clad in dismal
black, and apparently unconscious of his surroundings, sunk in a profound reverie that none
would dare to intrude upon. He had dreamed of a gracious, smiling sovereign, showering good
gifts upon his loyal subjects, and here was an apathetic, inanimate being, who seemed capable
of no thought for any one but himself. He was sadly disappointed, shocked, amazed; and he felt,
with a sinking heart, how hopeless was his own case. For even should he be able to approach
this mournful, listless monarch, what sympathy could be expected from him? The future looked
darker than ever now to this brave young heart. Absorbed in these sorrowful reflections he
walked silently along beside his companion, who suspected his taciturn mood, and did not intrude
upon it, until, as the hour of noon approached, he suggested that they should turn their steps
homeward, so as to be in time for the mid-day meal. When they reached the hotel they were relieved
to find that nothing particular had happened during their absence. Isabelle, quietly seated
at table with the others when they entered, received the baron with her usual sweet smile,
and held out her little white hand to him. The comedians asked many questions about his first
experiences in Paris, and inquired mischievously whether he had brought his cloak, his purse,
and his handkerchief home with him, to which de Sigognac joyfully answered in the affirmative.
In this friendly banter he soon forgot his sombre thoughts, and asked himself whether he had
not been the dupe of a hypochondriac fancy, which could see nothing anywhere but plots and
conspiracies.

He had not been alarmed without reason however, for his enemies, vexed but not discouraged
by the failure of their several attempts upon him, had by no means renounced their determination
to make away with him. Merindol, who was threatened by the duke with being sent back to the
galleys whence he had rescued him, unless he and his comrades succeeded in disposing of the
Baron de Sigognac, resolved to invoke the assistance of a certain clever rascal of his acquaintance,
who had never been known to fail in any job of that kind which he undertook. He no longer felt
himself capable to cope with the baron, and moreover now, laboured under the serious disadvantage
of being personally known to him. He went accordingly to look up his friend, Jacquemin Lampourde
by name, who lodged not very far from the Pont-Neuf, and was lucky enough to find him at home,
sleeping off the effects of his last carouse. He awoke him with some difficulty, and was violently
abused for his pains. Then, having quietly waited until his friend's first fury was exhausted,
he announced that he had come to consult with him on important business, having an excellent
job to intrust to him, and begging that he would be good enough to listen to what he had to say.

"I never listen to anybody when I am drunk," said Jacquemin Lampourde, majestically, putting
his elbow on his knee as he spoke, and resting his head on his hand--"and besides, I have plenty
of money--any quantity of gold pieces. We plundered a rich English lord last night, who was
a walking cash-box, and I am a gentleman of wealth just at present. However, one evening at
lansquenet may swallow it all up. I can't resist gambling you know, and I'm deuced unlucky
at it, so I will see you to-night about this little matter of yours. Meet me at the foot of
the bronze statue on the Pont-Neuf at midnight. I shall be as fresh and bright as a lark by
that time, and ready for anything. You shall give me your instructions then, and we will agree
upon my share of the spoils. It should be something handsome, for I have the vanity to believe
that no one would come and disturb a fellow of my calibre for any insignificant piece of business.
But after all I am weary of playing the thief and pickpocket--it is beneath me--and I mean
to devote all my energies in future to the noble art of assassination; it is more worthy of
my undisputed prowess. I would rather be a grand, man-slaying lion than any meaner beast of
prey. If this is a question of killing I am your man--but one thing more, it must be a fellow
who will defend himself. Our victims are so apt to be cowardly, and give in without a struggle--it
is no better than sticking a pig--and that I cannot stand, it disgusts me. A good manly resistance,
the more stubborn the better, gives a pleasant zest to the task."

"You may rest easy on that score," Mirindol replied, with a malicious smile; "you will find
a tough customer to handle, I promise you."

"So much the better," said Lampourde, "for it is a long time since I have found an adversary
worth crossing swords with. But enough of this for the present. Good-bye to you, and let me
finish my nap."

But he tried in vain to compose himself to sleep again, and, after several fruitless efforts,
gave it up as a bad job; then began to shake a companion, who had slept soundly on the floor
under the table during the preceding discussion, and when he had succeeded in rousing him,
both went off to a gaming-house, where lansquenet was in active progress. The company was composed
of thieves, cut-throats, professional bullies, ruffians of every sort, lackeys, and low fellows
of various callings, and a few well-to-do, unsophisticated bourgeois, who had been enticed
in there--unfortunate pigeons, destined to be thoroughly plucked. Lampourde, who played recklessly,
had soon lost all his boasted wealth, and was left with empty pockets. He took his bad luck
with the utmost philosophy.

"Ouf!" said he to his companion, when they had gone out into the street, and the cool, night
air blew refreshingly upon his heated face, "here am I rid of my money, and a free man again.
It is strange that it should always make such a brute of me. It surprises me no longer that
rich men should invariably be such stupid fools. Now, that I haven't a penny left, I feel as
gay as a lark--ready for anything. Brilliant ideas buzz about my brain, like bees around the
hive. Lampourde's himself again. But there's the Samaritan striking twelve, and a friend of
mine must be waiting for me down by the bronze Henri IV, so goodnight."

He quitted his companion and walked quickly to the rendezvous, where he found Merindol, diligently
studying his own shadow in the moonlight; and the two ruffians, after looking carefully about
them to make sure that there was no one within ear-shot, held a long consultation, in very
low tones. What they said we do not know; but, when Lampourde quitted the agent of the Duke
of Vallombreuse, he joyously jingled the handful of gold pieces in his pocket, with an imprudent
audacity that showed conclusively how much he was respected by the thieves and cut throats
who haunted the Pont-Neuf.

CHAPTER XII. THE CROWNED RADISH

Jacquemin Lampourde, after parting company with Merindol, seemed in great uncertainty as to
which way he should go, and had not yet decided when he reached the end of the Pont-Neuf. He
was like the donkey between two bundles of hay; or, if that comparison be not pleasing, like
a piece of iron between two magnets of equal power. On the one side was lansquenet, with the
fascinating excitement of rapidly winning and losing the broad gold pieces that he loved; and
on the other the tavern, with its tempting array of bottles; for he was a drunkard as well
as a gambler, this same notorious Jacquemin Lampourde. He stood stock still for a while, debating
this knotty point with himself, quite unable to come to a decision, and growing very much vexed
at his own hesitation, when suddenly a brilliant idea occurred to him, and, plunging his hand
into his well-filled pocket, he drew forth a gold piece, which he tossed into the air, crying,
"Head for the tavern, tail for lansquenet." The coin rang upon the pavement as it fell, and
he kneeled down to see what fate had decided for him; head was up. "Very well," said he, philosophically,
as he picked up the piece of money, carefully wiped off the mud, and put it back in his pocket,
"I'll go and get drunk." Then, with long strides, he made off to his favourite tavern, which
had the advantage of being in the immediate vicinity of his own lodgings, so that with a few
zigzags he was at home, after he had filled himself with wine from the soles of his boots to
the apple in his throat. It was not an inviting-looking place, this same tavern, with the odd
device of an enormous radish, bearing a golden crown--now rather tarnished--which had served
as its sign for many generations of wine-drinkers. The heavy wooden shutters were all closed
when Lampourde reached it; but by the bright light streaming through their crevices, and the
sounds of song and revelry that reached his ear, he knew that there must be a numerous company
within. Knocking on the door in a peculiar way with the handle of his sword, he made himself
known as an habitue of the house, and was promptly admitted--the door being carefully made
fast again the moment he had entered. The large, low room into which he made his way was filled
with the smoke from many pipes, and redolent with the fumes of wine. A cheerful wood fire was
blazing on the hearth, lighting up the array of bottles in the bar, which was placed near it,
where the master of the establishment sat enthroned, keeping a watchful eye on the noisy crowd
gathered round the many small tables with which the room abounded, drinking, smoking, playing
at various games, and singing ribald songs. Lampourde paid no attention to the uproarious throng,
further than to look about and make sure that none of his own particular friends and associates
were among them. He found an unoccupied table, to which a servant quickly brought a bottle
of fine old Canary wine, very choice and rare, which was reserved for a few privileged and
appreciative customers, who could afford to indulge in such luxuries. Although he was quite
by himself, two glasses were placed before him, as his dislike of drinking alone was well known,
and at any moment a comrade might come in and join him. Meantime he slowly filled his glass,
raised it to the level of his eyes, and looked long and lovingly through the beautiful, clear
topaz of the generous wine. Having thus satisfied the sense of sight, he passed to that of
smell, and held the glass under his nostrils, where he could enjoy the delicious aroma arising
from it, giving the wine a rotary motion as he did so, in a very artistic manner; then, putting
the glass to his lips, he let a few drops trickle slowly down over his tongue to his palate,
lengthening out the enjoyment as much as possible, and approving smack of relish as he at last
swallowed the smooth nectar. Thus Maitre Jacquemin Lampourde managed to gratify three of the
five senses man is blessed with by means of a single glass of wine. He pretended that the other
two might also have a share of the enjoyment--that of touch by the highly polished surface
and swelling curves of the wine-glass, and that of hearing by the merry ringing when two glasses
are clinked together, or by the musical sounds to be brought forth from a glass by drawing
the moistened finger round and round the edge of it. But these are fantastic and paradoxical
ideas, which only serve to show the vicious refinement of this fastidious ruffian. He had been
but a few minutes alone when an odd-looking, shabbily dressed individual came in, who rejoiced
in a remarkably pale face, which looked as if it had been chalked, and a nose as red and fiery
as a live coal; the idea of how many casks of wine and bottles of brandy must have been imbibed
to bring it to such an intensity of erubescence would be enough to terrify the ordinary drinker.
This singular countenance was like a cheese, with a bright, red cherry stuck in the middle
of it; and to finish the portrait it would only be necessary to add two apple seeds, placed
a little obliquely, for the eyes, and a wide gash for a mouth. Such was Malartic--the intimate
friend, the Pylades, the Euryalus, the "fidus Achates" of Jacquemin Lampourde; who certainly
was not handsome--but his mental and moral qualities made up for his little physical disadvantages.
Next to Lampourde--for whom he professed the most exalted admiration and respect--he was accounted
the most skillful swordsman in Paris; he was always lucky at cards, and could drink to any
extent without becoming intoxicated. For the rest, he was a man of great delicacy and honour,
in his way--ready to run any risk to help or support a friend, and capable of enduring any
amount of torture rather than betray his comrades--so that he enjoyed the universal and unbounded
esteem of his circle.

Malartic went straight to Lampourde's table, sat down opposite to him, silently seized the
glass the other had promptly filled, and drained it at a single draught; evidently his method
differed from his friend's, but that it was equally efficacious his nose bore indisputable
witness. The two men drank steadily and in silence until they had emptied their third bottle,
and then called for pipes. When they had puffed away for a while, and enveloped themselves
in a dense cloud of smoke, they fell into conversation, deploring the bad times since the king,
his court and followers, had all gone to Saint Germain, and comparing notes as to their own
individual doings since their last meeting. Thus far they had paid no attention whatever to
the company round them, but now such a loud discussion arose over the conditions of a bet between
two men about some feat that one of them declared he could perform and the other pronounced
impossible, that they both looked round to see what it was all about. A man of lithe, vigorous
frame, with a complexion dark as a Moor's, jet-black hair and flashing eyes, was drawing out
of his red girdle a large, dangerous looking knife, which, when opened, was nearly as long
as a sword, and called in Valencia, where it was made, a navaja. He carefully examined and
tested the edge and point of this formidable weapon, with which he seemed satisfied, said to
the man he had been disputing with, "I am ready!" then turned and called, "Chiquita! Chiquita!"

At the sound of her name a little girl, who had been sleeping, rolled up in a cloak, on the
floor in a dark corner, rose and came towards Agostino--for it was he of course--and, fixing
her large dark eyes upon his face earnestly, said, "Master, what do you want me to do? I am
ready to obey you here as everywhere else, because you are so brave, and have so many red marks
on your navaja."

Chiquita said this rapidly, in a patois which was as unintelligible to the Frenchmen around
her as German, Hebrew or Chinese. Agostino took her by the hand and placed her with her back
against the door, telling her to keep perfectly still, and the child, accustomed to that sort
of thing, showed neither alarm nor surprise, but stood quietly, looking straight before her
with perfect serenity, while Agostino, at the other end of the room, standing with one foot
advanced, balanced the dread navaja in his hand. Suddenly with a quick jerking movement he
sent it flying through the air, and it struck into the wooden door, just over Chiquita's head.
As it darted by, like a flash of lightning, the spectators had involuntarily closed their eyes
for a second, but the fragile child's long dark eyelashes did not even quiver. The brigand's
wonderful skill elicited a loud burst of admiration and applause from an audience not easily
surprised or pleased, in which even the man who had lost his water joined enthusiastically.
Agostino went and drew out the knife, which was still vibrating, and returning to his place
this time sent it in between Chiquita's arm--which was hanging down by her side--and her body;
if it had deviated a hair's breadth it must have wounded her. At this everybody cried "Enough!"
but Agostino insisted upon aiming at the other side as well, so as to prove to them that there
was no chance about it; that it was purely a matter of skill. Again the terrible navaja flew
through the air, and went straight to the mark, and Chiquita, very much delighted at the applause
that followed, looked about her proudly, glorying in Agostino's triumph. She still wore Isabelle's
pearl beads round her slender brown neck; in other respects was much better dressed than when
we first saw her, and even had shoes on her tiny feet; they seemed to worry and annoy her very
much, it is true, but she found them a necessary nuisance on the cold Paris pavements, and
so had to submit to wearing them with as good a grace as she could muster. When Agostino gave
her leave to quit her position she quietly returned to her corner, rolled herself up anew in
the large cloak, and fell sound asleep again, while he, after pocketing the five pistoles he
had won, sat down to finish his measure of cheap wine; which he did very slowly, intending
to remain where he was as long as possible; he had no lodging place yet in Paris, having arrived
that very evening, and this warm room was far more comfortable than a refuge in some convent
porch, or under the arch of a bridge perhaps, where he had feared that he and Chiquita might
have to lie shivering all night long. 

Their Venison in the lower Parts of the Country is not so plentiful as it has been, tho' there
be enough and tolerably good; but in the Frontier Counties they abound with Venison, wild Turkies,
&c. where the common People sometimes dress Bears, whose Flesh, they say, is not to be well distinguished
from good Pork or Bacon.

They pull the Down of their living Geese and wild and tame Ducks, wherewith they make the softest
and sweetest Beds.

The Houses stand sometimes two or three together; and in other Places a Quarter, half a Mile,
or a Mile, or two, asunder, much as in the Country in England.

CHAP. The Climate makes them bright, and of excellent Sense, and sharp in Trade, an Ideot,
or deformed Native being almost a Miracle.

Thus they have good natural Notions, and will soon learn Arts and Sciences; but are generally
diverted by Business or Inclination from profound Study, and prying into the Depth of Things;
being ripe for Management of their Affairs, before they have laid so good a Foundation of Learning,
and had such Instructions, and acquired such Accomplishments, as might be instilled into such
good natural Capacities. Nevertheless thro' their quick Apprehension, they have a Sufficiency
of Knowledge, and Fluency of Tongue, tho' their Learning for the most Part be but superficial.

They
are more inclinable to read Men by Business and Conversation, than to dive into Books, and
are for the most Part only desirous of learning what is absolutely necessary, in the shortest
and best Method.

Having this Knowledge of their Capacities and Inclination from sufficient
Experience, I have composed on Purpose some short Treatises adapted
with my best Judgment to a Course of Education for the Gentlemen of
the Plantations; consisting in a short English Grammar; an Accidence
to Christianity; an Accidence to the Mathematicks, especially to Arithmetick
in all its Parts and Applications, Algebra, Geometry, Surveying of
Land, and Navigation.

These are the most useful Branches of Learning for them, and such as they willingly and readily
master, if taught in a plain and short Method, truly applicable to their Genius; which I have
endeavoured to do, for the Use of them, and all others of their Temper and Parts.

They are not very easily persuaded to the Improvement of useful Inventions (except a few, such as
Sawing Mills) neither are they great Encouragers of Manufactures, because of the Trouble and
certain Expence in Attempts of this kind, with uncertain Prospect of Gain; whereas by their
staple Commodity, Tobacco, they are in hopes to get a plentiful Provision; nay, often very
great Estates.

Upon this Account they think it Folly to take off their Hands (or Negroes) and employ their
Care and Time about any thing, that may make them lessen their Crop of Tobacco.

So that though they are apt to learn, yet they are fond of, and will follow their own Ways.
Humours, and Notions, being not easily brought to new Projects and Schemes; so that I question,
if they would have been imposed upon by the Missisippi or South-Sea or any other such monstrous
Bubbles.

In their Computations of Time, Weights and Measures both of Length, Superficies, and Solidity,
they strictly adhere to what is legal; not running into precarious Customs, as they do in England.
Thus their Quart is the true Winchester, their Hundred is 100, not 112, and they survey Land by
Statute Measure.

Indeed, what English Coin is there, is advanced in Value; so that a Shilling passes for 14 d.
and a Guinea goes by Tale for 26 s. but the Current Money is the Spanish which in Reality is about
15 l. per Cent. inferior to our English Coin, as settled by Law;
but frequently the Value of this varies in Respect of Sterling Bills
according to the Circumstances of Trade; Currency and Sterling being
sometimes at a Par; but for the Generality 10 per Cent. Discount is
allowed for Sterling Bills.

As for Education several are sent to England for it; though the Virginians being naturally of
good Parts, (as I have already hinted) neither require nor admire as much Learning, as we do
in Britain: yet more would be sent over, were they not afraid of the Small-Pox, which most commonly
proves fatal to them.

But indeed when they come to England they are generally put to learn to Persons that know little
of their Temper, who keep them drudging on in what is of least Use to them, in pedantick Methods,
too tedious for their volatile Genius.

For Grammar Learning taught after the common round-about Way is not much beneficial nor delightful to
them; so that they are noted to be more apt to spoil their School-Fellows than improve themselves;
because they are imprisoned and enslaved to what they hate, and think useless, and have not peculiar
Management proper for their Humour and Occasion.

A civil Treatment with some Liberty, if permitted with Discretion is most proper for them,
and they have most Need of, and readily take polite and mathematical Learning; and in English may be
conveyed to them (without going directly to Rome and Athens) all
the Arts, Sciences, and learned Accomplishments of the Ancients and
Moderns, without the Fatigue and Expence of another Language, for
which most of them have little Use or Necessity, since (without another)
they may understand their own Speech; and all other Things requisite
to be learn'd by them sooner and better.

Thus the Youth might as well be instructed there as here by proper Methods, without the Expence
and Danger of coming hither; especially if they make Use of the great Advantage of the College
at Williamsburgh, where they may (and many do) imbibe the Principles of all human and divine
Literature, both in English and in the learned Languages.

By the happy Opportunity of this College may they be advanced to religious and learned Education,
according to the Discipline and Doctrine of the established Church of England; in which Respect
this College may prove of singular Service, and be an advantageous and laudable Nursery and
strong Bulwark against the contagious dissentions in Virginia; which is the most ancient and loyal,
the most plentiful and flourishing, the most extensive and beneficial Colony belonging to
the Crown of Great Britain, upon which it is most directly dependant; wherein is establish'd
the Church of England free from Faction and Sects, being ruled by the Laws, Customs, and Constitutions
of Great Britain, which it strictly observes, only where the Circumstances and Occasion of the Country
by an absolute Necessity require some small Alterations; which nevertheless
must not be contrary (though different from and subservient) to the
Laws of England.

Though the Violence of neither Whig nor Tory reigns there, yet have they Parties; for the very best Administration
must expect to meet with some Opposition in all Places; especially where there is a Mixture
of People of different Countries concerned, whose Education and Interest may propose to them Notions
and Views different from each other.

Most other Plantations, especially they that are granted away to Proprietors, are inferior to Virginia:
where the seeming Interest and Humour of the Owners often divert them from Pursuit of the most
proper Methods; besides, they cannot have such a right Claim to the Favour of the Crown, nor
demand its best Protection, since they may often interfere with its Interest: whereas Virginia
is esteemed one of the most valuable Gems in the Crown of Great Britain.

Thus Virginia having to itself (with Maryland) the staple Commodity of Tobacco, has a great Advantage
of all other Plantations on the Continent for the Encouragement of the Crown; whereas others belonging
to Gentlemen, or having no peculiar Trade, cannot expect such Power to advance and promote their
Interest.

To this add, that Virginia equals, if not exceeds, all others in Goodness
of Climate, Soil, Health, Rivers, Plenty, and all Necessaries, and
Conveniencies of Life: Besides she has, among others, these particular
Advantages of her younger Sister Maryland, viz.

Freedom from Popery, and the Direction of Proprietors; not but that Part of Virginia, which
is between the Rivers Potowmack and Rappahannock belongs to Proprietors, as to the Quit-Rent;
yet the Government of these Counties (called the Northern Neck) is under the same Regulation
with the other Parts of the Country.

If New England be called a Receptacle of Dissenters, and an Amsterdam of Religion, Pensylvania the Nursery
of Quakers, Maryland the Retirement of Roman Catholicks, North Carolina the Refuge of Run-aways,
and South Carolina the Delight of Buccaneers and Pyrates, Virginia
may be justly esteemed the happy Retreat of true Britons and true
Churchmen for the most Part; neither soaring too high nor drooping
too low, consequently should merit the greater Esteem and Encouragement.

The

Saddle-Horses, though not very large, are hardy, strong, and fleet; and will pace naturally and
pleasantly at a prodigious Rate.

They are such Lovers of Riding, that almost every ordinary Person
keeps a Horse; and I have known some spend the Morning in ranging
several Miles in the Woods to find and catch their Horses only to
ride two or three Miles to Church, to the Court-House, or to a Horse-Race,
where they generally appoint to meet upon Business; and are more certain
of finding those that they want to speak or deal with, than at their
Home.

No People can entertain their Friends with better Cheer and Welcome; and Strangers and Travellers
are here treated in the most free, plentiful, and hospitable Manner; so that a few Inns or Ordinaries
on the Road are sufficient.

As to the Weather, the Spring and Fall are not unlike those Seasons
in England, only the Air is never long foggy, nor very cloudy; but
clear, sometimes of a bluish Colour, occasioned by the thin Smoak,
dispersed in the Air, from the Flames of the Woods and Leaves, which
are fired in Hunting, to drive the Beasts from their lurking Places;
or in the Spring to burn the old Leaves and Grass, that there may
be the better Pasture the next Summer.

The Months of December, January and February are generally much colder, and June, July and
August are much hotter than in England; tho' sometimes 'tis on a sudden very cool in Summer,
and pretty warm in Winter, the Weather being governed by the Wind; which with sudden Storms from
the North-West, and sometimes from the West and South-West bring violent Gusts or Tempests, with
Thunder, Lightning, and Rain very terrible, but soon over.

The North West Winds are exquisitely sharp and cold, proceeding from Clouds arising from the
vast Lakes and prodigious snowy Mountains that lie to that Quarter; but the Southerly Winds and
others are very warm.

The Days and Nights are there always much nearer the Equality of twelve Hours, than in the Latitude
of England.

At the sudden Changes of the Weather, from Heat to Cold, People are apt to take Cold, often
neglecting to shift their Cloaths with the Weather; which with Abundance of Damps and Mists
from the Water, and by eating too plentifully of some delicious Fruits, makes the People subject
to Feavers and Agues, which is the Country Distemper, a severe Fit of which (called a Seasoning)
most expect, some time after their Arrival in that Climate; but the Goodness of God has furnished
us with a perfect Catholicon for that Sickness, viz. the Bark; which being taken and repeated
in a right Manner, seldom fails of a Cure, unless the morbifick Matter comes to a Head again from
fresh Causes, and so returns with Mastery; upon which Recourse must be had to the same specifick
Remedy; besides which there are several Ways of Cure, but none so universal and sure as that.

Some
for Want of timely Care, through Ignorance or Obstinacy, will permit the Distemper to lurk
about them so long, till at last it has reduced them to an irrecoverable,
lingering, ill Habit of Body; especially if they live meanly, drinking
too much Water, and eating too much salt Meat; and this Cachexy generally
ends their Lives with a Dropsy, Consumption, the Jaundice, or some
such Illness.

Besides this, some are troubled with the dry Gripes, proceeding from Colds (I suppose) which take
away for a long Time the Use of the Limbs of some, especially hard Drinkers of Rum; some that
have lain out in mighty cold Weather have been Frost-bitten, and lost their Fingers or Toes.

There is no Danger of wild Beasts in traveling; for the Wolves and Bears, which are up the Country,
never attack any, unless they be first assaulted and hurt; and the Wolves of late are much destroyed
by Virtue of a Law, which allows good Rewards for their Heads with
the Ears on, to prevent Imposition and cheating the Publick; for the
Ears are crop'd when a Head is produced.

The Bears are also much destroyed by the Out-Planters, &c. for the Sake of their Flesh and Skins.

As
for Rattle-Snakes, &c. they make off from you, unless you by Carelesness chance to tread on
them; and then their Bite is found now not to be mortal, if Remedies
can be applied in Time.

As for their Drink, good Springs of excellent Water abound every where almost, which is very
cooling and pleasant in Summer, and the general Drink of abundance: not so much out of Necessity,
as Choice.

Some Planters, &c. make good small Drink with Cakes of Parsimmons a kind of Plumbs, which grow
there in great Plenty; but the common small Beer is made of Molossus, which makes extraordinary
brisk good tasted Liquor at a cheap Rate, with little Trouble in brewing; so that they have it
fresh and fresh, as they want it in Winter and Summer.

And as they brew, so do they bake daily, Bread or Cakes, eating too much hot and new Bread, which
cannot be wholsom, tho' it be pleasanter than what has been baked
a Day or two.

Some raise Barley and make Malt there, and others have Malt from England, with which those that
understand it, brew as good Beer as in England, at proper Seasons of the Year; but the common
strong Malt-Drink mostly used, is Bristol Beer; of which is consumed vast Quantities there
yearly; which being well brew'd and improv'd by crossing the Sea, drinks exceedingly fine and
smooth; but Malt Liquor is not so much regarded as Wine, Rack, Brandy, and Rum, Punch, with Drams
of Rum or Brandy for the common Sort, when they drink in a Hurry.

The common Wine comes from Madera or Phial, which moderately drank is fittest to cheer the fainting
Spirits in the Heat of Summer, and to warm the chilled Blood in the bitter Colds of Winter, and seems
most peculiarly adapted for this Climate: Besides this, are plentifully
drank with the better Sort, of late Years, all Kinds of French, and
other European Wine, especially Claret and Port.

Here is likewise used a great deal of Chocolate, Tea and Coffee, which, with several Sorts of
Apparel, they have as cheap, or cheaper than in England, because of the Debenture of such Goods
upon their Exportation thither: Besides, they are allowed to have
Wines directly from Madera, and other Commodities are brought from
the West-Indies, and the Continent, which cannot be brought to England
without spoiling.

As for grinding Corn, &c. they have good Mills upon the Runs and Creeks: besides Hand-Mills, Wind-Mills,
and the Indian Invention of pounding Hommony in Mortars burnt in the Stump of a Tree, with a Log
for a Pestle hanging at the End of a Pole, fix'd like the Pole of a Lave.

Though they are permitted to trade to no Parts but Great Britain, except these Places: yet have
they in many Respects better and cheaper Commodities than we in England, especially of late
Years; for the Country may be said to be altered and improved in Wealth and polite Living within
these few Years, since the Beginning of Col. Spotswood's Government, more than in all the Scores
of Years before that, from its first Discovery. The Country is yearly supplied with vast Quantities
of Goods from Great Britain, chiefly from London, Bristol, Liverpool,
Whitehaven, and from Scotland.

The Ships that transport these Things often call at Ireland to victual,
and bring over frequently white Servants, which are of three Kinds.

1. Such as come upon certain Wages by Agreement for a certain Time. 2. Such as come bound by Indenture,
commonly call'd Kids, who are usually to serve four or five Years; and 3. those Convicts or Felons
that are transported, whose Room they had much rather have than their Company; for abundance
of them do great Mischiefs, commit Robbery and Murder, and spoil Servants, that were before very
good: But they frequently there meet with the End they deserved at Home, though indeed some of them
prove indifferent good. Their being sent thither to work as Slaves for Punishment, is but
a mere Notion, for few of them ever lived so well and so easy before, especially if they are
good for any thing. These are to serve seven, and sometimes fourteen Years, and they and Servants
by Indentures have an Allowance of Corn and Cloaths, when they are
out of their Time, that they may be therewith supported, till they
can be provided with Services, or otherwise settled.

With these three Sorts of Servants are they supplied from England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland,
among which they that have a Mind to it, may serve their Time with Ease and Satisfaction to themselves
and their Masters, especially if they fall into good Hands.

Except the last Sort, for the most Part who are loose Villains, made tame by Wild, and then
enslaved by his Forward Namesake: To prevent too great a Stock of
which Servants and Negroes many Attempts and Laws have been in vain
made.

These if they forsake their Roguery together with the other Kids of the later Jonathan, when
they are free, may work Day-Labour, or else rent a small Plantation for a Trifle almost; or else
turn Overseers, if they are expert, industrious, and careful, or follow their Trade, if they
have been brought up to any; especially Smiths, Carpenters, Taylors, Sawyers, Coopers, Bricklayers,
&c. The Plenty of the Country, and the good Wages given to Work-Folks occasion very few Poor,
who are supported by the Parish, being such as are lame, sick, or
decrepit through Age, Distempers, Accidents, or some Infirmities;
for where there is a numerous Family of poor Children the Vestry takes
Care to bind them out Apprentices, till they are able to maintain
themselves by their own Labour; by which Means they are never tormented
with Vagrant, and Vagabond Beggars, there being a Reward for taking
up Run-aways, that are at a small Distance from their Home; if they
are not known, or are without a Pass from their Master, and can give
no good Account of themselves, especially Negroes.

In all convenient Places are kept Stores or Ware-Houses of all Sorts
of Goods, managed by Store-Keepers or Factors, either for themselves
or others in the Country, or in Great Britain.

This Trade is carried on in the fairest and genteelest Way of Merchandize,
by a great Number of Gentlemen of Worth and Fortune; who with the
Commanders of their Ships, and several Virginians (who come over through
Business or Curiosity, or often to take Possession of Estates, which
every Year fall here to some or other of them) make as considerable
and handsom a Figure, and drive as great and advantageous a Trade
for the Advancement of the Publick Good, as most Merchants upon the
Royal-Exchange.

At the Stores in Virginia, the Planters, &c. may
be supplied with what English Commodities they want.

The Merchants,
Factors, or Store-Keepers in Virginia buy up the Tobacco of the Planters,
either for Goods or current Spanish Money, or with Sterling Bills
payable in Great Britain.

The Intent of this Law was to improve the
Commodity, prevent Frauds in publick Payments; and for Ease of the
common Planters, and Expedition and Conveniency of Shipping.

But
though the first Design was for publick Tobacco only, yet the private
Crops of Gentlemen being included in the Law, was esteemed a great
Grievance; and occasioned Complaints, which destroyed a Law, that
with small Amendments might have proved most advantageous.

The Abrogation
of this Law reduced the Sailors to their old Slavery of rolling the
Tobacco in some Places; where they draw it for some Miles, as Gardeners
draw a Roller, which makes them frequently curse the Country, and
thro' Prejudice give it a very vile Character.

The Tobacco purchased
by the Factors or Store-Keepers, is sent Home to their Employers,
or consign'd to their correspondent Merchants in Great Britain.

But
most Gentlemen, and such as are beforehand in the World, lodge Money
in their Merchant's Hands here, to whom they send their Crop of Tobacco,
or the greatest Part of it.

This Money is employed according to the
Planter's Orders; chiefly in sending over yearly such Goods, Apparel,
Liquors, &c. as they write for, for the Use of themselves, their Families,
Slaves and Plantations; by which Means they have every Thing at the
best Hand, and the best of its Kind.

Besides English Goods, several
Merchants in Virginia import from the West-Indies great Quantities
of Rum, Sugar, Molossus, &c. and Salt very cheap from the Salt Islands;
which Things they purchase with Money, or generally with Pork, Beef,
Wheat, Indian-Corn, and the like.

In some of the poorer Parts of
the Country abounding in Pine, do they gather up the Light-wood, or
Knots of the old Trees, which will not decay, which being piled up
(as a Pit of Wood to be burnt to Charcoal) and encompassed with a
Trench, and covered with Earth, is set on Fire; whereby the Tar is
melted out, and running into a hole is taken up, and filled into Barrels;
and being boiled to a greater Consistency becomes Pitch.
For one instant the duke, in his rage, was tempted to draw his sword, make a furious charge
upon the intruding canaille, and disperse them "vi et armis"--but a second thought stayed his
hand, as he realized that the killing or wounding of two or three of these miserable actors
would not further his suit; and besides, he could not stain his noble hands with such vile
blood as theirs. So he put force upon himself and restrained his rage, and, bowing with icy
politeness to Isabelle, who, trembling in every limb, had edged nearer to her friends, he made
his way out of the room; turning, however, at the threshold to say, with peculiar emphasis,
"Au revoir, mademoiselle!"--a very simple phrase certainly, but replete with significance of
a very terrible and threatening nature from the way in which it was spoken. His face was so
expressive of evil passions as he said it that Isabelle shuddered, and felt a violent spasm
of fear pass over her, even though the presence of her companions guaranteed her against any
further attempts at violence just then. She felt the mortal anguish of the fated dove, above
which the cruel kite is circling swiftly in the air, drawing nearer with every rapid round.

The Duke of Vallombreuse regained his carriage, which awaited him in the court followed by
the obsequious landlord, with much superfluous and aggravating ceremony that he would gladly
have dispensed with, and the next minute the rumble of wheels indicated to Isabelle that her
dangerous visitor had taken his departure.

Now, to explain the timely interruption that came so opportunely to rescue Isabelle from her
enemy's clutches. The arrival of the duke in his superb carriage at the hotel in the Rue Dauphine
had caused an excitement and flutter throughout the whole establishment, which soon reached
the ears of the tyrant, who, like Isabelle, was busy learning his new part in the seclusion
of his own room. In the absence of de Sigognac, who was detained at the theatre to try on a
new costume, the worthy tyrant, knowing the duke's evil intentions, determined to keep a close
watch over his actions, and having summoned the others, applied his ear to the key-hole of
Isabelle's door, and listened attentively to all that passed within--holding himself in readiness
to interfere at any moment, if the duke should venture to offer violence to the defenceless
girl--and to his prudence and courage it was due that she escaped further persecution, on that
occasion, from her relentless and unscrupulous tormentor.

That day was destined to be an eventful one. It will be remembered that Lampourde, the professional
assassin, had received from Merindol--acting for the Duke Of Vallombreuse--a commission to
put Captain Fracasse quietly out of the way, and accordingly that worthy was dodging about
on the Pont-Neuf, at the hour of sunset, waiting to intercept his intended victim, who would
necessarily pass that way in returning to his hotel. Jacquemin awaited his arrival impatiently,
frequently breathing on his fingers and rubbing them vigorously, so that they should not be
quite numb with the cold when the moment for action came, and stamping up and down in order
to warm his half-frozen feet. The weather was extremely cold, and the sun had set behind the
Pont Rouge, in a heavy mass of blood-red clouds. Twilight was coming on apace, and already
there were only occasional foot-passengers, or vehicles, to be encountered hurrying along the
deserted streets.

At last de Sigognac appeared, walking very fast, for a vague anxiety about Isabelle had taken
possession of him, and he was in haste to get back to her. In his hurry and preoccupation he
did not notice Lampourde, who suddenly approached and laid hold of his cloak, which he snatched
off, with a quick, strong jerk that broke its fastenings. Without stopping to dispute the cloak
with his assailant, whom he mistook at first for an ordinary foot-pad, de Sigognac instantly
drew his sword and attacked him. Lampourde, on his side, was ready for him, and pleased with
the baron's way of handling his weapon, said to himself, though in an audible tone, "Now for
a little fun." Then began a contest that would have delighted and astonished a connoisseur
in fencing--such swift, lightning-like flashing of the blades, as they gave and parried cut
and thrust--the clashing of the steel, the blue sparks that leaped from the contending swords
as the fight grew more furious--Lampourde keeping up meanwhile an odd running commentary, as
his wonder and admiration grew momentarily greater and more enthusiastic, and he had soon reached
an exulting mood. Here at last was a "foeman worthy of his steel," and he could not resist
paying a tribute to the amazing skill that constantly and easily baffled his best efforts,
in the shape of such extraordinary and original compliments that de Sigognac was mightily amused
thereby. As usual, he was perfectly cool and self-possessed, keeping control of his temper
as well as of his sword--though by this time he felt sure that it was another agent of the
Duke of Vallombreuse's he had to deal with, and that his life, not his cloak, was the matter
at stake. At last Lampourde, who had begun to entertain an immense respect for his valiant
opponent, could restrain his curiosity no longer, and eagerly asked,

"Would it be indiscreet, sir, to inquire who was your instructor? Girolamo, Paraguante, or
Cote d'Acier would have reason to be proud of such a pupil. Which one of them was it?"

"My only master was an old soldier, Pierre by name," answered de Sigognac, more and more amused
at the oddities of the accomplished swordsman he was engaged with. "Stay, take that! it is
one of his favourite strokes."

"The devil!" cried Lampourde, falling back a step, "I was very nearly done for, do you know!
The point of your sword actually went through my sleeve and touched my arm--I felt the cold
steel; luckily for me it was not broad daylight--I should have been winged; but you are not
accustomed, like me, to this dim, uncertain light for such work. All the same, it was admirably
well done, and Jacquemin Lampourde congratulates you upon it, sir! Now, pay attention, to me--I
will not take any mean advantage of such a glorious foe as you are, and I give you fair warning
that I am going to try on you my own secret and special thrust Captain Fracasse--the crowning
glory of my art, the 'ne plus ultra' of my science--the elixir of my life. It is known only
to myself, and up to this time has been infallible. I have never failed to kill my man with
it. If you can parry it I will teach it to you. It is my only possession, and I will leave
it to you if you survive it; otherwise I will take my secret to the grave with me. I have never
yet found any one capable of executing it, unless indeed it be yourself--admirable, incomparable
swordsman that you are! It is a joy to meet such an one. But suppose we suspend hostilities
a moment to take breath."

So saying Jacquemin Lampourde lowered the point of his sword, and de Sigognac did the same.
They stood eyeing each other for a few moments with mutual admiration and curiosity, and then
resumed the contest more fiercely than ever--each man doing his best, as he had need to do,
and enjoying it. After a few passes, de Sigognac became aware that his adversary was preparing
to give the decisive blow, and held himself on his guard against a surprise; when it came,
delivered with terrible force, he parried it so successfully that Lampourde's sword was broken
short off in the encounter with his own trusty weapon, leaving only the hilt and a few inches
of the blade in his hand.

"If you have not got the rest of my sword in your body," cried Lampourde, excitedly, "you are
a great man!--a hero!--a god!"

"No," de Sigognac replied calmly, "it did not touch me; and now, if I chose, I could pin you
to the wall like a bat; but that would be repugnant to me, though you did waylay me to take
my life, and besides, you have really amused me with your droll sayings.

"Baron," said Jacquemin Lampourde, calmly, "permit me, I humbly pray you, to be henceforth,
so long as I live, your devoted admirer, your slave, your dog! I was to be paid for killing
you--I even received a portion of the money in advance, which I have spent. But never mind
that; I will pay it back, every penny of it, though I must rob some one else to do it."

With these words he picked up de Sigognac's cloak, and having put it carefully, even reverentially,
over his shoulders, made him a profound obeisance, and departed.

Thus the efforts of the Duke of Vallombreuse, to advance his suit and to get rid of his rival,
had once more failed ignominiously.

CHAPTER XIV. LAMPOURDE'S DELICACY

It is easy to imagine the frame of mind in which the Duke of Vallombreuse returned home after
his repulse by Isabelle, and her rescue from his arms by the timely intervention of her friends,
the comedians. At sight of his face, fairly livid and contorted with suppressed rage, his servants
trembled and shrunk away from him--as well they might--for his natural cruelty was apt to vent
itself upon the first unhappy dependent that happened to come in his way when his wrath was
excited. He was not an easy master to serve, even in his most genial mood--this haughty, exacting
young nobleman--and in his frantic fits of anger he was more savage and relentless than a half-starved
tiger. Upon entering his own house he rushed through it like a whirlwind, shutting every door
behind him with such a violent bang that the very walls shook, and pieces of the gilt mouldings
round the panels were snapped off, and scattered on the floor. When he reached his own room
he flung down his hat with such force that it was completely flattened, and the feather broken
short off. Then, unable to breathe freely, he tore open his rich velvet pourpoint, as he rushed
frantically to and fro, without any regard for the superb diamond buttons that fastened it,
which flew in every direction. The exquisitely fine lace ruffles round his neck were reduced
to shreds in a second, and with a vigorous kick he knocked over a large arm-chair that stood
in his way, and left it upside down, with its legs in the air.

"The impudent little hussy!" he cried, as he continued his frenzied walk, like a wild beast
in a cage. "I have a great mind to have her thrown into prison, there to be well-whipped, and
have her hair shaved off, before being sent to a lunatic asylum--or better still to some strict
convent where they take in bad girls who have been forcibly rescued from lives of infamy. I
could easily manage it. But no, it would be worse than useless--persecution would only make
her hate me more, and would not make her love that cursed de Sigognac a bit less. How can I
punish her? what on earth shall I do?" and still he paced restlessly to and fro, cursing and
swearing, and raving like a madman. While he was indulging in these transports of rage, without
paying any attention to how the time was passing, evening drew on, and it was rapidly growing
dark when his faithful Picard, full of commiseration, screwed up his courage to the highest
point, and ventured to go softly in--though he had not been called, and was disobeying orders--to
light the candles in his master's room; thinking that he was quite gloomy enough already without
being left in darkness as well, and hoping that the lights might help to make him more cheerful.
They did seem to afford him some relief, in that they caused a diversion; for his thoughts,
which had been all of Isabelle and her cruel repulse of his passionate entreaties, suddenly
flew to his successful rival, the Baron de Sigognac.

"But how is this?" he cried, stopping short in his rapid pacing up and down the room. "How
comes it that that miserable, degraded wretch has not been despatched before this? I gave the
most explicit orders about it to that good-for-nothing Merindol. In spite of what Vidalinc
says, I am convinced that I shall succeed with Isabelle when once that cursed lover of hers
is out of my way. She will be left entirely at my mercy then, and will have to submit to my
will and pleasure with the best grace she can muster--for I shall not allow any sulking or
tears. Doubtless she clings so obstinately to that confounded brute in the belief that she
can induce him to marry her in the end. She means to be Mme. la Baronne de Sigognac--the aspiring
little actress! That must be the reason of all this mighty display of mock modesty, and of
her venturing to repulse the attentions of a duke, as scornfully, by Jove! as if he were a
stable-boy. But she shall rue it--the impertinent little minx! and I'll have no mercy shown
to the audacious scoundrel who dared to disable this right arm of mine. Halloa there! send
Merindol up to me instantly, do you hear?"

Picard flew to summon him, and in a few moments the discomfited bully made his appearance;
pale from abject terror, with teeth chattering and limbs trembling, as he was ushered into
the dread presence of his angry lord. In spite of his efforts to assume the sang-froid he was
so far from feeling, he staggered like a drunken man, though he had not drank enough wine that
day to drown a fly, and did not dare to lift his eyes to his master's face.

"Well, you cowardly beast," said Vallombreuse angrily, how long, pray, are you going to stand
there speechless, like a stupid fool, with that hang-dog air, as if you already had the rope
that you so richly deserve round your wicked neck? "I only awaited your lordship's orders,"
stammered Merindol, trying to appear at ease, and failing lamentably. "My lord duke knows that
I am entirely devoted to his service--even to being hanged, if it seems good to your lordship."

"Enough of that cant!" interrupted the duke impatiently. "Didn't I charge you to have that
cursed de Sigognac, otherwise Captain Fracasse, cleared out of my way? You have not done it--my
orders have not been obeyed. It is worth while, upon my word, to keep confounded hired rascals
to do such work for me, at this rate! All that you are good for is to stuff yourself in the
kitchen, you dastardly beast, and to guzzle my good wine from morning until night. But I've
had enough of this, by Jove! and if there is not a change, and that without any further loss
of time, to the hangman you shall go--do you hear? just as sure as you stand there, gaping
like a drivelling idiot."

"My lord duke," said Merindol in a trembling voice, "is unjust to his faithful servant, who
desires nothing but to do his lord's bidding. But this Baron de Sigognac is not to be disposed
of so easily as my lord believes. Never was there a braver, more fearless man. In our first
attack on him, at Poitiers, he got the better of us in a most wonderful way--we never saw the
like of it--and all he had to fight with was a dull, rusty sword, not intended for use at all;
a theatre sword, just for looks. And when we tried to do for him here in Paris, the very night
he got here, it all came to naught, because he was so watchful, and somehow suspected what
we were up to, and was ready for us; and that upset our beautiful little plan entirely. I never
was so surprised in my life; and there was nothing for us to do, the whole four of us, but
to get out of his sight as fast as we could, and he standing there laughing at us. Oh! he's
a rare one, is Captain Fracasse. And now he knows my face, so I can't go near him myself. But
I have engaged the services of a particular friend of mine--the bravest man and the best fighter
in Paris--he hasn't his equal in the world with the sword, they all say. He is lying in wait
for him on the Pont-Neuf now, at this very moment, and there'll be no mistake this time. Lampourde
will be sure to despatch him for us--if it is not done already--and that without the slightest
danger of your lordship's name being mixed up with the affair in any way, as it might have
been if your lordship's own servants had done it."

"The plan is not a bad one," said the young duke, somewhat mollified, "and perhaps it is better
that it should be done in that way. But are you really sure of the courage and skill of this
friend of yours? He will need both to get the better of that confounded de Sigognac, who is
no coward, and a master hand with the sword, I am bound to acknowledge, though I do hate him
like the devil."

"My lord need have no fears," said Merindol enthusiastically, being now more at his ease. "Jacquemin
Lampourde is a hero, a wonder, as everybody will tell your lordship. He is more valiant than
Achilles, or the great Alexander. He is not spotless certainly, like the Chevalier Bayard,
but he is fearless."

Picard, who had been hovering about for a few minutes in an uneasy way, now seeing that his
master was in a better humour, approached and told him that a very odd-looking man was below,
who asked to see him immediately on most important business.

"You may bring him in," said the duke, "but just warn him, Picard, that if he dares to intrude
upon me for any trifling matter, I'll have him skinned alive before I let him go."

Mirindol was just about leaving the room, when the entrance of the newcomer rooted him to the
spot; he was so astonished and alarmed that he could not move hand or foot. And no wonder,
for it was no other than the hero whose name he had just spoken--Jacquemin Lampourde in person--and
the bare fact of his having dared to penetrate so boldly into the dread presence of that high
and mighty seignior, the Duke of Vallombreuse, ignoring entirely the agent through whom his
services had been engaged, showed of itself that something very extraordinary must have taken
place.

Lampourde himself did not seem to be in the least disconcerted, and after winking at his friend
furtively in a very knowing way, stood unabashed before the duke, with the bright light of
the many wax candles shining full upon his face. There was a red mark across his forehead,
where his hat had been pressed down over it, and great drops of sweat stood on it, as if he
had been running fast, or exercising violently. His eyes, of a bluish gray tint, with a sort
of metallic lustre in them, were fixed upon those of the haughty young nobleman, with a calm
insolence that made Merindol's blood run cold in his veins; his large nose, whose shadow covered
all one side of his face, as the shadow of Mount Etna covers a considerable portion of the
island of Sicily, stood out prominently, almost grotesquely, in profile; his mustache, with
its long stiff points carefully waxed, which produced exactly the effect of an iron skewer
stuck through his upper lip, and the "royal" on his chin curled upward, like a comma turned
the wrong way, all contributed to make up a very extraordinary physiognomy, such as caricaturists
dote on. He wore a large scarlet cloak, wrapped closely about his erect, vigorous form, and
in one hand, which he extended towards the duke, he held suspended a well filled purse--a strange
and mysterious proceeding which Mirindol could by no means understand.

"Well, you rascal," said the duke, after staring for a moment in astonishment at this odd-looking
specimen, "what does this mean? Are you offering alms to me, pray, or what? with your purse
there held out at arm's length, apparently for my acceptance."

"In the first place, my lord duke," said Lampourde, with perfect sang-froid and gravity, "may
it not displease your highness, but I am not a rascal. My name is Jacquemin Lampourde, and
I ply the sword for a living. My profession is an honourable one. I have never degraded myself
by taking part in trade of any kind, or by manual labour. Killing is my business, at the risk
of my own life and limb--for I always do my work alone, unaided, armed only with my trusty
sword. Fair play is a jewel, and I would scorn to take a mean advantage of anybody. I always
give warning before I attack a man, and let him have a chance to defend himself--having a horror
of treachery, and cowardly, sneaking ways. What profession could be more noble than mine, pray?
I am no common, brutal assassin, my lord duke, and I beseech your lordship to take back that
offensive epithet, which I could never accept, save in a friendly, joking way--it outrages
too painfully the sensitive delicacy of my amour-propre, my lord!"

"Very well, so be it, Maitre Jacquemin Lampourde, since you desire it," answered Vallombreuse,
very much amused at the oddity of his strange visitor. "And now have the goodness to explain
your business here, with a purse in your hand, that you certainly appear to be steadily offering
to me."

Jacquemin satisfied by this concession to his susceptibility, suddenly jerked his head forward,
without bending his body, while he waved the hat that he held slowly to and fro, making, according
to his ideas, a salute that was a judicious mingling of the soldier's and the courtier's--which
ceremony being concluded, he proceeded as follows with his explanation:

"Here is the whole thing in a nutshell, my lord duke! I received, from Merindol--acting for
your lordship--part payment in advance for despatching a certain Baron de Sigognac, commonly
called Captain Fracasse. On account of circumstances beyond my control, I have not been able
to finish the job, and as I am a great stickler for honesty, and honour also, I have hastened
to bring back to you, my lord duke, the money that I did not earn."

With these words he advanced a step, and with a gesture that was not devoid of dignity, gently
laid the purse down on a beautiful Florentine mosaic table, that stood at the duke's elbow.

"Verily," said Vallombreuse sneeringly, "we seem to have here one of those droll bullies who
are good for naught but to figure in a comedy; an ass in a lion's skin, whose roar is nothing
worse than a bray. Come, my man, own up frankly that you were afraid of that same de Sigognac."

"Jacquemin Lampourde has never been afraid of anybody in his life," the fighting man replied,
drawing himself up haughtily, "and no adversary has ever seen his back. Those who know me will
tell your lordship that easy victories have no charm for me. I love danger and court it. I
take positive delight in it. I attacked the Baron de Sigognac 'secundum artem,' and with one
of my very best swords--made by Alonzo de Sahagun, the elder, of Toledo."

"Well, and what happened then?" said the young duke eagerly. "It would seem that you could
not have been victorious, since you wish to refund this money, which was to pay you for despatching
him."

"First let me inform your highness that in the course of my duels and combats, of one sort
and another, I have left no less than thirty-seven men stretched dead upon the ground--and
that without counting in all those I have wounded mortally or crippled for life. But this Baron
de Sigognac intrenched himself within a circle of flashing steel as impenetrable as the walls
of a granite fortress. I called into requisition all the resources of my art against him, and
tried in every possible way to surprise him off his guard, but he was ready for everything--as
quick as a flash, as firm as a rock--he parried every thrust triumphantly, magnificently, with
the most consummate science, and a grace and ease I have never seen equalled. He kept me busy
defending myself too all the time, and more than once had nearly done for me. His audacity
was astonishing, his sang froid superb, and his perfect mastery over his sword, and his temper,
sublime--he was not a man, but a god. I could have fallen down and worshipped him. At the risk
of being spitted on his sword, I prolonged the fight as much as I dared, so as to enjoy his
marvellous, glorious, unparalleled method to the utmost. However, there had to be an end of
it, and I thought I was sure of despatching him at last by means of a secret I possess--an
infallible and very difficult thrust, taught and bequeathed to me by the great Girolamo of
Naples, my beloved master--no man living has a knowledge of it but myself--there is no one
else left capable of executing it to perfection, and upon that depends its success. Well, my
lord duke, Girolamo himself could not have done it better than I did to-night. I was thunderstruck
when my opponent did not go down before it as if he had been shot. I expected to see him lying
dead at my feet. But not at all, by Jove! That devil of a Captain Fracasse parried my blow
with dazzling swiftness, and with such force that my blade was broken short off, and I left
completely at his mercy, with nothing but the stump in my hand. See here, my lord duke! just
look what he did to my precious, priceless Sahagun." And Jacquemin Lampourde, with a piteous
air, drew out and exhibited the sorry remains of his trusty sword--almost weeping over it--and
calling the duke's attention to the perfectly straight and even break.

"Your highness can see that it was a prodigious blow that snapped this steel like a pipe-stem,
and it was done with such ease and precision. To despatch Captain Fracasse by fair means is
beyond my skill, my lord duke, and I would scorn to resort to treachery. Like all truly brave
men, he is generous. I was left entirely defenceless, and he could have spitted me like an
ortolan just by extending his arm, but he refrained; he let me go unscathed. A miraculous display
of delicacy, as well as chivalrous generosity, from a gentleman assaulted in the gloaming on
the Pont-Neuf. I owe my life to him, and moreover, such a debt of gratitude as I shall never
be able to repay. I cannot undertake anything more against him, my lord duke; henceforth he
is sacred to me. Besides, it would be a pity to destroy such a swordsman--good ones are rare
in these degenerate days, and growing more so every year. I don't believe he has his equal
on earth. Most men handle a sword as if it were a broomstick nowadays, and then expect to be
praised and applauded, the clumsy, stupid fools! Now, I have given my reasons for coming to
inform your highness that I must resign the commission I had accepted. As for the money there,
I might perhaps have been justified in keeping it, to indemnify me for the great risk and peril
I incurred, but such a questionable proceeding would be repugnant to my tender conscience and
my honest pride, as your highness can understand."

"In the name of all the devils in the infernal regions, take back your money!" cried Vallombreuse
impetuously, "or I will have you pitched out of the window yonder, you and your money both.
I never heard of such a scrupulous scoundrel in my life. You, Merindol, and your cursed crew,
have not a spark of honour or honesty among you all; far enough from it." Then perceiving that
Lampourde hesitated about picking up the purse, he added, "Take it, I tell you! I give it to
you to drink my health with."

"In that, my lord duke, you shall be religiously obeyed," Lampourde replied joyfully; "however,
I do not suppose that your highness will object to my dedicating part of it to lansquenet."
And he stretched out his long arm, seized the purse, and with one dexterous movement, like
a juggler, chucked it jingling into the depths of his pocket.

"It is understood then, my lord duke, that I retire from the affair so far as the Baron de
Sigognac is concerned," continued Lampourde, "but, if agreeable to your highness, it will be
taken in hand by my 'alter ego,' the Chevalier Malartic, who is worthy to be intrusted with
the most delicate and hazardous enterprises, because of his remarkable adroitness and superior
ability, and he is one of the best fellows in the world into the bargain. I had sketched out
a scheme for the abduction of the young actress, in whom your highness condescends to take
an interest, which Malartic will now carry out, with all the wonderful perfection of detail
that characterizes his clever way of doing things. Merindol here, who knows him, will testify
to his rare qualifications, my lord duke, and you could not find a better man for your purpose.
I am presenting a real treasure to your lordship in tendering Malartic's services. When he
is wanted your highness has only to send a trusty messenger to mark a cross in chalk on the
left-hand door-post of the Crowned Radish. Malartic will understand, and repair at once, in
proper disguise, to this house, to receive your lordship's last orders."

Having finished this triumphant address, Maitre Jacquemin Lampourde again saluted the duke
as before, then put his hat on his head and stalked majestically out of the room, exceedingly
well satisfied with his own eloquence, and what he considered courtly grace, in the presence
of so illustrious a nobleman. His oddity and originality, together with his strange mingling
of lofty notions of honour and rascality, had greatly amused and interested the young Duke
of Vallombreuse, who was even willing to forgive him for not having despatched de Sigognac;
for, if even this famous professional duellist could not get the better of him, he really must
be invincible, and in consequence the thought of his own defeat became less galling and intolerable
to his pride and vanity. Moreover, he had not been able to get rid of an uncomfortable consciousness,
even in his most angry mood, that his endeavouring to compass de Sigognac's assassination was
rather too great an enormity, not on account of any conscientious scruples, but simply because
his rival was a gentleman; he would not have hesitated a second about having half-a-dozen bourgeois
murdered, if they had been rash or unfortunate enough to interfere with him, the blood of such
base, ignoble creature being of no more consequence in his eyes than so much water. Vallombreuse
would have liked to despatch his enemy himself in honourable combat, but that was rendered
impossible by the baron's superior ability as a swordsman, of which he still had a painful
reminder in his wounded arm; which was scarcely healed yet, and would prevent his indulging
in anything like a duel for some time to come. So his thoughts turned to the abduction of the
young actress; a pleasanter subject to dwell upon, as he felt not the slightest doubt that
once he had her to himself, separated from de Sigognac and her companions, she would not long
be able to withstand his eloquent pleading and personal attractions. His self-conceit was boundless,
but not much to be wondered at, considering his invariable and triumphant success in affairs
of gallantry; so, in spite of his recent repulse, he flattered himself that he only required
a fitting opportunity to obtain from Isabelle all that he desired.

"Let me have her for a few days in some secluded place," said he to himself, "where she cannot
escape from me, or have any intercourse with her friends, and I shall be sure to win her heart.
I shall be so kind and good and considerate to her, treat her with so much delicacy and devotion,
that she cannot help feeling grateful to me; and then the transition to love will be easy and
natural. But when once I have won her, made her wholly mine, then she shall pay dearly for
what she has made me suffer. Yes, my lady, I mean to have my revenge--you may rest assured
of that."

CHAPTER XV. MALARTIC AT WORK

If the Duke of Vallombreuse had been furious after his unsuccessful visit to Isabelle, the
Baron de Sigognac was not less so, when, upon his return that evening, he learned what had
taken place during his absence. The tyrant and Blazius were almost obliged to use force to
prevent his rushing off, without losing a minute, to challenge the duke to mortal combat--a
challenge sure to be refused; for de Sigognac, being neither the brother nor husband of the
injured fair one, had no earthly right to call any other gentleman to account for his conduct
towards her; in France all men are at liberty to pay their court to every pretty woman.

As to the attack upon the baron on the Pont-Neuf, there could be no doubt that it was instigated
by the Duke of Vallombreuse; but how to prove it? that was the difficulty. And even supposing
it could be proved, what good would that do? In the eyes of the world the Baron de Sigognac,
who carefully concealed his real rank, was only Captain Fracasse, a low play-actor, upon whom
a great noble, like the Duke of Vallombreuse, had a perfect right to inflict a beating, imprisonment,
or even assassination, if it so pleased him; and that without incurring the blame, or serious
disapproval, of his friends and equals.

So far as Isabelle was concerned, if the affair were made public, nobody would believe that
she was really pure and virtuous--the very fact of her being an actress was enough to condemn
her--for her sake it was important to keep the matter secret if possible. So there was positively
no means of calling their enemy to account for his flagrant misdeeds, though de Sigognac, who
was almost beside himself with rage and indignation, and burning to avenge Isabelle's wrongs
and his own, swore that he would punish him, even if he had to move heaven and earth to compass
it. Yet, when he became a little calmer, he could not but acknowledge that Herode and Blazius
were right in advising that they should all remain perfectly quiet, and feign the most absolute
indifference; but at the same time keep their eyes and ears very wide open, and be unceasingly
on their guard against artful surprises, since it was only too evident that the vindictive
young duke, who was handsome as a god and wicked as the devil, did not intend to abandon his
designs upon them; although thus far he had failed ignominiously in everything he had undertaken
against them.

A gentle, loving remonstrance from Isabelle, as she held de Sigognac's hands, all hot and trembling
with suppressed rage, between her own soft, cool palms, and caressingly interlaced her slender
white fingers with his, did more to pacify him than all the rest, and he finally yielded to
her persuasions; promising to keep quiet himself, and allow, things to go on just as usual.

Meantime the representations of the troupe had met with splendid success. Isabelle's modest
grace and refined beauty, Serafina's more brilliant charms, the soubrette's sparkling vivacity
and bewitching coquetry, the superb extravagances of Captain Fracasse, the tyrant's majestic
mien, Leander's manly beauty, the grotesque good humour of the pedant, Scapin's spicy deviltries,
and the duenna's perfect acting had taken Paris by storm, and their highest hopes were likely
to be realized. Having triumphantly won the approbation of the Parisians, nothing was wanting
but to gain also that of the court, then at Saint Germain, and a rumour had reached their ears
that they were shortly to be summoned thither; for it was asserted that the king, having heard
such favourable reports of them, had expressed a desire to see them himself. Whereas Herode,
in his character of treasurer, greatly rejoiced, and all felt a pleasant excitement at the
prospect of so distinguished an honour. Meanwhile the troupe was often in requisition to give
private representations at the houses of various people of rank and wealth in Paris, and it
quickly became the fashion among them to offer this very popular style of entertainment to
their guests.

Thus it befell that the tyrant, being perfectly accustomed to that sort of thing, was not at
all surprised, or suspicious of evil, when one fine morning a stranger, of most venerable and
dignified mien, presented himself at the hotel in the Rue Dauphine, and asked to speak with
him on business. He appeared to be the major-domo, or steward, of some great nobleman's establishment,
and, in effect, announced to Herode that he had been sent to consult with him, as manager of
the troupe, by his master, the Comte de Pommereuil.

This highly respectable old functionary was richly dressed in black velvet, and had a heavy
gold chain round his neck. His face was slightly sunburnt; the wavy hair that fell upon his
shoulders, his thick, bushy eyebrows, heavy mustache, and long, sweeping beard were all white
as snow. He had the most patriarchal, benevolent air imaginable, and a very gentle, yet dignified
manner. The tyrant could not help admiring him very much, as he said, courteously, "Are you,
sir, the famous Herode I am in quest of, who rules with a hand as firm as Apollo's the excellent
company of comedians now playing in Paris? Their renown has gone abroad, beyond the walls of
the city, and penetrated even to my master's ears, on his estate out in the country."

"Yes, I have the honour to be the man you seek," the tyrant answered, bowing very graciously.

"The Comte de Pommereuil greatly desires to have you give one of your celebrated representations
at his chateau, where guests of high rank are sojourning at this moment, and I have come to
ascertain whether it will be possible for you to do so. The distance is not very considerable,
only a few leagues. The comte, my master, is a very great and generous seignior, who is prepared
to reward your illustrious company munificently for their trouble, and will do everything in
his power to make them comfortable while they are under his roof."

"I will gladly do all that I can to please your noble master," the tyrant replied, "though
it will be a little difficult for us to leave Paris at present, just in the height of the season;
even if it be only for a short absence."

"Three days would suffice for this expedition," said the venerable major-domo persuasively;
"one for the journey, the second for the representation, and the third for the return to Paris.
There is a capital theatre at the chateau, furnished with everything that is requisite, so
that you need not be encumbered with much luggage--nothing beyond your costumes. Here is a
purse containing a hundred pistoles that the Comte de Pommereuil charged me to put into your
hands, to defray the expenses of the journey. You will receive as much more before you return,
and there will be handsome presents for the actresses forthcoming, of valuable jewels, as souvenirs
of the occasion."

After a momentary hesitation, the tyrant accepted the well-filled purse tendered to him, and,
with a gesture of acquiescence, put it into his pocket.

"I am to understand then that you accept, and I may tell my master that you will give a representation
at the chateau, as he desires?"

"Yes, I place myself and my company at his disposition," Herode said, smilingly. "And now let
me know what day you want us to go, and which of our pieces your master prefers."

"Thursday is the day my master designated; as for selecting the play, that he leaves to your
own good taste and discretion."

"Very well; and now you have only to give me directions as to the road we must take to reach
the chateau. Be as explicit as you can, I pray you, so that there may be no danger of our going
astray."

The agent of the Comte de Pommereuil accordingly gave the most minute and exact directions
possible, but ended by saying, "Never mind, you need not burden your memory with all these
troublesome details! I will send you a lackey to serve as guide."

Matters being thus satisfactorily arranged, the charming old major-domo took leave of Herode,
who accompanied him down the stairs and across the court to the outer door of the hotel, and
departed, looking back to exchange a last polite sign of farewell ere he turned the corner
of the street. If the honest tyrant could have seen him as he walked briskly away, the moment
he was safely out of sight, he would have been astonished at the way the broad, stooping shoulders
straightened themselves up, and at the rapid, vigorous step that succeeded to the slow, rather
infirm gait of his venerable visitor--but these things our worthy Herode neither saw nor suspected.

On Wednesday morning, as the comedians were finishing the packing of their chariot, which stood
ready for departure in the courtyard of the hotel, with a pair of fine spirited horses before
it that the tyrant had hired for the journey, a tall, rather fierce-looking lackey, dressed
in a neat livery and mounted on a stout pony, presented himself at the outer door, cracking
his whip vigorously, and announcing himself as the guide, sent according to promise by the
considerate major-domo, to conduct them to the Chateau de Pommereuil.

Eight clear strokes rang out from the Samaritan just as the heavy vehicle emerged into the
Rue Dauphine, and our company of players set forth on their ill-fated expedition. In less than
half an hour they had left the Porte Saint Antoine and the Bastile behind them, passed through
the thickly settled faubourg and gained the open country; advancing towards Vincennes, which
they could distinguish in the distance, with its massive keep partially veiled by a delicate
blue mist, that was rapidly dispersing under the influence of the bright, morning sunshine.
As the horses were fresh, and travelled at a good pace, they soon came up with the ancient
fortress--which was still formidable in appearance, though it could not have offered any adequate
resistance to the projectiles of modern artillery. The gilded crescents on the minarets of
the chapel built by Pierre de Montereau shone out brightly, as if joyous at finding themselves
in such close proximity to the cross--the sign of redemption. After pausing a few minutes to
admire this monument of the ancient splendour of our kings, the travellers entered the forest,
where, amid the dense growth of younger trees, stood a few majestic old oaks--contemporaries
doubtless of the one under which Saint Louis, that king of blessed memory, used to sit and
dispense justice to his loyal subjects in person--a most becoming and laudable occupation for
a monarch.

The road was so little used that it was grass-grown in many places, and the chariot rolled
so smoothly and noiselessly along over it that they occasionally surprised a party of rabbits
frolicking merrily together, and were very much amused to see them scamper away, in as great
a hurry as if the hounds were at their heels. Farther on a frightened deer bounded across the
road in front of them, and they could watch its swift, graceful flight for some distance amid
the leafless trees. The young baron was especially interested in all these things, being country-bred,
and it was a delight unspeakable to him to see the fields, the hedgerows, the forest, and the
wild creatures of the wood once more. It was a pleasure he had been deprived of ever since
he had frequented cities and towns, where there is nothing to look at but dingy houses, muddy
streets and smoky chimneys--the works of man not of God. He would have pined in them for the
fresh country air if he had not had the sweet companionship of the lovely woman he adored;
in whose deep, blue eyes he saw a whole heaven of bliss.

Upon emerging from the wood the road wound up a steep hill-side, so the horses were stopped,
to rest a few minutes before beginning the ascent, and de Sigognac, profiting by the opportunity
thus afforded him, said to Isabelle, "Dear heart, will you get down and walk a little way with
me? You will find it a pleasant change and rest after sitting still in the chariot so long.
The road is smooth and dry, and the sunshine deliciously warm--do come!"

Isabelle joyfully acceded to this request, and putting her hand into the one extended to help
her, jumped lightly down. It was a welcome means of according an innocent tete-a-tete to her
devoted lover, and both felt as if they were treading on air, they were so happy to find themselves
alone together, as, arm in arm, they walked briskly forward, until they were out of sight of
their companions. Then they paused to look long and lovingly into each other's eyes, and de
Sigognac began again to pour out to Isabelle "the old, old story," that she was never weary
of hearing, but found more heavenly sweet at every telling. They were like the first pair of
mortal lovers in Paradise, entirely sufficient to and happy in each other. Yet even then Isabelle
gently checked the passionate utterances of her faithful suitor, and strove to moderate his
rapturous transports, though their very fervour made her heart rejoice, and brought a bright
flush to her cheeks and a happy light to her eyes that rendered her more adorably beautiful
than ever.

"Whatever you may do or say, my darling," he answered, with a sweet, tender smile, "you will
never be able to tire out my constancy. If need be, I will wait for you until all your scruples
shall have vanished of themselves--though it be not till these beautiful, soft brown tresses,
with their exquisite tinge of gold where the sun shines on them, shall have turned to silver."

"Oh!" cried Isabelle, "I shall be so old and so ugly then that even your sublime courage will
be daunted, and I fear that in rewarding your perseverance and fidelity by the gift of myself
I should only be punishing my devoted knight and brave champion."

"You will never be ugly, my beloved Isabelle, if you live to be a hundred," he replied, with
an adoring glance, "for yours is not the mere physical beauty, that fades away and vanishes--it
is the beauty of the soul, which is immortal."

"All the same you would be badly off," rejoined Isabelle, "if I were to take you at your word,
and promise to be yours when I was old and gray. But enough of this jesting," she continued
gravely, "let us be serious! You know my resolution, de Sigognac, so try to content yourself
with being the object of the deepest, truest, most devoted love that was ever yet bestowed
on mortal man since hearts began to beat in this strange world of ours."

"Such a charming avowal ought to satisfy me, I admit, but it does not! My love for you is infinite--it
can brook no bounds--it is ever increasing--rising higher and higher, despite your heavenly
voice, that bids it keep within the limits you have fixed for it."

"Do not talk so, de Sigognac! you vex me by such extravagances," said Isabelle, with a little
pout that was as charming as her sweetest smile; for in spite of herself her heart beat high
with joy at these fervent protestations of a love that no coldness could repel, no remonstrance
diminish.

They walked on a little way in silence--de Sigognac not daring to say more then, lest he should
seriously displease the sweet creature he loved better than his own life. Suddenly she drew
her arm out of his, and with an exclamation of delight, sprang to a little bank by the road-side,
where she had spied a tiny violet, peeping out from amid the dead leaves that had lain there
all the winter through--the first harbinger of spring, smiling up at her a friendly greeting,
despite the wintry cold of February. She knelt down and gently cleared away the dry leaves
and grass about it, carefully broke the frail little stem, and returned to de Sigognac's side
with her treasure--more delighted than if she had found a precious jewel lying hidden among
the mosses.

"Only see, how exquisitely beautiful and delicate it is"--said she, showing it to him--"with
its dear little petals scarcely unrolled yet to return the greeting of this bright, warm sunshine,
that has roused it from its long winter sleep."

"It was not the sunshine, however bright and warm," answered de Sigognac, "but the light of
your eyes, sweet Isabelle, that made it open out to greet you--and it is exactly the colour
too of those dear eyes of yours."

"It has scarcely any fragrance, but that is because it's so cold," said Isabelle, loosening
her scarf, and putting it carefully inside the ruff that encircled her slender, white neck.
In a few minutes she took it out again, inhaled its rich perfume, pressed it furtively to her
lips, and offered it to de Sigognac.

"See how sweet it is now! The warmth I imparted to it has reassured the little modest, timid
blossom, and it breathes out its incomparable fragrance in gratitude to me."

"Say rather that it has received it from you," he replied, raising the violet tenderly to his
lips, and taking from it the kiss Isabelle had bestowed--"for this delicate, delicious odour
has nothing gross or earthly about it--it is angelically pure and sweet, like yourself, my
own Isabelle."

"Ah! the naughty flatterer," said she, smiling upon him with all her heart in her eyes. "I
give him a little flower that he may enjoy its perfume, and straightway he draws from it inspiration
for all sorts of high-flown conceits, and fine compliments. There's no doing anything with
him--to the simplest, most commonplace remark he replies with a poetical flight of fancy."

However, she could not have been very seriously displeased, for she took his arm again, and
even leaned upon it rather more heavily than the exigencies of the way actually required; which
goes to prove that the purest virtue is not insensible to pretty compliments, and that modesty
itself knows how to recompense delicate flattery.

Not far from the road they were travelling stood a small group of thatched cottages--scarcely
more than huts--whose inhabitants were all afield at their work, excepting a poor blind man,
attended by a little ragged boy, who sat on a stone by the wayside, apparently to solicit alms
from those who passed by. Although he seemed to be extremely aged and feeble, he was chanting
a sort of lament over his misfortunes, and an appeal to the charity of travellers, in a loud,
whining, yet vigorous voice; promising his prayers to those who gave him of their substance,
and assuring them that they should surely go to Paradise as a reward for their generosity.
For some time before they came up with him, Isabelle and de Sigognac had heard his doleful
chant--much to the annoyance of the latter; for when one is listening, entranced, to the sweet
singing of the nightingale, it is sorely vexatious to be intruded upon by the discordant croaking
of a raven. As they drew near to the poor old blind man, they saw his little attendant bend
down and whisper in his ear, whereupon he redoubled his groans and supplications--at the same
time holding out towards them a small wooden bowl, in which were a few coppers, and shaking
it, so as to make them rattle as loudly as possible, to attract their attention. He was a venerable
looking old man, with a long white beard, and seemed to be shivering with cold, despite the
great, thick, woollen cloak in which he was wrapped. The child, a wild-looking little creature,
whose scanty, tattered clothing was but a poor protection against the stinging cold, shrunk
timidly from notice, and tried to hide himself behind his aged charge. Isabelle's tender heart
was moved to pity at the sight of so much misery, and she stopped in front of the forlorn little
group while she searched in her pocket for her purse--not finding it there she turned to her
companion and asked him to lend her a little money for the poor old blind beggar, which the
baron hastened to do--though he was thoroughly out of patience with his whining jeremiads--and,
to prevent Isabelle's coming in actual contact with him, stepped forward himself to deposit
the coins in his wooden bowl. Thereupon, instead of tearfully thanking his benefactor and invoking
blessings upon his head, after the usual fashion of such gentry, the blind man--to Isabelle's
inexpressible alarm--suddenly sprang to his feet, and straightening himself up with a jerk,
opened his arms wide, as a vulture spreads its wings for flight, gathered up his ample cloak
about his shoulders with lightning rapidity and flung it from him with a quick, sweeping motion
like that with which the fisherman casts his net. The huge, heavy mantle spread itself out
like a dense cloud directly above de Sigognac, and falling over and about him enveloped him
from head to foot in its long, clinging folds, held firmly down by the lead with which its
edges were weighted--making him a helpless prisoner--depriving him at once of sight and breath,
and of the use of his hands and feet. The young actress, wild with terror, turned to fly and
call for help, but before she could stir, or utter a sound, a hand was clapped over her mouth,
and she felt herself lifted from the ground. The old blind beggar, who, as by a miracle, had
suddenly become young and active, and possessed of all his faculties, had seized her by the
shoulders, while the boy took her by the feet, and they carried her swiftly and silently round
a clump of bushes near by to where a man on horseback and masked, was waiting for them. Two
other men, also mounted and masked, and armed to the teeth, were standing close at hand, behind
a wall that prevented their being seen from the road. Poor Isabelle, nearly fainting with fright,
was lifted up in front of the first horseman, and seated on a cloak folded so as to serve for
a cushion; a broad leather strap being passed round her waist, which also encircled that of
the rider, to hold her securely in her place. All this was done with great rapidity and dexterity,
as if her captors were accustomed to such manoeuvres, and then the horseman, who held her firmly
with one hand, shook his bridle with the other, drove his spurs into the horse's sides, and
was off like a flash--the whole thing being done in less time than it takes to describe it.
Meanwhile de Sigognac was struggling fiercely and wildly under the heavy cloak that enveloped
him--like a gladiator entangled in his adversary's net--beside himself with rage and despair,
as he gasped for breath in his stifling prison, and realized that this diabolical outrage must
be the work of the Duke of Vallombreuse. Suddenly, like an inspiration, the thought flashed
into his mind of using his dagger to free himself from the thick, clinging folds, that weighed
him down like the leaden cloaks of the wretched condemned spirits we read of with a shudder
in Dante's Inferno. With two or three strong, quick strokes he succeeded in cutting through
it, and casting it from him, with a fierce imprecation, perceived Isabelle's abductors, still
near at hand, galloping across a neighbouring field, and apparently making for a thick grove
at a considerable distance from where he was standing. As to the blind beggar and the child,
they had disappeared--probably hiding somewhere near by--but de Sigognac did not waste a second
thought on them; throwing off his own cloak, lest it should impede him, he started swiftly
in pursuit of the flying enemy and their fair prize, with fury and despair in his heart. He
was agile and vigorous, lithe of frame, fleet of foot, the very figure for a runner, and he
quickly began to gain on the horsemen. As soon as they became aware of this one of them drew
a pistol from his girdle and fired at their pursuer, but missed him; whereupon de Sigognac,
bounding rapidly from side to side as he ran, made it impossible for them to take aim at him,
and effectually prevented their arresting his course in that way. The man who had Isabelle
in front of him tried to ride on in advance, and leave the other two to deal with the baron,
but the young actress struggled so violently on the horse's neck, and kept clutching so persistently
at the bridle, that his rider could not urge him to his greatest speed. Meantime de Sigognac
was steadily gaining upon them; without slackening his pace he had managed to draw his sword
from the scabbard, and brandished it aloft, ready for action, as he ran. It is true that he
was one against three--that he was on foot while they were on horseback--but he had not time
to consider the odds against him, and he seemed possessed of the strength of a giant in Isabelle's
behalf. Making a prodigious effort, he suddenly increased his speed, and coming up with the
two horsemen, who were a little behind the other one, quickly disposed of them, by vigorously
pricking their horses' flanks with the point of his sword; for, what with fright and pain,
the animals, after plunging violently, threw off all restraint and bolted--dashing off across
country as if the devil were after them, and carrying their riders with them, just as de Sigognac
had expected and intended that they should do. The brave young baron was nearly spent--panting,
almost sobbing, as he struggled desperately on--feeling as if his heart would burst at every
agonizing throb; but he was indued with supernatural strength and endurance, and as Isabelle's
voice reached his ear calling, "Help, de Sigognac, help!" he cleared with a bound the space
that separated them, and leaping up to catch the broad leathern strap that was passed round
her and her captor, answered in a hoarse, shrill tone, "I am here." Clinging to the strap,
he ran along beside the galloping horse--like the grooms that the Romans called desultores--and
strove with all his might to pull the rider down out of his saddle. He did not dare to use
his sword to disable him, as they struggled together, lest he should wound Isabelle also; and,
meantime, the man on horseback was trying his utmost to shake off his fierce assailant-unsuccessfully,
because he had both hands fully occupied with his horse and his captive, who was doing all
she could to slip from his grasp, and throw herself into her lover's arms. Loosing his hold
on the rein for a second, the horseman managed to draw a knife from his girdle, and with one
blow severed the strap to which the baron was clinging; then, driving his spurs into the horse's
sides made the frightened animal spring suddenly forward, while de Sigognac--who was not prepared
for this emergency, and found himself deprived of all support--fell violently upon his back
in the road. He was up again in an instant, and flying after Isabelle, who was now being borne
rapidly away from him, and whose cries for help came more and more faintly to his ear; but
the moment he had lost made his pursuit hopeless, and he knew that it was all in vain when
he saw her disappear behind the thicket her ravisher had been aiming for from the first. His
heart sank within him, and he staggered as he still ran feebly on--feeling now the effects
of his superhuman exertions, and fearing at each step that his feet would carry him no farther.
He was soon overtaken by Herode and Scapin, who, alarmed by the pistol shot, and fearing that
something was wrong, had started in hot pursuit, though the lackey who served them as guide
had done all that he possibly could to hinder them, and in a few faltering words he told them
what had occurred.

"Vallombreuse again!" cried the tyrant, with an oath. "But how the devil did he get wind of
our expedition to the Chateau de Pommereuil? or can it be possible that it was all a plot from
the beginning, and we are bound on a fool's errand? I really begin to think it must be so.
If it is true, I never saw a better actor in my life than that respectable old major-domo,
confound him! But let us make haste and search this grove thoroughly; we may find some trace
of poor Isabelle; sweet creature that she is! Rough old tyrant though I be, my heart warms
to her, and I love her more tenderly than I do myself. Alas! I'm afraid, that this poor, innocent,
little fly is caught in the toils of a cruel spider, who will take care never to let us get
sight of her again."

"I will crush him," said de Sigognac, striking his heel savagely on the ground, as if he actually
had the spider under it. "I will crush the life out of him, the venomous beast!" and the fierce,
determined expression of his usually calm, mild countenance showed that this was no idle threat,
but that he was terribly in earnest.

"Look," cried Herode, as they dashed through the thicket, "there they are!"

They could just discern, through the screen of leafless but thickly interlaced branches, a
carriage, with all the curtains carefully closed, and drawn by four horses lashed to a gallop,
which was rapidly rolling away from them in the distance. The two men whose horses had run
away with them had them again under control, and were riding on either side of it--one of them
leading the horse that had carried Isabelle and her captor. HE was doubtless mounting guard
over her in the carriage--perhaps using force to keep her quiet--at thought of which de Sigognac
could scarcely control the transport of rage and agony that shook him. Although the three pursuers
followed the fugitives, as fast as they could run, it was all of no avail, for they soon lost
sight of them altogether, and nothing remained to be done but to ascertain, if possible, the
direction they had taken, so as to have some clew to poor Isabelle's whereabouts. They had
considerable difficulty in making out the marks of the carriage wheels, for the roads were
very dry; and when at length they had succeeded in tracing them to a place where four roads
met they lost them entirely--it was utterly impossible to tell which way they had gone. After
a long and fruitless search they turned back sorrowfully to join their companions, trying to
devise some plan for Isabelle's rescue, but feeling acutely how hopeless it was. They found
the others in the chariot waiting for them, just where the tyrant and Scapin had left them,
for their false guide had put spurs to his horse and ridden off after his confederates, as
soon as he became aware that their undertaking had proved successful. When Herode asked an
old peasant woman, who came by with a bundle of fagots on her back, how far it was to the Chateau
de Pommereuil, she answered that there was no place of that name anywhere in the country round.
Upon being questioned closely, she said that she had lived in the neighbourhood for seventy
years, knew every house within many leagues, and could positively assure them that there was
no such Chateau within a day's journey. So it was only too evident that they were the dupes
of the clever agents of the Duke of Vallombreuse, who had at last succeeded in getting possession
of Isabelle, as he had sworn that he would do. Accordingly, all of the party turned back towards
Paris, excepting de Sigognac, the tyrant and Scapin, who had decided to go on to the next village,
where they hoped to be able to procure horses, with which to prosecute their search for Isabelle
and her abductors.

After the baron's fall, she had been swiftly taken on to the other side of the thicket, where
the carriage stood awaiting her; then lifted down from the horse and put into it, in spite
of her frantic struggles and remonstrances. The man who had held her in front of him got down
also and sprang in after her, closing the door with a bang, and instantly they were off at
a tremendous pace. He seated himself opposite to her, and when she impetuously tried to pull
aside the curtain, so that she could see out of the window nearest to her, he respectfully
but firmly restrained her.

"Mademoiselle, I implore you to keep quiet," he said, with the utmost politeness, "and not
oblige me to use forcible means to restrain so charming and adorable a creature as your most
lovely self. No harm shall come to you--do not be afraid!--only kindness is intended; therefore
I beseech you do not persist in vain resistance. If you will only submit quietly, you shall
be treated with as much consideration and respect as a captive queen, but if you go on acting
like the devil, struggling and shrieking, I have means to bring you to terms, and I shall certainly
resort to them. THIS will stop your screaming, mademoiselle, and THIS will prevent your struggling."

As he spoke he drew out of his pocket a small gag, very artistically made, and a long, thick,
silken cord, rolled up into a ball.

"It would be barbarous indeed," he continued, "to apply such a thing as this to that sweet,
rosy mouth of yours, mademoiselle, as I am sure that you will admit--or to bind together those
pretty, delicate, little wrists, upon which no worse fetters than diamond bracelets should
ever be placed."

Poor Isabelle, furious and frightened though she was, could not but acknowledge to herself
that further physical resistance then would be worse than useless, and determined to spare
herself at least such indignities as she was at that moment threatened with; so, without vouchsafing
a word to her attendant, she threw herself back into the corner of the carriage, closed her
eyes, and tried to keep perfectly still. But in spite of her utmost endeavours she could not
altogether repress an occasional sob, nor hold back the great tears that welled forth from
under her drooping eyelids and rolled down over her pale cheeks, as she thought of de Sigognac's
despair and her own danger.

"After the nervous excitement comes the moist stage;" said her masked guardian to himself,
"things are following their usual and natural course. I am very glad of it, for I should have
greatly disliked to be obliged to act a brutal part with such a sweet, charming girl as this."

Now and then Isabelle opened her eyes and cast a timid glance at her abductor, who finally
said to her, in a voice he vainly strove to render soft and mild:

"You need not be afraid of me, mademoiselle! I would not harm you in any way for the world.
If fortune had been more generous to me I certainly would never have undertaken this enterprise
against such a lovely, gentle young lady as you are; but poor men like me are driven to all
sorts of expedients to earn a little money; they have to take whatever comes within their reach,
and sacrifice their scruples to their necessities."

"You do admit then," said Isabelle vehemently, "that you have been bribed to carry me off?
An infamous, cruel, outrageous thing it is."

"After what I have had to do," he replied, "it would be idle to deny it. There are a good many
philosophers like myself in Paris, mademoiselle, who, instead of indulging in love affairs,
and intrigues of various sorts, of their own, interest themselves in those of other people,
and, for a consideration, make use of their courage, ingenuity and strength to further them.
But to change the subject, how charming you were in that last new play! You went through the
scene of the avowal with a grace I have never seen equalled. I applauded you to the echo; the
pair of hands that kept it up so perseveringly and vigorously, you know, belonged to me."

"I beg you to dispense with these ill-judged remarks and compliments, and to tell me where
you are taking me, in this strange, outrageous manner, against my will, and, in despite of
all the ordinary usages of civilized society."

"I cannot tell you that, mademoiselle, and besides, it would do you no sort of good to know.
In our profession, you see, we are obliged to observe as much secrecy and discretion as confessors
and physicians. Indeed, in such affairs as this we often do not know the names of the parties
we are working for ourselves."

"Do you mean to say that you do not know who has employed you to commit this abominable, cruel
crime?"

"It makes no difference whether I know his name or not, since I am not at liberty to disclose
it to you. Think over your numerous admirers, mademoiselle! the most ardent and least favoured
one among them would probably be at the bottom of all this."

Finding that she could not get any information from him, Isabelle desisted, and did not speak
again. She had not the slightest doubt that the Duke of Vallombreuse was the author of this
new and daring enterprise. The significant and threatening way in which he had said "au revoir,
mademoiselle," as he quitted her presence after she had repulsed him a few days before, had
haunted her, and she had been in constant dread ever since of some new outrage. She hoped,
against hope, that de Sigognac, her valiant lover, would yet come to her rescue, and thought
proudly of the gallant deeds he had already done in her behalf that day--but how was he to
find out where to seek her?

"If worst comes to worst," she said to herself, "I still have Chiquita's knife, and I can and
will escape from my persecutor in that way, if all other means fail."

For two long hours she sat motionless, a prey to sad and terrible thoughts and fears, while
the carriage rolled swiftly on without slackening its speed, save once, for a moment, when
they changed horses. As the curtains were all lowered, she could not catch even a glimpse of
the country she was passing through, nor tell in what direction she was being driven. At last
she heard the hollow sound of a drawbridge under the wheels; the carriage stopped, and her
masked companion, promptly opening the door, jumped nimbly out and helped her to alight. For Mulberries
of all Sorts thrive there to Admiration, and the Heat of the Summer has been found to agree with
the Nature of the Silk-Worm extreamly well; so that the only Reason that I know, why the Gentlemen
formerly concerned in making of Silk in Virginia drop'd their Proceedings, was the great Profit
that Tobacco brought them in in those Days; which being raised there only, turned then to an
extraordinary Advantage, much better than any other Project; but now when so much Tobacco is made,
and the Gain so much less than formerly, I can't imagine why the Silk Trade is not there revived;
which I am very positive would turn to a very great Account, if carried on by good Managers. To
this Nature seems to invite us; for upon the Leaves of the Chinckapin (which seem somewhat
like Mulberry Leaves) I have frequently found a very large Worm not much unlike the Silk-Worm, only
much bigger.

If the Manufacture of Silk was carried on in Virginia, every Body knows what Profit it must bring to
make Silk of the Produce of our own Dominions, in great Plenty, and at cheaper Rates than we
can have it from Asia.

Besides, we may observe that the great Numbers of People employed in this Manufacture, for
the most Part, might be the young, the aged, and the disabled, who could not work at any thing
that required hard Labour or much Stirring.

As for Hops, England might save a great deal of Trouble and Expence, and employ their People
in better Business than Hop-Yards, if Hop-Grounds were cultivated in Virginia, which is much
fitter for the Purpose.

As for physical Plants and Trees, abundance of Poor might be employed in simpling and collecting
Drugs for the Apothecaries Service, which abound there; such as Sassafras, Saxafras, Snakeroot,
with numberless more, whose Virtue is unknown; and undoubtedly among such various Sorts of anonymous
Plants and Shrubs, there must be many whose Qualities are strange to the most skilful Europeans,
tho' many of them be understood by the Indian Doctors: If it be not the true Cortex, yet they have
a Bark very like it in Colour, Taste, and Operation.

I know that Abundance of Sumack is yearly consumed in England; but not being perfect in the
Use and Nature of it, I shall only say that it grows there in great Plenty; and that the Indians
have several fine Colours both for Dying and Painting, that we know nothing of, as to their Composition
and Use; but Enquiry into these Things, and Experience might, for what any knows, in a small
Time turn to a good Account, both for the publick Advantage, and for the Interest of particular
Persons.

I shall say little of Sawing-Mills, since they are already in Use there, and the great Benefit of
them is so well known. Certainly it must be improper to bestow much Labour and Expence upon
that which might easily be done for a small Cost, and with much quicker Expedition; yet is this
wonderful and useful Invention prohibited in some Parts of Great Britain, upon Account of a few
that pretend they can't get their Livelihood by any other, but the stupid slavish Work of Sawing:
But in my Opinion we might as well prohibit the Use of Boats in all our Rivers, because it interferes
with the Interest of the Carriers, and hinders the Consumption of great Quantities of Hay
and Oats in the Inns. I wonder that they don't neglect the Use of Horses, Jacks, Handspikes,
and Cranes in his Majesty's Yards, as well as Sawing-Mills; since each of them abbreviates
Labour and lessens the Expence, requiring fewer People than must be employed, were it not for those
Inventions, so much hated by the common People; but certainly these might be so employed in
other Business, as to get more Money with less Labour. But to return to Virginia, I am certain
that if more Sawing-Mills were set up there, it would bring great Profit to the Owners, employ
many People there, and make Timber for Ships and Houses come at a much cheaper Rate in England,
than it now does, without any Loss to the English landed Gentlemen or Timber Merchants.

Paper-Mills I believe would answer well there; for there are good Runs of Water with Timber for
nothing for building them, and I am sure the Negroes would supply them with Rags enough for
Trifles; to which add the Advantage of Water Carriage; these need not interfere with the English
Paper-Mills, but only supply us with such Quantities of Paper, as we buy from foreign Countries.

As
for carrying on the Fishing Trade in Virginia, though there be Plenty of Fish there, yet I
believe other Countries where Fisheries are establish'd, and that have little else to mind and
depend upon, would outdo it in this Respect; only more Whales might be taken upon the Eastern
Shore, and bring good Gain to such People as would make it their Business; and I don't question
but the Sturgeons (with the best of which the Rivers abound) might with good Management and
Industry be made to surpass all others, both for Cheapness and Goodness, for they are large,
fine, and easily taken; nay, they frequently leap, some ashoar and some in Boats, as I have
been very credibly informed.

Upon the Rivers and Creeks are vast large Marshes, which being drained and secured with mud Walls,
would employ abundance of People, and might be converted into as good Meadows and as large, as
those upon the Thames about and below London.

Such Meadows are much wanting there, and would well recompence the Cost and Trouble of the
Undertakers of such noble Projects; besides this would confine the Rivers to their proper Channels;
whereas now they cover for Miles from each Shoar large Quantities of flat and shoaly Ground,
useless and incommodious. However impracticable or difficult this Task may appear to some, yet
I doubt not but in Process of Time it may be effected.

The upper Parts of Virginia are deprived of the Advantage of Water Carriage, because the Rivers
above the Falls are generally full of Trees brought down by Land Floods, with some Rocks here
and there; but they might be made navigable, and cleared very easily
with small skilful Labour, for they are generally broad and fuller
of Water than our inland Rivers where Boats and Barges of great Burden
can pass; and Wears might be occasionally made there as up the Thames;
but the main Difficulty would be at the Falls or Cataracts, where
the Water falls over vast Rocks with an hideous Noise and great Force.

Hither Sloops can come, where the Goods might be landed with Cranes,
and then put on Board the Boats above the Falls; and by the like Methods
might Goods be sent down.

But in Time it may be worth while to turn Part of the Rivers, and make Locks one above another, whereby
Sloops might easily be let down or taken up, and so pass the Falls; like as the large Boats of Pleasure
and Burden are carried with Profit and Ease thro' Vallies and over Hills quite a-cross France,
in the wonderful Canal of Languedoc, which was contrived by the late King, in order to make a
Communication from our Seas, to the Mediterranean through the Heart (almost) of his Kingdom; which
Action has added to his Glory as well as Profit, and brings in a great Income both to the Crown
and to the Undertaker of this most wonderful Work. If in England we will not follow this Example
by making a Communication from the head Branches of the Thames into the Severn, which is very
practicable, the Distance being but a few Miles; yet I question not but in a few Years they
will be obliged to imitate the Locks of Languedoc at the Falls in Virginia.

In the Rocks up James River, and in other Places is found a Stone resembling a Diamond, much
nearer than any Crystal or Bristol-Stone, being very hard and ornamental.

There has been formerly discovered a Sand taken for Gold Dust; and towards the Mountains are variety
of Stones, some seeming to contain several Kinds of Metals, and others are good for Building;
among which is the Appearance of Abundance of excellent Marble of several Sorts. Upon the
River Sides is cast up by the Tides abundance of black heavy Sand resembling Smith's Filings;
but the Nature and Vertue of this is unknown as yet: I believe it is washed from some Veins of
Mines at the Bottoms of the Rivers, or is carried down by the Current, as Gold Dust in Africa,
from the upper Parts of the Rivers, and from the Rocks and Mountains.

In several Places is Coal enough near the Surface of the Earth; and undoubtedly in Time they will either
have Occasion or Vent for it, to supply other Places, if they will not use it themselves; but
if Coal Works were there carried on to Advantage, Newcastle may witness, what Numbers of Ships
and People are employed in such Affairs, and what vast Profit accrues from thence.

If our Iron Works in Virginia meet with any tolerable Encouragement, we shall have no Need to apply
to Spain and Sweden for Iron, for we have there enough to stock all Europe; and as I have been
informed it surpasses all other Iron in Goodness and Cheapness. This Manufacture might be
carried on without any Detriment to the Iron Merchants and Makers in England; for they might
stint the Quantity, have it all brought into their Hands, and use themselves what they want instead
of foreign Iron, and vend Abroad the Overplus that they may permit to be made. Certainly this
most useful Commodity would come cheaper from our own Dominions than from other Countries; and
in working it from the Oar to the Bar would employ great Numbers of People that now beg or steal
for their Living. As for working Iron up into Instruments and Tools in Virginia, I believe they
would scarce desire so great Liberty; unless upon Consideration the Gentlemen concerned in
such hard Ware found it to be for the Interest of themselves, their Workmen, and the Publick,
to send over People to make all Sorts of Utensils in Iron in Virginia,
where they may have all Sorts of Provisions and Materials for their
Work much cheaper than in England; where they may have Land to settle
for little or nothing; where Wood, Oar, and Water Conveniences are
plentiful.

What Detriment would it be to work up Iron there, if it may be done cheaper, and by the same
People, who are so numerous in England that they can (abundance of them) hardly get Work and
a poor Livelihood? But if it will not be granted that Iron shall be wrought in Virginia, yet
might it be cast there; if Forges will not be allowed there, yet might Furnaces be encouraged,
from whence our Merchants may be supplied with better and cheaper Iron than from other Places;
and Recompence might easily be made in the Trade to Spain and Sweden, &c. for the Deficiency
that would ensue in the Quantities of Goods exported thither in Exchange for their Iron.

Virginia is justly esteemed one of the most considerable Branches of the British Dominions; may
it then not be thought very hard that the Virginians should not only be debarred the Favours
allowed other Britons; but also have less Privilege allowed them than is given to foreign Nations?
What then may be the Reason why other Nations are permitted to import their bar Iron, whereas the
Virginians shall not make a Bar, and must pay the Duty of foreign Iron for all the pig and sow
Iron that they make?

I might mention more Projects, that in all Probability would turn to an extraordinary Advantage,
if carried on in Virginia; but I presume these may suffice as a Specimen to shew how useful and
easy it is to promote many Trades, Arts, and Manufactures there, and what Numbers of poor,
idle, and wicked People may there be employed, and get a plentiful Maintenance and Settlement for their
Families, and by their Labour may enrich themselves, the Planters and Merchants, benefit our
Trade, encrease the Revenue of the Crown, and advance the Interest and Glory of Great Britain,
Ireland, and all the English Plantations and Settlements Abroad.

I shall conclude this Scheme with observing, that the People sent over for such Employments as are
here mentioned, when rightly settled, might have their Provision much cheaper than in England,
and might have their Cloths sent over at the best Hand; and might be seated conveniently on
Tracts of Land taken up, bought, or rented by long and cheap Leases; which besides the Profit
of their Labour would secure Estates for Thousands of poor miserable
Wretches, would advance the Price of Land, and augment the Income
of the Quit-Rents.

SCHEME IV.

Of Trade in Virginia.

The Projects before laid down might be put in Execution without any Impediment to the planting
of Tobacco, Corn, &c. in the Methods that are now practised, and without any Loss to the present
Virginia Trade, and Income to the Crown arising from Tobacco, or Decrease of the vast Quantities
of all Sorts of Commodities yearly transported to that large Plantation. And till such Designs
as are here laid down be put in Execution, or brought to due Regulation and Perfection, it
might not be Cost and Labour thrown away if the Virginia Gentlemen, Traders and Planters attempted
at some, if not all the Things mentioned for their Advantage in the last Scheme; especially
when Tobacco is so very low, that it is not worth while to plant too much of it, which frequently
happens. They might soon perceive if these Designs would answer Expectation; and Trials for
Experience at their Leisure would not cost much; for their Experience, I say, rather than their
Satisfaction, because they may be satisfied as to the Practicableness
and Usefulness of most of these Things, from the repeated Proofs that
have been already made in most of these Commodities, together with
many more; particularly Hides, which I forgot to mention, which are
now hardly of any Use or Value there, but might be tann'd very cheap,
because of the Plenty of Bark; and I believe likewise that good Use
might be made of their Sheep and Calf-Skins, which are now of no Value
nor Use worth speaking of. What Numbers would the Manufacture of these
Things employ, and what Advantage would it bring to the Workmen and
the Planters?

But I see that these Propositions may raise the loud
Clamours of Thousands of People concerned in England, in the Trades
belonging to all the Commodities here spoken of: In Answer to whose
various Objections it may be replied, that all these Things would
be wrought by their own Countrymen, poor Neighbours, or Friends; that
it will ease them of their Poor, Vagabonds, and Villains: That all
these Goods are to be transported to England, so that in reality Virginia
would be only as a Yard or Work-House where these Servants and Journeymen
would labour for the English; besides several of these Things are
such as we are wholly or in part supplied with from other Nations;
and certainly we had better have Goods of the Produce of our own People
and Countries, than buy them of Strangers, who make them for us; and
if too great Quantities of any kind should be made, more than our
own Consumption requires, surely it will be very advantageous for
us, if we can supply other Nations with such Goods, the best of their
Kind, and at the cheapest Rate.
Even if she had been actually in the room with them, she would have found much of their conversation
incomprehensible, as it was largely made up of the extraordinary slang of the Paris street
Arabs and rascals generally. From time to time one or the other of the participants in this
orgy seemed to propose a toast, whereupon they would all clink their glasses together before
raising them to their lips, drain them at a draught, and applaud vociferously, while there
was a constant drawing of corks and placing of fresh bottles on the table by the servant who
was waiting upon them. Just as Isabelle, thoroughly disgusted with the brutality of the scene
before her, was about to turn away, Malartic rapped loudly on the table to obtain a hearing,
and after making a proposition, which met with ready and cordial assent, rose from his seat,
cleared his throat, and began to sing, or rather shout, a ribald song, all the others joining
in the chorus, with horrible grimaces and gesticulations, which so frightened poor Isabelle
that she could scarcely find strength to creep away from the loathsome spectacle.

Before re-entering the house she went to look at the drawbridge, with a faint hope that she
might chance upon some unexpected means of escape, but all was secure there, and a little postern,
opening on the moat, which she discovered near by, was also carefully fastened, with bolts
and bars strong enough to keep out an army. As these seemed to be the only means of exit from
the chateau, she felt that she was a prisoner indeed, and understood why it had not been deemed
necessary to lock any of the inner doors against her. She walked slowly back to the gallery,
entered it by the glass door, found her lamp burning tranquilly just where she had left it,
retraced her steps swiftly through the long suite of spacious apartments already described
and flew up the grand staircase to her own room, congratulating herself upon not having been
detected in her wanderings. She put her lamp down in the antechamber, but paused in terror
on the threshold of the inner room, stifling a shriek that had nearly escaped her as she caught
sight of a strange, wild figure crouching on the hearth. But her fears were short-lived, for
with an exclamation of delight the intruder sprang towards her and she saw that it was Chiquita--but
Chiquita in boy's clothes.

"Have you got the knife yet?" said the strange little creature abruptly to Isabelle--"the knife
with three bonny red marks."

"Yes, Chiquita, I have it here in my bosom," she replied. "But why do you ask? Is my life in
danger?"

"A knife," said the child with fierce, sparkling eyes, "a knife is a faithful friend and servant;
it never betrays or fails its master, if he is careful to give it a drink now and then, for
a knife is often thirsty you know."

"You frighten me, you naughty child!" exclaimed Isabelle, much troubled and agitated by these
sinister, extravagant words, which perhaps, she thought, might be intended as a friendly warning.

"Sharpen the edge on the marble of the chimney-piece, like this," continued Chiquita, "and
polish the blade on the sole of your shoe."

"Why do you tell me all this?" cried Isabelle, turning very pale.

"For nothing in particular, only he who would defend himself gets his weapons ready--that's all."

These odd, fierce phrases greatly alarmed Isabelle, yet Chiquita's presence in her room was
a wonderful relief and comfort to her. The child apparently cherished a warm and sincere affection
for her, which was none the less genuine because of its having arisen from such a trivial incident--for
the pearl beads were more precious than diamonds to Chiquita. She had given a voluntary promise
to Isabelle never to kill or harm her, and with her strange, wild, yet exalted notions of honour
she looked upon it as a solemn obligation and vow, by which she must always abide--for there
was a certain savage nobility in Chiquita's character, and she could be faithful unto death.
Isabelle was the only human being, excepting Agostino, who had been kind to her. She had smiled
upon the unkempt child, and given her the coveted necklace, and Chiquita loved her for it,
while she adored her beauty. Isabelle's sweet countenance, so angelically mild and pure, exercised
a wonderful influence over the neglected little savage, who had always been surrounded by fierce,
haggard faces, expressive of every evil passion, and disfigured by indulgence in the lowest
vices, and excesses of every kind.

"But how does it happen that you are here, Chiquita?" asked Isabelle, after a short silence.
"Were you sent to keep guard over me?"

"No, I came alone and of my own accord," answered Chiquita, "because I saw the light and fire.
I was tired of lying all cramped up in a corner, and keeping quiet, while those beastly men
drank bottle after bottle of wine, and gorged themselves with the good things set before them.
I am so little, you know, so young and slender, that they pay no more attention to me than
they would to a kitten asleep under the table. While they were making a great noise I slipped
quietly away unperceived. The smell of the wine and the food sickened me. I am used to the
sweet perfume of the heather, and the pure resinous odour of the pines. I cannot breathe in
such an atmosphere as there is down below there."

"And you were not afraid to wander alone, without a light, through the long, dark corridors,
and the lonely, deserted rooms?"

"Chiquita does not know what it is to be afraid--her eyes can see in the dark, and her feet
never stumble. The very owls shut their eyes when they meet her, and the bats fold their wings
when she comes near their haunts. Wandering ghosts stand aside to let her pass, or turn back
when they see her approaching. Night is her comrade and hides no secrets from her, and Chiquita
never betrays them to the day."

Her eyes flashed and dilated as she spoke, and Isabelle looked at her with growing wonder,
not unmixed with a vague sensation of fear.

"I like much better to stay here, in this heavenly quiet, by the fire with you," continued
the child, "than down there in all the uproar. You are so beautiful that I love to look at
you-you are like the Blessed Virgin that I have seen shining above the altar. Only from afar
though, for they always chase me out of the churches with the dogs, because I am so shabby
and forlorn. How white your hand is! Mine looks like a monkey's paw beside it--and your hair
is as fine and soft as silk, while mine is all rough and tangled. Oh! I am so horribly ugly--you
must think so too."

"No, my dear child," Isabelle replied, touched by her naive expressions of affection and admiration,
"I do not think so. You have beauty too--you only need to make yourself neat and clean to be
as pretty a little girl as one would wish to see."

"Do you really think so? Are you telling me true? I would steal fine clothes if they would
make me pretty, for then Agostino would love me."

This idea brought a little flush of colour to her thin brown cheeks, and for a few minutes
she seemed lost in a pleasant reverie.

"Do you know where we are?" asked Isabelle, when Chiquita looked up at her again.

"In a chateau that belongs to the great seignior who has so much money, and who wanted to carry
you off at Poitiers. I had only to draw the bolt and it would have been done then. But you
gave me the pearl necklace, and I love you, and I would not do anything you did not like."

"Yet you have helped to carry me off this time," said Isabelle reproachfully. "Is it because
you don't love me any more that you have given me up to my enemies?"

"Agostino ordered me, and I had to obey; besides, some other child could have played guide
to the blind man as well as I, and then I could not have come into the chateau with you, do
you see?--here I may be able to do something to help you. I am brave, active and strong, though
I am so small, and quick as lightning too--and I shall not let anybody harm you."

"Is this chateau very far from Paris?" asked Isabelle, drawing Chiquita up on her lap. "Did
you hear any one mention the name of this place?"

"Yes, one of them called it--now what was it?" said the child, looking up at the ceiling and
absently scratching her head, as if to stimulate her memory.

"Try to remember it, my child!" said Isabelle, softly stroking Chiquita's brown cheeks, which
flushed with delight at the unwonted caress--no one had ever petted the poor child in her life
before.

"I think that it was Val-lom-breuse," said Chiquita at last, pronouncing the syllables separately
and slowly, as if listening to an inward echo. "Yes, Vallombreuse, I am sure of it now. It
is the name of the seignior that your Captain Fracasse wounded in a duel--he would have done
much better if he had killed him outright--saved a great deal of trouble to himself and to
you. He is very wicked, that rich duke, though he does throw his gold about so freely by the
handfuls--just like a man sowing grain. You hate him, don't you? and you would be glad if you
could get away from him, eh?"

"Oh yes, indeed!" cried Isabelle impetuously. "But alas! it is impossible--a deep moat runs
all around this chateau the drawbridge is up, the postern securely fastened--there is no way
of escape."

"Chiquita laughs at bolts and bars, at high walls and deep moats. Chiquita can get out of the
best guarded prison whenever she pleases, and fly away to the moon, right before the eyes of
her astonished jailer. If you choose, before the sun rises your Captain Fracasse shall know
where the treasure that he seeks is hidden."

Isabelle was afraid, when she heard these incoherent phrases, that the child was not quite
sane, but her little face was so calm, her dark eyes so clear and steady, her voice so earnest,
and she spoke with such an air of quiet conviction, that the supposition was not admissible,
and the strange little creature did seem to be possessed of some of the magic powers she claimed.
As if to convince Isabelle that she was not merely boasting, she continued, "Let me think a
moment, to make a plan--don't speak nor move, for the least sound interferes with me--I must
listen to the spirit."

Chiquita bent down her head, put her hand over her eyes, and remained for several minutes perfectly
motionless; then she raised her head and without a word went and opened the window, clambered
up on the sill, and gazed out intently into the darkness.

"Is she really going to take flight?" said Isabelle to herself, as she anxiously watched Chiquita's
movements, not knowing what to expect. Exactly opposite to the window, on the other side of
the moat, was an immense tree, very high and old, whose great branches, spreading out horizontally,
overhung the water; but the longest of them did not reach the wall of the chateau by at least
ten feet. It was upon this tree, however, that Chiquita's plan for escape depended. She turned
away from the window, drew from her pocket a long cord made of horse-hair, very fine and strong,
which she carefully unrolled to its full length and laid upon the floor; then produced from
another pocket an iron hook, which she fastened securely to the cord. This done to her satisfaction,
she went to the window again, and threw the end of the cord with the hook into the branches
of the tree. The first time she was unsuccessful; the iron hook fell and struck against the
stone wall beneath the casement; but at the second attempt the hook caught and held, and Chiquita,
drawing the cord taut, asked Isabelle to take hold of it and bear her whole weight on it, until
the branch was bent as far as possible towards the chateau--coming five or six feet nearer
to the window where they were. Then Chiquita tied the cord firmly to the ornamental iron railing
of the tiny balcony, with a knot that could not slip, climbed over, and grasping the cord with
both hands, swung herself off, and hung suspended over the waters of the moat far below. Isabelle
held her breath. With a rapid motion of the hands Chiquita crossed the clear space, reached
the tree safely, and climbed down into it with the agility of a monkey.

"Now undo the knot so that I can take the cord with me," she said, in a low but very distinct
tone of voice to Isabelle, who began to breathe freely again, "unless, indeed, you would like
to follow me. But you would be frightened and dizzy, and might fall, so you had better stay
where you are. Good-bye! I am going straight to Paris, and shall soon be back again; I can
get on quickly in this bright moonlight."

Isabelle did as she was bid, and the branch, being no longer held by the cord, swung back to
its original position. In less than a minute Chiquita had scrambled down to the ground, and
the captive soon lost sight of her slender little figure as she walked off briskly towards
the capital.

All that had just occurred seemed like a strange dream to Isabelle, now that she found herself
alone again. She remained for some time at the open casement, looking at the great tree opposite,
and trembling as she realized the terrible risk Chiquita had run for her sake--feeling warm
gratitude and tender affection for the wild, incomprehensible little creature, who manifested
such a strong attachment for herself, and a new hope sprang up in her heart as she thought
that now de Sigognac would soon know where to find her. The cold night air at last forced her
to close the window, and after arranging the curtains over it carefully, so as to show no signs
of having been disturbed, she returned to her easy-chair by the fire; and just in time, for
she had scarcely seated herself when the major-domo entered, followed by the two servants,
again carrying the little table, set for one, with her supper daintily arranged upon it. A
few minutes earlier and Chiquita's escape would have been discovered and prevented. Isabelle,
still greatly agitated by all that had passed, could not eat, and signed to the servants to
remove the supper untouched. Whereupon the major-domo himself put some bread and wine on a
small table beside the bed, and placed on a chair near the fire a richly trimmed dressing-gown,
and everything that a lady could require in making her toilet for the night. Several large
logs of wood were piled up on the massive andirons, the candles were renewed, and then the
major-domo, approaching Isabelle with a profound obeisance, said to her that if she desired
the services of a maid he would send one to her. As she made a gesture of dissent he withdrew,
after again bowing to her most respectfully. When they had all gone, Isabelle, quite worn out,
threw herself down on the outside of the bed without undressing, so as to be ready in case
of any sudden alarm in the night; then took out Chiquita's knife, opened it, and laid it beside
her. Having taken these precautions, she closed her eyes, and hoped that she could for a while
forget her troubles in sleep; but she had been so much excited and agitated that her nerves
were all quivering, and it was long before she even grew drowsy. There were so many strange,
incomprehensible noises in the great, empty house to disturb and startle her; and in her own
room, the cracking of the furniture, the ticking of a death-watch in the wall near her bed,
the gnawing of a rat behind the wainscot, the snapping of the fire. At each fresh sound she
started up in terror, with her poor heart throbbing as if it would burst out of her breast,
a cold perspiration breaking out on her forehead, and trembling in every limb. At last, however,
weary nature had to succumb, and she fell into a deep sleep, which lasted until she was awakened
by the sun shining on her face. Her first thought was to wonder that she had not yet seen the
Duke of Vallombreuse; but she was thankful for his absence, and hoped that it would continue
until Chiquita should have brought de Sigognac to the rescue.

The reason why the young duke had not yet made his appearance was one of policy. He had taken
especial pains to show himself at Saint Germain on the day of the abduction--had joined the
royal hunting party, and been exceedingly and unwontedly affable to all who happened to come
in contact with him. In the evening he had played at cards, and lost ostentatiously sums that
would have been of importance to a less wealthy man--being all the time in a very genial mood--especially
after the arrival of a mounted messenger, who brought him a little note. Thus the duke's desire
to be able to establish an incontestable alibi, in case of need, had spared Isabelle thus far
the infliction of his hated presence; but while she was congratulating herself upon it, and
welcoming the sunshine that streamed into her room, she heard the drawbridge being let down,
and immediately after a carriage dashed over it and thundered into the court. Her heart sank,
for who would be likely to enter in that style save the master of the house? Her face grew
deathly pale, she reeled, and for one dreadful moment felt as if she should faint; but, rallying
her courage, she reminded herself that Chiquita had gone to bring de Sigognac to her aid, and
determined afresh to meet bravely whatever trials might be in store for her, until her beloved
knight and champion should arrive, to rescue her from her terrible danger and irksome imprisonment.
Her eyes involuntarily sought the portrait over the chimney-piece, and after passionately invoking
it, and imploring its aid and protection, as if it had been her patron saint, she felt a certain
sense of ease and security, as if what she had so earnestly entreated would really be accorded
to her.

A full hour had elapsed, which the young duke had employed in the duties of the toilet, and
in snatching a few minutes of repose after his rapid night-journey, when the major-domo presented
himself, and asked respectfully if Isabelle would receive the Duke of Vallombreuse.

"I am a prisoner," she replied, with quiet dignity, "and this demand, which would be fitting
and polite in any ordinary case, is only a mockery when addressed to one in my position. I
have no means of preventing your master's coming into this room, nor can I quit it to avoid
him. I do not accept his visit but submit to it. He must do as he pleases about it, and come
and go when he likes. He allows me no choice in the matter. Go and tell him exactly what I
have said to you."

The major-domo bowed low, and retired backward to the door, having received strict orders to
treat Isabelle with the greatest respect and consideration. In a few minutes he returned, and
announced the Duke of Vallombreuse.

Isabelle half rose from her chair by the fire, but turned very pale and fell back into it,
as her unwelcome visitor made his appearance at the door. He closed it and advanced slowly
towards her, hat in hand, but when he perceived that she was trembling violently, and looked
ready to faint, he stopped in the middle of the room, made a low bow, and said in his most
dulcet, persuasive tones:

"If my presence is too unbearably odious now to the charming Isabelle, and she would like to
have a little time to get used to the thought of seeing me, I will withdraw. She is my prisoner,
it is true, but I am none the less her slave."

"This courtesy is tardy," Isabelle replied coldly, "after the violence you have made use of
against me."

"That is the natural result," said the duke, with a smile, "of pushing people to extremity
by a too obstinate and prolonged resistance. Having lost all hope, they stop at nothing--knowing
that they cannot make matters any worse, whatever they do. If you had only been willing to
suffer me to pay my court to you in the regular way, and shown a little indulgence to my love,
I should have quietly remained among the ranks of your passionate adorers; striving, by dint
of delicate attentions, chivalrous devotion, magnificent offerings, and respectful yet ardent
solicitations, to soften that hard heart of yours. If I could not have succeeded in inspiring
it with love for me, I might at least have awakened in it that tender pity which is akin to
love, and which is so often only its forerunner. In the end, perhaps, you would have repented
of your cruel severity, and acknowledged that you had been unjust towards me. Believe me, my
charming Isabelle, I should have neglected nothing to bring it about."

"If you had employed only honest and honourable means in your suit," Isabelle rejoined, "I
should have felt very sorry that I had been so unfortunate as to inspire an attachment I could
not reciprocate, and would have given you my warm sympathy, and friendly regard, instead of
being reluctantly compelled, by repeated outrages, to hate you instead.

"You do hate me then?--you acknowledge it?" the duke cried, his voice trembling with rage;
but he controlled himself, and after a short pause continued, in a gentler tone, "Yet I do
not deserve it. My only wrongs towards you, if any there be, have come from the excess and
ardour of my love; and what woman, however chaste and virtuous, can be seriously angry with
a gallant gentleman because he has been conquered by the power of her adorable charms? whether
she so desired or not."

"Certainly, that is not a reason for dislike or anger, my lord, if the suitor does not overstep
the limits of respect, as all women will agree. But when his insolent impatience leads him
to commit excesses, and he resorts to fraud, abduction, and imprisonment, as you have not hesitated
to do, there is no other result possible than an unconquerable aversion. Coercion is always
and inevitably revolting to a nature that has any proper pride or delicacy. Love, true love,
is divine, and cannot be furnished to order, or extorted by violence. It is spontaneous, and
freely given--not to be bought, nor yet won by importunity."

"Is an unconquerable aversion then all that I am to expect from you?" said Vallombreuse, who
had become pale to ghastliness, and been fiercely gnawing his under lip, while Isabelle was
speaking, in her sweet, clear tones, which fell on his ear like the soft chiming of silver
bells, and only served to enhance his devouring passion.

"There is yet one means of winning my friendship and gratitude--be noble and generous, and
give me back the liberty of which you have deprived me. Let me return to my companions, who
must be anxiously seeking for me, and suffering keenly because of their fears for my safety.
Let me go and resume my lowly life as an actress, before this outrageous affair--which may
irreparably injure my reputation--has become generally known, or my absence from the theatre
been remarked by the public."

"How unfortunate it is," cried the duke, angrily, "that you should ask of me the only thing
I cannot do for you. If you had expressed your desire for an empire, a throne, I would have
given it to you--or if you had wished for a star, I would have climbed up into the heavens
to get it for you. But here you calmly ask me to open the door of this cage, little bird, to
which you would never come back of your own accord, if I were stupid enough to let you go.
It is impossible! I know well that you love me so little, or rather hate me so much, that you
would never see me again of your own free will--that my only chance of enjoying your charming
society is to lock you up--keep you my prisoner. However much it may cost my pride, I must
do it--for I can no more live without you than a plant without the light. My thoughts turn
to you as the heliotrope to the sun. Where you are not, all is darkness for me. If what I have
dared to do is a crime, I must make the best of it, and profit by it as much as I can--for
you would never forgive nor overlook it, whatever you may say now. Here at least I have you--I
hold you. I can surround you with my love and care, and strive to melt the ice of your coldness
by the heat of my passion. Your eyes must behold me--your ears must listen to my voice. I shall
exert an influence over you, if only by the alarm and detestation I am so unfortunate as to
inspire in your gentle breast; the sound of my footsteps in your antechamber will make you
start and tremble. And then, besides all that, this captivity separates you effectually from
the miserable fellow you fancy that you love--and whom I abhor; because he has dared to turn
your heart away from me. I can at least enjoy this small satisfaction, of keeping you from
him; and I will not let you go free to return to him--you may be perfectly sure of that, my
fair lady!"

"And how long do you intend to keep me captive?--not like a Christian gentleman, but like a
lawless corsair."

"Until you have learned to love me--or at least to say that you have, which amounts to the
same thing."

Then he made her a low bow, and departed, with as self-satisfied and jaunty an air as if he
had been in truth a favoured suitor. Half an hour later a lackey brought in a beautiful bouquet,
of the rarest and choicest flowers, while the stems were clasped by a magnificent bracelet,
fit for a queen's wearing. A little piece of folded paper nestled among the flowers--a note
from the duke--and the fair prisoner recognised the handwriting as the same in which "For Isabelle"
was written, on the slip of paper that accompanied the casket of jewels at Poitiers. The note
read as follows:

"DEAR ISABELLE--I send you these flowers, though I know they will be ungraciously received.
As they come from me, their beauty and fragrance will not find favour in your eyes. But whatever
may be their fate, even though you only touch them to fling them disdainfully out of the window,
they will force you to think for a moment--if it be but in anger--of him who declares himself,
in spite of everything, your devoted adorer,

"VALLOMBREUSE."

This note, breathing of the most specious gallantry, and tenacity of purpose, did produce very
much the effect it predicted; for it made Isabelle exceedingly angry; and, without even once
inhaling the delicious perfume of the flowers, or pausing for an instant to admire their beauty,
she flung the bouquet, diamond bracelet and all, out into the antechamber. Never surely were
lovely blossoms so badly treated; and yet Isabelle was excessively fond of them; but she feared
that if she even allowed them to remain a little while in her room, their donor would presume
upon the slight concession. She had scarcely resumed her seat by the fire, after disposing
of the obnoxious bouquet, when a maid appeared, who had been sent to wait upon her. She was
a pretty, refined looking girl, but very pale, and with an air of deep melancholy--as if she
were brooding over a secret sorrow. She offered her services to Isabelle without looking up,
and in a low, subdued voice, as if she feared that the very walls had ears. Isabelle allowed
her to take down and comb out her long, silky hair, which was very much dishevelled, and to
arrange it again as she habitually wore it; which was quickly and skilfully done. Then the
maid opened a wardrobe and took out several beautiful gowns, exquisitely made and trimmed,
and just Isabelle's size; but she would not even look at them, and sharply ordered that they
should instantly be put back where they belonged, though her own dress was very much the worse
for the rough treatment it had been subjected to on the preceding day, and it was a trial to
the sweet, dainty creature to be so untidy. But she was determined to accept nothing from the
duke, no matter how long her captivity might last. The maid did not insist, but acceded to
her wishes with a mild, pitying air--just as indulgence is shown, as far as possible, to all
the little whims and caprices of prisoners condemned to death. Isabelle would have liked to
question her attendant, and endeavour to elicit some information from her, but the girl was
more like an automaton than anything else, and it was impossible to gain more than a monosyllable
from her lips. So Isabelle resigned herself with a sigh to her mute ministerings, not without
a sort of vague terror.

After the maid had retired, dinner was served as before, and Isabelle made a hearty meal--feeling
that she must keep up her strength, and also hopeful of hearing something in a few hours more
from her faithful lover. Her thoughts were all of him, and as she realized the dangers to which
he would inevitably be exposed for her sake, her eyes filled with tears, and a sharp pang shot
through her heart. She was angry with herself for being the cause of so much trouble, and fain
to curse her own beauty--the unhappy occasion of it all. She was absorbed in these sad thoughts
when a little noise as if a hail-stone had struck against the window pane, suddenly aroused
her. She flew to the casement, and saw Chiquita, in the tree opposite, signing to her to open
it, and swinging back and forth the long horse-hair cord, with the iron hook attached to it.
She hastened to comply with the wishes of her strange little ally, and, as she stepped back
in obedience to another sign, the hook, thrown with unerring aim, caught securely in the iron
railing of the little balcony. Chiquita tied the other end of the cord to the branch to which
she was clinging, and then began to cross over the intervening space as before; but ere she
was half-way over, the knot gave way, and poor Isabelle for one moment of intense agony thought
that the child was lost. But, instead of falling into the moat beneath her, Chiquita, who did
not appear to be in the least disconcerted by this accident, swung over against the wall below
the balcony, and climbing up the cord hand over hand, leaped lightly into the room, before
Isabelle had recovered her breath. Finding her very pale, and tremulous, the child said smilingly,
"You were frightened, eh? and thought Chiquita would fall down among the frogs in the moat.
When I tied my cord to the branch, I only made a slip-knot, so that I could bring it back with
me. I must have looked like a big spider climbing up its thread," she added, with a laugh.

"My dear child," said Isabelle, with much feeling, and kissing Chiquita's forehead, "you are
a very brave little girl."

"I saw your friends. They had been searching and searching for you; but without Chiquita they
would never have found out where you were hidden. The captain was rushing about like an angry
lion--his eyes flashed fire--he was magnificent. I came back with him. He rode, and held me
in front of him. He is hidden in a little wood not far off, he and his comrades--they must
keep out of sight, you know. This evening, as soon as it is dark, they will try to get in here
to you--by the tree, you know. There's sure to be a scrimmage--pistol shots and swords clashing--oh!
it will be splendid; for there's nothing so fine as a good fight; when the men are in earnest,
and fierce and brave. Now don't you be frightened and scream, as silly women do; nothing upsets
them like that. You must just remain perfectly quiet, and keep out of their way. If you like,
I will come and stay by you, so that you will not be afraid."

"Don't be uneasy about that, Chiquita! I will not annoy my brave friends, who come to save
my life at the risk of their own, by any foolish fears or demonstrations; that I promise you."

"That's right," the child replied, "and until they come, you can defend yourself with my knife,
you know. Don't forget the proper way to use it. Strike like this, and then do so; you can
rip him up beautifully. As for me, I'm going to hunt up a quiet corner where I can get a nap.
No, I can't stay here, for we must not be seen together; it would never do. Now do you be sure
to keep away from that window. You must not even go near it, no matter what you hear, for fear
they might suspect that you hoped for help from that direction. If they did, it would be all
up with us; for they would send out and search the woods, and beat the bushes, and find our
friends where they lie hidden. The whole thing would fall through, and you would have to stop
here with this horrid duke that you hate so much."

"I will not go near the window," Isabelle answered, "nor even look towards it, however much
I may wish to. You may depend upon my discretion, Chiquita, I do assure you."

Reassured upon this important point, Chiquita crept softly away, and went back to the lower
room where she had left the ruffians carousing. They were still there--lying about on the benches
and the floor, in a drunken sleep, and evidently had not even missed her. She curled herself
up in a corner, as far as might be from the loathsome brutes, and was asleep in a minute. The
poor child was completely tired out; her slender little feet had travelled eight leagues the
night before, running a good part of the way, and the return on horseback had perhaps fatigued
her even more, being unaccustomed to it. Although her fragile little body had the strength
and endurance of steel, she was worn out now, and lay, pale and motionless, in a sleep that
seemed like death.

"Dear me! how these children do sleep to be sure," said Malartic, when he roused himself at
last and looked about him. "In spite of our carouse, and all the noise we made, that little
monkey in the corner there has never waked nor stirred. Halloa! wake up you fellows! drunken
beasts that you are. Try to stand up on your hind legs, and go out in the court and dash a
bucket of cold water over your cursed heads. The Circe of drunkenness has made swine of you
in earnest--go and see if the baptism I recommend will turn you back into men, and then we'll
take a little look round the place, to make sure there's no plot hatching to rescue the little
beauty we have in charge."

The men scrambled to their feet slowly and with difficulty, and staggered out into the court
as best they might, where the fresh air, and the treatment prescribed by Malartic, did a good
deal towards reviving them; but they were a sorry looking set after all, and there were many
aching heads among them. As soon as they were fit for it, Malartic took three of the least
tipsy of them, and leading the way to a small postern that opened on the moat, unchained a
row-boat lying there, crossed the broad ditch, ascended a steep flight of steps leading up
the bank on the other side, and, leaving one man to guard the boat, proceeded to make a tour
of inspection in the immediate vicinity of the chateau; fortunately without stumbling on the
party concealed in the wood, or seeing anything to arouse their suspicions; so they returned
to their quarters perfectly satisfied that there was no enemy lurking near.

Meantime Isabelle, left quite alone, tried in vain to interest herself in a book she had found
lying upon one of the side-tables. She read a few pages mechanically, and then, finding it
impossible to fix her attention upon it, threw the volume from her and sat idly in front of
the fire, which was blazing cheerily, thinking of her own true lover, and praying that he might
be preserved from injury in the impending struggle. Evening came at last--a servant brought
in lights, and soon after the major-domo announced a visit from the Duke of Vallombreuse. He
entered at once, and greeted his fair captive with the most finished courtesy. He looked very
handsome, in a superb suit of pearl gray satin, richly trimmed with crimson velvet, and Isabelle
could not but admire his personal appearance, much as she detested his character.

"I have come to see, my adorable Isabelle, whether I shall be more kindly received than my
flowers," said he, drawing up a chair beside hers. "I have not the vanity to think so, but
I want you to become accustomed to my presence. To-morrow another bouquet, and another visit."

"Both will be useless, my lord," she replied, "though I am sorry to have to be so rude as to
say so--but I had much better be perfectly frank with you."

"Ah, well!" rejoined the duke, with a malicious smile, "I will dispense with hope, and content
myself with reality. You do not know, my poor child, what a Vallombreuse can do--you, who vainly
try to resist him. He has never yet known what it was to have an unsatisfied desire--he invariably
gains his ends, in spite of all opposition--nothing can stop him. Tears, supplication, laments,
threats, even dead bodies and smoking ruins would not daunt him. Do not tempt him too powerfully,
by throwing new obstacles in his way, you imprudent child!"

Isabelle, frightened by the expression of his countenance as he spoke thus, instinctively pushed
her chair farther away from his, and felt for Chiquita's knife. But the wily duke, seeing that
he had made a mistake, instantly changed his tone, and begging her pardon most humbly for his
vehemence, endeavoured to persuade her, by many specious arguments, that she was wrong in persistently
turning a deaf ear to his suit--setting forth at length, and in glowing words, all the advantages
that would accrue to her if she would but yield to his wishes, and describing the happiness
in store for her. While he was thus eloquently pleading his cause, Isabelle, who had given
him only a divided attention, thought that she heard a peculiar little noise in the direction
whence the longed-for aid was to come, and fearing that Vallombreuse might hear it also, hastened
to answer him the instant that he paused, in a way to vex him still further--for she preferred
his anger to his love-making. Also, she hoped that by quarrelling with him she would be able
to prevent his perceiving the suspicious little sound--now growing louder and more noticeable.

"The happiness that you so eloquently describe, my lord, would be for me a disgrace, which
I am resolved to escape by death, if all other means fail me. You never shall have me living.
Formerly I regarded you with indifference, but now I both hate and despise you, for your infamous,
outrageous and violent behaviour to me, your helpless victim. Yes, I may as well tell you openly--and
I glory in it--that I do love the Baron de Sigognac, whom you have more than once so basely
tried to assassinate, through your miserable hired ruffians."

The strange noise still kept on, and Isabelle raised her voice to drown it. At her audacious,
defiant words, so distinctly and impressively enunciated--hurled at him, as it were--Vallombreuse
turned pale, and his eyes flashed ominously; a light foam gathered about the corners of his
mouth, and he laid hold of the handle of his sword. For an instant he thought of killing Isabelle
himself, then and there. If he could not have her, at least no one else should. But he relinquished
that idea almost as soon as it occurred to him, and with a hard, forced laugh said, as he sprang
up and advanced impetuously towards Isabelle, who retreated before him:

"Now, by all the devils in hell, I cannot help admiring you immensely in this mood. It is a
new role for you, and you are deucedly charming in it. You have got such a splendid colour,
and your eyes are so bright--you are superb, I declare. I am greatly flattered at your blazing
out into such dazzling beauty on my account--upon my word I am. You have done well to speak
out openly--I hate deceit. So you love de Sigognac, do you? So much the better, say I--it will
be all the sweeter to call you mine. It will be a pleasing variety to press ardent kisses upon
sweet lips that say 'I hate you,' instead of the insipid, everlasting 'I love you,' that one
gets a surfeit of from all the pretty women of one's acquaintance."

Alarmed at this coarse language, and the threatening gestures that accompanied it, Isabelle
started back and drew out Chiquita's knife.

"Bravo!" cried the duke--"here comes the traditional poniard. We are being treated to a bit
of high tragedy. But, my fierce little beauty, if you are well up in your Roman history, you
will remember that the chaste Mme. Lucretia did not make use of her dagger until AFTER the
assault of Sextus, the bold son of Tarquin the Proud. That ancient and much-cited example is
a good one to follow."

And without paying any more attention to the knife than to a bee-sting, he had violently seized
Isabelle in his arms before she could raise it to strike.

Just at that moment a loud cracking noise was heard, followed by a tremendous crash, and the
casement fell clattering to the floor, with every pane of glass in it shattered; as if a giant
had put his knee against it and broken it in; while a mass of branches protruded through the
opening into the room. It was the top of the tree that Chiquita had made such good use of as
a way of escape and return. The trunk, sawed nearly through by de Sigognac and his companions,
was guided in its fall so as to make a means of access to Isabelle's window; both bridging
the moat, and answering all the purposes of a ladder.

The Duke of Vallombreuse, astonished at this most extraordinary intrusion upon his love-making,
released his trembling victim, and drew his sword. Chiquita, who had crept into the room unperceived
when the crash came, pulled Isabelle's sleeve and whispered, "Come into this corner, out of
the way; the dance is going to begin."

As she spoke, several pistol shots were heard without, and four of the duke's ruffians--who
were doing garrison duty came rushing up the stairs, four steps at a time, and dashed into
the room-sword in hand, and eager for the fray.

CHAPTER XVII. THE AMETHYST RING

The topmost branches of the tree, protruding through the window, rendered the centre of the
room untenable, so Malartic and his three aids ranged themselves two and two against the wall
on either side of it, armed with pistols and swords--ready to give the assailants a warm welcome.

"You had better retire, my lord duke, or else put on a mask," whispered Malartic to the young
nobleman, "so that you may not be seen and recognised in this affair."

"What do I care?" cried Vallombreuse, flourishing his sword. "I am not afraid of anybody in
the world--and besides, those who see me will never go away from this to tell of it."

"But at least your lordship will place this second Helen in some safe retreat. A stray bullet
might so easily deprive your highness of the prize that cost so dear--and it would be such a pity."

The duke, finding this advice judicious, went at once over to where Isabelle was standing beside
Chiquita, and throwing his arms round her attempted to carry her into the next room. The poor
girl made a desperate resistance, and slipping from the duke's grasp rushed to the window,
regardless of danger, crying, "Save me, de Sigognac! save me!" A voice from without answered,
"I am coming," but, before he could reach the window, Vallombreuse had again seized his prey,
and succeeded in carrying her into the adjoining room, closing and bolting the stout oaken
door behind him just as de Sigognac bounded into the chamber he had quitted. His entrance was
so sudden, and so swiftly and boldly made, that he entirely escaped the pistol shots aimed
at him, and the four bullets all fell harmless. When the smoke had cleared away and the "garrison"
saw that he was unhurt, a murmur of astonishment arose, and one of the men exclaimed aloud
that Captain Fracasse--the only name by which THEY knew him--must bear a charmed life; whereupon,
Malartic cried, "Leave him to me, I'll soon finish him, and do you three keep a strict guard
over the window there; for there will be more to follow this one if I am not mistaken."

But he did not find his self-imposed task as easy as he supposed--for de Sigognac was ready
for him, and gave him plenty to do, though his surprise and disappointment were overwhelming
when he found that Isabelle was nowhere to be seen.

"Where is she?" he cried impetuously. "Where is Isabelle? I heard her voice in here only a
moment ago."

"Don't ask me!" Malartic retorted. "YOU didn't give her into my charge." And all this time
their swords were flashing and clashing, as the combat between them grew more animated.

A moment later, before the men had finished reloading their pistols, Scapin dashed in through
the window, throwing a remarkable somersault like an acrobat as he came, and seeing that the
three ruffians had laid down their swords beside them on the floor while attending to their
other weapons, he seized upon them all, ere their owners had recovered from their astonishment
at his extraordinary advent, and hurled them through the broken casement down into the moat.
Then, laying hold of one of the three from behind, and pinning down his arms securely, he placed
him in front of himself for a shield--turning him dexterously this way and that, in order to
keep his body always between his own and the enemy; so that they dared not fire upon him lest
they should kill their comrade, who was vehemently beseeching them to spare his life, and vainly
struggling to escape from Scapin's iron grip.

The combat between de Sigognac and Malartic was still going on, but at last, the baron--who
had already wounded his adversary slightly, and whose agony and desperation at being kept from
prosecuting his search for Isabelle were intense--wrested Malartic's sword from his grasp,
by a dexterous manoeuvre with his own, and putting his foot upon it as it lay on the floor
raised the point of his blade to the professional ruffian's throat, crying "Surrender, or you
are a dead man!"

At this critical moment another one of the besieging party burst in through the window, who,
seeing at a glance how matters stood, said to Malartic in an authoritative tone, "You can surrender
without dishonour to this valiant hero--you are entirely at his mercy. You have done your duty
loyally--now consider yourself a prisoner of war."

Then turning to de Sigognac, he said, "You may trust his word, for he is an honourable fellow
in his way, and will not molest you again--I will answer for him."

Malartic made a gesture of acquiescence, and the baron let him go--whereupon the discomfited
bully picked up his sword, and with a crestfallen air walked off very disconsolately to a corner,
where he sat down and occupied himself in staunching the blood that was flowing from his wound.
The other three men were quickly conquered, and, at the suggestion of the latest comer, were
securely bound hand and foot as they lay upon the floor, and then left to reflect upon their
misfortunes.

"They can't do any more mischief now," said Jacquemin Lampourde, mockingly; for it was that
famous fighting man in person, who, in his enthusiastic admiration, or rather adoration, for
de Sigognac, had offered his services on this momentous occasion--services by no means to be
despised. As to the brave Herode, he was doing good service in fighting the rest of the garrison
below. They had hastened out and crossed the moat in the little row-boat as quickly as possible
after the alarm was given, but arrived too late, as we have seen, to prevent the assailants
from ascending their strange scaling ladder. So they determined to follow, hoping to overtake
and dislodge some of them. But Herode, who had found the upper branches bending and cracking
in a very ominous manner under his great weight, was forced to turn about and make his way
back to the main trunk, where, under cover of darkness, he quietly awaited the climbing foe.
Merindol, who commanded this detachment of the garrison, was first, and being completely taken
by surprise was easily dislodged and thrown down into the water below. The next one, aroused
to a sense of his danger by this, pulled out a pistol and fired, but in the agitation of the
moment, and the darkness, missed his aim, so that he was entirely at the tyrant's mercy, and
in an instant was held suspended over the deep waters of the moat. He clung desperately to
a little branch he had managed to lay hold of, and made such a brave fight for his life, that
Herode, who was merciful by nature, though so fierce of aspect, decided to make terms with
him, if he could do so without injuring the interests of his own party; and upon receiving
a solemn promise from him to remain strictly neutral during the remainder of the fray, the
powerful actor lifted him up, with the greatest ease, and seated him in safety upon the tree-trunk
again. The poor fellow was so grateful that he was even better than his word, for, making use
of the password and giving a pretended order from Merindol to the other two, who were some
distance behind him and ignorant of what had happened, he sent them off post-haste to attend
to an imaginary foe at some distance from the chateau; availing himself of their absence to
make good his escape, after heartily thanking Herode for his clemency. The moon was just rising,
and by its light the tyrant spied the little row-boat, lying not very far off at the foot of
a flight of steps in the steep bank, and he was not slow to make use of it to cross the moat,
and penetrate into the interior court of the chateau--the postern having been fortunately left
open. Looking about him, to see how he could best rejoin his comrades within the building,
his eyes fell upon the porch guarded by the two huge, calm sphinxes, and he wisely concluded
that through it must lie his way to the scene of action.

Meantime de Sigognac, Scapin and Lampourde, having a chance to look about them, were horrified
to find that they were prisoners in the room where the battle had been fought. In vain they
tried to burst open the stout oaken door which was their only means of egress--for the tree
had, but a moment before, given way and fallen with a loud crash into the moat; in vain they
strove to cut through one of the panels, or force the lock from its fastenings. To de Sigognac
this delay was maddening, for he knew that the Duke of Vallombreuse had carried Isabelle away,
and that he must still be with her. He worked like a giant himself, and incited the others
to redouble their efforts; making battering rams of various pieces of furniture--resorting
to every means that their ingenuity could devise--but without making the least impression on
the massive barrier. They had paused in dismay, when suddenly a slight, grinding noise was
heard, like a key turning in a lock, and the door, so unsuccessfully attacked, opened as if
by magic before them.

"What good angel has come to our aid?" cried de Sigognac; "and by what miracle does this door
open of itself, after having so stoutly resisted all our efforts?"

"There is neither angel nor miracle; only Chiquita," answered a quiet little voice, as the
child appeared from behind the door, and fixed her great, dark, liquid eyes calmly on de Sigognac.
She had managed to slip out with Vallombreuse and Isabelle, entirely unnoticed by the former,
and in the hope of being of use to the latter.

"Where is Isabelle?" cried the baron, as he crossed the threshold and looked anxiously round
the anteroom, which was dimly lighted by one little flickering lamp. For a moment he did not
perceive her; the Duke of Vallombreuse, surprised at the sudden opening of the door, which
he had believed to be securely fastened and impenetrable, had retreated into a corner, and
placed Isabelle, who was almost fainting from terror and exhaustion, behind him. She had sunk
upon her knees, with her head leaning against the wall, her long hair, which had come down,
falling about her, and her dress in the utmost disorder; for she had struggled desperately
in the arms of her captor; who, feeling that his fair victim was about to escape from his clutches,
had vainly striven to snatch a few kisses from the sweet lips so temptingly near his own.

"Here she is," said Chiquita, "in this corner, behind the Duke of Vallombreuse; but to get
to her you must first kill him."

"Of course I shall kill him," cried de Sigognac, advancing sword in hand towards the young
duke, who was ready to receive him.

"We shall see about that, Sir Captain Fracasse--doughty knight of Bohemiennes!" said Vallombreuse
disdainfully, and the conflict began. The duke was not de Sigognac's equal at this kind of
work, but still he was skilful and brave, and had had too much good instruction to handle his
sword like a broom-stick, as Lampourde expressed it. He stood entirely upon the defensive,
and was exceedingly wary and prudent, hoping, as his adversary must be already considerably
fatigued by his encounter with Malartic, that he might be able to get the better of him this
time, and retrieve his previous defeat. At the very beginning he had succeeded in raising a
small silver whistle to his lips with his left hand--and its shrill summons brought five or
six armed attendants into the room.

"Carry away this woman," he cried, "and put out those two rascals. I will take care of the
captain myself."

The sudden interruption of these fresh forces astonished de Sigognac, and as he saw two of
the men lift up and carry off Isabelle--who had fainted quite away--he was thrown for an instant
off his guard, and very nearly run through the body by his opponent.

Roused to a sense of his danger, he attacked the duke with renewed fury, and with a terrible
thrust, that made him reel, wounded him seriously in the upper part of the chest.

Meanwhile Lampourde and Scapin had shown the duke's lackeys that it would not be a very easy
matter to put them out, and were handling them rather roughly, when the cowardly fellows, seeing
that their master was wounded, and leaning against the wall, deathly pale, thought that he
was done for, and although they were fully armed, took to their heels and fled, deaf to his
feeble cry for assistance. While all this was going on, the tyrant was making his way up the
grand staircase, as fast as his corpulence would permit, and reached the top just in time to
see Isabelle, pale, dishevelled, motionless, and apparently dead, being borne along the corridor
by two lackeys. Without stopping to make any inquiries, and full of wrath at the thought that
the sweet girl had fallen a victim to the wickedness of the cruel Duke of Vallombreuse, he
drew his sword, and fell upon the two men with such fury that they dropped their light burden
and fled down the stairs as fast as their legs could carry them. Then he knelt down beside
the unconscious girl, raised her gently in his arms, and found that her heart was beating,
though but feebly, and that she apparently had no wound, while she sighed faintly, like a person
beginning to revive after a swoon. In this position he was found by de Sigognac, who had effectually
gotten rid of Vallombreuse, by the famous and well-directed thrust that had thrown Jacquemin
Lampourde into a rapture of admiration and delight. He knelt down beside his darling, took
both her hands in his, and said, in the most tender tones, that Isabelle heard vaguely as if
in a dream:

"Rouse yourself, dear heart, and fear nothing. You are safe now, with your own friends, and
your own true lover--nobody can harm or frighten you again."

Although she did not yet open her eyes, a faint smile dawned upon the colourless lips, and
her cold, trembling, little fingers feebly returned the tender pressure of de Sigognac's warm
hands. Lampourde stood by, and looked down with tearful eyes upon this touching group--for
he was exceedingly romantic and sentimental, and always intensely interested in a love affair.
Suddenly, in the midst of the profound silence that had succeeded to the uproar of the melee,
the winding of a horn was heard without, and in a moment energetically repeated. It was evidently
a summons that had to be instantly obeyed; the drawbridge was lowered in haste, with a great
rattling of chains, and a carriage driven rapidly into the court, while the red flaring light
of torches flashed through the windows of the corridor. In another minute the door of the vestibule
was thrown open, and hasty steps ascended the grand staircase. First came four tall lackeys,
in rich liveries, carrying lights, and directly behind them a tall, noble-looking man, who
was dressed from head to foot in black velvet, with an order shining on his breast--of those
that are usually reserved for kings and princes of the blood, and only very exceptionally bestowed,
upon the most illustrious personages.

When the four lackeys reached the landing at the head of the stairs, they silently ranged themselves
against the wall, and stood like statues bearing torches; without the raising of an eyelid,
or the slightest change in the stolid expression of their countenances to indicate that they
perceived anything out of the usual way--exhibiting in perfection that miraculous imperturbability
and self-command which is peculiar to well-bred, thoroughly trained menservants. The gentleman
whom they had preceded paused ere he stepped upon the landing. Although age had brought wrinkles
to his handsome face, and turned his abundant dark hair gray, it was still easy to recognise
in him the original of the portrait that had so fascinated Isabelle, and whose protection she
had passionately implored in her distress.

It was the princely father of Vallombreuse--the son bearing a different name, that of a duchy
he possessed, until he in his turn should become the head of the family, and succeed to the
title of prince.

At sight of Isabelle, supported by de Sigognac and the tyrant, whose ghastly pallor made her
look like one dead, the aged gentleman raised his arms towards heaven and groaned.

"Alas! I am too late," said he, "for all the haste I made," and advancing a few steps he bent
over the prostrate girl, and took her lifeless hand in his. Upon this hand, white, cold and
diaphanous, as if it had been sculptured in alabaster, shone a ring, set with an amethyst of
unusual size. The old nobleman seemed strangely agitated as it caught his eye. He drew it gently
from Isabelle's slender finger, with a trembling hand signed to one of the torch-bearers to
bring his light nearer, and by it eagerly examined the device cut upon the stone; first holding
it close to the light and then at arm's length; as those whose eyesight is impaired by age
are wont to do. The Baron de Sigognac, Herode and Lampourde anxiously watched the agitated
movements of the prince, and his change of expression, as he contemplated this jewel, which
he seemed to recognise; and which he turned and twisted between his fingers, with a pained
look in his face, as if some great trouble had befallen him.

"Where is the Duke of Vallombreuse?" he cried at last, in a voice of thunder. "Where is that
monster in human shape, who is unworthy of my race?"

He had recognised, without a possibility of doubt, in this ring, the one bearing a fanciful
device, with which he had been accustomed, long ago, to seal the notes he wrote to Cornelia--Isabelle's
mother, and his own youthful love. How happened it that this ring was on the finger of the
young actress, who had been forcibly and shamefully abducted by Vallombreuse? From whom could
she have received it? These questions were torturing to him.

"Can it be possible that she is Cornelia's daughter and mine?" said the prince to himself.
"Her profession, her age, her sweet face, in which I can trace a softened, beautified likeness
of her mother's, but which has a peculiarly high bred, refined expression, worthy of a royal
princess, all combine to make me believe it must be so. Then, alas! alas! it is his own sister
that this cursed libertine has so wronged, and he has been guilty of a horrible, horrible crime.
Oh! I am cruelly punished for my youthful folly and sin."

Isabelle at length opened her eyes, and her first look fell upon the prince, holding the ring
that he had drawn from her finger. It seemed to her as if she had seen his face before--but
in youth, without the gray hair and beard. It seemed also to be an aged copy of the portrait
over the chimney-piece in her room, and a feeling of profound veneration filled her heart as
she gazed at him. She saw, too, her beloved de Sigognac kneeling beside her, watching her with
tenderest devotion; and the worthy tyrant as well--both safe and sound. To the horrors of the
terrible struggle had succeeded the peace and security of deliverance. She had nothing more
to fear, for her friends or for herself--how could she ever be thankful enough?

The prince, who had been gazing at her with passionate earnestness, as if her fair face possessed
an irresistible charm for him, now addressed her in low, moved tones:

"Mademoiselle, will you kindly tell me how you came by this ring, which recalls very dear and
sacred memories to me? Has it been long in your possession?"

"I have had it ever since my infancy; it is the only thing that my poor mother left me," Isabelle
replied, with gentle dignity.

"And who was your mother? Will you, tell me something about her?" continued the prince, with
increasing emotion.

"Her name was Cornelia, and she was an actress, belonging to the same troupe that I am a member
of now."

"Cornelia! then there is no possible doubt about it," murmured the prince to himself, in great
agitation. "Yes, it is certainly she whom I have been seeking all these years--and now to find
her thus!"

Then, controlling his emotion, he resumed his usual calm, majestic demeanour, and turning back
to Isabelle, said to her, "Permit me to keep this ring for the present; I will soon give it
back to you."

"I am content to leave it in your lordship's hands," the young actress replied, in whose mind
the memory of a face, that she had seen long years ago bending over her cradle, was growing
clearer and more distinct every moment.

"Gentlemen," said the prince, turning to de Sigognac and his companions, "under any other circumstances
I might find your presence here, in my chateau, with arms in your hands, unwarranted, but I
am aware of the necessity that drove you to forcibly invade this mansion, hitherto sacred from
such scenes as this--I know that violence must be met with violence, and justifies it; therefore
I shall take no further notice of what has happened here to-night, and you need have no fears
of any evil consequences to yourselves because of your share in it. But where is the Duke of
Vallombreuse? that degenerate son who disgraces my old age."

As if in obedience to his father's call, the young duke at that moment appeared upon the threshold
of the door leading into what had been Isabelle's apartment, supported by Malartic. He was
frightfully pale, and his clinched hand pressed a handkerchief tightly upon his wounded chest.
He came forward with difficulty, looking like a ghost. Only a strong effort of will kept him
from falling--an effort that gave to his face the immobility of a marble mask. He had heard
the voice of his father, whom, depraved and shameless as he was, he yet respected and dreaded,
and he hoped to be able to conceal his wound from him. He bit his lips so as not to cry out
or groan in his agony, and resolutely swallowed down the bloody foam that kept rising and filling
his mouth. He even took off his hat, in spite of the frightful pain the raising of his arm
caused him, and stood uncovered and silent before his angry parent.

"Sir," said the prince, severely, "your misdeeds transcend all limits, and your behaviour is
such that I shall be forced to implore the king to send you to prison, or into exile. You are
not fit to be at large. Abduction--imprisonment--criminal assault. These are not simple gallantries;
and though I might be willing to pardon and overlook many excesses, committed in the wildness
of licentious youth, I never could bring myself to forgive a deliberate and premeditated crime.
Do you know, you monster," he continued approaching Vallombreuse, and whispering in his ear,
so that no one else could hear, "do you know who this young girl is? this good and chaste Isabelle,
whom you have forcibly abducted, in spite of her determined and virtuous resistance! She is
your own sister!

"May she replace the son you are about to lose," the young duke replied, attacked by a sudden
faintness, and an agony of pain which he felt that he could not long endure and live; "but
I am not as guilty as you suppose. Isabelle is pure--stainless. I swear it, by the God before
whom I must shortly appear. Death does not lie, and you may believe what I say, upon the word
of a dying gentleman."

These words were uttered loudly and distinctly, so as to be heard by all. Isabelle turned her
beautiful eyes, wet with tears, upon de Sigognac, and read in those of her true and faithful
lover that he had not waited for the solemn attestation, "in extremis," of the Duke of Vallombreuse
to believe in the perfect purity of her whom he adored.

"But what is the matter?" asked the prince, holding out his hand to his son, who staggered
and swayed to and fro in spite of Malartic's efforts to support him, and whose face was fairly
livid.

"Nothing, father," answered Vallombreuse, in a scarcely articulate voice, "nothing--only I
am dying"--and he fell at full length on the floor before the prince could clasp him in his
arms, as he endeavoured to do.

"He did not fall on his face," said Jacquemin Lampourde, sententiously; "it's nothing but a
fainting fit. He may escape yet. We duellists are familiar with this sort of thing, my lord;
a great deal more so than most medical men, and you may depend upon what I say."

"A doctor! a doctor!" cried the prince, forgetting his anger as he saw his son lying apparently
lifeless at his feet. "Perhaps this man is right, and there may be some hope for him yet. A
fortune to whomsoever will save my son!--my only son!--the last scion of a noble race. Go!
run quickly! What are you about there?--don't you understand me? Go, I say, and run as fast
as you can; take the fleetest horse in the stable."

Whereupon two of the imperturbable lackeys, who had held their torches throughout this exciting
scene without moving a muscle, hastened off to execute their master's orders. Some of his own
servants now came forward, raised up the unconscious Duke of Vallombreuse with every possible
care and precaution, and by his father's command carried him to his own room and laid him on
his own bed, the aged prince following, with a face from which grief and anxiety had already
driven away all traces of anger. He saw his race extinct in the death of this son, whom he
so dearly loved--despite his fault--and whose vices he forgot for the moment, remembering only
his brilliant and lovable qualities. A profound melancholy took complete possession of him,
as he stood for a few moments plunged in a sorrowful reverie that everybody respected.

Isabelle, entirely revived, and no longer feeling at all faint, bad risen to her feet, and
now stood between de Sigognac and the tyrant, adjusting, with a trembling hand, her disordered
dress and dishevelled hair. Lampourde and Scapin had retired to a little distance from them,
and held themselves modestly aloof, whilst the men within, still bound hand and foot, kept
as quiet as possible; fearful of their fate if brought to the prince's notice. At length that
aged nobleman returned, and breaking the terrible silence that had weighed upon all, said,
in severe tones, "Let all those who placed their services at the disposition of the Duke of
Vallombreuse, to aid him in indulging his evil passions and committing a terrible crime, quit
this chateau instantly. I will refrain from placing you in the hands of the public executioner,
though you richly deserve it. Go now! vanish! get ye back to your lairs! and rest assured that
justice will not fail to overtake you at last."

These words were not complimentary, but the trembling offenders were thankful to get off so
easily, and the ruffians, whom Lampourde and Scapin had unbound, followed Malartic down the
stairs in silence, without daring to claim their promised reward. When they had disappeared,
the prince advanced and took Isabelle by the hand, and gently detaching her from the group
of which she had formed a part, led her over to where he had been standing, and kept her beside
him.

"Stay here, mademoiselle," he said; "your place is henceforth by my side. It is the least that
you can do to fulfil your duty as my daughter, since you are the innocent means of depriving
me of my son." And he wiped away a tear, that, despite all his efforts to control his grief,
rolled down his withered cheek. Then turning to de Sigognac, he said, with an incomparably
noble gesture, "Sir, you are at liberty to withdraw, with your brave companions. Isabelle will
have nothing to fear under her father's protection, and this chateau will be her home for the
present. Now that her birth is made known it is not fitting that my daughter should return
to Paris with you. I thank you, though it costs me the hope of perpetuating my race, for having
spared my son a disgraceful action--what do I say? An abominable crime. I would rather have
a bloodstain on my escutcheon than a dishonourable blot. Since Vallombreuse was infamous in
his conduct, you have done well to kill him. You have acted like a true gentleman, which I
am assured that you are, in chivalrously protecting weakness, innocence and virtue. You are
nobly in the right. That my daughter's honour has been preserved unstained, I owe to you--and
it compensates me for the loss of my son--at least my reason tells me that it should do so;
but the father's heart rebels, and unjust ideas of revenge might arise, which I should find
it difficult to conquer and set at rest. Therefore you had better go your way now, and whatever
the result may be I will not pursue or molest you. I will try to forget that a terrible necessity
turned your sword against my son's life."

"My lord," said de Sigognac, with profound respect, "I feel so keenly for your grief as a father,
that I would have accepted any reproaches, no matter how bitter and unjust, from you, without
one word of protest or feeling of resentment; even though I cannot reproach myself for my share
in this disastrous conflict. I do not wish to say anything to justify myself in your eyes,
at the expense of the unhappy Duke of Vallombreuse, but I beg you to believe that this quarrel
was not of my seeking. He persistently threw himself in my way, and I have done everything
I could to spare him, in more than one encounter. Even here it was his own blind fury that
led to his being wounded. I leave Isabelle, who is dearer to me than my own soul, in your hands,
and shall grieve my whole life long for this sad victory; which is a veritable and terrible
defeat for me, since it destroys my happiness. Ah! if only I could have been slain myself,
instead of your unhappy son; it would have been better and happier for me."

He bowed with grave dignity to the prince, who courteously returned his salute, exchanged a
long look, eloquent of passionate love and heart-breaking regret, with Isabelle, and went sadly
down the grand staircase, followed by his companions--not however without glancing back more
than once at the sweet girl he was leaving--who to save herself from falling, leaned heavily
against the railing of the landing, sobbing as if her heart would break, and pressing a handkerchief
to her streaming eyes. And, so strange a thing is the human heart, the Baron de Sigognac departed
much comforted by the bitter grief and tears of her whom he so devotedly loved and worshipped.
He and his friends went on foot to the little wood where they had left their horses tied to
the trees, found them undisturbed, mounted and returned to Paris.

"What do you think, my lord, of all these wonderful events?" said the tyrant, after a long
silence, to de Sigognac, beside whom he was riding. "It all ends up like a regular tragi-comedy.
Who would ever have dreamed, in the midst of the melee, of the sudden entrance upon the scene
of the grand old princely father, preceded by torches, and coming to put a little wholesome
restraint on the too atrociously outrageous pranks of his dissolute young son? And then the
recognition of Isabelle as his daughter, by means of the ring with a peculiar device of his
own engraved upon it; haven't you seen exactly the same sort of thing on the stage? But, after
all, it is not so surprising perhaps as it seems at the first glance--since the theatre is
only a copy of real life. Therefore, real life should resemble it, just as the original does
the portrait, eh? I have always heard that our sweet little actress was of noble birth. Blazius
and old Mme. Leonarde remember seeing the prince when he was devoted to Cornelia. The duenna
has often tried to persuade Isabelle to seek out her father, but she is of too modest and gentle
a nature to take a step of that kind; not wishing to intrude upon a family that might reject
her, and willing to content herself in her own lowly, position."

"Yes, I knew all about that," rejoined de Sigognac, "for Isabelle told me some time ago her
mother's history, and spoke of the ring; but without attaching any importance to the fact of
her illustrious origin. It is very evident, however, from the nobility and delicacy of her
nature, without any other proof, that princely blood flows in her veins; and also the refined,
pure, elevated type of her beauty testifies to her descent. But what a terrible fatality that
this cursed Vallombreuse should turn out to be her brother! There is a dead body between us
now--a stream of blood separates us--and yet, I could not save her honour in any other way.
Unhappy mortal that I am! I have myself created the obstacle upon which my love is wrecked,
and killed my hopes of future bliss with the very sword that defended the purity of the woman
I adore. In guarding her I love, I have put her away from me forever. How could I go now and
present myself to Isabelle with blood-stained hands? Alas! that the blood which I was forced
to shed in her defence should have been her brother's. Even if she, in her heavenly goodness,
could forgive me, and look upon me without a feeling of horror, the prince, her father, would
repulse and curse me as the murderer of his only son. I was born, alas! under an unlucky star."

"Yes, it is all very sad and lamentable, certainly," said the tyrant; "but worse entanglements
than this have come out all right in the end. You must remember that the Duke of Vallombreuse
is only half-brother to Isabelle, and that they were aware of the relationship but for a few
minutes before he fell dead at our feet; which must make a great difference in her feelings.
And besides, she hated that overbearing nobleman, who pursued her so cruelly with his violent
and scandalous gallantries. The prince himself was far from being satisfied with his wretched
son--who was ferocious as Nero, dissolute as Heliogabalus, and perverse as Satan himself, and
who would have been hanged ten times over if he had not been a duke. Do not be so disheartened!
things may turn out a great deal better than you think now."

"God grant it, my good Herode," said de Sigognac fervently. "But naturally I cannot feel happy
about it. It would have been far better for all if I had been killed instead of the duke, since
Isabelle would have been safe from his criminal pursuit under her father's care. And then,
I may as well tell you all, a secret horror froze the very marrow in my bones when I saw that
handsome young man, but a moment before so full of life, fire, and passion, fall lifeless,
pale and stiff at my feet. Herode, the death of a man is a grave thing, and though I cannot
suffer from remorse for this one, since I have committed no crime, still, all the time I see
Vallombreuse before me, lying, motionless and ghastly, with the blood oozing slowly from his
wound. It haunts me. I cannot drive the horrid sight away."

"That is all wrong," said the tyrant, soothingly--for the other was much excited--"for you
could not have done otherwise. Your conscience should not reproach you. You have acted throughout,
from the very beginning to the end, like the noble gentleman that you are. These scruples are
owing to exhaustion, to the feverishness due to the excitement you have gone through, and the
chill from the night air. We will gallop on swiftly in a moment, to set our blood flowing more
freely, and drive away these sad thoughts of yours. But one thing must be promptly done; you
must quit Paris, forthwith, and retire for a time to some quiet retreat, until all this trouble
is forgotten. The violent death of the Duke of Vallombreuse will make a stir at the court,
and in the city, no matter how much pains may be taken to keep the facts from the public, and,
although he was not at all popular, indeed very much the reverse, there will be much regret
expressed, and you will probably be severely blamed. But now let us put spurs to these lazy
steeds of ours, and try to get on a little faster."

While they are galloping towards Paris, we will return to the chateau--as quiet now as it had
been noisy a little while before. In the young duke's room, a candelabrum, with several branches,
stood on a round table, so that the light from the candles fell upon the bed, where he lay
with closed eyes, as motionless as a corpse, and as pale. The walls of the large chamber, above
a high wainscot of ebony picked out with gold, were hung with superb tapestry, representing
the history of Medea and Jason, with all its murderous and revolting details. Here, Medea was
seen cutting the body of Pelias into pieces, under pretext of restoring his youth--there, the
madly jealous woman and unnatural mother was murdering her own children; in another panel she
was fleeing, surfeited with vengeance, in her chariot, drawn by huge dragons breathing out
flames of fire. The tapestry was certainly magnificent in quality and workmanship, rich in
colouring, artistic in design, and very costly--but inexpressibly repulsive. These mythological
horrors gave the luxurious room an intensely disagreeable, lugubrious aspect, and testified
to the natural ferocity and cruelty of the person who had selected them. Behind the bed the
crimson silk curtains had been drawn apart, exposing to view the representation of Jason's
terrible conflict with the fierce, brazen bulls that guarded the golden fleece, and Vallombreuse,
lying senseless below them, looked as if he might have been one of their victims. Various suits
of clothes, of the greatest richness and elegance, which had been successively tried on and
rejected, were scattered about, and in a splendid great Japanese vase, standing on an ebony
table near the head of the bed, was a bouquet of beautiful flowers, destined to replace the
one Isabelle had already refused to receive--its glowing tints making a strange contrast with
the death-like face, which was whiter than the snowy pillow it rested on. The prince, sitting
in an arm-chair beside the bed, gazed at his unconscious son with mournful intentness, and
bent down from time to time to listen at the slightly parted lips; but no fluttering breath
came through them; all was still. Never had the young duke looked handsomer. The haughty, fierce
expression, habitual with him, had given place to a serenity that was wonderfully beautiful,
though so like death. As the father contemplated the perfect face and form, so soon to crumble
into dust, he forgot, in his overwhelming grief, that the soul of a demon had animated it,
and he thought sorrowfully of the great name that had been revered and honoured for centuries
past, but which could not go down to centuries to come. "Yet it is true that he is far from perfect,--a
subtle rascal, who dons disguises, and masquerades as other than
he is, a leader of night-birds, and sometimes a turbulent roysterer."

"I have been told," she said, "that he treacherously killed a man
in Paris, and deserted from the French Guards."

"As for the killing," I replied, "there was no treachery or unfairness
on his part; and if he deserted from the King's French Guards, it
was when the King had consented to give him up to the Duke of Guise,
whom the weak King, then as now, hated as much as feared."

She gave a heavy sigh, and went on, "La Tournoire is a brave man, of course?"

"He is a man," I said, "who expects to meet death as he meets life, cheerfully, not hoping too much,
not fearing anything."

"And this hiding-place of his," she said, in a very low voice, again dropping her glance to the ground.
"Tell me of it."

I gave her a description of the ruined Chateau of Maury.

"But," she said, "is not the place easily accessible to the troops of the Governor?"

"The troops of the garrison at Clochonne have not yet found the way to it," I replied. "The chateau
was abandoned twenty years ago.

Its master is an adventurer in the new world, if he is not dead. Its very existence has been
forgotten, for the land pertaining to it is of no value. The soldiers from Clochonne could find it
only by scouring this almost impenetrable wilderness."

"Is there, then, no road leading to it?" she asked.

"This road leads hither from Clochonne, and on southward across the mountain. There are the remains
of a by-road leading from here westward to the chateau, and ending there. But this by-road,
almost entirely recovered by the forest, is known only to La Tournoire and his friends. A better
way for the Governor's soldiers to find La Tournoire's stronghold, if they but knew, would be to
take the road along the river from Clochonne to Narjec, and to turn up the hill at the throne-shaped
rock half-way between those towns. At the top of that hill is Maury,
hidden by dense woods and thickets."

Mlle. de Varion, who had heard my last words with a look of keen attention and also of bitter
pain of mind, now rose and walked to and fro as if meditating. Inwardly I lamented my inability
to drive from her face the clouds which I attributed to her increasing distress, as she found herself
further and further from her father and her home, bound for still gloomier shades and wilder surroundings.

I
asked if she would go in and hear the music of the gypsy, or have him come out and play for
her, but she thanked me with a sorrowful attempt at a smile, and returned to her own chamber.

When the sun declined, I ordered Marianne to prepare the best supper that her resources would
allow, and then, as it was time that Blaise should have been back from Maury, I went to a little
knoll, which gave a view of a part of the abandoned byroad, to look and listen for him. Presently,
I heard the sound of a horse's footfalls near the inn, and made haste back to see who rode
there. Just as I reached the cleared space, I saw the rider disappearing around a bend of the
road which led to Clochonne. Though I saw only his back, I recognized him as mademoiselle's boy,
Pierre, mounted on one of her horses.

On the bench before the inn sat mademoiselle herself, alone. She gave a start of surprise when
I came up to her.

"Mademoiselle," I said, "I have just seen your boy, Pierre, riding towards Clochonne."

"Yes," she replied, looking off towards the darkest part of the forest. "I--I was alarmed at your
absence. I did not know where you had gone; I sent him to look for you."

"Then I would better run after and call him back," I said, taking a step towards the road.

"No, no!" she answered, quickly. "Do not leave me now. He will come back soon of his own accord.
I told him to do so if he did not find you. I must ask you to bear with me, monsieur. The
solitude, the strangeness of the place, almost appal me. I feel a kind of terror when I do
not know that you are near."

"Mademoiselle," I said, sitting beside her on the bench, "I cannot describe that which I shall
feel, if I am doomed ever to know that you are not near me. It will be as if the sun had ceased
to shine, and the earth had turned barren."

A blush mounted to her cheeks; she dropped her humid eyes; her breast heaved. For an instant
she seemed to have forgotten her distresses.

Then sorrow resumed its place on her countenance, and she answered, sadly:

"Ah, monsieur, when you shall have truly known me!"

"Have I not known you a whole day?" I asked. "I wonder that life had any relish for me before
yesterday. It seems as if I had known you always, though the joy
that your presence gives me will always be fresh and novel.

Ah, mademoiselle, if you knew what sweetness suddenly filled the world at my first sight of
you!"

I took her hand in mine.

She made a weak effort to withdraw it; I tightened my hold; she let
it remain.

Then she turned her blue eyes up to mine with a look of infinite trust and yielding, so that
I felt that, rapid as had been my own yielding to the charm of her beauty and her gentleness,
she had as speedily acknowledged in me the man by whom her heart might be commanded.

As we sat thus, the gypsy within, who had been for some time aimlessly strumming his instrument,
began to sing. The words of his song came to us subdued, but distinct:

"The sparkle of my lady's eyes-- Ah, sight that is the fairest! The look of love that in them
lies-- Ah, thrill that is the rarest! Oh, comrades mine, go roam the earth, You'll find in
all your roving That all its other joys are worth Not half the joys of loving!"

"Ah, mademoiselle," I whispered, "before yesterday those words would have meant nothing to me!"

She
made no answer, but closed her eyes, as if to shut out every thought but consciousness of that
moment.

And now the gypsy, in an air and voice expressive of sadness, as he had before been expressive
of rapture, sang a second stanza:

"But, ah, the price we have to pay For joys that have their season! And, oh, the sadness of the day
When woman shows her treason!

Her look of love is but a mask For plots that she is weaving. Alas, for those who fondly bask In
smiles that are deceiving!"

I thought of Mlle. d'Arency, but not for long; for suddenly Mlle. de Varion started up, as if
awakened from a dream, and looked at me with an expression of unspeakable distress of mind.

"Oh,
monsieur!" she cried. "You must leave me! I must never see you again. Go, go,--or let me go
at once!"

"Mademoiselle!" I cried, astonished.

"I beg you, make no objections, ask no questions! Only go! It is a crime, an infamy, for me to
have listened while you spoke as you spoke a while ago! I ought not to have accepted your protection!
Go, monsieur, and have no more to do with the most miserable woman in France!"

She started to go into the inn, but I caught her by the hand and detained her.

"Mademoiselle," I said, gently, "the difference in our religions need not forbid such words between
us as I have spoken. I can understand how you regard it as an insuperable barrier, but it is really
a slight one, easily removed, as it has been in many notable cases."

"Monsieur," she replied, resolutely, shaking her head, "I say again, we must part. I am not to be
urged or persuaded. The greatest kindness you can do me is to go, or let me go, without more
words."

"But, mademoiselle," I interposed, "it will be very difficult for you to continue your flight
across this border without a guide. Not to speak of the danger from men, there is the chance
of losing your way."

"The Sieur de la Tournoire will not refuse me his guidance," she said, in a voice that seemed forced
to an unwonted hardness.

"Then you will discard my protection, and accept his, a stranger's?"

"Yes, because he is a stranger,--thank God!"

What, I asked myself, was to be the end of this? Would she not, on learning that La Tournoire
was myself, all the more decidedly insist on going her own way? Therefore, before disclosing myself
to her, I must accustom her to the view that a difference in religion ought not to separate two
who love each other. In order to do this, I must have time; so I said:

"At least, mademoiselle, you will let me show you the way to Maury,
and present to you the Sieur de la Tournoire.

That is little to ask."

"I have already accepted too much from you," she replied, hesitating.

"Then cancel the obligation by granting me this one favor."

"Very well, monsieur. But you will then go immediately?"

"From the moment when you first meet La Tournoire, he shall be your only guide, unless you yourself
choose another. In the meantime," I added, for she had taken another step towards the inn,
"grant me at least as much of your society as you would bestow on an indifferent acquaintance,
who happened to be your fellow-traveler in this lonely place."

She gave a sigh which I took as meaning that the more we should see
each other, the harder the parting would be at last, but she said,
tremulously:

"We shall meet at supper, monsieur, and to-morrow, when
you conduct me on to Maury."

Then she entered the inn, but stopped on the threshold, and, casting on me a strangely wistful
look, she added, "Great must be the friendship between you and La Tournoire, that you can so
confidently assure his protection to those for whom you ask it."

"Oh, I have done much for him, and he cannot refuse me any request that it is in his power to grant,"
I said, truly enough.

"Then," she went on, "the tie is one of obligation, rather than of great friendship?"

"Yes. I have often been in a position to do him great services when no one else was, and when he
most needed them. As for my feeling of friendship for him, I shall not even weep when he is
dead."

"Suppose you should love a woman," she continued, with a strange eagerness, "and there should
come a time when you would have to choose between your love for her, and your friendship for this man,
which would prevail?"

"I would sacrifice La Tournoire for the woman
I loved," I answered, with truth.

She looked at me steadily, and
a hope seemed to dawn in her eyes, but in a moment they darkened again;
she sighed deeply, and she turned to ascend to her chamber, while
I stood there trying to deduce a meaning from her strange speeches
and conduct, which I finally put down to the capaciousness of woman.
I could understand the feeling that she ought to part from a man who
loved her and whom her religion forbade her to love in return; but
why she should seem pleased at the apparent lukewarmness of my friendship
for La Tournoire, whom she was willing to accept as her guide, I could
not guess. Since she intended to part from me, never to see me again,
what mattered it to her whether or not I was the intimate of a proscribed
ruffian? Yet she seemed glad to hear that I was not, but this might
be only seeming. I might not have read her face and tone aright. Her
inquiries might have been due to curiosity alone. So I thought no
more of them, and gave my mind instead to planning how she might be
made to ignore the difference between our religions, and to revoke
the edict banishing me from her side. It would be necessary that she
should be willing to remain at Maury, with a guard composed of some
of my men, while I, giving a pretext for delaying the flight and for
the absence of myself and the most of my company, should attempt the
delivery of her father from the chateau of Fleurier. It was my hope,
though I dared not yet breathe it, that I might bring her father and
my company back to Maury, and that all of us might then proceed to
Guienne.

My meditations were interrupted by the return of Blaise
from Maury, where he had found all well and the men there joyous at
the prospect of soon rejoining the army in Guienne. A part of the
company was absent on a foraging raid. Two of the roofed chambers
were rapidly being made habitable for Mlle. de Varion, whom Blaise
had announced to the men as a distinguished refugee.

When supper
was ready in the kitchen, I sent Jeannotte to summon her mistress.
Mademoiselle came down from her chamber, her sweet face betokening
a brave attempt to bear up under the many woes that crushed her,--the
condition of her father, her own exile, the peril in which she stood
of the governor's reconsidering his order and sending to make her
prisoner, the seeming necessity of exchanging my guidance for that
of a stranger who had been painted to her in repulsive colors, and
the other unhappy elements of her situation.

"It is strange that
the boy, Pierre, has not returned," I said, while we sat at table.

Mademoiselle
reddened. It then occurred to me that, in her abstraction, she had
not even noticed his absence, and that now it came on her as a new
trouble.

"Pardon me for speaking of it in such a way as to frighten
you," I said. "There is no cause for alarm. Not finding me on the
road, he may have turned into the woods to look for me, and so have
lost his way. He would surely be able to find the road again."

"I
trust he will not come to any harm," replied mademoiselle, in a low
voice that seemed forced, as if she were concealing the fears that
she really felt.

Jeannotte cast a sympathetic look at her mistress.

"Shall
I go and look for him?" asked Hugo, showing in his face his anxiety
for his comrade.

"You would lose yourself, also," I said. "Mademoiselle,
I shall go, for I know all the hillocks and points of vantage from
which he may be seen."

"Nay, monsieur, do not give yourself the trouble,
I pray you."

But I rose from the table, to show that I was determined,
and said:

"Blaise, I leave you as guard. Remember last night."

"I
am not likely to forget," he growled, dropping his eyes before the
sharp glance of Jeannotte. "Mademoiselle need have no fears."

"But,
monsieur," said mademoiselle. She was about to continue, but her eye
met Jeannotte's, and in the face of the maid was an expression as
if counselling silence. So mademoiselle said no more, but she followed
me to the door, and stood on the threshold.

"Monsieur," she said,
"if you do not find him within a few minutes, I entreat that you will
not put yourself to further discomfort. See, it is already nearly
dark. If he be lost in the woods for the night, he can doubtless find
his way hither tomorrow."

"I shall not seek long, mademoiselle, for
the reason that I would not be long away from you."

At that moment,
feeling under my foot something different from leaves or earth, I
stooped and found one of mademoiselle's gloves, which she had dropped,
probably, on first entering the inn. Remaining in my kneeling posture
and looking up at her sweet, sad face, I said:

"Whatever may come
in the future, mademoiselle, circumstance has made me your faithful
chevalier for a day. Will you not give me some badge of service that
I may wear forever in memory of that sweet, though sorrowful day?"

"Keep
what you have in your hand," she replied, in a low voice, and pointed
to her glove.

I rose, and fastened the glove on my hat, and said:
"They shall find it on me when I am dead, mademoiselle." Then I turned
to go in search of Pierre.

"I shall go to my room now," she said,
"and so, good-night, monsieur!"

I turned, and made to take her hand
that I might kiss it, but she drew it away, and then, standing on
the threshold, she raised it as one does in bestowing a benedicite,
and said:

"God watch you through the night, monsieur!"

"And you
forever, mademoiselle!" said I, but she had gone. For a moment I stood
looking up at her chamber window, thinking how it had come over me
again, as in the days of my youth, the longing to be near one woman.

Night
was now coming on. In the deeper shades of the forest it was already
dark, but the sky was clear, and soon the moon would rise. Musing
as I went, I walked along the road that Pierre had first taken. The
only sounds that I heard were the ceaseless chirps and whirrs of the
insects of the bushes and trees.

She was dazzled and agitated by this sudden change of fortune, anxious about her brother, now
lying at the point of death, and, above all, troubled and grieved at her separation from her
lover--so she could only make a pretence of dining, and played languidly with the food on her
plate.

"You are eating nothing, my dear comtesse," said the prince, who had been furtively watching
her; "I pray you try to do better with this bit of partridge I am sending you."

At this title of comtesse, spoken as a matter of course, and in such a kind, tender tone, Isabelle
looked up at the prince with astonishment written in her beautiful, deep blue eyes, which seemed
to plead timidly for an explanation.

"Yes, Comtesse de Lineuil; it is the title which goes with an estate I have settled on you,
my dear child, and which has long been destined for you. The name of Isabelle alone, charming
though it be, is not suitable for my daughter."

Isabelle, yielding to the impulse of the moment--as the servants had retired and she was alone
with her father--rose, and going to his side, knelt down and kissed his hand, in token of gratitude
for his delicacy and generosity.

"Rise, my child," said he, very tenderly, and much moved, "and return to your place. What I
have done is only just. It calls for no thanks. I should have done it long ago if it had been
in my power. In the terrible circumstances that have reunited us, my dear daughter, I can see
the finger of Providence, and through them I have learned your worth. To your virtue alone
it is due that a horrible crime was not committed, and I love and honour you for it; even though
it may cost me the loss of my only son. But God will be merciful and preserve his life, so
that he may repent of having so persecuted and outraged the purest innocence. Maitre Laurent,
in whom I have every confidence, gives me some hope this morning; and when I looked at Vallombreuse--from
the threshold of his room only--I could see that the seal of death was no longer upon his face."

They were interrupted by the servants, bringing in water to wash their fingers, in a magnificent
golden bowl, and this ceremony having been duly gone through with, the prince threw down his
napkin and led the way into the adjoining salon, signing to Isabelle to follow him. He seated
himself in a large arm-chair in front of the blazing wood fire, and bidding Isabelle place
herself close beside him, took her hand tenderly between both of his, and looked long and searchingly
at this lovely young daughter, so strangely restored to him. There was much of sadness mingled
with the joy that shone in his eyes, for he was still very anxious about his son, whose life
was in such jeopardy; but as he gazed upon Isabelle's sweet face the joy predominated, and
he smiled very lovingly upon the new comtesse, as he began to talk to her of long past days.

"Doubtless, my beloved child, in the midst of the strange events that have brought us together,
in such an odd, romantic, almost supernatural manner, the thought has suggested itself to your
mind, that during all the years that have passed since your infancy I have not sought you out,
and that chance alone has at last restored the long-lost child to her neglectful father. But
you are so good and noble that I know you would not dwell upon such an idea, and I hope that
you do not so misjudge me as to think me capable of such culpable neglect, now that you are
getting a little better acquainted with me. As you must know, your mother, Cornelia, was excessively
proud and high-spirited. She resented every affront, whether intended as such or not, with
extraordinary violence, and when I was obliged, in spite of my most heartfelt wishes, to separate
myself from her, and reluctantly submit to a marriage that I could not avoid, she obstinately
refused to allow me to provide for her maintenance in comfort and luxury, as well as for you
and your education. All that I gave her, and settled on her, she sent back to me with the most
exaggerated disdain, and inexorably refused to receive again. I could not but admire, though
I so deplored, her lofty spirit, and proud rejection of every benefit which I desired to confer
upon her, and I left in the hands of a trusty agent, for her, the deeds of all the landed property
and houses I had destined for her, as well as the money and jewels--so that she could at any
time reclaim them, if she would--hoping that she might see fit to change her mind when the
first flush of anger was over. But, to my great chagrin, she persisted in her refusal of everything,
and changing her name, fled from Paris into the provinces; where she was said to have joined
a roving band of comedians. Soon after that I was sent by my sovereign on several foreign missions
that kept me long away from France, and I lost all trace of her and you. In vain were all my
efforts to find you both, until at last I heard that she was dead. Then I redoubled my diligence
in the search for my little motherless daughter, whom I had so tenderly loved; but all in vain.
No trace of her could I find. I heard, indeed, of many children among these strolling companies,
and carefully investigated each case that came to my knowledge; but it always ended in disappointment.
Several women, indeed, tried to palm off their little girls upon me as my child, and I had
to be on my guard against fraud; but I never failed to sift the matter thoroughly, even though
I knew that deceit was intended, lest I should unawares reject the dear little one I was so
anxiously seeking. At last I was almost forced to conclude that you too had perished; yet a
secret intuition always told me that you were still in the land of the living. I used to sit
for hours and think of how sweet and lovely you were in infancy; how your little rosy fingers
used to play with and pull my long mustache--which was black then, my dear--when I leaned over
to kiss you in your cradle--recalling all your pretty, engaging little baby tricks, remembering
how fond and proud I was of you, and grieving over the loss that I seemed to feel more and
more acutely as the years went on. The birth of my son only made me long still more intensely
for you, instead of consoling me for your loss, or banishing you from my memory, and when I
saw him decked with rich laces and ribbons, like a royal babe, and playing with his jewelled
rattle, I would think with an aching heart that perhaps at that very moment my dear little
daughter was suffering from cold and hunger, or the unkind treatment of those who had her in
charge. Then I regretted deeply that I had not taken you away from your mother in the very
beginning, and had you brought up as my daughter should be--but when you were born I did not
dream of our parting. As years rolled on new anxieties tortured me. I knew that you would be
beautiful, and how much you would have to suffer from the dissolute men who hover about all
young and pretty actresses--my blood would boil as I thought of the insults and affronts to
which you might be subjected, and from which I was powerless to shield you--no words can tell
what I suffered. Affecting a taste for the theatre that I did not possess, I never let an opportunity
pass to see every company of players that I could hear of--hoping to find you at last among
them. But although I saw numberless young actresses, about your age, not one of them could
have been you, my dear child--of that I was sure. So at last I abandoned the hope of finding
my long-lost daughter, though it was a bitter trial to feel that I must do so. The princess,
my wife, had died three years after our marriage, leaving me only one child--Vallombreuse--whose
ungovernable disposition has always given me much trouble and anxiety. A few days ago, at Saint
Germain, I heard some of the courtiers speak in terms of high praise of Herode's troupe, and
what they said made me determine to go and see one of their representations without delay,
while my heart beat high with a new hope--for they especially lauded a young actress, called
Isabelle; whose graceful, modest, high-bred air they declared to be irresistible, and her acting
everything that could be desired--adding that she was as virtuous as she was beautiful, and
that the boldest libertines respected her immaculate purity. Deeply agitated by a secret presentiment,
I hastened back to Paris, and went to the theatre that very night. There I saw you, my darling,
and though it would seem to be impossible for even a father's eye to recognise, in the beautiful
young woman of twenty, the babe that he had kissed in its cradle, and had never beheld since,
still I knew you instantly--the very moment you came in sight--and I perceived, with a heart
swelling with happiness and thankfulness, that you were all that I could wish. Moreover, I
recognised the face of an old actor, who had been I knew in the troupe that Cornelia joined
when she fled from Paris, and I resolved to address myself first to him; so as not to startle
you by too abrupt a disclosure of my claims upon you. But when I sent the next morning to the
hotel in the Rue Dauphine, I learned that Herode's troupe had just gone to give a representation
at a chateau in the environs of Paris, and would be absent three days. I should have endeavoured
to wait patiently for their return, had not a brave fellow, who used to be in my service, and
has my interest at heart, come to inform me that the Duke of Vallombreuse, being madly in love
with a young actress named Isabelle, who resisted his suit with the utmost firmness and determination,
had arranged to gain forcible possession of her in the course of the day's journey--the expedition
into the country being gotten up for that express purpose--that he had a band of hired ruffians
engaged to carry out his nefarious purpose and bring his unhappy victim to this chateau--and
that he had come to warn me, fearing lest serious consequences should ensue to my son, as the
young actress would be accompanied by brave and faithful friends, who were armed, and would
defend her to the death. This terrible news threw me into a frightful state of anxiety and
excitement. Feeling sure, as I did, that you were my own daughter, I shuddered at the thought
of the horrible crime that I might not be in time to prevent, and without one moment's delay
set out for this place--suffering such agony by the way as I do not like even to think of.
You were already delivered from danger when I arrived, as you know, and without having suffered
anything beyond the alarm and dread--which must have been terrible indeed, my poor child! And
then, the amethyst ring on your finger confirmed, past any possibility of doubt, what my heart
had told me, when first my eyes beheld you in the theatre."

"I pray you to believe, dear lord and father," answered Isabelle, "that I have never accused
you of anything, nor considered myself neglected. Accustomed from my infancy to the roving
life of the troupe I was with, I neither knew nor dreamed of any other. The little knowledge
that I had of the world made me realize that I should be wrong in wishing to force myself upon
an illustrious family, obliged doubtless by powerful reasons, of which I knew nothing, to leave
me in obscurity. The confused remembrance I had of my origin sometimes inspired me--when I
was very young--with a certain pride, and I would say to myself, when I noticed the disdainful
air with which great ladies looked down upon us poor actresses, I also am of noble birth. But
I outgrew those fancies, and only preserved an invincible self-respect, which I have always
cherished. Nothing in the world would have induced me to dishonour the illustrious blood that
flows in my veins. The disgraceful license of the coulisses, and the loathsome gallantries
lavished upon all actresses, even those who are not comely, disgusted me from the first, and
I have lived in the theatre almost as if in a convent. The good old pedant has been like a
watchful father to me, and as for Herode, he would have severely chastised any one who dared
to touch me with the tip of his finger, or even to pronounce a vulgar word in my presence.
Although they are only obscure actors, they are very honourable, worthy men, and I trust you
will be good enough to help them if they ever find themselves in need of assistance. I owe
it partly to them that I can lift my forehead for your kiss without a blush of shame, and proudly
declare myself worthy, so far as purity is concerned, to be your daughter. My only regret is
to have been the innocent cause of the misfortune that has overtaken the duke, your son. I
could have wished to enter your family, my dear father, under more favourable auspices."

"You have nothing to reproach yourself with, my sweet child, for you could not divine these
mysteries, which have been suddenly disclosed by a combination of circumstances that would
be considered romantic and improbable, even in a novel; and my joy at finding you as worthy
in every way to be my beloved and honoured daughter, as if you had not lived amid all the dangers
of such a career, makes up for the pain and anxiety caused by the illness and danger of my
son. Whether he lives or dies, I shall never for one moment blame you for anything in connection
with his misfortune. In any event, it was your virtue and courage that saved him from being
guilty of a crime that I shudder to contemplate. And now, tell me, who was the handsome young
man among your liberators who seemed to direct the attack, and who wounded Vallombreuse? An
actor doubtless, though it appeared to me that he had a very noble bearing, and magnificent
courage."

"Yes, my dear father," Isabelle replied, with a most lovely and becoming blush, "he is an actor,
a member of our troupe; but if I may venture to betray his secret, which is already known to
the Duke of Vallombreuse, I will tell you that the so-called Captain Fracasse conceals under
his mask a noble countenance, as indeed you already know, and under his theatrical pseudonym,
the name of an illustrious family."

"True!" rejoined the prince, "I have heard something about that already. It would certainly
have been astonishing if an ordinary, low-born actor had ventured upon so bold and rash a course
as running counter to a Duke of Vallombreuse, and actually entering into a combat with him;
it needs noble blood for such daring acts. Only a gentleman can conquer a gentleman, just as
a diamond can only be cut by a diamond."

The lofty pride of the aged prince found much consolation in the knowledge that his son had
not been attacked and wounded by an adversary of low origin; there was nothing compromising
in a duel between equals, and he drew a deep breath of relief at thought of it.

"And pray, what is the real name of this valiant champion?" smilingly asked the prince, with
a roguish twinkle in his dark eyes--"this dauntless knight, and brave defender of innocence
and purity!"

"He is the Baron de Sigognac," Isabelle replied blushingly, with a slight trembling perceptible
in her sweet, low voice. "I reveal his name fearlessly to you, my dear father, for you are
both too just and too generous to visit upon his head the disastrous consequences of a victory
that he deplores."

"De Sigognac?" said the prince. "I thought that ancient and illustrious family was extinct.
Is he not from Gascony?"

"Yes; his home is in the neighbourhood of Dax."

"Exactly--and the de Sigognacs have an appropriate coat of arms--three golden storks on an
azure field. Yes, it is as I said, an ancient and illustrious family--one of the oldest and
most honourable in France. Paramede de Sigognac figured gloriously in the first crusade. A
Raimbaud de Sigognac, the father of this young man without doubt, was the devoted friend and
companion of Henri IV, in his youth, but was not often seen at court in later years. It was
said that he was embarrassed financially, I remember."

"So much so, that when our troupe sought refuge of a stormy night under his roof, we found
his son living in a half ruined chateau, haunted by bats and owls, where his youth was passing
in sadness and misery. We persuaded him to come away with us, fearing that he would die there
of starvation and melancholy--but I never saw misfortune so bravely borne."

"Poverty is no disgrace," said the prince, "and any noble house that has preserved its honour
unstained may rise again from its ruins to its ancient height of glory and renown. But why
did not the young baron apply to some of his father's old friends in his distress? or lay his
case before the king, who is the natural refuge of all loyal gentlemen under such circumstances?"

"Misfortunes such as his are apt to breed timidity, even with the bravest," Isabelle replied,
"and pride deters many a man from betraying his misery to the world. When the Baron de Sigognac
consented to accompany us to Paris, he hoped to find some opportunity there to retrieve his
fallen fortunes; but it has not presented itself. In order not to be an expense to the troupe,
he generously and nobly insisted upon taking the place of one of the actors, who died on the
way, and who was a great loss to us. As he could appear upon the stage always masked, he surely
did not compromise his dignity by it."

"Under this theatrical disguise, I think that, without being a sorcerer, I can detect a little
bit of romance, eh?" said the prince, with a mischievous smile. "But I will not inquire too
closely; I know how good and true you are well enough not to take alarm at any respectful tribute
paid to your charms. I have not been with you long enough yet as a father, my sweet child,
to venture upon sermonizing."

As he paused, Isabelle raised her lovely eyes, in which shone the purest innocence and the
most perfect loyalty, to his, and met his questioning gaze unflinchingly. The rosy flush which
the first mention of de Sigognac's name had called up was gone, and her countenance showed
no faintest sign of embarrassment or shame. In her pure heart the most searching looks of a
father, of God himself, could have found nothing to condemn. Just at this point the doctor's
assistant was announced, who brought a most favourable report from the sick-room. He was charged
to tell the prince that his son's condition was eminently satisfactory--a marked change for
the better having taken place; and that Maitre Laurent considered the danger past--believing
that his recovery was now only a question of time.

A few days later, Vallombreuse, propped up on his pillows, received a visit from his faithful
and devoted friend, the Chevalier de Vidalinc, whom he had not been permitted to see earlier.
The prince was sitting by the bedside, affectionately watching every flitting expression on
his son's face, which was pathetically thin and pale, but handsomer than ever; because the
old haughty, fierce look had vanished, and a soft light, that had never been in them before,
shone in his beautiful eyes, whereat his father's heart rejoiced exceedingly. Isabelle stood
at the other side of the bed, and the young duke had clasped his thin, startlingly white fingers
round her hand. As he was forbidden to speak, save in monosyllables--because of his injured
lung--he took this means of testifying his sympathy with her, who had been the involuntary
cause of his being wounded and in danger of losing his life, and thus made her understand that
he cherished no resentments. The affectionate brother had replaced the fiery lover, and his
illness, in calming his ardent passion, had contributed not a little to make the transition
a less difficult one than it could possibly have been otherwise. Isabelle was now for him really
and only the Comtesse de Lineuil, his dear sister. He nodded in a friendly way to Vidalinc,
and disengaged his hand for a moment from Isabelle's to give it to him--it was all that the
doctor would allow--but his eyes were eloquent enough to make up for his enforced silence.

In the course of a few weeks, Vallombreuse, who had gained strength rapidly, was able to leave
his bed and recline upon a lounge near the open window; so as to enjoy the mild, delightful
air of spring, that brought colour to his cheeks and light to his eyes. Isabelle was often
with him, and read aloud for hours together to entertain him; as Maitre Laurent's orders were
strict that he should not talk, even yet, any more than was actually necessary. One day, when
Isabelle had finished a chapter in the volume from which she was reading to him, and was about
to begin another, he interrupted her, and said, "My dear sister, that book is certainly very
amusing, and the author a man of remarkable wit and talent; but I must confess that I prefer
your charming conversation to your delightful reading. Do you know, I would not have believed
it possible to gain so much, in losing all hope of what I desired more ardently than I had
ever done anything in my whole life before. The brother is very much more kindly treated than
the suitor--are you aware of that? You are as sweet and amiable to the one as you were severe
and unapproachable to the other. I find in this calm, peaceful affection, charms that I had
never dreamed of, and you reveal to me a new side of the feminine character, hitherto utterly
unknown to me. Carried away by fiery passions, and irritated to madness by any opposition,
I was like the wild huntsman of the ancient legend, who stopped for no obstacle, but rode recklessly
over everything in his path. I looked upon whatever beautiful woman I was in pursuit of as
my legitimate prey. I scouted the very idea of failure, and deemed myself irresistible. At
the mention of virtue, I only shrugged my shoulders, and I think I may say, without too much
conceit, to the only woman I ever pursued who did not yield to me, that I had reason not to
put much faith in it. My mother died when I was a mere baby; you, my sweet sister, were not
near me, and I have never known, until now, all the purity, tenderness, and sublime courage
of which your sex is capable. I chanced to see you. An irresistible attraction, in which, perhaps,
the unknown tie of blood had its influence, drew me to you, and for the first time in my life
a feeling of respect and esteem mingled with my passion. Your character delighted me, even
when you drove me to despair. I could not but secretly approve and admire the modest and courteous
firmness with which you rejected my homage. The more decidedly you repulsed me, the more I
felt that you were worthy of my adoration. Anger and admiration succeeded each other in my
heart, and even in my most violent paroxysms of rage I always respected you. I descried the
angel in the woman, and bowed to the ascendency of a celestial purity. Now I am happy and blessed
indeed; for I have in you precisely what I needed, without knowing it--this pure affection,
free from all earthly taint--unalterable--eternal. I possess at last the love of a soul."

"Yes, my dear brother, it is yours," Isabelle replied; "and it is a great source of happiness
to me that I am able to assure you of it. You have in me a devoted sister and friend, who will
love you doubly to make up for the years we have lost--above all, now that you have promised
me to correct the faults that have so grieved and alarmed our dear father, and to exhibit only
the good qualities of which YOU have plenty."

"Oh! you little preacher," cried Vallombreuse, with a bright, admiring smile; "how you take
advantage of my weakness. However, it is perfectly true that I have been a dreadful monster,
but I really do mean to do better in future--if not for love of virtue itself, at least to
avoid seeing my charming sister put on a severe, disapproving air, at some atrocious escapade
of mine. Still, I fear that I shall always be Folly, as you will be Reason."

"If you will persist in paying me such high-flown compliments," said Isabelle, with a little
shrug of her pretty shoulders, "I shall certainly resume the reading, and you will have to
listen to a long story that the corsair is just about to relate to the beautiful princess,
his captive, in the cabin of his galley."

"Oh, no! surely I do not deserve such a severe punishment as that. Even at the risk of appearing
garrulous, I do so want to talk a little. That confounded doctor has kept me mute long enough
in all conscience, and I am tired to death of having the seal of silence upon my lips, like
a statue of Hippocrates."

"But I am afraid you may do yourself harm; remember that your wound is scarcely healed yet,
and the injured lung is still very irritable. Maitre Laurent laid such stress upon my reading
to you, so that you should keep quiet, and give your chest a good chance to get strong and
well again."

"Maitre Laurent doesn't know what he's talking about, and only wants to prolong his own importance
to me. My lungs work as well as ever they did. I feel perfectly myself again, and I've a great
mind to order my horse and go for a canter in the forest."

"You had better talk than do such a wildly imprudent thing as that; it is certainly less dangerous."

"I shall very soon be about again, my sweet little sister, and then I shall have the pleasure
of introducing you into the society suitable to your rank--where your incomparable grace and
beauty will create a sensation, and bring crowds of adorers to your feet. From among them you
will be able to select a husband, eh?" "I can have no desire to do anything of that kind, Vallombreuse,
and pray do not think this the foolish declaration of a girl who would be very sorry to be
taken at her word. I am entirely in earnest, I do assure you. I have bestowed my hand so often
in the last act of the pieces I have played that I am in no hurry to do it in reality. I do
not wish for anything better than to remain quietly here with the prince and yourself."

"But, my dear girl, a father and brother will not always content you--do not think it! Such
affection cannot satisfy the demands of the heart forever."

"It will be enough for me, however, and if some day they fail me, I can take refuge in a convent."

"Heaven forbid! that would be carrying austerity too far indeed. I pray you never to mention
it again, if you have any regard for my peace of mind. And now tell me, my sweet little sister,
what do you think of my dear friend, the Chevalier de Vidalinc? does not he seem to be possessed
of every qualification necessary to make a good husband?"

"Doubtless, and the woman that he marries will have a right to consider herself fortunate but
however charming and desirable your friend may be, my dear Vallombreuse, I shall never be that
woman."

"Well, let him pass, then--but tell me what you think of the Marquis de l'Estang, who came
to see me the other day, and gazed spell-bound at my lovely sister all the time he was here.
He was so overwhelmed by your surpassing grace, so dazzled by your exquisite beauty, that he
was struck dumb, and when he tried to pay you pretty compliments, did nothing but stammer and
blush. Aside from this timidity, which made him appear to great disadvantage, and which your
ladyship should readily excuse, since you yourself were the cause of it, the marquis is an
accomplished and estimable gentleman. He is handsome, young, of high birth and great wealth.
He would do capitally for my fair sister, and is sure to address himself to the prince--if
indeed he has not already done so--as an aspirant to the honour of an alliance with her."

"As I have the honour of belonging to this illustrious family," said Isabelle a little impatiently,
for she was exceedingly annoyed by this banter, "too much humility would not become me, therefore
I will not say that I consider myself unworthy of such an alliance; but if the Marquis de l'Estang
should ask my hand of my father, I would refuse him. I have told you, my dear brother, more
than once, that I do not wish to marry--and you know it too--so pray don't tease me any more
about it."

"Oh! what a fierce, determined little woman is this fair sister of mine. Diana herself was
not more inaccessible, in the forests and valleys of Haemus--yet, if the naughty mythological
stories may be believed, she did at last smile upon a certain Endymion. You are vexed, because
I casually propose some suitable candidates for the honour of your hand; but you need not be,
for, if THEY do not please you, we will hunt up one who will."

"I am not vexed, my dear brother, but you are certainly talking far too much for an invalid,
and I shall tell Maitre, Laurent to reprimand you, or not permit you to have the promised bit
of fowl for your supper."

"Oh! if that's the case I will desist at once," said Vallombreuse, with a droll air of submission,
"for I'm as hungry as an ogre--but rest assured of one thing, my charming sister: No one shall
select your husband but myself."

To put an end to this teasing, Isabelle began to read the corsair's long story, without paying
any attention to the indignant protests that were made, and Vallombreuse, to revenge himself,
finally closed his eyes and pretended to be asleep; which feigned slumber soon became real,
and Isabelle, perceiving that it was so, put aside her book and quietly stole away.

This conversation, in which, under all his mischievous banter, the duke seemed to have a definite
and serious purpose in view, worried Isabelle very much, in spite of her efforts to banish
it from her mind. Could it be that Vallombreuse was nursing a secret resentment against de
Sigognac? He had never once spoken his name, or referred to him in any way, since he was wounded
by him; and was he trying to place an insurmountable barrier between his sister and the baron,
by bringing about her marriage with another? or was he simply trying to find out whether the
actress transformed to a countess, had changed in sentiments as well as in rank? Isabelle could
not answer these questions satisfactorily to herself. They seldom commit Violence upon the English,
but when provoked, or put on by others.

The French, that are seated upon the River of St. Laurence and the Messisippi, and the Lakes between
them in Canada and Lovisiana, which extend behind all the English Plantations along the Heart of North
America a vast Way, from the most Northern Parts of the French Settlements, which are contiguous
quite to the Gulf of Mexico, are numerous, and through the Policy of their late King intermarry
with the Indians; by which means being united with them, they often set them on to destroy the
English, which may prove dangerous in Case of a War with France.

But to prevent more Mischiefs of this kind, Providence has secured us from them by a continued Ridge
of vast high Hills, called the Apelachian Mountains, running nearly under the Meridian, as being
passable but in very few Places; which Mountains through the Care and Conduct of the Honourable
Colonel Spotswood are secured for his Majesty, tho' not guarded as yet; which might easily be done
to the great Safety and Encouragement of back Settlements in a vast rich Country Westward of
the Settlements of Virginia, some hundred of Miles from the Sea quite to the Mountains, which might
prove a Terror to the French Indians and Planters, in Case of Inroads and Irruptions, and become a
Safeguard to the Trade of those Places.

Governor Spotswood, when he undertook the great Discovery of the Passage over the Mountains,
attended with a sufficient Guard and Pioneers and Gentlemen, with a sufficient Stock of Provision,
with abundant Fatigue passed these Mountains, and cut his Majesty's Name in a Rock upon the Highest
of them, naming it MOUNT GEORGE; and in Complaisance the Gentlemen from the Governor's Name, called
the Mountain next in Height, Mount Alexander.

For this Expedition they were obliged to provide a great Quantity of Horse-Shoes; (Things seldom
used in the lower Parts of the Country, where there are few Stones:) Upon which Account the
Governor upon their Return presented each of his Companions with
a Golden Horse-Shoe, (some of which I have seen studded with valuable
Stones resembling the Heads of Nails) with this Inscription on the
one Side: Sic juvat transcendere montes: And on the other is written
the tramontane Order.

This he instituted to encourage Gentlemen to venture backwards, and make Discoveries and new
Settlements; any Gentleman being entitled to wear this Golden Shoe
that can prove his having drank His Majesty's Health, upon MOUNT GEORGE.

He

built a Fort called Christanna, which tho' not so far back, yet proved of great Service and
Use; where at his sole Expence (I think) I have seen Seventy Seven Indian Children at a Time at
School, under the careful Management of the worthy Mr. Charles Griffin, who lived there some
Years for that Purpose; from whom I have been informed of most of the Indian Customs and Principles,
that I here mention, except such as I have seen and known my self.

These Children could all read, say their Catechisms and Prayers tolerably well; but this pious
Design being laid aside thro' the Opposition of Trade and Interest, Mr. Griffin was removed to
the College to teach the Indians, instructed there by the Benefaction of the Honourable Mr. Boyle.

The
Indians so loved and adored him, that I have seen them hug him and lift him up in their Arms, and
fain would have chosen him for a King of the Sapony Nation.

The Southern Indians, that came several hundred Miles to meet the Governor, there to treat of
War, and Peace, and Trade, though they had several murthered by their own Northern Enemies, (even
under the Mouths of our great Guns, and whilst we were there) which
made them somewhat jealous that we had betray'd them; yet left several
Children under his Care, and engaged themselves to send more, though
they themselves would not relinquish their Barbarity; for they in
reasoning with us by Interpreters, asked Leave to be excused from
becoming as we are; for they thought it hard, that we should desire
them to change their Manners and Customs, since they did not desire
us to turn Indians: However, they permitted their Children to be brought
up in our Way; and when they were able to judge for themselves, they
were to live as the ENGLISH, or as the INDIANS, according to their
best liking.

The Indians have a blind Worship and Sacrifice, Priests, and Physicians, and Expiation, with
howling Lamentations and Purgation at their Burials: All which I have seen at the Funeral of their
Slain at Christanna, whom they buried thus; having made Holes like
Saw-Pits, and lined them with Bark and Sticks, they wrapped the Bodies
in the best Cloth they could buy with the Skins of the Deceased, and
laid them in the Graves, with all the Cloths, Skins and Nicknacks
of the Dead: Then they covered the Body hollow with Sticks, and flung
in the Earth with mournful Noise; so the Bodies lay as in Coffins.

The Priest or Physician in curing the Wounded, made an hideous Noise,
singing certain Charms, with particular Actions and Forms of Incantation,
to which he ascribed the Cure, tho' I believe this is done only to
blind the common Indians; for I observed he did not begin his Operation,
till he had been in the Woods.

Then he shut us all out for an Hour, and when we were readmitted, I perceived he had been using
certain Roots and Herbs that I knew not.

Upon Enquiry, we have from them these their Notions of the State of the Dead.

They believe that they go to Mohomny that lives beyond the Sun, if they have not been Wicked, nor
like Dogs nor Wolves, that is, not unchast, then they believe that
Mohomny sends them to a plentiful Country abounding with Fish, Flesh
and Fowls, the best of their Kind, and easy to be caught; but if they
have been naughty, then he sends them to a poor barren Country, where
be many Wolves and Bears, with a few nimble Deer, swift Fish and Fowls,
difficult to be taken; and when killed, being scarce any thing but
Skin and Bones.

They allow Polygamy, if the Man can maintain his Family, as I have been informed.

They punish Adultery in a Woman by cutting off her Hair, which they fix upon a long Pole without the
Town; which is such a Disgrace that the Party is obliged to fly, and becomes a Victim to some Enemy,
a Slave to some Rover, or perishes in the Woods.

They have certain Hieroglyphical Methods of characterizing Things; an Instance of which I have
seen upon the Side of a Tree where the Bark was taken off.

There was drawn something like a Deer and a River, with certain Strokes and Dashes; the Deer looking
down the River, which we interpreted to be left for Information to some of their stragling
Company, that certain of them were gone down that River a Hunting, and others were gone different
Ways.

I know by the Boys at the College, that they have an excellent Genius for Drawing; and I fancy
by Art they might be made some of the best Masters of Painting and Limning, to which they seem
naturally inclined.

They hate Injury and Oppression; and I have been told they have some capital Punishments.

Besides the French, the Traders of some Companies and Countries often
set the Indians on to injure the English on the Frontiers, out of
a barbarous inhuman Design; and often private Injuries done by some
of our ordinary or vile People (who esteem and use the Indians as
Dogs) are repaid with publick Barbarity.

An Instance of their Resolutions for Satisfaction, we have in the Death of Major Wynne, who
was shot by an Indian, because one of our Servants had killed one of their great Men; and upon
the Trial of the Indian, they pleaded that we were the Aggressors, and that they never rest
without Revenge and Reprisals; and that now they said we and they were equal, having each lost a great
Man: Wherefore to avoid more Bloodshed, there was a Necessity to pardon the Indian.

They report that the Northern Indians send out Bodies of young Fellows yearly, who dare not return
without a certain Number of Scalps or Prisoners, in order to train them up, and qualify them for
great and fighting Men.

Now these, and such as are set on by others, do some Mischief (tho' but very seldom) in the Frontier
Plantations, tho' they be guarded with Rangers; and these with such as think themselves injured
are the Indians that make Wars, and such Disturbance in the Northern and Southern Colonies: But
the tributary Indians, of which there are but four very small Nations in Virginia on this Side the
Mountains, keep to the Bounds allowed them, and seldom do any Hurt, being sure to be punished
for Offences in a great Measure by our Laws, since we protect and shelter them, by permitting
them to live among us; tho' sometimes they will pretend to claim their prior Right to all our Lands,
as Blunt King of the Tuskaroodaus did, when he told Colonel Spotswood that the Country belonged
to them before we English came thither; so that he thought they had a better Title than we, and
ought not to be confined to such narrow Limits for Hunting.

To retort this Argument, the Governor told him that Mohomny took the Ground from them and gave
it us, because we did as he bid us, but they would not.

Blunt answered, that they could not tell what Mohomny would have them do; and asked how we knew.

The
Governor then told him that Mohomny sent his Son to us, who lived a long time with us, and
told us and taught us what we should do; and then he went back again to his Father.

With this King Blunt seemed satisfied and surprized; and after a Pause, he said, he had talked
with several Governors and other English, but he really never before heard that Mohomny had
a Son.

I relate this, to shew how by Degrees, after proper Methods, they may be humoured, and brought
to have some Notions of the true Religion, when their Capacity and Temper is rightly studied
and managed; for we must give Milk to such Babes in Faith.

Some indeed, after seeming Conversion have apostatized and returned to their own Ways, chiefly because
they can live with less Labour, and more Pleasure and Plenty, as Indians, than they can with us;
but this might easily be remedied by making a plentiful Provision for them, especially those at
the College, by sending some to Sea, and putting out others to Trades,
and not letting them idle away their Time, nor return to their Towns
so soon, before they be perfect in the Understanding and Approbation
of our Customs and Religion, and have seen some more of the World,
and be handsomly provided for; for then if they returned, they might
do Good to themselves and others.

This might by Degrees convert all the tributary and neighbouring Indians; and the Northern and
Southern Nations might be managed by Missionaries from the Society, and the College Indians.

These
inland People are vastly numerous, as I have been told by the Traders, who are sent out amongst
them seven or eight hundred Miles, with about a hundred Horses, and stay there sometimes for Years
together.

The Missionaries that are now sent, generally keep among the English, and rarely see an Indian;
or when they do, know but little how to manage them; for you may
as well talk Reason, Philosophy, or Divinity to a Block, as to them,
unless you perfectly understand their Temper, and know how to humour
them.

I believe indeed, Mr. Andrews, Missionary to the Northern Indians, in the late Queen's Time, did
great Good among them in seven Years: In which Time, he found out
something of their Nature, and translated Part of our Prayers and
Psalms into their Language: Which Book when he gave me, he told me
that it had not the desired Effect, neither did his Preaching avail
as much as could be wished, because Policy and Interest intervening
often superseded the Promotion of the Gospel, and the debauched Lives
and vile Practices of our ordinary People give Examples very pernicious
to Religion; for the Indians think, that they may surely be allowed
the same Liberty as we; and if our Folks don't act, as they say, they
should, the Indians may think the Christian Profession to be a Cheat,
when our pretended Principles are contradicted by our Actions.

I have here specified some general Customs and Notions of the Indians,
without a superficial Knowledge of which Things the Government and
Society for propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, may be at great
Trouble and Expence, and yet make but small Progress in the Propagation
of Learning, Religion and good Manners among the Heathen Indians of
America; who in Gross may all be said to be such, as I have here given
an Account of.

PART II.

CHAP.

I.

Of the English Settlements in Virginia.

The first Discovery made for the English in North-America, was in the Year 1584, (a hundred and
forty Years ago) by Captain Philip Amidas, and Captain Arthur Barlow, by the Protection and
Encouragement of Queen Elizabeth; with the Persuasion and Direction of Sir Walter Raleigh.

They anchored at Roenoak Inlet, now belonging to the Government of North Carolina, and from the
Virgin Queen, and the apparent Purity of the Indians, and primitive Plenty of the Place, that
new discover'd Part of the World was named Virginia.

After that, Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir Francis Drake, and Sir Walter Raleigh carried on the Project,
and made Advancements in it, with the Leave of the Government; which were promoted and continued
by the Merchants of London, Bristol, Exeter and Plymouth; with Variety of Accidents, Successes
and Disappointments in Respect of their Trade and Possessions, and War and Peace with the Indians;
especially under the Conduct of Captain Smith, who was employed by the Company of Merchants incorporated
by King James I. in 1606; and has written a large History of his particular Transactions.

They then fixed chiefly at, and near James Town, on a small Island in James River, till the Year
1609, when they sent out Settlements to Nansemond, Powhatan, and the Year after to Kiquotan.

After
that the Plantations of Virginia were formed into a Government, managed first by three, and
afterwards by one Governor, to whose Assistance in a small Time they added Counsellors; and in
1620, they called an Assembly of Burgesses, who being elected by the People, met the Governor
and Council at James Town, and debated Matters for the Improvement and good Government of the Country.

About
this Time the Dutch brought over some Negroes for Sale, who are now wonderfully encreased;
besides the constant Supplies of them imported yearly.

At this Time, they made new Settlements, laid out and apportioned Lands, some to the Governor,
some for a College and Indian School, some to the Church and Glebes,
and some to particular Persons; and carried on Salt Works and Iron
Works, besides Tobacco.

This Prosperity of the Colony so encouraged its Increase, that one thousand three hundred People have
gone over in one Year to settle there; upon which they made County Courts for the Tryal of
some Causes and Criminals under the General Court and Assembly; but
private Interest and Quarrels byassing the Governors and other Persons
concerned, often introduced ill Success, Faction, and Indian Wars.

The
fatal Consequences of this Male-Administration cry'd so loud, that
King Charles I. coming to the Crown of England, had a tender Concern
for the poor People, that had been betrayed thither and almost lost:
Upon which he dissolved the Company in 1626, reducing the Country
and Government into his own immediate Direction, appointing the Governor
and Council himself, and ordering all Patents and Processes to issue
in his own Name, reserving to himself a Quit-Rent of two Shillings
for every hundred Acres of Land.

In this happy Constitution, the
Colony of Virginia has prosperously encreased gradually and wonderfully,
to its present most flourishing Condition.

Indeed Bacon's Rebellion
against the Governor occasioned a great deal of Bloodshed and Disturbance;
but that after his Death soon ceased.

The assured good Report of
this vast Tract of Land and happy Climate encouraged several Gentlemen
of Condition and good Descent, to transport themselves and Families,
and settle in this new Paradise; some for the Sake of Wealth, some
for Religion, and others because they could not well live elsewhere;
and others because they dared not, or cared not to stay at Home.

But
one particular Occasion that sent several Families of good Birth and
Fortune to settle there, was the Civil Wars in England; for Sir William
Barkley the Governor being strong for the King, held out the last
of all the King's Dominions against the Usurper; and likewise proclaimed
King Charles II. before the Restoration. When he graphically described his two duels with the Duke of Vallombreuse--the old man,
filled with pride and delight at the proficiency of his beloved pupil, could not restrain his
enthusiasm, and snatching up a stick gave vigorous illustrations of all the most salient points
of the encounters as the baron delineated them, ending up with a wild flourish and a shout
of triumph.

"Alas! my good Pierre," said he, with a sigh, when quiet was restored, "you taught me how to
use my sword only too well. My unfortunate victory has been my ruin, and has sent me back,
hopeless and bereaved, to this poor old crumbling chateau of mine, where I am doomed to drag
out the weary remainder of my days in sorrow and misery. I am peculiarly unhappy, in that my
very triumphs have only made matters worse for me--it would have been better far for me, and
for all, if I had been wounded, or even killed, in this last disastrous encounter, instead
of my rival and enemy, the young Duke of Vallombreuse."

"The de Sigognacs are never beaten," said the old retainer loftily. "No matter what may come
of it, I am glad, my dear young master, that you killed that insolent duke. The whole thing
was conducted in strict accordance with the code of honour--what more could be desired? How
could any valiant gentleman object to die gloriously, sword in hand, of a good, honest wound,
fairly given? He should consider himself most fortunate."

"Ah well! perhaps you are right--I will not dispute you," said de Sigognac, smiling secretly
at the old man's philosophy. "But I am very tired, and would like to go to my own room now--will
you light the lamp, my good Pierre, and lead the way?"

Pierre obeyed, and the baron, preceded by his old servant and followed by his old dog and cat,
slowly ascended the ancient staircase. The quaint frescoes were gradually fading, growing ever
paler and more indistinct, and there were new stains on the dull blue sky of the vaulted ceiling,
where the rain and melting snow of winter storms had filtered through from the dilapidated
roof. The ruinous condition of everything in and about the crumbling old chateau, to which
de Sigognac had been perfectly accustomed before he quitted it, and taken as a matter of course,
now struck him forcibly, and increased his dejection. He saw in it the sad and inevitable decadence
of his race, and said to himself, "If these ancient walls had any pity for the last forlorn
remnant of the family they have sheltered for centuries, they would fall in and bury me in
their ruins."

When he reached the landing at the head of the stairs he took the lamp from Pierre's hand,
bade him good-night and dismissed him--not willing that even his faithful old servant, who
had cared for him ever since his birth, should witness his overpowering emotion. He walked
slowly through the great banqueting hall, where the comedians had supped on that memorable
night, and the remembrance of that gay scene rendered the present dreary solitude and silence
more terrible than they had ever seemed to him before. The death-like stillness was only broken
by the horrid gnawing of a rat somewhere in the wall, and the old family portraits glared down
at him reproachfully, as he passed on below them with listless step and downcast eyes, oblivious
of everything but his own deep misery, and his yearning for his lost Isabelle. As he came under
the last portrait of all, that of his own sweet young mother, he suddenly looked up, and as
his eyes rested on the calm, beautiful countenance--which had always worn such a pathetic,
mournful expression that it used to make his heart ache to look at it in his boyish days--it
seemed to smile upon him. He was startled for an instant, and then, thrilling with a strange,
exquisite delight, and inspired with new hope and courage, he said in a low, earnest tone,
"I accept my dear dead mother's smile as a good omen--perhaps all may not be lost even yet--I
will try to believe so."

After a moment of silent thought, he went on into his own chamber, and put down the small lamp
he carried, upon the little table, where still lay the stray volume of Ronsard's poems that
he had been reading--or rather trying to read--on that tempestuous night when the old pedant
knocked at his door. And there was his bed, where Isabelle had slept--the very pillow upon
which her dear head had rested. He trembled as he stood and gazed at it, and saw, as in a vision,
the perfect form lying there again in his place, and the sweetest face in all the world turned
towards him, with a tender smile parting the ripe red lips, a rosy flush mantling in the delicate
cheeks, and warm lovelight shining in the deep blue eyes. He stood spell-bound--afraid to move
or breathe--and worshipped the beautiful vision with all his soul and strength, as if it had
been indeed divine--but alas! it faded as suddenly as it had appeared, and he felt as if the
doors of heaven had been shut upon him. He hastily undressed, and threw himself down in the
place where Isabelle had actually reposed; passionately kissed the pillow that had been hallowed
by the touch of her head, and bedewed it with his tears. He lay long awake, thinking of the
angelic being who loved him and whom he adored, whilst Beelzebub, rolled up in a ball, slept
at his feet, and snored like the traditional cat of Mahomet, that lay and slumbered upon the
prophet's sleeve.

When morning came, de Sigognac was more impressed than ever with the dilapidated, crumbling
condition of his ancient mansion. Daylight has no mercy upon old age and ruins; it reveals
with cruel distinctness the wrinkles, gray hairs, poverty, misery, stains, fissures, dust and
mould in which they abound; but more kindly night softens or conceals all defects, with its
friendly shade, spreading over them its mantle of darkness. The rooms that used to seem so
vast to their youthful owner had shrunken, and looked almost small and insignificant to him
now, to his extreme surprise and mortification; but he soon regained the feeling of being really
at home, and resumed his former way of life completely; just as one goes back to an old garment,
that has for a time been laid aside, and replaced by a new one. His days were spent thus: early
in the morning he went to say a short prayer in the half-ruined chapel where his ancestors
lay, ere he repaired to the kitchen where his simple breakfast awaited him; that disposed of,
he and old Pierre fetched their swords, and fought their friendly duels; after which he mounted
Bayard, or the pony he had brought home with him, and went off for long, solitary rides over
the desolate Landes. Returning late in the afternoon he sat, sad and silent as of old, until
his frugal supper was prepared, partook of it, also in silence, and then retired to his lonely
chamber, where he tried to read some musty old volume which he knew by heart already, or else
flung himself on his bed--never without kissing the sacred pillow that had supported Isabelle's
beloved head--and lay there a prey to mournful and bitter meditations, until at last he could
forget his troubles and grief in sleep. There was not a vestige left of the brilliant Captain
Fracasse, nor of the high-spirited rival of the haughty Duke of Vallombreuse; the unfortunate
young Baron de Sigognac had relapsed entirely into the sad-eyed, dejected master of Castle Misery.

One morning he sauntered listlessly down into the garden, which was wilder and more overgrown
than ever--a tangled mass of weeds and brambles. He mechanically directed his steps towards
the straggling eglantine that had had a little rose ready for each of the fair visitors that
accompanied him when last he was there, and was surprised and delighted to see that it again
held forth, as if for his acceptance, two lovely little blossoms that had come out to greet
him, and upon each of which a dewdrop sparkled amid the frail, delicately tinted petals. He
was strangely moved and touched by the sight of these tiny wild roses, which awoke such tender,
precious memories, and he repeated to himself, as he had often done before, the words in which
Isabelle had confessed to him that she had furtively kissed the little flower, his offering,
and dropped a tear upon it, and then secretly given him her own heart in exchange for it--surely
the sweetest words ever spoken on this earth. He gently plucked one of the dainty little roses,
passionately inhaled its delicate fragrance and pressed a kiss upon it, as if it had been her
lips, which were not less sweet, and soft, and fresh. He had done nothing but think of Isabelle
ever since their separation, and he fully realized now, if he had not before, how indispensable
she was to his happiness. She was never out of his mind, waking or sleeping, for he dreamed
of her every night, and his love grew fonder, if that were possible, as the weary days went
on. She was so good and true, so pure and sweet, so beautiful, so everything that was lovely
and desirable, "made of all creatures' best," a veritable angel in human guise. Ah! how passionately
he loved her--how could he live without her? Yet he feared--he was almost forced to believe--that
he had lost her irreparably, and that for him hope was dead. Those were terrible days for the
poor, grief-stricken young baron, and he felt that he could not long endure such misery and
live. Two or three months passed away thus, and one day when de Sigognac chanced to be in his
own room, finishing a sonnet addressed to Isabelle, Pierre entered, and announced to his master
that there was a gentleman without who wished to speak with him.

"A gentleman, who wants to see me!" exclaimed the astonished baron. "You must be either romancing
or mad, my good Pierre! There is no gentleman in the world who can have anything to say to
me. However, for the rarity of the thing, you may bring in this extraordinary mortal--if such
there really be, and you are not dreaming, as I shrewdly suspect. But tell me his name first,
or hasn't he got any?"

"He declined to give it, saying that it would not afford your lordship any information," Pierre
made answer, as he turned back and opened wide both leaves of the door.

Upon the threshold appeared a handsome young man, dressed in a rich and elegant travelling
costume of chestnut brown cloth trimmed with green, and holding in his hand a broad felt hat
with a long green plume; leaving his well shaped, proudly carried head fully exposed to view,
as well as the delicate, regular features of a face worthy of an ancient Greek statue. The
sight of this fine cavalier did not seem to make an agreeable impression upon de Sigognac,
who turned very pale, and rushing to where his trusty sword was suspended, over the head of
his bed, drew it from the scabbard, and turned to face the new-comer with the naked blade in
his hand.

"By heaven, my lord duke, I believed that I had killed you!" he cried in excited tones. "Is
it really you--your very self--or your wraith that stands before me?"

"It is really I--my very self--Hannibal de Vallombreuse, in the flesh, and no wraith; as far
from being dead as possible," answered the young duke, with a radiant smile. "But put up that
sword I pray you, my dear baron! We have fought twice already, you know, and surely that is
enough. I do not come as an enemy, and if I have to reproach myself with some little sins against
you, you have certainly had your revenge for them, so we are quits. To prove that my intentions
are not hostile, but of the most friendly nature if you will so allow, I have brought credentials,
in the shape of this commission, signed by the king, which gives you command of a regiment.
My good father and I have reminded his majesty of the devotion of your illustrious ancestors
to his royal ones, and I have ventured to bring you this good news in person. And now, as I
am your guest, I pray you have something or other killed, I don't care what, and put on the
spit to roast as quickly as may be--for the love of God give me something to eat--I am starving.
The inns are so far apart and so abominably bad down here that there might almost as well be
none at all, and my baggage-wagon, stocked with edibles, is stuck fast in a quagmire a long
way from this. So you see the necessities of the case."

"I am very much afraid, my lord duke, that the fare I can offer will seem to you only another
form of revenge on my part," said de Sigognac with playful courtesy; "but do not, I beseech
you, attribute to resentment the meagre repast for which I shall be obliged to claim your indulgence.
You must know how gladly I would put before you a sumptuous meal if I could; and what we can
give you will at least, as my good Pierre says, satisfy hunger, though it may not gratify the
palate. And let me now say that your frank and cordial words touch me deeply, and find an echo
in my inmost heart. I am both proud and happy to call you my friend--henceforth you will not
have one more loyal and devoted than myself--and though you may not often have need of my services,
they will be, none the less, always at your disposition. Halloa! Pierre! do you go, without
a moment's delay, and hunt up some fowls, eggs, meat, whatever you can find, and try to serve
a substantial meal to this gentleman, my friend, who is nearly dying with hunger, and is not
used to it like you and I."

Pierre put in his pocket some of the money his master had sent him from Paris--which he had
never touched before--mounted the pony, and galloped off to the nearest village in search of
provisions. He found several fowls--such as they were--a splendid Bayonne ham, a few bottles
of fine old wine, and by great good luck, discovered, at the priest's house, a grand big pate
of ducks' livers--a delicacy worthy of a bishop's or a prince's table--and which he had much
difficulty to obtain from his reverence, who was a bit of a gourmand, at an almost fabulous
price. But this was evidently a great occasion, and the faithful old servant would spare no
pains to do it honour. In less than an hour he was at home again, and leaving the charge of
the cooking to a capable woman he had found and sent out to the chateau, he immediately proceeded
to set the table, in the ancient banqueting hall--gathering together all the fine porcelain
and dainty glass that yet remained intact in the two tall buffets--evidences of former splendour.
But the profusion of gold and silver plate that used to adorn the festive board of the de Sigognacs
had all been converted into coin of the realm long ago.

When at last the old servant announced that dinner was ready, the two young men took their
places opposite to each other at table, and Vallombreuse, who was in the gayest, most jovial
mood, attacked the viands with an eagerness and ferocity immensely diverting to his host. After
devouring almost the whole of a chicken, which, it is true, seemed to have died of a consumption,
there was so little flesh on its bones, he fell back upon the tempting, rosy slices of the
delicate Bayonne ham, and then passed to the pate of ducks' livers, which he declared to be
supremely delicious, exquisite, ambrosial--food fit for the gods; and he found the sharp cheese,
made of goat's milk, which followed, an excellent relish. He praised the wine, too--which was
really very old and fine and drank it with great gusto, out of his delicate Venetian wine-glass.
Once, when he caught sight of Pierre's bewildered, terrified look, as he heard his master address
his merry guest as the Duke of Vallombreuse--who ought to be dead, if he was not--he fairly
roared with laughter, and was as full of fun and frolic as a school-boy out for a holiday;
Meantime de Sigognac, whilst he endeavoured to play the attentive host, and to respond as well
as he could to the young duke's lively sallies, could not recover from his surprise at seeing
him sitting there opposite to himself, as a guest at his own table--making himself very much
at home, too, in the most charming, genial, easy way imaginable--and yet he was the haughty,
overbearing, insolent young nobleman, who had been his hated rival; whom he had twice encountered
and defeated, in fierce combat, and who had several times tried to compass his death by means
of hired ruffians. What could be the explanation of it all?

The Duke of Vallombreuse divined his companion's thoughts, and when the old servant had retired,
after placing a bottle of especially choice wine and two small glasses on the table, he looked
up at de Sigognac and said, with the most amicable frankness, "I can plainly perceive, my dear
baron, in spite of your admirable courtesy, that this unexpected step of mine appears very
strange and inexplicable to you. You have been saying to yourself, How in the world has it
come about, that the arrogant, imperious Vallombreuse has been transformed, from the unscrupulous,
cruel, blood-thirsty tiger that he was, into the peaceable, playful lamb he seems to be now--which
a 'gentle shepherdess' might lead about with a ribbon round its neck!--I will tell you. During
the six weeks that I was confined to my bed, I made various reflections, which the thoughtless
might pronounce cowardly, but which are permitted to the bravest and most valiant when death
stares them in the face. I realized then, for the first time, the relative value of many things,
and also how wrong and wicked my own course had been; and I promised myself to do very differently
for the future, if I recovered. As the passionate love that Isabelle inspired in my heart had
been replaced by a pure and sacred fraternal affection--which is the greatest blessing of my
life--I had no further reason to dislike you. You were no longer my rival; a brother cannot
be jealous in that way of his own sister; and then, I was deeply grateful to you, for the respectful
tenderness and deference I knew you had never failed to manifest towards her, when she was
in a position that authorized great license. You were the first to recognise her pure, exalted
soul, while she was still only an obscure actress. When she was poor, and despised by those
who will cringe to her now, you offered to her--lowly as was her station--the most precious
treasure that a nobleman can possess: the time-honoured name of his ancestors. You would have
made her your wife then--now that she is rich, and of high rank, she belongs to you of right.
The true, faithful lover of Isabelle, the actress, should be the honoured husband of the Comtesse
de Lineuil."

"But you forget," cried de Sigognac, in much agitation, "that she always absolutely refused
me, though she knew that I was perfectly disinterested."

"It was because of her supreme delicacy, her angelic susceptibility, and her noble spirit of
self-sacrifice that she said that. She feared that she would necessarily be a disadvantage
to you--an obstacle in the way of your advancement. But the situation is entirely changed now."

"Yes, now it is I who would be a disadvantage to her; have I then a right to be less generous
and magnanimous than she was?"

"Do you still love my sister?" said Vallombreuse, in a grave tone. "As her brother, I have
the right to ask this question."

"I love her with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength," de Sigognac replied
fervently, "as much and more than ever man loved woman on this earth--where nothing is perfect--save
Isabelle."

"Such being the case, my dear Captain of Mousquetaires, and governor of a province--soon to
be--have your horse saddled, and come with me to the Chateau of Vallombreuse, so that I may
formally present you to the prince, my father, as the favoured suitor of the Comtesse de Lineuil,
my sister. Isabelle has refused even to think of the Chevalier de Vidalinc, or the Marquis
de l'Estang, as aspirants to her hand--both right handsome, attractive, eligible young fellows,
by Jove!--but I am of opinion that she will accept, without very much persuasion, the Baron
de Sigognac."

The next day the duke and the baron were riding gaily forward, side by side, on the road to Paris.

CHAPTER XX. CHIQUITA'S DECLARATION OF LOVE

A compact crowd filled the Place de Greve, despite the early hour indicated by the clock of
the Hotel de Ville.

The tall buildings on the eastern side of the square threw their shadows more than half-way
across it, and upon a sinister-looking wooden framework, which rose several feet above the
heads of the populace, and bore a number of ominous, dull red stains. At the windows of the
houses surrounding the crowded square, a few heads were to be seen looking out from time to
time, but quickly drawn back again as they perceived that the interesting performance, for
which all were waiting, had not yet begun. Clinging to the transverse piece of the tall stone
cross, which stood at that side of the open square nearest the river, was a forlorn, little,
ragged boy, who had climbed up to it with the greatest difficulty, and was holding on with
all his might, his arms clasped round the cross-piece and his legs round the upright, in a
most painful and precarious position. But nothing would have induced him to abandon it, so
long as he could possibly maintain himself there, no matter at what cost of discomfort, or
even actual distress, for from it he had a capital view of the scaffold, and all its horribly
fascinating details--the wheel upon which the criminal was to revolve, the coil of rope to
bind him to it, and the heavy bar to break his bones.

If any one among the anxious crowd of spectators, however, had carefully studied the small,
thin countenance of the child perched up on the tall stone cross, he would have discovered
that its expression was by no means that of vulgar curiosity. It was not simply the fierce
attractions of an execution that had drawn thither this wild, weird-looking young creature,
with his sun-burned complexion, great, flashing, dark eyes, brilliant white teeth, unkempt
masses of thick, black hair, and slender brown hands--which were convulsively clinging to the
rough, cold stone. The delicacy of the features would seem to indicate a different sex from
the dress--but nobody paid any attention to the child, And all eyes were turned towards the
scaffold, or the direction from which the cart bearing the condemned criminal was to come.
Among the groups close around the scaffold were several faces we have seen before; notably,
the chalky countenance and fiery red nose of Malartic, and the bold profile of Jacquemin Lampourde,
also several of the ruffians engaged in the abduction of Isabelle, as well as various other
habitues of the Crowned Radish. The Place de Greve, to which sooner or later they were all
pretty sure to come and expiate their crimes with their lives, seemed to exercise a singular
fascination over murderers, thieves, and criminals of all sorts, who invariably gathered in
force to witness an execution. They evidently could not resist it, and appeared to find a fierce
satisfaction in watching the terrible spectacle that they themselves would some day probably
furnish to the gaping multitude. Then the victim himself always expected his friends' attendance--he
would be hurt and disappointed if his comrades did not rally round him at the last. A criminal
in that position likes to see familiar faces in the throng that hems him in. It gives him courage,
steadies his nerves.

He cannot exhibit any signs of cowardice before those who appreciate true merit and bravery,
according to his way of thinking, and pride comes to his aid. A man will meet death like a
Roman under such circumstances, who would be weak as a woman if he were despatched in private.

The criminal to be executed on that occasion was a thief, already notorious in Paris for his
daring and dexterity, though he had only been there a few months. But, unfortunately for himself--though
very much the reverse for the well-to-do citizens of the capital in general--he had not confined
himself to his legitimate business. In his last enterprise--breaking into a private dwelling
to gain possession of a large sum of money that was to be kept there for a single night--he
had killed the master of the house, who was aroused by his entrance; and, not content to stop
there, had also brutally murdered his wife, as she lay quietly sleeping in her bed--like a
tiger, that has tasted blood and is wild for more. So atrocious a crime had roused the indignation
of even his own unscrupulous, hardened companions, and it was not long ere his hiding-place
was mysteriously revealed, and he was arrested, tried, and condemned to death. Now he was to
pay the penalty of his guilt.

As the fatal hour approached, a carriage drove down along the quay, turned into the Place de
Greve, and attempted to cross it; but, becoming immediately entangled in the crowd, could make
little or no progress, despite the utmost exertions of the majestic coachman and attendant
lackeys to induce the people to make way for it, and let it pass.

But for the grand coat of arms and ducal coronet emblazoned on the panels, which inspired a
certain awe as well as respect in the motley throng of pedestrians, the equipage would undoubtedly
have been roughly dealt with-but as it was, they contented themselves with resolutely and obstinately
barring its passage, after it had reached the middle of the square. The indignant coachman
did not dare to urge his spirited horses forward at all hazards, ruthlessly trampling down
the unlucky individuals who happened to be directly in his way, as he would certainly have
done in any ordinary crowd, for the canaille, that filled the Place de Greve to overflowing,
was out in too great force to be trifled with--so there was nothing for it but patience.

"These rascals are waiting for an execution, and will not stir, nor let us stir, until it is
over," said a remarkably handsome young man, magnificently dressed, to his equally fine looking,
though more modestly attired friend, who was seated beside him in the luxurious carriage. "The
devil take the unlucky dog who must needs be broken on the wheel just when we want to cross
the Place de Greve. Why couldn't he have put it off until to-morrow morning, I should like
to know!"

"You may be sure that the poor wretch would be only too glad to do so if he could," answered
the other, "for the occasion is a far more serious matter to him than to us."

"The best thing we can do under the circumstances, my dear de Sigognac, is to turn our heads
away if the spectacle is too revolting--though it is by no means easy, when something horrible
is taking place close at hand. Even Saint Augustine opened his eyes in the arena at a loud
cheer from the people, though he had vowed to himself beforehand to keep them closed."

"At all events, we shall not be detained here long," rejoined de Sigognac, "for there comes
the prisoner. See, Vallombreuse, how the crowd gives way before him, though it will not let
us move an inch."

A rickety cart, drawn by a miserable old skeleton of a horse, and surrounded by mounted guards,
was slowly advancing through the dense throng towards the scaffold. In it were a venerable
priest, with a long white beard, who was holding a crucifix to the lips of the condemned man,
seated beside him, the executioner, placed behind his victim, and holding the end of the rope
that bound him, and an assistant, who was driving the poor old horse. The criminal, whom every
one turned to gaze at, was no other than our old acquaintance, Agostino, the brigand.

"Why, what is this!" cried de Sigognac, in great surprise. "I know that man--he is the fellow
who stopped us on the highway, and tried to frighten us with his band of scarecrows, as poor
Matamore called them. I told you all about it when we came by the place where it happened."

"Yes, I remember perfectly," said Vallombreuse; "it was a capital story, and I had a good laugh
over it. But it would seem that the ingenious rascal has been up to something more serious
since then--his ambition has probably been his ruin. He certainly is no coward--only look what
a good face he puts on it."

Agostino, holding his head proudly erect, but a trifle paler than usual perhaps, seemed to
be searching for some one in the crowd. When the cart passed slowly in front of the stone cross,
he caught sight of the little boy, who had not budged from his excessively uncomfortable and
wearisome position, and a flash of joy shone in the brigand's eyes, a slight smile parted his
lips, as he made an almost imperceptible sign with his head, and said, in a low tone, "Chiquita!"

"My son, what was that strange word you spoke?" asked the priest. "It sounded like an outlandish
woman's name. Dismiss all such subjects from your mind, and fix your thoughts on your own hopes
of salvation, for you stand on the threshold of eternity."

"Yes, my father, I know it but too well, and though my hair is black and my form erect, whilst
you are bowed with age, and your long beard is white as snow, you are younger now than I--every
turn of the wheels, towards that scaffold yonder, ages me by ten years."

During this brief colloquy the cart had made steady progress, and in a moment more had stopped
at the foot of the rude wooden steps that led up to the scaffold, which Agostino ascended slowly
but unfalteringly--preceded by the assistant, supported by the priest, and followed by the
executioner. In less than a minute he was firmly bound upon the wheel, and the executioner,
having thrown off his showy scarlet cloak, braided with white, and rolled up his sleeves, stooped
to pick up the terrible bar that lay at his feet. It was a moment of intense horror and excitement.
An anxious curiosity, largely mixed with dread, oppressed the hearts of the spectators, who
stood motionless, breathless, with pale faces, and straining eyes fixed upon the tragic group
on the fatal scaffold. Suddenly a strange stir ran through the crowd--the child, who was perched
up on the cross, had slipped quickly down to the ground, and gliding like a serpent through
the closely packed throng, reached the scaffold, cleared the steps at a bound, and appeared
beside the astonished executioner, who was just in the act of raising the ponderous bar to
strike, with such a wild, ghastly, yet inspired and noble countenance--lighted up by a strength
of will and purpose that made it actually sublime--that the grim dealer of death paused involuntarily,
and withheld the murderous blow about to fall.

"Get out of my way, thou puppet!" he roared in angry tones, as he recovered his sang-froid,
"or thou wilt get thy accursed head smashed."

But Chiquita paid no attention to him--she did not care whether she was killed too, or not.
Bending over Agostino, she passionately kissed his forehead, whispered "I love thee!"--and
then, with a blow as swift as lightning, plunged into his heart the knife she had reclaimed
from Isabelle. It was dealt with so firm a hand, and unerring an aim, that death was almost
instantaneous--scarcely had Agostino time to murmur "Thanks."

With a wild burst of hysterical laughter the child sprang down from the scaffold, while the
executioner, stupefied at her bold deed, lowered his now useless club; uncertain whether or
not he should proceed to break the bones of the man already dead, and beyond his power to torture.

"Well done, Chiquita, well done, and bravely!" cried Malartic--who had recognised her in spite
of her boy's clothes--losing his self-restraint in his admiration. The other ruffians, who
had seen Chiquita at the Crowned Radish, and wondered at and admired her courage when she stood
against the door and let Agostino fling his terrible navaja at her without moving a muscle,
now grouped themselves closely together so as to effectually prevent the soldiers from pursuing
her. The fracas that ensued gave Chiquita time to reach the carriage of the Duke of Vallombreuse--which,
taking advantage of the stir and shifting in the throng, was slowly making its way out of the
Place de Greve. She climbed up on the step, and catching sight of de Sigognac within, appealed
to him, in scarcely audible words, as she panted and trembled--"I saved your Isabelle, now
save me!"

Vallombreuse, who had been very much interested by this strange and exciting scene, cried to
the coachman, "Get on as fast as you can, even if you have to drive over the people."

But there was no need--the crowd opened as if by magic before the carriage, and closed again
compactly after it had passed, so that Chiquita's pursuers could not penetrate it, or make
any progress--they were completely baffled, whichever way they turned. Meanwhile the fugitive
was being rapidly carried beyond their reach. As soon as the open street was gained, the coachman
had urged his horses forward, and in a very few minutes they reached the Porte Saint Antoine.
As the report of what had occurred in the Place de Greve could not have preceded them, Vallombreuse
thought it better to proceed at a more moderate pace--fearing that their very speed might arouse
suspicion--and gave orders accordingly; as soon as they were fairly beyond the gate he took
Chiquita into the carriage--where she seated herself, without a word, opposite to de Sigognac.
Under the calmest exterior she was filled with a preternatural excitement--not a muscle of
her face moved; but a bright flush glowed on her usually pale cheeks, which gave to her magnificent
dark eyes--now fixed upon vacancy, and seeing nothing that was before them--a marvellous brilliancy.
A complete transformation had taken place in Chiquita--this violent shock had torn asunder
the childish chrysalis in which the young maiden had lain dormant--as she plunged her knife
into Agostino's heart she opened her own. Her love was born of that murder--the strange, almost
sexless being, half child, half goblin, that she had been until then, existed no longer--Chiquita
was a woman from the moment of that heroic act of sublime devotion. Her passion, that had bloomed
out in one instant, was destined to be eternal--a kiss and a stab, that was Chiquita's love story.

The carriage rolled smoothly and swiftly on its way towards Vallombreuse, and when the high,
steep roof of the chateau came in sight the young duke said to de Sigognac, "You must go with
me to my room first, where you can get rid of the dust, and freshen up a bit before I present
you to my sister--who knows nothing whatever of my journey, or its motive. I have prepared
a surprise for her, and I want it to be complete--so please draw down the curtain on your side,
while I do the same on mine, in order that we may not be seen, as we drive into the court,
from any of the windows that command a view of it. But what are we to do with this little wretch
here?"

Chiquita, who was roused from her deep reverie by the duke's question, looked gravely up at
him, and said, "Let some one take me to Mlle. Isabelle--she will decide what is to be done
with me."

With all the curtains carefully drawn down the carriage drove over the drawbridge and into
the court. Vallombreuse alighted, took de Sigognac's arm, and led him silently to his own apartment,
after having ordered a servant to conduct Chiquita to the presence of the Comtesse de Lineuil.
At sight of her Isabelle was greatly astonished, and, laying down the book she was reading,
fixed upon the poor child a look full of interest, affection, and questioning.

Chiquita stood silent and motionless until the servant had retired, then, with a strange solemnity,
which was entirely new in her, she went up to Isabelle, and timidly taking her hand, said:

"My knife is in Agostino's heart. I have no master now, and I must devote myself to somebody.
Next to him who is dead I love you best of all the world. You gave me the pearl necklace I
wished for, and you kissed me. Will you have me for your servant, your slave, your dog? Only
give me a black dress, so that I may wear mourning for my lost love--it is all I ask. I will
sleep on the floor outside your door, so that I shall not be in your way. When you want me,
whistle for me, like this,"--and she whistled shrilly--"and I will come instantly. Will you
have me?"

In answer Isabelle drew Chiquita into her arms, pressed her lips to the girl's forehead warmly,
and thankfully accepted this soul, that dedicated itself to her.

CHAPTER XXI. HYMEN! OH HYMEN!

Isabelle, accustomed to Chiquita's odd, enigmatical ways, had refrained from questioning her--waiting
to ask for explanations until the poor girl should have become more quiet, and able to give
them. She could see that some terrible catastrophe must have occurred, which had left all her
nerves quivering, and caused the strong shudders that passed over her in rapid succession;
but the child had rendered her such good service, in her own hour of need, that she felt the
least she could do was to receive and care for the poor little waif tenderly, without making
any inquiries as to her evidently desperate situation. After giving her in charge to her own
maid, with orders that she should be properly clothed, and made thoroughly comfortable in every
way, Isabelle resumed her reading--or rather tried to resume it; but her thoughts would wander,
and after mechanically turning over a few pages in a listless way, she laid the book down,
beside her neglected embroidery, on a little table at her elbow. Leaning her head on her hand,
and closing her eyes, she lapsed into a sorrowful reverie--as, indeed, she had done of late
many times every day.

"Oh! what has become of de Sigognac?" she said to herself. "Where can he be? and does he still
think of me, and love me as of old? Yes, I am sure he does; he will be true and faithful to
me so long as he lives, my brave, devoted knight! I fear that he has gone back to his desolate,
old chateau, and, believing that my brother is dead, does not dare to approach me. It must
be that chimerical obstacle that stands in his way--otherwise he would surely have tried to
see me again--or at least have written to me. Perhaps I ought to have sent him word that Vallombreuse
had recovered; yet how could I do that? A modest woman shrinks from even seeming to wish to
entice her absent lover back to her side. How often I think that I should be far happier if
I could have remained as I was--an obscure actress; then I could at least have had the bliss
of seeing him every day, and of enjoying in peace the sweetness of being loved by such a noble,
tender heart as his. Despite the touching affection and devotion that my princely father lavishes
upon me, I feel sad and lonely in this magnificent chateau. If Vallombreuse were only here
his society would help to pass the time; but he is staying away so long--and I try in vain
to make out what he meant when he told me, with such a significant smile, as he bade me adieu,
that I would be pleased with what he was about to do. Sometimes I fancy that I do understand;
but I dare not indulge myself with such blissful thoughts for an instant. If I did, and were
mistaken after all, the disappointment would be too cruel--too heart-rending. But, if it only
could be true! ah! if it only might! I fear I should go mad with excess of joy."

The young Comtesse de Lineuil was still absorbed in sad thoughts when a tall lackey appeared,
and asked if she would receive his lordship, the Duke of Vallombreuse who had just arrived,
at the chateau and desired to speak with her.

"Certainly, I shall be delighted to see him," she said in glad surprise; "ask him to come to
me at once."

In a few minutes--which had seemed like hours to Isabelle--the young duke made his appearance,
with beaming eyes, rosy cheeks, light, elastic step, and that air of glorious health and vigour
which had distinguished him before his illness. He threw down his broad felt hat as he came
in, and, hastening to his sister's side, took her pretty white hands and raised them to his lips.

"Dearest Isabelle," he cried, "I am so rejoiced to see you again! I was obliged to stay away
from you much longer than I wished, for it is a great deprivation to me now not to be with
you every day--I have gotten so thoroughly into the habit of depending upon your sweet society.
But I have been occupied entirely with your interests during my absence, and the hope of pleasing
my darling sister, and adding to her happiness, has helped me to endure the long separation
from her." 

"It seems that Mrs. Zamboni is going to get married again." Hal lowered his voice, confidentially.
"It's a romance, Edward--it may interest you as an illustration of the manners of these foreign
races. She met a man on the street, a fine, fine man, she says--and he gave her a lot of money.
So she went and bought herself some new clothes, and she wants to
give these widow's weeds to the new man.

That's the custom in her country, it seems--her sign that she accepts him as a suitor."

Seeing the look of wonderment growing on his brother's face, Hal had to stop for a moment to
keep his own face straight. "If that man wasn't serious in his intention, Edward, he'll have
trouble, for I know Mrs. Zamboni's emotional nature. She'll follow him about everywhere--"

"Hal, that creature is insane!" And Edward looked about him nervously, as if he thought the Slavish
widow might appear suddenly in the hotel lobby to demonstrate her
emotional nature.

"No," replied Hal, "it's just one of those differences in national
customs."

And suddenly Hal's face gave way. He began to laugh; he laughed, perhaps more loudly than good
form permitted.

Edward was much annoyed. There were people in the lobby, and they were staring at him. "Cut it out,
Hal!" he exclaimed. "Your fool jokes bore me!" But nevertheless, Hal could see uncertainty in
his brother's face. Edward recognised those widow's weeds. And how could he be sure about the
"national customs" of that grotesque creature who had pinched him in the ribs on the street?

"Cut
it out!" he cried again.

So at last the truth in its full enormity began to dawn upon Edward.

His consternation and disgust poured themselves out; and Hal listened, his laughter dying. "Edward,"
he said, "you don't take me seriously even yet!"

"Good God!" cried the other.

"I believe you're really insane!"

"You were up there, Edward! You heard what I said to those poor devils! And you actually thought
I'd go off with you and forget about them!"

Edward ignored this. "You're really insane!" he repeated. "You'll get yourself killed, in spite
of all I can do!"

But Hal only laughed. "Not a chance of it! You should have seen the tea-party manners of the
camp-marshal!"

SECTION 27.

Edward would have endeavoured to carry his brother away forthwith,
but there was no train until late at night; so Hal went upstairs,
where he found Moylan and Hartman with Mary Burke and Mrs. Zamboni,
all eager to hear his story.

As the members of the committee, who had been out to supper, came straggling in, the story
was told again, and yet again.

They were almost as much delighted as the men in Reminitsky's. If only all strikes that had to
be called off could be called off as neatly as that!

Between these outbursts of satisfaction, they discussed their future.
Moylan was going back to Western City, Hartman to his office in Sheridan,
from which he would arrange to send new organisers into North Valley.
No doubt Cartwright would turn off many men--those who had made themselves
conspicuous during the strike, those who continued to talk union out
loud. But such men would have to be replaced, and the union knew through
what agencies the company got its hands. The North Valley miners would
find themselves mysteriously provided with union literature in their
various languages; it would be slipped under their pillows, or into
their dinner-pails, or the pockets of their coats while they were
at work.

Also there was propaganda to be carried on among those who
were turned away; so that, wherever they went, they would take the
message of unionism. There had been a sympathetic outburst in Barela,
Hal learned--starting quite spontaneously that morning, when the men
heard what had happened at North Valley. A score of workers had been
fired, and more would probably follow in the morning. Here was a job
for the members of the kidnapped committee; Tim Rafferty, for example--would
he care to stay in Pedro for a week or two, to meet such men, and
give them literature and arguments? Without a word, she sprang up, and throwing
her arms round her brother's neck hid her face on his shoulder, while two or three convulsive
sobs shook her slender frame and a little shower of tears fell from her eyes. By this instinctive
movement, so exquisitely modest and truly feminine, Isabelle manifested all the exceeding delicacy
and purity of her nature. Thus were her warm thanks to Vallombreuse, whose kindness and generosity
overcame her, mutely expressed; and as she could not follow the dictates of her heart, and
throw herself into her lover's arms, she took refuge in her transport of joy with her brother,
who had restored him to her.

Vallombreuse supported her tenderly for a few moments, until he found she was growing calmer,
when he gently disengaged himself from her clasping arms, and drawing down the hands with which
she had covered her face, to hide its tears and blushes, said, "My sweet sister, do not, I
pray you, hide your lovely face from us; I fear my protege will be driven to believe that you
entertain such an invincible dislike to him you will not even look at him."

Isabelle raised her drooping head, and turning full upon de Sigognac her glorious eyes, shining
with a celestial joy, in spite of the sparkling tear-drops that still hung upon their long
lashes, held out to him her beautiful white hand, which he took reverentially in both his own,
and bending down pressed fervently to his lips. The passionate kiss he imprinted upon it thrilled
through Isabelle's whole being, and for a second she turned faint and giddy; but the delicious
ecstasy, which is almost anguish, of such emotion as hers, is never hurtful, and she presently
looked up and smiled reassuringly upon her anxious lover, as the colour returned to her lips
and cheeks, and the warm light to her eyes.

"And now tell me, my sweet little sister," began Vallombreuse, with an air of triumph, and
a mischievous twinkle in his eyes, "wasn't I right when I declared that you would smile upon
the husband I had chosen for you? and would not be discouraged, though you were so obstinate?
If I had not been equally so, this dear de Sigognac would have gone back to his far-away chateau,
without even having seen you; and that would have been a pity, as you must admit."

"Yes, I do admit it, my dearest brother, and also that you have been adorably kind and good
to me. You were the only one who, under the circumstances, could bring about this reunion,
and we both know how to appreciate what you have so nobly and generously done for us."

"Yes, indeed," said de Sigognac warmly; "your brother has given us ample proof of the nobility
and generosity of his nature--he magnanimously put aside the resentment that might seem legitimate,
and came to me with his hand outstretched, and his heart in it. He revenges himself nobly for
the harm I was obliged to do him, by imposing an eternal gratitude upon me--a light burden,
that I shall bear joyfully so long as I live."

"Say nothing more about that, my dear baron!" Vallombreuse exclaimed. "You would have done
as much in my place. The differences of two valiant adversaries are very apt to end in a warm
mutual attachment--we were destined from the beginning to become, sooner or later, a devoted
pair of friends; like Theseus and Pirithous, Nisus and Euryalus, or Damon and Pythias. But
never mind about me now, and tell my sister how you were thinking of her, and longing for her,
in that lonely chateau of yours; where, by the way, I made one of the best meals I ever had
in my life, though you do pretend that starvation is the rule down there."

"And I had a charming supper there too," said Isabelle with a smile, "which I look back upon
with the greatest pleasure."

"Nevertheless," rejoined de Sigognac, "plenty does not abound there--but I cannot regret the
blessed poverty that was the means of first winning me your regard, my precious darling! I
am thankful for it--I owe everything to it."

"I am of opinion," interrupted Vallombreuse, with a significant smile, "that it would be well
for me to go and report myself to my father. I want to announce your arrival to him myself,
de Sigognac! Not that he will need to be specially prepared to receive you, for I am bound
to confess--what may surprise my little sister here--that he knew such a thing might come about,
and was equally implicated with my graceless self in this little conspiracy. But one thing
yet--tell me before I go, Isabelle, Comtesse de Lineuil, whether you really do intend to accept
the Baron de Sigognac as your husband--I don't want to run any risk of making a blunder at
this stage of the proceedings, you understand, after having conducted the negotiations successfully
up to this point. You do definitely and finally accept him, eh?--that is well--and now I will
go to the prince. Engaged lovers sometimes have matters to discuss that even a brother may
not hear, so I will leave you together, feeling sure that you will both thank me for it in
your hearts. Adieu!--make the most of your time, for I shall soon return to conduct de Sigognac
to the prince."

With a laughing nod the young duke picked up his hat and went away, leaving the two happy lovers
alone together, and--however agreeable his company may have been to them, it must be admitted
that his absence was, as he had predicted, very welcome to both. The Baron de Sigognac eagerly
approached Isabelle, and--again possessed himself of her fair hand, which she did not withdraw
from his warm, loving clasp. Neither spoke, and for a few minutes the fond lovers stood side
by side and gazed into each other's eyes. Such silence is more eloquent than any words. One
cannot make a good consumer without a really LIBERAL EDUCATION.

For this reason it becomes necessary to resist certain narrownesses in certain phases of Home Economics.

One
of these narrownesses is the assumption that because a thing happens to be close to us it is
therefore important. We have heard lecturers insist that because a house contains drain-pipes
a woman should learn all about drain-pipes. But why? In most communities drain-pipes are installed
and repaired and in every way controlled by gentlemen who are drain-pipe specialists. The woman
who lives in the house has no more real need of a knowledge of the
structural mysteries of drain-pipes than a reporter has of a knowledge
of the structural mysteries of his typewriting machine.

The office mechanic fixes all that for him, and, so far as his efficiency as a reporter is concerned,
an investigation of his faithful keyboard's internal arrangements would be in most cases an amiable
waste of time.

Another possible narrowness is the attempt to manufacture "cultural backgrounds" for various
important but quite safe-and-sane household tasks.

For instance, in the books and in the courses of instruction (of college grade) on "The House"
we have sometimes observed elaborate accounts of the evolution of the human home, beginning
with the huts of the primitive Simianians.

And in pursuing the very essential subject of "Clothes and Fabrics" we have not infrequently
found ourselves in the midst of spacious preliminary dissertations on the structure of the loom,
beginning with that which was used by the Anthropenguins.

Now we would not for the world speak disparagingly of looms or huts. We have ourselves examined
some of them in the Hull House Museum in Chicago and in the woods of Canada, and have found them instructive.
We suggest only that college life is short, that the college curriculum
is crowded, and that (except possibly for those students who are especially
interested in anthropology or in industrial evolution) it would surely
be a misfortune to learn the Simianian hut and to miss Rossetti's
"House of Life," or to get the impression that as a "cultural background"
for shirtwaists the Anthropengruinian loom can really compete with
Carlyle's "Sartor Resartus."

If this occasional tendency toward exaggerating the importance of
drain-pipes, window-curtains, and door-mats were to grow strong, and
if girls, as a class, should be required to spend any large proportion
of their time on the specialized history and sociology of feminine
implements and tasks while the boys were still in the current of the
affairs of the race, we should indeed want President Thomas of Bryn
Mawr to repeat on a thousand lecture platforms her indignant assertion
of the fact that "nothing more disastrous for women, or for men, can
be conceived of than specialized education of women as a sex."



"I saw you also in my dreams, many nights in succession. Our souls must have met, de Sigognac,
while our bodies lay wrapped in slumber. But now, thanks be to God, we are reunited--and forever.
The prince, my father, knew and approved of your being brought here, Vallombreuse said, so
we can have no opposition to our wishes to fear from him. He has spoken to me of you several
times of late in very flattering terms; looking at me searchingly, the while, in a way that
greatly agitated and troubled me, for I did not know what might be in his mind, as Vallombreuse
had not then told me that he no longer hated you, and I feared that he would always do so after
his double defeat at your hands. But all the terrible anxiety is over now, my beloved, and
blessed peace and happiness lie before us."

At this moment the door opened, and the young duke announced to de Sigognac that his father
was waiting to receive him. The baron immediately rose from his seat beside Isabelle, bowed
low to her, and followed Vallombreuse to the prince's presence. The aged nobleman, dressed
entirely in black, and with his breast covered with orders, was sitting in a large arm-chair
at a table heaped up with books and papers, with which he had evidently been occupied. His
attitude was stately and dignified, and the expression of his noble, benevolent countenance
affable in the extreme. He rose to receive de Sigognac, gave him a cordial greeting, and politely
bade him be seated.

"My dear father," said Vallombreuse, "I present to you the Baron de Sigognac; formerly my rival,
now my friend, and soon to be my brother, if you consent. Any improvement that you may see
in me is due to his influence, and it is no light obligation that I owe to him--though he will
not admit that there is any. The baron comes to ask a favour of you, which I shall rejoice
to see accorded to him."

The prince made a gesture of acquiescence, and looked reassuringly at de Sigognac, as if inviting
him to speak fearlessly for himself. Encouraged by the expression of his eyes, the baron rose,
and, with a low bow, said, in clear, distinct tones, "Prince, I am here to ask of you the hand
of Mlle. la Comtesse Isabelle de Lineuil, your daughter."

The old nobleman looked at him steadily and searchingly for a moment, and then, as if satisfied
with his scrutiny, answered: "Baron de Sigognac, I accede to your request, and consent to this
alliance, with great pleasure--so far, that is, as my paternal will accords with the wishes
of my beloved daughter--whom I should never attempt to coerce in anything. The Comtesse de
Lineuil must be consulted in this matter, and herself decide the question which is of such
vital importance to her. I cannot undertake to answer for her--the whims and fancies of young
ladies are sometimes so odd and unexpected."

The prince said this with a mischievous smile--as if he had not long known that Isabelle loved
de Sigognac with all her heart, and was pining for him. After a brief pause, he added: "Vallombreuse,
go and fetch your sister, for, without her, I cannot give a definite answer to the Baron de
Sigognac."

The young duke accordingly went for Isabelle, who was greatly alarmed at this summons, and
obeyed it in fear and trembling. Despite her brother's assurances, she could not bring herself
to believe in the reality of such great happiness. Her breast heaved tumultuously, her face
was very pale, at each step her knees threatened to give way under her, and when her father
drew her fondly to his side she was forced to grasp the arm of his chair tightly, to save herself
from falling.

"My daughter," said the prince gravely, "here is a gentleman who does you the honour to sue
for your hand. For my own part, I should hail this union with joy--for he is of an ancient
and illustrious family, of stainless reputation and tried courage, and appears to me to possess
every qualification that heart could desire. I am perfectly satisfied with him--but has he
succeeded in pleasing you, my child? Young heads do not always agree with gray ones. Examine
your own heart carefully, and tell me if you are willing to accept the Baron de Sigognac as
your husband. Take plenty of time to consider--you shall not be hurried, my dear child, in
so grave a matter as this."

The prince's kindly, cordial smile gave evidence that he was in a playful mood, and Isabelle,
plucking up courage, threw her arms round her father's neck, and said in the softest tones,
"There is no need for me to consider or hesitate, my dear lord and father! Since the Baron
de Sigognac is so happy as to please you, I confess, freely and frankly, that I have loved
him ever since we first met, and have never wished for any other alliance. To obey, you in
this will be my highest happiness."

"And now clasp hands, my children, and exchange the kiss of betrothal," cried the Duke of Vallombreuse
gaily. "Verily, the romance ends more happily than could have been expected after such a stormy
beginning. And now the next question is, when shall the wedding be?"

"It will take a little time to make due preparation," said the prince. "So many people must
be set to work, in order that the marriage of my only daughter may be worthily celebrated.
Meanwhile, Isabelle, here is your dowry, the deed of the estate of Lineuil--from which you
derive your title, and which yields you an income of fifty thousand crowns per annum--together
with rent-rolls, and all the various documents appertaining thereto"--and he handed a formidable
roll of papers to her. "As to you, my dear de Sigognac, I have here for you a royal ordinance,
which constitutes you governor of a province; and no one, I venture to say, could be more worthy
of this distinguished honour than yourself."

Vallombreuse, who had gone out of the room while his father was speaking, now made his appearance,
followed by a servant carrying a box covered with crimson velvet.

He took it from the lackey at the door, and advancing, placed it upon the table in front of
Isabelle.

"My dear little sister," said he, "will you accept this from me as a wedding gift?"

On the cover was inscribed "For Isabelle," in golden letters, and it contained the very casket
which the Duke of Vallombreuse had offered at Poitiers to the young actress, and which she
had so indignantly refused to receive, or even look at.

"You will accept it this time?" he pleaded, with a radiant smile; "and honour these diamonds
of finest water, and these pearls of richest lustre, by wearing them, for my sake. They are
not more pure and beautiful than yourself."

Isabelle smilingly took up a magnificent necklace and clasped it round her fair neck, to show
that she harboured no resentment; then put the exquisite bracelets on her round, white arms,
and decked herself with the various superb ornaments that the beautiful casket contained.

And now we have only to add, that a week later Isabelle and de Sigognac were united in marriage
in the chapel at Vallombreuse, which was brilliantly lighted, and filled with fragrance from
the profusion of flowers that converted it into a very bower. The music was heavenly, the fair
bride adorably beautiful, with her long white veil floating about her, and the Baron de Sigognac
radiant with happiness. The Marquis de Bruyeres was one of his witnesses, and a most brilliant
and aristocratic assemblage "assisted" at this notable wedding in high life. As far as he was
aware the action was going on. Ever so many witnesses must be brought from a distance who had
seen the crop standing and who would have no bias against the owner,--as would be the case
with neighbours, such as Lawrence Twentyman. Of course it was not easy to oppose such a man
as Lord Rufford and a little money must be spent. Indeed such, he said, was his interest in
the case that he had already gone further than he ought to have done out of his own pocket.
Of course they would be successful,--that is if the matter were carried on with spirit, and
then the money would all come back again. But just at present a little money must be spent.
"I don't mean to spend it," said the Senator.

"I hope you won't
stick to that, Mr. Gotobed."

After a splendid collation, graced by the presence of the bride and groom, the happy pair vanished;
but we will not attempt to follow them, or intrude upon their privacy--turning away at the
very threshold of the nuptial chamber, singing, in low tones, after the fashion of the ancients,
"Hymen! oh Hymen!"

The mysteries of such sacred happiness as theirs should be respected; and besides, sweet, modest
Isabelle would have died of shame if so much as a single one of the pins that held her bodice
were indiscreetly drawn out.

CHAPTER XXII. THE CASTLE OF HAPPINESS

EPILOGUE

It will be readily believed that our sweet Isabelle had not forgotten, in her exceeding happiness
as Mme. la Baronne de Sigognac, her former companions of Herode's troupe. As she could not
invite them to her wedding because they would have been so much out of place there--she had,
in commemoration of that auspicious occasion, sent handsome and appropriate gifts to them all;
offered with a grace so charming that it redoubled their value. So long as the company remained
in Paris, she went often to see them play; applauding her old friends heartily, and judiciously
as well, knowing just where the applause should be given. The young baronne did not attempt
to conceal the fact that she had formerly been an actress herself--not parading it, but referring
to it quietly, if necessary, as a matter of course; an excellent method to disarm ill-natured
tongues, which would surely have wagged vigorously had any mystery been made about it. In addition,
her illustrious birth and exalted position imposed silence upon those around her, and her sweet
dignity and modesty had soon won all hearts--even those of her own sex--until it was universally
conceded that there was not a greater or truer lady in court circles than the beautiful young
Baronne de Sigognac.

The king, Louis XIII, having heard Isabelle's eventful history, praised her highly for her
virtuous conduct, and evinced great interest in de Sigognac, whom he heartily commended for
his respectful, honourable gallantry, under circumstances that, according to general opinion,
would authorize all manner of license. The Extent, the Wealth, the numerous Inhabitants, the Hands
employed, the Goods consumed, the Duties and Customs occasioned by the Plantations, especially
such as Virginia, are well worthy the most serious Consideration, and claim the greatest Favour
and Encouragement in the Trade and Manufactures of those Places, which are vastly larger than
all his Majesty's Dominions in Europe, and in Time may become as considerable; they being at present
one of the chiefest Causes and main Supports of our Trade, and bringing as much Money into
the Treasury, and the Purses of Merchants, and other People, as most other Parts of the World to
which we trade.

The Good of the Publick consists as well in the Welfare of the Subject, as in the Power and
Riches of the Prince; Regard being to be had as well to the Circumstances of the one, as the other.
Now the Advancement of Trade and Manufactures in the Plantations
in the highest Degree respects both the Sovereign and the Subject,
in which both the publick and private Interest is deeply engaged;
therefore should the Plantation Trade and Manufactures be set upon
the best Footing imaginable; be carried on strenuously to the best
Advantage; and be granted all reasonable Favour, Protection, and Encouragement.

They are Branches and chief Members, why then may they not continue justly to partake of the same
Privileges and Advantages that are enjoyed by England, which may truly be esteemed their Head,
to which they are inseparably joined, as being essential Parts of
the same Body Politick?

I need not relate the Fable of the Head and Members, for every one knows the Moral inferred
from it; how that unless the Members travel and labour for the Service of the Head and Body,
and the Head contrives, and the Body conveys Nourishment and Sustenance
to the Members, the whole Fabrick, both Head, Body, and Members would
soon perish, and moulder to Dust.

I presume that the Application of this to Great Britain, and our Trade and Plantations may not
be altogether improper.

There can be no Room for real Apprehension of Danger of a Revolt of the Plantations in future
Ages: Or if any of them should attempt it, they might very easily be reduced by the others; for
all of them will never unite with one another; for though all the Plantations agree in this, that
they all belong to, and depend entirely upon Great Britain; yet they have each Views different
from one another, and as strenuously pursue their separate Interests,
by various and distinct Methods.

Besides, they can't possibly be without Great Britain, to which they owe their being at first
made Colonies; and afterwards have been always supported, maintained
and employed by it.

They can't live without this Mart for their Manufactures and Market, for Supply of Goods that
they want; where they have a great Interest, from whence they are
descended, to which they are united by Blood, Religion, Language,
Laws, and Customs, and also they have and may always expect to find
greater Favour, Encouragement, and Protection in England, than from
any other Nation in the World.

The Plantations cannot possibly subsist without some Trade, Correspondence, Union, and Alliance
in Europe, and absolute Necessity obliges them to fix these perpetually in Great Britain. Upon which,
as upon a Stock, they are ingrafted, spring forth, blossom and bear Fruit abundantly, and being
once lop'd off from it, they would soon wither and perish; thus is it the Interest and Safety,
as well as the Duty and Inclination of the Inhabitants of our Plantations, always to be subservient
to the Government of England, by which they are planted, protected,
supported, assisted, and encouraged.

'Tis true indeed, that the Roman Colonies, so famous and flourishing of old, are long ago all quite
extinct; but then this is to be attributed to the Decline and Destruction of the Roman Empire
it self, and had that continued, in all Probability England it self had still been a Roman
Colony, as it once was; but when the Romans forsook England, then England soon disowned Rome, being
obliged to apply for Succour to the Saxons, afterwards to the Danes, and afterwards being brought
to the Norman Establishment; from whence it has wonderfully and gradually advanced its own Grandeur,
Wealth, Dominions and Trade, to its present immense and glorious Bulk; in which thriving and
flourishing Course may it still prosperously proceed in the present Establishment in Church and
State, till Time it self shall have an End.
 A handsome new roof, tastefully ornamented with a pretty design in different coloured
slates, had replaced the broken, weather-stained tiles, through which the rain used to find
its way down into the frescoed hall, and the long suite of deserted rooms. Every window had
bright large panes of clear glass shining in its casement, and a magnificent great door, turning
smoothly and noiselessly upon its huge hinges, had superseded the old, worm-eaten one, that
used to groan and creak piteously when opened ever so little. Above it shone the de Sigognac
arms--three golden storks upon an azure field, with this noble motto--entirely obliterated
of old--"Alta petunt."

For a few moments de Sigognac gazed at it all in silence, overcome by astonishment and emotion.
Then he suddenly turned to Isabelle, with joyful surprise written in every line of his speaking
countenance, and seizing her hands passionately, and holding them firmly clasped in his, said:
"It is to you, my kind, generous fairy, that I owe this marvellous transformation of my poor,
dilapidated, old chateau. You have touched it with your wand and restored its ancient splendour,
majesty and youth. I cannot tell you how enchanted, how gratified I am by this wonderful surprise.
It is unspeakably charming and delightful, like everything that emanates from my good angel.
Without a word or hint from me, you have divined, and carried out, the secret and most earnest
wish of my heart."

"You must also thank a certain sorcerer, who has greatly aided me in all this," said Isabelle
softly, touched by her husband's emotion and delight, and pointing to Vallombreuse, who was
sitting opposite to her. The two young men clasped hands for a moment, and smiled at each other
in friendly fashion. There was a perfect under standing between these kindred spirits now,
and no words were needed on either side.

By this time the carriage had reached the chateau, where Pierre, in a fine new livery--and
a tremor of delight--was waiting to receive them. After an affectionate, as well as respectful,
greeting from the faithful old servant, they entered the grand portico, which had been, like
all the rest, admirably restored, and, alighting from the carriage, paused a moment to admire
its magnificent proportions ere they passed on into the frescoed hall, where eight or ten tall
lackeys were drawn up in line, and bowed profoundly to their new master and mistress. Skilful
artists had retouched the ancient frescoes, and made them glow with all their original brilliant
tints. The colossal figures of Hercules were still supporting the heavy cornice, and the busts
of the Roman emperors looked out majestically from their niches. Higher up, the vine climbing
on its trellis was as luxuriant as in the olden time, and there were no unsightly stains on
the bright blue sky of the vaulted roof to mar its beauty. A like metamorphosis had been worked
everywhere--the worm-eaten woodwork had been renewed, the uneven floors relaid, the tarnished
gilding restored to its original splendour--and the new furniture throughout had been made
exactly like the old that it replaced. The fine old tapestry in de Sigognac's own room had
been minutely copied, down to the smallest detail, and the hangings of the bed were of green
and white brocade, in precisely the same delicate tint and graceful pattern as the old.

Isabelle, with her innate delicacy and perfect taste, had not aimed at producing a sensation,
by any overwhelming magnificence or dazzling splendour in renovating the intrinsically fine
old Chateau de Sigognac, but had simply wished to gratify and delight the heart of her husband,
so tenderly loved, in giving back to him the impressions and surroundings of his childhood
and youth, robbed of their misery and sadness. All was bright and gay now in this lordly mansion,
erst so dreary and melancholy; even the sombre old family portraits, cleansed, retouched and
revarnished by skilful hands, smiled down upon them, as if pleased with the new order of things;
especially their own handsome, richly gilt frames.

After looking through the interior of the chateau, de Sigognac and Isabelle went out into the
court, where no weeds or nettles were to be seen, no grass growing up between the paving stones,
no heaps of rubbish in the corners, and through the clear glass panes of the numerous windows
looking into it were visible the folds of the rich curtains in the chambers that were formerly
the favourite haunt of owls and bats. They went on down into the garden, by a noble flight
of broad stone steps, no longer tottering and moss-grown, and turned first to seek the wild
eglantine which had offered its delicate little rose to the young actress, on the memorable
morning when the baron had decided to go forth from his ruined castle for love of her. It had
another dainty blossom ready for her now, which Isabelle received from de Sigognac's hand,
with tears, that told of a happiness too deep for words, welling up into her eyes, and exchanged
with her adored and adoring husband a long, fond look, that seemed to give to each a glimpse
of heaven.

The gardeners had been busy too, and had converted the neglected wilderness we made acquaintance
with long ago into a veritable little paradise. At the end of the well-ordered and exquisitely
arranged garden, Pomona still stood in her cool grotto, restored to all the beauty of her youth,
while a stream of pure, sparkling water poured from the lion's mouth, and fell with a musical
murmur into the marble basin. Even in their best and most glorious days the garden and the
chateau had never known greater beauty and luxury than now. The baron, ever more and more astonished
and enchanted, as he rambled slowly through it all, like one in a delicious dream, kept Isabelle's
arm pressed tenderly to his heart, and was not ashamed to let her see the tears that at last
he could no longer restrain, and which came from a very full heart.

"Now," said Isabelle, "that we have seen everything here, we must go and inspect the different
pieces of property we have been able to buy back, so as to reconstruct, as nearly as possible,
the ancient barony of Sigognac. I will leave you for a few moments, to go and put on my riding
habit; I shall not be long, for I learned to make changes of that sort very rapidly in my old
profession, you know. Will you, meantime, go and select our horses, and order that they should
be made ready?"

Vallombreuse accompanied de Sigognac to the stables, where they found ten splendid horses contentedly
munching their oats in their oaken stalls. Everything was in perfect order, but ere the baron
had time to admire and praise, as he wished to do, a loud whinnying that was almost deafening
suddenly burst forth, as good old Bayard peremptorily claimed his attention. Isabelle had long
ago sent orders to the chateau that the superannuated pony should always have the best place
in the stable, and be tenderly cared for. His manger was full of ground oats, which he seemed
to be enjoying with great gusto, and he evidently approved highly of the new regime. In his
stall Miraut lay sleeping, but the sound of his master's voice aroused him, and he joyfully
jumped up and came to lick his hand, and claim the accustomed caress. As to Beelzebub, though
he had not yet made his appearance, it must not be attributed to a want of affection on his
part, but rather to an excess of timidity. The poor old cat had been so unsettled and alarmed
at the invasion of the quiet chateau by an army of noisy workmen, and all the confusion and
changes that had followed, that he had fled from his usual haunts, and taken up his abode in
a remote attic; where he lay in concealment, impatiently waiting for darkness to come, so that
he might venture out to pay his respects to his beloved master.

The baron, after petting Bayard and Miraut until they were in ecstasies of delight, chose from
among the horses a beautiful, spirited chestnut for himself, the duke selected a Spanish jennet,
with proudly arched neck and flowing mane, which was worthy to carry an Infanta, and an exquisite
white palfrey, whose skin shone like satin, was brought out for the baronne. In a few moments
Isabelle came down, attired in a superb riding habit, which consisted of a dark blue velvet
basque, richly braided with silver, over a long, ample skirt of silver-gray satin, and her
broad hat of white felt, like a cavalier's, was trimmed with a floating, dark blue feather.
Her beautiful hair was confined in the most coquettish little blue and silver net, and as she
came forward, radiant with smiles, she was a vision of loveliness, that drew forth fervent
exclamations of delight from her two devoted and adoring knights. The Baronne de Sigognac certainly
was enchantingly beautiful in her rich equestrian costume, which displayed the perfection of
her slender, well-rounded figure to the greatest advantage, and there was a high-bred, dainty
look about her which bore silent witness to her illustrious origin. She was still the sweet,
modest Isabelle of old, but she was also the daughter of a mighty prince, the sister of a proud
young duke, and the honoured wife of a valiant gentleman, whose race had been noble since before
the crusades. Vallombreuse, remarking it, could not forbear to say: "My dearest sister, how
magnificent you look to-day! Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons, was never more superb, or more
triumphantly beautiful, than you are in this most becoming costume."

Isabelle smiled in reply, as she put her pretty little foot into de Sigognac's hand, and sprang
lightly into her saddle.

Her husband and brother mounted also, and the little cavalcade set forth in high glee, making
the vaulted portico ring with their merry laughter, as they rode through it. Just in front
of the chateau they met the Marquis de Bruyeres, and several other gentlemen of the neighbourhood,
coming to pay their respects. They wished to go back into the chateau and receive their guests
properly, saying that they could ride out at any time, but the visitors would not listen to
such a thing, and turning their horses' heads proposed to ride with them. The party, increased
by six or eight cavaliers in gala dress--for the provincial lordlings had made themselves as
fine as possible to do honour to their new neighbours--was really very imposing; a cortege
worthy of a princess. They rode on between broad green fields, through woods and groves and
highly cultivated farms, all of which had now been restored to the estate they had originally
belonged to; and the grateful, adoring glances that the Baron de Sigognac found opportunity
to bestow upon his lovely baronne, made her heart beat high with a happiness almost too perfect
for this weary world of trials and sorrows.

As they were riding through a little pine wood, near the boundary line of the estate, the barking
of hounds was heard, and presently the party met the beautiful Yolande de Foix, followed by
her old uncle, and one or two attendant cavaliers. The road was very narrow, and there was
scarcely room to pass, though each party endeavoured to make way for the other. Yolande's horse
was prancing about restively, and the skirt of her long riding-habit brushed Isabelle's as
she passed her. She was furiously angry, and sorely tempted to address some cutting words to
the "Bohemienne" she had once so cruelly insulted; but Isabelle, who had a soul above such
petty malice, and had long ago forgiven Yolande for her unprovoked insolence, felt how much
her own triumph must wound the other's proud spirit, and with perfect dignity and grace bowed
to Mlle. de Foix, who could not do less than respond by a slight inclination of her haughty
head, though her heart was filled with rage, and she had much ado to control herself. The Baron
de Sigognac, with a quiet, unembarrassed air, had bowed respectfully to the fair huntress,
who looked eagerly, but in vain, into the eyes of her former adorer for a spark of the old
flame that used to blaze up in them at sight of her. Angry and disappointed, she gave her horse
a sharp cut with the whip, and swept away at a gallop.

"Now, by Venus and all the Loves," said Vallombreuse to the Marquis de Bruyeres, beside whom
he was riding, "that girl is a beauty, but she looked deucedly savage and cross. How she did
glare at my sister, eh! as if she wanted to stab her."

"When one has long been the acknowledged queen of a neighbourhood," the marquis replied, "it
is not pleasant to be dethroned, you know, and every one must admit that Mme. la Baronne de
Sigognac bears off the palm."

The gay cavalcade, after a long ride, returned to the chateau, to find a sumptuous repast awaiting
them in the magnificent banqueting hall, where the poor young baron had once supped with the
wandering comedians, upon their own provisions. What a transformation had been effected! now
a superb service of silver, bearing the family arms, shone upon the fine damask that covered
the table, in which also the three storks were apparent, while beautiful porcelain and dainty
glass, lovely flowers and luscious fruits contributed to the attractions of the bountifully
furnished board. Isabelle sat in the same place she had occupied on the eventful night that
had changed the destiny of the young lord of the chateau, and she could not but think of, and
live over, that widely different occasion, as did also the baron, and the married lovers exchanged
furtive smiles and glances, in which tender memories and bright hopes were happily mingled.

Near one of the tall buffets stood a large, fine-looking man with a thick black beard, dressed
in black velvet, and wearing a massive chain of silver round his neck, who kept a watchful
eye upon the numerous lackeys waiting on the guests, and from time to time gave an order, with
a most majestic air. Men turned, clenching their fists, glaring at the guard. But Hal rushed
on, quickly:

"Boys, hear what I say! Keep your heads! I can't stay in North Valley,
and you know it! But I've done the thing I came to do, I've brought
you the message from the union. At first de Sigognac did
not notice them, but chancing to glance in their direction, was astonished to recognise in
the first the tragic Herode, and in the second the grotesque Blazius. Isabelle, seeing that
her husband had become aware of their presence, whispered to him, that in order to provide
for the old age of those two devoted and faithful friends she had thought it well to give them
superior positions in their household; in which they would have only easy duties to perform,
as they had to direct others in their work, not to do any themselves; and the baron heartily
approved and commended what his sweet young wife, ever considerate for others, had been pleased
to do.

Course succeeded to course, and bottle to bottle--there was much laughing and talking around
the convivial board, and the host was exerting himself to do honour to the festive occasion,
when he felt a head laid on his knee, and a tattoo vigorously played by a pair of paws on his
leg that was well known to him of old. Miraut and Beelzebub, who had slipped into the room,
and under the table, without being detected, thus announced their presence to their indulgent
master. He did not repulse them, but managed, without attracting notice, to give them a share
of everything on his plate, and was especially amused at the almost insatiable voracity of
the old black cat--who had evidently been fasting in his hiding-place in the attic. He actually
seemed to enjoy, like an epicure, the rich and dainty viands that had replaced the frugal fare
of long ago, and ate so much that when the meal was over he could scarcely stand, and made
his way with difficulty into his master's bed-chamber, where he curled himself up in a luxurious
arm-chair and settled down comfortably for the night.

Vallombreuse kept pace with the Marquis de Bruyeres, and the other guests, in disposing of
the choice wines, that did credit to the pedant's selection; but de Sigognac, who had not lost
his temperate habits, only touched his lips to the edge of his wine-glass, and made a pretence
of keeping them company. Isabelle, under pretext of fatigue, had withdrawn when the dessert
was placed upon the table. She really was very tired, and sent at once for Chiquita, now promoted
to the dignity of first lady's maid, to come and perform her nightly duties. The wild, untutored
child had--under Isabelle's judicious, tender and careful training--developed into a quiet,
industrious and very beautiful young girl. She still wore mourning for Agostino, and around
her neck was the famous string of pearl beads--it was a sacred treasure to Chiquita, and she
was never seen without it. Second: Certain domestic applications of the physical and sociological
sciences.

Third: Money Sense in Expenditure (in the course on Household Management).

The last of these three things is appearing in many places. At the University of Illinois,
for instance, Professor Kinley, now delegate from the United States to the Pan-American Congress,
has given courses in Home Administration for women which he has regarded as of equal importance
with his courses in Business Administration for men.

At the University of Chicago, in the Department of Household Administration, Course 44 is on "The
Administration of the House" and includes "the proper apportionment
of income."

The business man says: "My sales cost, or my manufacturing cost, or my office-force cost, is
such and such a per cent. of my total cost. When it goes above that, I want to know why; and I find
out; and, if there isn't a mighty good reason for its going up, I make it go down again to
where it was." Shall we come to the day when in spending the money which has been earned in
business we shall say: "Such and such a per cent. to food; and such
and such a per cent. to clothes; and such and such a per cent. to
shelter; and such and such a per cent. to health and recreation; and
such and such a per cent. to good works; and such and such other per
cents. to various other purposes?"

Shall we come to the day when we shall consume wealth with as much forethought and with as much
balance of judgment between conflicting claims as we now exhibit in acquiring wealth?

They are trying to develop this "Costs System for Home Expenditures" in many of the schools and departments
of Home Economics to-day. They believe that most people, because of not looking ahead and because
of not making definite plans based on previous experience, come to
the contemplation of their bills on the first of each month with every
reason to confess that they have bought those things which they ought
not to have bought and have left unbought those things which they
ought to have bought. This death, even though it
was only that of a dumb beast, touched de Sigognac deeply; for poor Beelzebub had been his
faithful companion, night and day, through many long, weary years of sadness and poverty, and
had always shown the warmest, most devoted affection for him. He carefully wrapped the body
in a piece of fine, soft cloth, and waited, until evening should come, to bury it himself;
when he would be safe from observation and possible ridicule. Accordingly, after nightfall,
he took a spade, a lantern, and poor Beelzebub's body, which was stiff and stark by that time,
and went down into the garden, where he set to work to dig the grave, under the sacred eglantine,
in what seemed to him like hallowed ground. He wanted to make it deep enough to insure its
not being disturbed by any roaming beast of prey, and worked away diligently, until his spade
struck sharply against some hard substance, that he at first thought must be a large stone,
or piece of rock perhaps. He attempted, in various ways, to dislodge it, but all in vain, and
it gave out such a peculiar, hollow sound at every blow, that at last he threw down his spade
and took the lantern to see what the strange obstacle might be.

He was greatly surprised at finding the corner of a stout oaken chest, strengthened with iron
bands, much rusted, but still intact. He dug all round it, and then, using his spade as a lever,
succeeded in raising it, though it was very heavy, to the edge of the hole, and sliding it
out on the grass beside it; then he put poor Beelzebub into the place it had occupied, and
filled up the grave. He carefully smoothed it over, replaced the sod, and when all was finished
to his satisfaction, went in search of his faithful old Pierre, upon whose discretion and secrecy
he knew that he could rely. Together they carried the mysterious strong box into the chateau,
but not without great difficulty and frequent pauses to rest, because of its immense weight.
Pierre broke open the chest with an axe, and the cover sprang back, disclosing to view a mass
of gold coins--all ancient, and many of them foreign. Upon examination, a quantity of valuable
jewelry, set with precious stones, was found mingled with the gold, and, under all, a piece
of parchment, with a huge seal attached, bearing the three storks of the de Sigognacs, still
in a good state of preservation; but the writing was almost entirely obliterated by dampness
and mould. The signature, however, was still visible, and letter by letter the baron spelled
it out--"Raymond de Sigognac." It was the name of one of his ancestors, who had gone to serve
his king and country in the war then raging, and never returned; leaving the mystery of his
death, or disappearance, unsolved. He had only one child, an infant son, and when he left home--in
those troublous times--must have buried all his treasures for safety, and they had remained
undiscovered until this late day. Doubtless, he had confided the secret of their whereabouts
to some trusty friend or retainer, who, perhaps, had died suddenly before he could disclose
it to the rightful heir. From the time of that Raymond began the decadence of the de Sigognacs,
who, previous to that epoch, had always been wealthy and powerful.

Of course, the mystery about this treasure--so strangely brought to light--could never be cleared
up now; but one thing was certain, beyond a question or a doubt, that the strong box and its
contents belonged of right to the present Baron de Sigognac--the only living representative
of the family. His first move was to seek his generous, devoted wife, so that he might show
her the mysterious treasure he had found, and claim her sweet sympathy in his joy, which would
be incomplete without it. After relating to her all the surprising incidents of the evening,
he finished by saying, "Decidedly, Beelzebub was the good genius of the de Sigognacs--through
his means I have become rich--and now that my blessed angel has come to me he has taken his
departure; for there is nothing else left for him to do, since you, my love, have given me
perfect happiness."

