"I am Madame La Fleur," said the other, with a stateliness that none of her mistresses ever
supposed that she possessed. "I came to see Mrs. Drane, in whose service I was formerly engaged,
and I wish to know for myself what sort of a person was cooking for the ladies whose meals
I used to prepare."

Molly put down her knife and her half-pared potato, and arose. She had heard of La Fleur, whose
fame had spread through and about Thorbury.

"Sit down, mum," said she. "This isn't much of a kitchen, for I haven't had time to clane it
up, an' as for me, I'm not much of a cook, nather; for when ye have to be iverything, ye can't
be anything to no great ixtent."

La Fleur, still standing, looked at her severely.

"How often do you bake?" she asked.

"Three times a week," answered Molly, lying.

"The ladies upstairs," said La Fleur, "have been accustomed to fresh rolls every morning for
their breakfast."

"An' afther this, they shall have 'em," said Molly, "Sundays an' weekday, an' sorry I am that
I didn't know before that they was used to have 'em."

"How do you make your coffee?" asked La Fleur.

Molly looked at her hesitatingly.

"I am very keerful about that," she said. "I niver let it bile too much--"

"Ugh!" exclaimed La Fleur, raising her hand. "Tell your mistress to get you a French coffee-pot,
and if you don't know how to use it, I'll come and teach you. I shall be here off and on as
long as Mrs. Drane stops in this house." And then, seating herself, La Fleur proceeded to put
Molly through an elementary domestic service examination.

"Well," said the examiner, when she had finished, "I think you must be the worst cook in this
part of the country."

"No, mum, I'm not," said Molly. "There was one here afore me, a nager woman named Phoebe, that
must have been worse, from what I'm told."

"Where I have lived," said La Fleur, "they have such women to cook for the farm laborers."

"Beggin' your pardon, mum," said Molly, "that's what they are here, or th' same thing. Mr.
Haverley, he works on the farm with a pitchfork, jest like the nager man."

"Don't talk to me like that!" exclaimed La Fleur. "Mr. Haverley is a gentleman. I have lived
enough among gentlemen to know them when I see them, and they can work and they can play and
they can do what they please, and they are gentlemen still. Don't you ever speak that way,
again, of your master."

"I thought I had heard, mum," said Molly, "that you looked down on tradespeople and the loike."

"Tradespeople!" said the other, scornfully. "A gentleman farmer is very different from a person
in trade; but I can't expect anything better from a woman who boils coffee, and never heard
of bouillon. But remember the things I have told you, and thank your stars that a cook as high
up in the profession as I am is willing to tell you anything. Are you the only servant in this
house?"

"There's a man by the name of Mike," said Molly, "a nager, though you wouldn't think it from
his name. He helps me sometimes, an' he helps iverybody else other times."

"Is that the man?" said La Fleur, looking out of the window.

"That's him, mum," said Molly; "he's jest goin' to the woodpile with his axe."

"I wish to speak to him," said La Fleur, and with a very slight nod of the head she left the
kitchen by the door that led into the grounds.

Looking after her, Molly exclaimed,--

"Drat you, for a stuck-up, cross-grained, meddlin', bumble-bee-backed old hag of a soup-slopper;
to come stickin' yer big nose into other people's kitchens! If there was a rale misthress to
the house instead of the little gal upstairs, you'd be rowled down the front steps afore you'd
been let come into my kitchen." And with this she returned to her potatoes. 

They lay encamped at Valley Forge, sick and discouraged, destitute of food, clothing, and most of the
necessities of life.

It was on Christmas Eve, 1783, that Washington laid aside forever
his military clothes and assumed those of a civilian, feeling, as
he expressed it, "relieved of a load of public care."

After Congress removed to Philadelphia, Martha Washington held her
first public reception in the Executive Mansion on Christmas Eve,
when, it is stated, there was gathered "the most brilliant assemblage
ever seen in America."

At Yule-tide a few years later, 1799, the country was mourning the death of the beloved Father
of his Country.

In later years, the season continued prominent in the history of great events. The most notable
of these were the two Proclamations of President Lincoln, the one
freeing the slaves, January 1, 1863, and the other proclaiming the
"unconditional pardon and amnesty to all concerned in the late insurrection,"
on December 25, 1868.

And may the peace then declared remain with this people forevermore!

THE VOICE OF THE CHRIST-CHILD

The earth has grown cold with its burden of care, But at Christmas it always is young, The heart
of the jewel burns lustrous and fair, And its soul full of music
breaks forth on the air, When the song of the Angels is sung.

It is coming, old earth, it is coming to-night! On snowflakes which
covered thy sod, The feet of the Christ-child fall gently and white,
And the voice of the Christ-child tells out with delight That mankind
are the children of God. "I 'spects we'll git good 'nough
craps for what we do for 'em. This ain't the kind of farm your lords and ladies has got. It's
ramshackle, you know."

"Ramshackle?" repeated La Fleur. "Is that a sort of sheep farm?"

Mike grinned. "Law, no, we ain't got no sheep, and I'm glad of it. Ramshackle farmin' means
takin' things as you find 'em, an' makin' 'em do, an' what you git you've got, but with tother
kind of farmin' most times what you git, ye have to pay out, an' then you ain't got nuthin'."

This was more than La Fleur could comprehend, but she inferred in a general way that Mr. Haverley's
farm was a profitable one.

"All so pretty, so pretty," she said, looking from side to side; "such a grand barn, and such
broad acres. Is it the estate as far as I can see?"

"Yes, mum," said Mike, "an' a good deal furder. The woods cuts it off down thataway."

"It is a lordly place," said La Fleur, "and it does you honor, Michael, for the cook told me
you were Mr. Haverley's head man."

"I reckon she's about right there," said Mike.

"And I am very glad indeed," continued the old woman, "that Mrs. and Miss Drane are living
here. And now, Michael, if either of them is ever taken ill, and you're sent for the doctor,
I want you to come straight to me, and I'll see that he goes to them. If you knock at the back
door of the kitchen, I'll hear you, whether I am awake or asleep. And when you are coming to
town, Michael, you must drop in and see me. I can give you a nice bit of a lunch, any day.
I daresay you like good things to eat as well as any-body."

Mike stood silent for a moment, and his eyes began to brighten.

"Indeed I do, mum," said he. "If I was to carry in a punkin to you when they're ripe, I wonder
if you'd be willin' to make me a punkin pie, same kind as Queen Victoria has in the fall of
the year."

La Fleur beamed on him most graciously.

"I will do that gladly, Michael: you may count on me to do that. And I will give you other
things that you like. Wait till we see, wait till we see. Good-day, Michael; I must be going
now, or the doctor will be kept waiting for his dinner. Where's my cabby?"

"Mr. Griffing has drove round to the front of the house, mum," said Mike.

"Just like the stupid American," muttered the old woman as she hurried away, "as if I'd get
in at the front of the house."

Andy Griffing talked a good deal on the drive back to Thorbury, but La Fleur heard little and
answered less. She was in a state of great mental satisfaction, and during her driver's long
descriptions of persons and places, she kept saying to herself, "It couldn't be better than
that. It couldn't be better than that."

This mental expression she applied to Mr. Haverley, whom she considered an extraordinarily
fine-looking young man; to the broad acres and fine barn; to the fact that the Dranes were
living with him; to the probability that he would fall in love with the charming Miss Cicely,
and make her mistress of the estate; and to the strong possibility, that should this thing
happen, she herself would be the cook of Cobhurst, and help her young mistress put the establishment
on the footing that her station demanded.

"It couldn't be better than that," she muttered over and over again as she busied herself about
the Tolbridge dinner, and she even repeated the expression two or three times after she went
to bed.

CHAPTER XXVIII

THE GAME IS CALLED

In her notions and schemes regarding the person and estate of Ralph Haverley, the good cook,
La Fleur, lacked one great advantage possessed by her rival planner and schemer Miss Panney;
for she whose cause was espoused by the latter old woman was herself eager for the fray and
desirous of victory, whereas Cicely Drane had not yet thought of marrying anybody, and outside
of working hours was devoting herself to getting all the pleasure she could out of life, not
regarding much whether it was her mother or Miriam or Mr. Haverley who helped her get it. Moreover,
the advantages of co-residence, which La Fleur naturally counted upon, were not so great as
might have been expected; for Mrs. Drane, having perceived that Ralph was fond of the society
of young ladies to a degree which might easily grow beyond her ideas of decorous companionship
between a gentleman of the house and a lady boarder, gently interfered with the dual apple
gatherings and recreations of that nature. For this, had she been aware of it, Dora Bannister
would have been most grateful.

Ralph had gone twice to see Congo, and to talk to Miss Bannister about him, but he had not
taken the dog home. Dora said she would take him to Cobhurst the first time she drove over
there to see Miriam. Congo would follow her and the carriage anywhere, and this would be so
much pleasanter than to have him forced away like a prisoner.

The gig shafts had now been repaired, and Ralph urged his sister to go with him to Thorbury
and attend to her social duties; but Miriam disliked the little town and loved Cobhurst. As
to social duties, she thought they ought to be attended to, of course, but saw no need to be
in a hurry about them; so Ralph, one day, having business in Thorbury, prepared to go in again
by himself. He had been lately riding Mrs. Browning, who was still his only available horse
for family use; but she was not very agreeable under the saddle, and he now proposed to take
the gig. He had thought it might be a good idea to take a little drive out of the town, and
see if Congo would follow him. Perhaps Miss Bannister would accompany him, for she was very
anxious that the dog should become used to Ralph before leaving his present home; and her presence
would help very much in teaching the animal to follow.

But although Miriam declined to go with her brother, she took much interest in his expedition,
and came out to the barn to see him harness Mrs. Browning.

"Are you going to Dora Bannister's again?" she asked.

"Yes," said Ralph; "at least I think I shall stop in to see the dog. You know the oftener I
do that, the better."

"I think it is a shame," said Miriam, "that you should be driving to town alone, when there
are other people who wish so much to go, and you have no use at all for that empty seat."

"Who wants to go?" asked Ralph, quickly.

"Cicely Drane does. She has got into trouble over the doctor's manuscript, and says she can't
go on properly without seeing him. She has been expecting him here every day, but it seems
as if he never intended to come. She asked me this morning how far it was to Thorbury, and
I think she intends to walk in, if he does not come to-day."

"Why didn't you tell me this before?" asked Ralph. "I would have sent her into town or taken her."

"I had not formulated it in my mind," said Miriam. "Will you take her with you to-day? I know
that she has made up her mind she cannot wait any longer for the doctor to come."

"Of course I will take her," said Ralph. "Will you ask her to get ready? Tell her I shall be
at the door in ten or fifteen minutes."

Ralph's tone was perfectly good-humored, but Miriam fancied that she perceived a trace of disappointment
in it. She was sorry for this, for she could not imagine why any man should object to have
Cicely Drane as a companion on a drive, unless his mind was entirely occupied by some other
girl; and if Ralph's mind was thus occupied, it must be by Dora Bannister, and that did not
please her. So she resolutely put aside all Cicely's suggestions that it might be inconvenient
for Mr. Haverley to take her with him, and deftly overcame Mrs. Drane's one or two impromptu,
and therefore not very well constructed, objections to the acceptance of the invitation; and
in the gig Cicely went with Ralph to Thorbury.

After having left the secretary to attend to her business at the doctor's house, Ralph drove
to the Bannister's; but Dora would not see him, and technically was not at home. Alas! She
had seen him driving past with Miss Drane, and she was angry. This was contrary to the plan
of action she had adopted; but her eighteen-year-old spirit rebelled, and she could not help
it. A more hideous trap than that old gig could not be imagined, but she had planned a drive
in it with Ralph on some of the quiet country roads beyond Cobhurst. They would take Congo
with them, and that would be such a capital plan to teach the dog to follow his new master.
And now it was the Drane girl who was driving with him in his gig. She could not go down and
see him and meet him in the way she liked to meet him.

Miss Panney, on the other side of the street, had been passing the Tolbridge house at the moment
when Ralph and Cicely drove up. She stopped for a moment, her feelings absolutely outraged.
It was not uncommon for her to pass places at times when people were doing things in those
places which she thought they ought not to do; but this was a case which roused her anger in
an unusual manner. Whatever else might happen at Cobhurst, she did not believe that that girl
would begin so soon to go out driving with him.

She had left her phaeton at a livery stable, and was on her way to the Bannister house to have
a talk with Dora on a subject in which they were now both so much interested. She had been
very much surprised when the girl had come to her and freely avowed her feelings and hopes,
but she had been delighted. She liked a spirit of that sort, and it was a joy to her to work
with one who possessed it. But she knew human nature, and she was very much afraid that Dora's
purpose might weaken. It was quite natural that a young person, in a moment of excitement and
pique, should figuratively raise her sword in air and vow a vow; but it was also quite natural,
when the excitement and pique had cooled down, that the young person should experience what
might be called a "vow-fright," and feel unable to go through with her part. In a case such
as Dora's, this was very possible indeed, and all that Miss Panney had planned to say on her
present visit was intended to inspire the girl, if it should be needed, with some of her own
matured inflexibility and fixedness of purpose. But if the man were doing this sort of thing
already and Dora should know it, she would have a right to be discouraged.

Before the old lady reached the Bannisters' gate, she saw Mr. Haverley, in his gig, drive away.
This brightened her up a little.

"He comes here, anyway," she thought; "what a pity Dora is not in."

Nevertheless, she went on to the Bannister house; and when she found Dora was in, she began
to scold her.

"This will never do, will never do," she said. "Get angry with him if you choose, but don't
show it. If you do that, you may crash him too low or bounce him too high, and, in either case,
he may be off before you know it. It is too early in the game to show him that he has made
you angry."

"But if he doesn't want me, I don't want him," said Dora, sulkily.

"If you think that way, my dear," said Miss Panney, "you may as well make up your mind to make
a bad match, or die an old maid. The right man very seldom comes of his own accord; it is nearly
always the wrong one. If you happen to meet the right man, you should help him to know that
he ought to come. That is the way to look at it. That young Haverley does not know yet who
it is that he cares for. He is just floating along, waiting for some one to thrust out a boat-hook
and pull him in."

"I shall marry no floating log," said Dora, stiffly.

The old lady laughed.

"Perhaps that was not a very good figure of speech," she said; "but really, my dear, you must
not interfere with your own happiness by showing temper; and if you look at the affair in its
proper light, you will see it is not so bad, after all. Ten to one, he brought her to town
because she wanted to come with him,--probably on some patched-up errand; but he came here
because he wanted to come. There could be no other reason; and, instead of being angry with
him, you should have given him an extraordinary welcome. For the very reason that she has so
many advantages over you, being so much with him, you should be very careful to make use of
the advantages you have over her. And your advantages are that you are ten times better fitted
to be his wife than she is; and the great thing necessary to be done is to let him see it.
But her chances must come to an end. Those Dranes must be got away from Cobhurst."

"I don't like that way of looking at it," said Dora, leaning back in her chair, with a sigh.
"It's the same thing as fishing for a man, though I suppose it might have been well to see
him when he came."

Now Miss Panney felt encouraged; her patient was showing good symptoms. Let her keep in that
state of mind, and she would see that the lover came. She had made a mistake in speaking so
bluntly about getting the Dranes out of Cobhurst. Although she would not say anything more
to Dora about that important piece of work, she would do it all the same.

This little visit had been an important one to Miss Panney; it had enabled her to understand
Dora's character much better than she had understood it before; and she perceived that in this
case of matchmaking she must not only do a great deal of the work herself, but she must do
it without Dora's knowing anything about it. She liked this, for she was not much given to
consulting with people.

Miss Panney had another call to pay in the neighborhood, and she had intended, for form's sake,
to spend a little time with Mrs. Bannister; but she did neither. She went back by the way she
had come, wishing to learn all she could about the movements of the Cobhurst gig.

Approaching the Tolbridge house, she saw that vehicle standing before the door, with the sleepy
Mrs. Browning tied to a post, and as she drew nearer, she perceived Ralph Haverley sitting
alone on the vine-shaded piazza. The old lady would not enter the Tolbridge gate, but she stood
on the other side of the street, and beckoned to Ralph, who, as soon as he saw her, ran over
to her.

Ralph walked a little way with Miss Panney, and after answering her most friendly inquiries
about Miriam, he explained how he happened to be sitting alone on the piazza; the doctor and
Miss Drane, whom he had brought to town, were at work at some manuscript, and he had preferred
to wait outside instead of indoors.

"I called on Miss Bannister," he said, "but she was not at home, so I came back here."

"It is a pity she was out," said Miss Panney, carelessly, "and now that you have mentioned
Miss Bannister, I would like to ask you something; why does not your sister return her visits?
I saw Dora not very long ago, and found that her feelings had been a little hurt--not much,
perhaps, but a little--by Miriam's apparent indifference to her. Dora is a very sensitive girl,
and is slow to make friends among other girls. I never knew any friendship so quick and lively
as that she showed for Miriam. You know that Dora is still young; it has not been long since
she left school; there is not a girl in Thorbury that she cares anything about, and her life
at home must necessarily be a lonely one. Her brother is busy, even in the evenings, and Mrs.
Bannister is no companion for a lively young girl."

"I had thought," said Ralph, "that Miss Bannister went a good deal into society."

"Oh, no," answered Miss Panney; "she sometimes visits her relatives, who are society people;
but in years and disposition she is too young for that sort of thing. Society women and society
men would simply bore her. At heart she is a true country girl, and I think it was because
Miriam had country tastes, and loved that sort of life, that Dora's affections went out so
quickly to her. I wish your sister had the same feelings toward her."

"Oh, Miriam likes her very much," exclaimed Ralph, "and is always delighted to see her; but
my little sister is wonderfully fond of staying at home. I have told her over and over again
that she ought to return Miss Bannister's calls."

"Make her do it," said the old lady. "It is her duty, and I assure you, it will be greatly
to her advantage. Miriam is a most lovely girl, but her character has not hardened itself into
what it is going to be, and association with a thoroughbred girl, such as Dora Bannister, admirably
educated, who has seen something of the world, with an intelligence and wit such as I have
never known in any one of her age, and more than all with a soul as beautiful as her face,
cannot fail to be an inestimable benefit to your sister. What Miriam most needs, at this stage
of her life, is proper companionship of her own age and sex."

Ralph assented. "But," said he, "she is not without that, you know. Miss Drane, who with her
mother now lives with us, is a most--"

Miss Panney's face grew very hard.

"Excuse me," she interrupted, "I know all about that. Of course the Dranes are very estimable
people, and there are many things, especially in the way of housekeeping, which Mrs. Drane
could teach Miriam, if she chose to take the trouble. But while I respect the daughter's efforts
to support herself and her mother, it must be admitted that she is a working-girl--nothing
more or less--and must continue to be such. Her present business, of course, can only last
for a little while, and she will have to adopt some regular calling. This life she expects,
and is preparing herself for it. But a mind such as hers is, or must speedily become, is not
the one from which Miriam's young mind should receive its impressions. The two will move in
very different spheres, and neither can be of any benefit to the other. More than that I will
not say; but I will say that your sister can never find any friend so eager to love her, and
so willing to help and be helped by her in so many ways in which girls can help each other,
as my dear Dora. Now bestir yourself, Mr. Haverley, and make Miriam look at this thing as she
ought to. I don't pretend to deny that I have spoken to you very much for Dora's sake, for
whom I have an almost motherly feeling; but you should act for your sister's sake. And please
don't forget what I have said, young man, and give Miriam my best love."

When Ralph walked back to the Tolbridge piazza he found the working-girl sitting there, waiting
for him. His mind was not in an altogether satisfactory condition; some things Miss Panney
had said had pleased and even excited him, but there were other things that he resented. If
she had not been such an old lady, and if she had not talked so rapidly, he might have shown
this resentment. But he had not done so, and now the more he thought about it, the stronger
the feeling grew.

As for Cicely Drane, she was a great deal more quiet during the drive home, than she had been
when going to Thorbury. Her mind was in an unsatisfactory condition, and this had been occasioned
by an interview with La Fleur, who had waylaid her in the hall as she came out of the doctor's
office.

The good cook had been in a state of enthusiastic delight, since, looking out of the kitchen
window where she had been sitting, with a manuscript book of recipes in her lap, planning the
luncheon and dinner, she had seen the lord of Cobhurst drive up to the gate with dear Miss
Cicely. It was a joy like that of listening to a party of dinner guests, who were eating her
favorite ice. With intense impatience she had awaited the appearance of Cicely from the doctor's
office; and, having drawn her to one side, she hastily imparted her sentiments.

"It's a shabby gig, Miss Cicely," she said, "such as the farmers use in the old country, but
it's his own, and not hired, and the big house is his own, and all the broad acres. And he's
a gentleman from head to heel, living on his own estate, and as fine a built man as ever rode
in the Queen's army. Oh, Miss Cicely, your star is at the top of the heavens this time, and
I want you to let me know if there is anything you want in the way of hats or wraps or clothes,
or anything of that kind. It doesn't make the least difference to me, you know, just now, and
we'll settle it all after a while. It is the Christian duty for every young lady to look the
smartest, especially at a time like this."

Cicely, her face flushed, drew herself away.

"La Fleur," she said, speaking quickly and in a low voice, "you ought to be ashamed of yourself."
And she hurried away, fearing that Mr. Haverley was waiting for her.

La Fleur was not a bit ashamed of herself; she chuckled as she went back to the kitchen.

"She's a young thing of brains and beauty," said she to herself, "and I don't doubt that she
had the notion in her own mind. But if it wasn't there, I have put it there, and if it was
there, I've dished it and dressed it, and it will be like another thing to her. As for the
rest of it, he'll attend to that. I haven't a doubt that he is the curly-headed, brave fellow
to do that; and I'll find out from her mother if she needs anything, and not hurt her pride
neither."

CHAPTER XXIX

HYPOTHESIS AND INNUENDO

To say that Cicely Drane had not thought of Ralph Haverley as an exceedingly agreeable young
man would be an injustice to her young womanly nature, but it would be quite correct to state
that she had not thought him a whit more agreeable than Miriam. She was charmed with them both;
they had taken her into their home circle as if they had adopted her as a sister. It was not
until her mother began to put a gentle pressure upon her in order to prevent her gathering
too many apples, and joining in too many other rural recreations with Mr. Haverley, that she
thought of him as one who was not to be considered in the light of a brother. There could be
no doubt that she would have come to the same conclusion if left to herself, but she would
not have reached it so soon.

But the effect that her mother's precautionary disposition had had upon her was nothing compared
to that produced by the words of La Fleur. For the first time she looked upon Ralph as one
on whom other persons looked as her lover, and to sit by the side of the said young man, immediately
after being informed of said fact, was not conducive to a free and tranquil flow of remark.

Her own sentiments on the subject, so far as she had put them into shape,--and it was quite
natural that she should immediately begin to do this,--were neither embarrassing nor disagreeable.
She liked him very much, and there was no reason why she should object to his liking her very
much, and if they should ever do more than this, she should not be ashamed of it, and perhaps
should be glad of it. But she was sorry that before either of them had thought of this, some
one else should have done so.

This might prove to be embarrassing, and the only comfort she could give herself was that La
Fleur was such an affectionate old body, always talking of some bit of good fortune for her,
that if she had seen her in company with a king or an emperor, she would immediately set herself
to find some sort of throne-covering which would suit her hair and complexion.

The definite result of her reflections, made between desultory questions and answers, was that
she regarded the young gentleman by her side in a light very different from that in which she
had viewed him before she had met La Fleur in the doctor's hall. It was not that she looked
upon him as a possible lover--she had sense enough to know that almost any man might be that--he
was a hypothetic lover, and in view of the assumption it behooved her to give careful observation
to everything in him, herself, or others, which might bear upon the ensuing argument.

As for Ralph, it angered him to look at the young lady by his side, who was as handsome, as
well educated and cultured, as tastefully dressed, as intelligent and witty, of as gentle,
kind, and winning a disposition, and, judging from what the doctor had told him when he first
spoke of the Dranes, of as good blood, family, and position, as any one within the circle of
his acquaintance, and then to remember that she had been called a working-girl, and spoken
of in a manner that was almost contemptuous.

Ralph always took the side of the man who was down, and, consequently, very often put himself
on the wrong side; and although he did not consider that Miss Drane was down, he saw that Miss
Panney had tried to put her down, and therefore he became her champion.

"There could not be any one," he said to himself, "better fitted to be the friend and companion
of Miriam than Cicely Drane is, and the next time I see that old lady, I shall tell her so.
I have nothing to say against Miss Bannister, but I shall stand up for this one."

And now, feeling that it was not polite to treat a young lady with seeming inattention, because
he happened to be earnestly thinking about her, he began to talk to Cicely in his liveliest
and gayest manner, and she, not wishing him to think that she thought that there was anything
out of the way in this, or in his previous preoccupation, responded just as gayly.

Ralph delivered Miss Panney's message to his sister, and Miriam, giving much more weight to
the advice and opinion of the old lady, whom she knew very slightly and cared for very little,
than to that of her brother, whom she loved dearly, said she would go to see Miss Bannister
the next afternoon if it happened to be clear.

It was clear, and she went, and Ralph drove her there in the gig, and Dora was overwhelmed
with joy to see her, and scolded Ralph in the most charming way for not bringing her before;
Miriam was taken to see Congo, because Dora wanted her to begin to love him, and they were
shown into the library, because Dora said that she knew they both loved books, and her father
had gathered together so many. In ten minutes, Miriam was in the window seat, dipping, which
ended in her swimming, far beyond her depth in Don Quixote, which she had so often read of
and never seen, and Dora and Ralph sat, heads together, over a portfolio of photographs of
foreign places where the Bannisters had been.

There were very few books at Cobhurst, and Miriam had read all of them she cared for, and consequently
it was an absorbing delight to follow the adventures of the Knight of La Mancha.

Ralph had not travelled in Europe, and there were very few pictures at Cobhurst, and he was
greatly interested in the photographs, but this interest soon waned in the increasing delight
of having Dora seated so close to him, of seeing her fair fingers point out the things he should
look at, and listening to her sweet voice, as she talked to him about the scenes and buildings.
There was an element of gentle and sympathetic interest in Dora's manner, which reminded him
of her visit to Cobhurst, and the good-night on the stairs, and this had a very charming effect
upon Ralph, and made him wish that the portfolio were at least double its actual size.

The Haverleys stayed so long that Mrs. Bannister, upstairs, began to be nervous, and wondered
if Dora had asked those young people to remain to tea.

On the way home Ralph was in unusually good spirits, and talked much about Dora. She must have
seen a great deal of the world, he said, for one so young, and she talked in such an interesting
and appreciative way about what she had seen, that he felt almost as if he had been to the
places himself.

With this for a text, he dilated upon the subject of Dora and foreign travel, but Miriam was
not a responsive hearer.

"I wish you knew Mr. Bannister better," she said in a pause in her brother's remarks. "He must
have been everywhere that his sister has been, and probably saw a great deal more."

"No doubt," said Ralph, carelessly, "and probably has forgotten most of it; men generally do
that. A girl's mind is not crammed with business and all that sort of stuff, and she can keep
it free for things that are worth remembering."

Miriam did not immediately answer, but presently she said, speaking with a certain air of severity:--

"If my soul ached for the company of anybody as Miss Panney told you Dora Bannister's soul
ached for my company, I think I should have a little more to say to her when she came to see
me, than Dora Bannister had to say to me to-day."

"My dear child!" exclaimed Ralph, "that was because you were so busy with your book. She saw
you were completely wrapped up in it, and so let you take your own pleasure in your own way.
I think that is one of her good points. She tries to find out what pleases people."

"Bother her good points!" snapped Miriam. "You will make a regular porcupine of her if you
keep on. I wish Mr. Bannister had given you the dog."

Ralph was very much disturbed; it was seldom that his sister snapped at him. He could see,
now that he considered the matter, that Miriam had been somewhat neglected. She was young and
a little touchy, and this ought to be considered. He thought it might be well, the next time
he saw Miss Bannister by herself, to explain this to her. He believed he could do it without
making it appear a matter of any great importance. It was important, however, for he should
very much dislike to see ill will grow up between Miriam and Miss Bannister. What Miss Panney
had said about this young lady was very, very true, although, of course, it did not follow
that any one else need be disparaged.

Early in the forenoon of the next day, Miss Panney drove to Cobhurst. She had come, she informed
Miriam, not only to see her, dear girl, but to make a formal call upon the Dranes.

The call was very formal; Miss Drane left her work to meet the visitor, but having been loftily
set aside by that lady during a stiff conversation with her mother about old residents in the
neighborhood in which they had lived, she excused herself, after a time, and went back to her
table and her manuscripts.

Then Miss Panney changed the conversational scene, and began to talk about Thorbury.

"I do not know, madam," she said, "that you are aware that I was the cause of your coming to
this neighborhood."

Mrs. Drane was a quiet lady, and the previous remarks of her visitor had been calculated to
render her more quiet, but this roused her.

"I certainly did not," she said. "We came on the invitation and through the kindness of Dr.
Tolbridge, my old friend."

"Yes, yes, yes," said Miss Panney, "that is all true enough, but I told him to send for you.
In fact, I insisted upon it. I did it, of course, for his sake; for I knew that the arrangement
would be of advantage to him in various ways, but I was also glad to be of service to your
daughter, of whom I had heard a good report. Furthermore, I interested myself very much in
getting you lodgings, and found you a home at Mrs. Brinkly's that I hoped you would like. If
I had not done so, I think you would have been obliged to go to the hotel, which is not pleasant
and much more expensive than a private house. I do not mention these things, madam, because
I wish to be thanked, or anything of that sort; far from it. I did what I did because I thought
it was right; but I must admit, if you will excuse my mentioning it, that I was surprised,
to say the least, that I was not consulted, in the slightest degree, on the occasion of your
leaving the home I had secured for you."

"I am very sorry," said Mrs. Drane, "that I should appear to have been discourteous to one
who had done us a service, for which, I assure you, we are both very much obliged, but Dr.
and Mrs. Tolbridge managed the whole affair of our removal from Mrs. Brinkly's house, and I
did not suppose there was any one, besides them and ourselves, who would take the slightest
interest in the matter."

"Oh, I find no fault," said Miss Panney. "It is not an affair of importance, but I think you
will agree, madam, that after the interest I had shown in procuring you suitable accommodation,
I might have been spared what some people might consider the mortification of being told, when
I stated to Mrs. Tolbridge that I intended to call upon you, that you were not then living
with the lady whose consent to receive you into her family I had obtained, after a great deal
of personal solicitation and several visits."

Upon this presentation of the matter, Mrs. Drane could not help thinking that the old lady
had been treated somewhat uncivilly, and expressed her regret in the most suitable terms she
could think of, adding that she was sure that Miss Panney would agree that the change had been
an excellent one.

"Of course, of course," said Miss Panney. "For a temporary country residence, I suppose you
could not have found a better spot, though it must be a long walk for your daughter when she
goes to submit her work to Dr. Tolbridge."

"That has not yet been necessary," said Mrs. Drane; "Mr. Haverley is very kind--"

At this point Miss Panney rose. She had said all she wanted to say, and to decline to hear
anything about Ralph Haverley's having been seen driving about with a young woman who had been
engaged as Dr. Tolbridge's secretary, was much better than speaking of it, and she took her
leave with a prim politeness.

Mrs. Drane was left in an uncomfortable state of mind. It was not pleasant to be reminded that
this delightful country house was only a temporary home, for that implied a return to Thorbury,
a town she disliked; and although she had, of course, expected to go back there, she had not
allowed the matter to dwell in her mind at all, putting it into the future, without consideration,
as she liked to do with things that were unpleasant.

