They began one, therefore, on Montecavallo, opposite to S. Silvestro, in company with Pellegrino
da Modena, which encouraged them to make further efforts to see whether this should be their
profession; and they went on to execute another opposite to the side-door of S. Salvatore del
Lauro, and likewise painted a scene by the side-door of the Minerva, with another, which is
a frieze of marine monsters, above S. Rocco a Ripetta. But even if it be supposed that mind could
survive the toil, and the earth the quantity of our accumulating books, there are other difficulties.
There are other imperative limitations, beyond which the art of writing
cannot go. Gaining courage,
therefore, from this, they began to study the antiquities of Rome, counterfeiting the ancient
works of marble in their works in chiaroscuro, so that there remained no vase, statue, sarcophagus,
scene, or any single thing, whether broken or entire, which they did not draw and make use
of. And with such constancy and resolution did they give their minds to this pursuit, that
they both acquired the ancient manner, the work of the one being so like that of the other,
that, even as their minds were guided by one and the same will, so their hands expressed one
and the same knowledge. And although Maturino was not as well assisted by Nature as Polidoro,
so potent was the faithful imitation of one style by the two in company, that, wherever either
of them placed his hand, the work of both one and the other, whether in composition, expression,
or manner, appeared to be the same.

In the Piazza di Capranica, on the way to the Piazza Colonna, they painted a façade with the
Theological Virtues, and a frieze of very beautiful invention beneath the windows, including
a draped figure of Rome representing the Faith, and holding the Chalice and the Host in her
hands, who has taken captive all the nations of the earth; and all mankind is flocking up to
bring her tribute, while the Turks, overcome at the last, are shooting arrows at the tomb of
Mahomet; all ending in the words of Scripture, "There shall be one fold and one Shepherd."
And, indeed, they had no equals in invention; of which we have witness in all their works,
abounding in personal ornaments, vestments, foot-wear, and things bizarre and strange, and
executed with an incredible beauty. And another proof is that their works are continually being
drawn by all the foreign painters; wherefore they conferred greater benefits on the art of
painting with the beautiful manner that they displayed and with their marvellous facility,
than have all the others together who have lived from Cimabue downwards. It has been seen continually,
therefore, in Rome, and is still seen, that all the draughtsmen are inclined more to the works
of Polidoro and Maturino than to all the rest of our modern pictures. 

Who can understand the mania of the leader-writer, who never thinks of a subject without discovering
the possibility of a column concerning it,--who never looks upon his plate of soup without mentally
reviewing in elaborate periods the whole vegetable, animal, and mineral kingdoms?

But what is the advantage of newspapers? Forsooth, popular intelligence. The newspaper is, in
the first place, the legitimate and improved successor of the fiery cross, beacon-light, signal-smoking
summit, hieroglyphic mark, and bulletin-board. It is, in addition to this, a popular daily edition
and application of the works of Aristotle, St. Thomas Aquinas, Lord Bacon, Vattel, and Thomas
Jefferson. On one page it records items, on the other it shows the relations between those items
and the highest thought. Yet the whole circle is accomplished daily. The journal is thus the
synopticized, personified, incarnate madness of the day,--for to-day is always mad, and becomes
a thing of reason only when it becomes yesterday. A proper historical fact is one of the rarest
shots in the journalist's bag, as time is sure to prove. If we had newspaper-accounts of the
age of Augustus, the chances are that no other epoch in history would be so absolutely problematical,
and Augustus himself would be lucky, if he were not resolved into a myth, and the journal into
sibylline oracles. The dissertational department is equally faulty;
for to first impressions everything on earth is chameleon-like. And in the Piazza della Dogana, beside S. Eustachio, there is a façade of
battle-pieces; and within that church, on the right as one enters, may be perceived a little
chapel with figures painted by Polidoro.

They also executed another above the Farnese Palace for the Cepperelli, and a façade behind
the Minerva in the street that leads to the Maddaleni; and in the latter, which contains scenes
from Roman history, may be seen, among other beautiful things, a frieze of children in triumph,
painted to look like bronze, and executed with supreme grace and extraordinary beauty. On the
façade of the Buoni Auguri, near the Minerva, are some very beautiful stories of Romulus, showing
him when he is marking out the site of his city with the plough, and when the vultures are
flying over him; wherein the vestments, features, and persons of the ancients are so well imitated,
that it truly appears as if these were the very men themselves. Certain it is that in that
field of art no man ever had such power of design, such practised mastery, a more beautiful
manner, or greater facility. And every craftsman is so struck with wonder every time that he
sees these works, that he cannot but be amazed at the manner in which Nature has been able
in this age to present her marvels to us by means of these men.

Below the Corte Savella, also, on the house bought by Signora Costanza, they painted the Rape
of the Sabines, a scene which reveals the raging desire of the captors no less clearly than
the terror and panic of the wretched women thus carried off by various soldiers, some on horseback
and others in other ways. I was filled with the vague recognition of a present soul in Nature--with
a sense of the humanity everywhere diffused through her and operating upon ours. I was but fourteen,
and had only feelings, but something lay at the heart of the feelings, which would one day
blossom into thoughts.

At the coach-office in the county-town, I first met my future companion, with his father, who
was to see us to our destination. My uncle accompanied me no further, and I soon found myself
on the top of a coach, with only one thing to do--make the acquaintance of Charles Osborne. His
father was on the box-seat, and we two sat behind; but we were both shy, and for some time neither
spoke. Charles was about my own age, rather like his sister, only
that his eyes were blue, and his hair a lightish brown. On another wall, round the corner, are Romulus and his brother being suckled by the
wolf, and the terrible combat of Horatius, who is defending the head of the bridge, alone against
a thousand swords, while behind him are many very beautiful figures in various attitudes, working
with might and main to hew away the bridge with pickaxes. There, also, is Mucius Scævola, who,
before the eyes of Porsena, is burning his own hand, which had erred in slaying the King's
minister in place of the King; and in the King's face may be seen disdain and a desire for
vengeance. And within that house they executed a number of landscapes.

