During my illness Mr. Robinson so powerfully wrought upon the feelings of my mother, that she
prevailed on me to promise, in case I should recover, to give him my hand in marriage. The
words of my father were frequently repeated, not without some innuendoes that I refused my
ready consent to a union with Mr. Robinson from a blind partiality to the libertine Captain----.
Repeatedly urged and hourly reminded of my father's vow, I at last consented, and the banns
were published while I was yet lying on a bed of sickness. I was then only a few months advanced
in my sixteenth year.

My mother, whose affection for me was boundless, notwithstanding her hopes of my forming an
alliance that would be productive of felicity, still felt the most severe pain at the thought
of our approaching separation. She was estranged from her husband's affections; she had treasured
up all her fondest hopes in the society of an only daughter; she knew that no earthly pleasure
can compensate for the loss of that sweet sympathy which is the bond of union betwixt child
and parent. Her regrets were infinite as they were evident, and Mr. Robinson, in order to remove
any obstacle which this consideration might throw in the way of our marriage, voluntarily proposed
that she should reside with us. He represented me as too young and inexperienced to superintend
domestic concerns; and while he flattered my mother's armour propre, he rather requested her
aid as a sacrifice to his interest than as an obligation conferred on her.

The banns were published three successive Sundays at St. Martin's Church, and the day was fixed
for our marriage,--the twelfth of April. It was not till all preliminaries were adjusted that
Mr. Robinson, with much apparent agitation, suggested the necessity of keeping our union a
secret. I was astonished at the proposal; but two reasons were given for his having made it,
both of which seemed plausible; the first was, that Mr. Robinson had still three months to
serve before his articles to Messrs. Vernon and Elderton expired; and the second was, the hope
which a young lady entertained of forming a matrimonial union with Mr. Robinson as soon as
that period should arrive. The latter reason alarmed me, but I was most solemnly assured that
all the affection was cherished on the lady's part; that Mr. Robinson was particularly averse
to the idea of such a marriage, and that as soon as he should become of age his independence
would place him beyond the control of any person whatsoever.

I now proposed deferring our wedding-day till that period. I pleaded that I thought myself
too young to encounter the cares and important duties of domestic life; I shrunk from the idea
of everything clandestine, and anticipated a thousand ill consequences that might attend on
a concealed marriage. My scruples only seemed to increase Mr. Robinson's impatience for that
ceremony which should make me his for ever. He represented to my mother the disapprobation
which my father would not fail to evince at my adopting a theatrical life in preference to
engaging in an honourable and prosperous connection. He so powerfully worked upon the credulity
of my beloved parent that she became a decided convert to his opinions. My youth, my person,
he represented as the destined snares for my honour on a public stage, where all the attractions
of the mimic scene would combine to render me a fascinating object. He also persuaded her that
my health would suffer by the fatigues and exertions of the profession, and that probably I
might be induced to marry some man who would not approve of a mother's forming a part in our
domestic establishment.

These circumstances were repeatedly urged in favour of the union. Still I felt an almost instinctive
repugnance at the thought of a clandestine marriage. My mother, whose parental fondness was
ever watchful for my safety, now imagined that my objections proceeded from a fixed partiality
toward the libertine Captain----, who, though he had not the temerity to present himself before
my mother, persisted in writing to me, and in following me whenever I appeared in public. I
never spoke to him after the story of his marriage was repeated to my mother; I never corresponded
with him, but felt a decided and proud indignation whenever his name was mentioned in my presence.

My appearance on the stage had been put off from time to time, till Mr. Garrick became impatient,
and desired my mother to allow of his fixing the night of important trial. It was now that
Mr. Robinson and my mother united in persuading me to relinquish my project; and so perpetually,
during three days, was I tormented on the subject, so ridiculed for having permitted the banns
to be published, and afterward hesitating to fulfil my contract, that I consented--and was married.

As soon as the day of my wedding was fixed, it was deemed necessary that a total revolution
should take place in my external appearance. I had till that period worn the habit of a child,
and the dress of a woman, so suddenly assumed, sat rather awkwardly upon me. Still, so juvenile
was my appearance, that, even two years after my union with Mr. Robinson, I was always accosted
with the appellation of "Miss" whenever I entered a shop or was in company with strangers.
My manners were no less childish than my appearance; only three months before I became a wife
I had dressed a doll, and such was my dislike to the idea of a matrimonial alliance that the
only circumstance which induced me to marry was that of being still permitted to reside with
my mother, and to live separated, at least for some time, from my husband.

My heart, even when I knelt at the altar, was as free from any tender impression as it had
been at the moment of my birth. I knew not the sensation of any sentiment beyond that of esteem;
love was still a stranger to my bosom. I had never, then, seen the being who was destined to
inspire a thought which might influence my fancy or excite an interest in my mind, and I well
remember that, even while I was pronouncing the marriage vow, my fancy involuntarily wandered
to that scene where I had hoped to support myself with eclat and reputation.

The ceremony was performed by Doctor Saunders, the venerable vicar of St. Martin's, who, at
the conclusion of the ceremony, declared that he had never before performed the office for
so young a bride. The clerk officiated as father; my mother and the woman who opened the pews
were the only witnesses to the union. I was dressed in the habit of a Quaker,--a society to
which, in early youth, I was particularly partial. From the church we repaired to the house
of a female friend, where a splendid breakfast was waiting; I changed my dress to one of white
muslin, a chip hat adorned with white ribbons, a white sarsnet scarf-cloak, and slippers of
white satin embroidered with silver. I mention these trifling circumstances because they lead
to some others of more importance.

From the house of my mother's friend we set out for the inn at Maidenhead Bridge, Mr. Robinson
and myself in a phaeton, my mother in a post-chaise; we were also accompanied by a gentleman
by the name of Balack, a very intimate acquaintance and schoolfellow of my husband, who was
not apprised of our wedding, but who nevertheless considered Mr. Robinson as my avowed suitor.

On his first seeing me, he remarked that I was "dressed like a bride." The observation overwhelmed
me with confusion. During the day I was more than pensive,--I was melancholy; I considered
all that had passed as a vision, and would scarcely persuade myself that the union which I
had permitted to be solemnised was indissoluble. My mother frequently remarked my evident chagrin;
and in the evening, while we strolled together in the garden which was opposite the inn, I
told her, with a torrent of tears, the vouchers of my sincerity, that I was the most wretched
of mortals! that I felt the most perfect esteem for Mr. Robinson, but that, according to my
ideas of domestic happiness, there should be a warm and powerful union of soul, to which I
was yet totally a stranger.

During my absence from town, a letter was written to Mr. Garrick, informing him that an advantageous
marriage (for my mother considered Mr. Robinson as the legal heir to a handsome fortune, together
with an estate in South Wales) had induced me to relinquish my theatrical prospects; and a
few weeks after, meeting Mr. Garrick in the street, he congratulated me on my union, and expressed
the warmest wishes for my future happiness.

The day after our marriage, Mr. Robinson proposed dining at Henley-upon-Thames. My mother would
not venture in the phaeton, and Mr. Balack occupied the place which was declined by her. On
taking his seat between Robinson and myself, he remarked, "Were you married, I should think
of the holy anathema,--Cursed is he that parteth man and wife." My countenance was suddenly
suffused with the deepest scarlet; I cautiously concealed the effect which his remarks had
produced, and we proceeded on our journey.

Descending a steep hill, betwixt Maidenhead Thicket and Henley, we met a drove of oxen. The
comic opera of the "Padlock" was then in high celebrity, and our facetious little friend a
second time disconcerted me by saying, in the words of Don Diego, "I don't like oxen, I wish
they had been a flock of sheep!" I now began to discover the variety of unpleasant sensations
which, even undesignedly, must arise from conversation, in the presence of those who were clandestinely
married. I also trembled with apprehension, lest anything disgraceful should attach itself
to my fame, by being seen under doubtful circumstances in the society of Mr. Robinson.

On our return to London, after ten days' absence, a house was hired in Great Queen Street,
Lincoln's Inn Fields. It was a large, old-fashioned mansion, and stood on the spot where the
Freemasons' Tavern has been since erected. This house was the property of a lady, an acquaintance
of my mother, the widow of Mr. Worlidge, an artist of considerable celebrity. It was handsomely
furnished, and contained many valuable pictures by various masters. I resided with my mother;
Mr. Robinson continued at the house of Messrs. Vernon and Elderton, in Southampton Buildings.

The stated time of concealment elapsed, and still my husband was perpetually at chambers in
Lincoln's Inn. Still he was evidently under the control of his articles, and still desirous
that our marriage should be kept a secret. My mother began to feel a considerable degree of
inquietude upon the subject; particularly as she was informed that Mr. Robinson was not exactly
in that state of expectation which he had represented. She found that he was already of age,
and that he had still some months to serve of his clerkship. She also heard that he was not
the nephew and heir, but the illegitimate son of the man from whom he expected a handsome fortune;
though he had an elder brother, now Commodore William Robinson, who was then in India, reaping
the fruits of industry under the patronage of Lord Clive.

It was now for the first time that my mother repented the influence she had used in promoting
our union. She informed Mr. Robinson that she apprehended some gross deception on his part,
and that she would no longer consent to our marriage being kept a secret. The reputation of
a darling child, she alleged, was at stake; and though during a few weeks the world might have
been kept in ignorance of my marriage, some circumstances that had transpired, now rendered
an immediate disclosure absolutely necessary.

Mr. Robinson, finding my mother inexorable, resolved on setting out for Wales, in order to
avow our marriage, and to present me to his "uncle," for such he still obstinately denominated
his father. My mother wished to avail herself of this opportunity to visit her friends at Bristol,
and accordingly we set out on the journey. We passed through Oxford; visited the different
colleges; proceeded to Blenheim, and made the tour a tour of pleasure, with the hope of soothing
my mother's resentment, and exhilarating my spirits, which were now perpetually dejected. I
cannot help mentioning that, shortly after my marriage, I formed an acquaintance with a young
lady, whose mind was no less romantic than my own, and while Mr. Robinson was occupied at chambers,
we almost daily passed our morning hours in Westminster Abbey. It was to me a soothing and
a gratifying scene of meditation. I have often remained in the gloomy chapels of that sublime
fabric till I became, as it were, an inhabitant of another world. The dim light of the Gothic
windows, the vibration of my footsteps along the lofty aisles, the train of reflections that
the scene inspired, were all suited to the temper of my soul; and the melancholy propensities
of my earliest infancy seemed to revive with an instinctive energy, which rendered them the
leading characteristics of my existence. Indeed, the world has mistaken the character of my
mind; I have ever been the reverse of volatile and dissipated. I mean not to write my own eulogy,
though with the candid and sensitive mind I shall, I trust, succeed in my vindication.

On our arrival at Bristol, Mr. Robinson thought it most advisable to proceed toward Tregunter,
the seat of his "uncle," alone, in order to prepare him for my cordial reception, or to avoid
the mortification I should experience, should he refuse to sanction our union. Mr. Robinson
left me a few guineas, and promised that his absence should be short, and his affection increasing.

I had now been married near four months; and, though love was not the basis of my fidelity,
honour, and a refined sense of feminine rectitude, attached me to the interest as well as to
the person of my husband. I considered chastity as the brightest ornament that could embellish
the female mind, and I regulated my conduct to that tenor which has principle more than affection
to strengthen its progress.

At Bristol my mother experienced the most gratifying reception; all her former friends rejoiced
to see her; I was invited daily to feasts of hospitality, and I found that fortune was to common
minds a never failing passport. Mr. Robinson was represented as a young man of considerable
expectations, and his wife was consequently again received as the daughter of Mr. Darby. The
house in which I first opened my eyes to this world of sorrow, the minster, its green, the
schoolhouse where I had passed many days, the tomb of my lost relatives in the church of St.
Augustine, were all visited by me with a sweet and melancholy interest. But the cathedral,
the brass eagle in the middle aisle, under which, when an infant, I used to sit and join in
the loud anthem, or chant the morning service, most sensibly attached me. I longed again to
occupy my place beneath its expanding wings, and once I went before the service began to gratify
my inclination.

Language cannot describe the sort of sensation which I felt when I heard the well-known, long-remembered
organ flinging its loud peal through the Gothic structure. I hastened to the cloisters. The
nursery windows were dim and shattered; the house was sinking to decay. The mouldering walk
was gloomy, and my spirits were depressed beyond description: I stood alone, rapt in meditation,
"Here," said I, "did my infant feet pace to and fro; here did I climb the long stone bench,
and swiftly measure it at the peril of my safety. On those dark and winding steps did I sit
and listen to the full-toned organ, the loud anthem, the bell which called the parishioners
to prayer." I entered the cathedral once more; I read and re-read the monumental inscriptions;
I paused upon the grave of Powell; I dropped a tear on the small square ground tablet which
bore the name of Evelyn. Ah! how little has the misjudging world known of what has passed in
my mind, even in the apparently gayest moments of my existence! How much have I regretted that
ever I was born, even when I have been surrounded with all that could gratify the vanity of woman!

Mr. Robinson, on his arrival at Tregunter, despatched a letter informing me that his "uncle"
seemed disposed to act handsomely, but that he had only ventured to avow an intention to marry,
fearful of abruptly declaring that he had been already some months a husband. Mr. Harris, for
that was the name of my father-in-law, replied that "he hoped the object of his choice was
not too young!" At this question Mr. Robinson was somewhat disconcerted. "A young wife," continued
Mr. Harris, "cannot mend a man's fortune. How old is the girl you have chosen?"

"She is nearly seventeen!"

I was then only fifteen and a few months.[10]

"I hope she is not handsome," was the second observation. "You say she is not rich; and beauty
without money is but a dangerous sort of portion."

"Will you see her?"

"I have no objection," said Mr. Harris.

"She is now with her mother at Bristol,--for," continued Mr. Robinson, with some hesitation,
"she is my wife."

Mr. Harris paused, and then replied, "Well! stay with me only a few days, and then you shall
fetch her. If the thing is done, it cannot be undone. She is a gentlewoman, you say, and I
can have no reason to refuse seeing her."

The same letter which contained this intelligence also requested me to prepare for my journey,
and desired me to write to a person whom Mr. Robinson named in London, and whom I had seen
in his company, for a sum of money which would be necessary for our journey. This person was
Mr. John King, then a money-broker in Goodman's Fields; but I was an entire stranger to the
transaction which rendered him the temporary source of my husband's finances.

One or two letters passed on this subject, and I waited anxiously for my presentation at Tregunter.
At length the period of Mr. Robinson's return arrived, and we set out together, while my mother
remained with her friends at Bristol. Crossing the old passage to Chepstow in an open boat,
a distance, though not extended, extremely perilous, we found the tide so strong and the night
so boisterous that we were apprehensive of much danger. The rain poured and the wind blew tempestuously.
The boat was full of passengers, and at one end of it were placed a drove of oxen. My terror
was infinite; I considered this storm as an ill omen, but little thought that at future periods
of my life I should have cause to regret that I had not perished!

During our journey Robinson entreated me to overlook anything harsh that might appear in the
manners of his "uncle,"--for he still denied that Mr. Harris was his father. But above all
things he conjured me to conceal my real age, and to say that I was some years older than he
knew me to be. To this proposal I readily consented, and I felt myself firm in courage at the
moment when we came within sight of Tregunter.

Mr. Harris was then building the family mansion, and resided in a pretty little decorated cottage
which was afterward converted into domestic offices. We passed through a thick wood, the mountains
at every break meeting our eyes, covered with thin clouds, and rising in a sublime altitude
above the valley. A more romantic space of scenery never met the human eye! I felt my mind
inspired with a pensive melancholy, and was only awakened from my reverie by the postboy stopping
at the mansion of Tregunter.

Mr. Harris came out to receive me. I wore a dark claret-coloured riding-habit, with a white
beaver hat and feathers. He embraced me with excessive cordiality, while Miss Robinson, my
husband's sister, with cold formality led me into the house. I never shall forget her looks
or her manner. Had her brother presented the most abject being to her, she could not have taken
my hand with a more frigid demeanour. Miss Robinson, though not more than twenty years of age,
was Gothic in her appearance and stiff in her deportment; she was of low stature and clumsy,
with a countenance peculiarly formed for the expression of sarcastic vulgarity--a short snub
nose, turned up at the point, a head thrown back with an air of hauteur; a gaudy-coloured chintz
gown, a thrice-bordered cap, with a profusion of ribbons, and a countenance somewhat more ruddy
than was consistent with even pure health, presented the personage whom I was to know as my
future companion and kinswoman!

Mr. Harris looked like a venerable Hawthorn; a brown fustian coat, a scarlet waistcoat edged
with narrow gold, a pair of woollen spatter-dashes, and a gold-laced hat, formed the dress
he generally wore. He always rode a small Welsh pony, and was seldom in the house, except at
eating-time, from sunrise to the close of the evening.

There was yet another personage in the domestic establishment, who was by Mr. Harris regarded
as of no small importance: this was a venerable housekeeper of the name of Mary Edwards. Mrs.
Molly was the female Mentor of the family; she dined at the table with Mr. Harris; she was
the governess of the domestic department; and a more overbearing, vindictive spirit never inhabited
the heart of mortal than that which pervaded the soul of the ill-natured Mrs. Molly.

It may easily be conjectured that my time passed heavily in this uninteresting circle. I was
condemned either to drink ale with "the squire," for Mr. Harris was only spoken of by that
title, or to visit the Methodistical seminary which Lady Huntingdon had established at Trevecca,
another mansion house on the estate of Mr. Harris. Miss Robinson was of this sect; and though
Mr. Harris was not a disciple of the Huntingdonian school, he was a constant church visitor
on every Sunday. His zeal was indefatigable; and he would frequently fine the rustics (for
he was a justice of the peace, and had been sheriff of the county) when he heard them swear,
though every third sentence he uttered was attended by an oath that made his hearers shudder.

I soon became a considerable favourite of "the squire," but I did not find any yielding qualities
about the hearts of Miss Betsy or Mrs. Molly. They observed me with jealous eyes; they considered
me as an interloper, whose manners attracted Mr. Harris's esteem, and who was likely to diminish
their divided influence in the family. I found them daily growing weary of my society; I perceived
their sidelong glances when I was complimented by the visiting neighbours on my good looks
or taste in the choice of my dresses. Miss Robinson rode on horseback in a camlet safeguard,
with a high-crowned bonnet; I wore a fashionable habit, and looked like something human. Envy
at length assumed the form of insolence, and I was taunted perpetually on the folly of appearing
like a woman of fortune; that a lawyer's wife had no right to dress like a duchess; and that,
though I might be very accomplished, a good housewife had no occasion for harpsichords and
books,--they belonged to women who brought wherewithal to support them. Such was the language
of vulgar, illiberal natures! Yet for three weeks I endured it patiently.

Knowing that Mr. Harris was disposed to think favourably of me,--that he even declared he should
"have liked me for his wife, had I not married Tom," though he was then between sixty and seventy
years of age, I thought it most prudent to depart, lest, through the machinations of Miss Betsy
and Mrs. Molly, I should lose the share I had gained in his affections. My mother was still
at Bristol; and the morning of our departure being arrived, to my infinite astonishment Mr.
Harris proposed accompanying us thither. It was in vain that Molly and Miss interfered to prevent
him; he swore that he would see me safe across the channel, whatever might be the consequence
of his journey. We set out together.

On our arrival at Bristol, Mr. Harris was presented to my mother, and by her introduced to
many respectable friends. He was consequently invited to several dinner-parties. I was his
idol; he would dance with me; when he had taken the evening draught, he would sing with me,
and I was to him the most delightful of beings. Many embellishments for Tregunter House were
submitted to my taste and choice; and I remember, on his giving orders for the marble chimney-pieces,
he said, "Choose them as you like them, Mrs. Robinson, for they are all for you and Tom when
I am no more." Indeed, he frequently assured me, while I was at Tregunter, that the estate
should be my husband's.

After passing many days at Bristol Mr. Harris returned to Wales, and our party set out for
London. Mr. Robinson's mind was easy, and his hopes were confirmed by the kindness of his uncle;
he now considered himself as the most happy of mortals. We removed from Great Queen Street
to a house, No. 13, in Hatton Garden, which had been recently built. Mr. Robinson hired it,
and furnished it with peculiar elegance. I frequently inquired into the extent of his finances,
and he as often assured me that they were in every respect competent to his expenses. In addition
to our domestic establishment, Mr. Robinson purchased a handsome phaeton, with saddle-horses
for his own use; and I now made my debut, though scarcely emerged beyond the boundaries of
childhood, in the broad hemisphere of fashionable folly.

A new face, a young person dressed with peculiar but simple elegance, was sure to attract attention
at places of public entertainment. The first time I went to Ranelagh, my habit was so singularly
plain and Quaker-like that all eyes were fixed upon me. I wore a gown of light brown lustring
with close round cuffs (it was then the fashion to wear long ruffles); my hair was without
powder, and my head adorned with a plain round cap and a white chip hat, without any ornaments
whatever.

The second place of polite entertainment to which Mr. Robinson accompanied me was the Pantheon
concert, then the most fashionable assemblage of the gay and the distinguished. At this place
it was customary to appear much dressed; large hoops and high feathers were universally worn.
My habit was composed of pale pink satin, trimmed with broad sable; my dear mother presented
me a suit of rich and valuable point lace, which she had received from my father as a birthday
gift, and I was at least some hours employed in decorating my person for this new sphere of
fascination; I say some hours, because my shape at that period required some arrangement, owing
to the visible increase of my domestic solicitudes.

As soon as I entered the Pantheon rotunda, I never shall forget the impression which my mind
received; the splendour of the scene, the dome illuminated with variegated lamps, the music,
and the beauty of the women, seemed to present a circle of enchantment. I recollect that the
most lovely of fair forms met my eyes in that of Lady Almeria Carpenter. The countenance which
most pleased me was that of the late Mrs. Baddeley.[11] The first Countess of Tyrconnel also
appeared with considerable eclat. But the buzz of the room, the unceasing murmur of admiration,
attended the Marchioness Townshend. I took my seat on a sofa nearly opposite to that on which
she was sitting, and I observed two persons, evidently men of fashion, speaking to her, till
one of them, looking toward me, with an audible voice inquired of the other, "Who is she?"

Their fixed stare disconcerted me; I rose, and, leaning on my husband's arm, again mingled
in the brilliant circle. The inquirers followed us; stopping several friends, as we walked
around the circle, and repeatedly demanding of them, "Who is that young lady in the pink dress
trimmed with sable?" My manner and confusion plainly evinced that I was not accustomed to the
gaze of impertinent high breeding. I felt uneasy, and proposed returning home, when I perceived
that our two followers were joined by a third, who, on looking at me, said, "I think I know
her." It was the late Earl of Northington.[12]

We had now to pass the group in order to quit the rotunda. Lord Northington, leaving his companions,
approached me. "Miss Darby, or I am mistaken," said he, with a bow of marked civility. I replied
that my name was now changed to that of Robinson, and, to prevent any awkward embarrassment,
presented my husband, on whose arm I was still leaning. Lord Northington continued to walk
around the Pantheon with us, made many inquiries after my father, complimented me on the improvement
of my person, and "hoped that he should be permitted to pay his respects to Mr. and Mrs. Robinson."

We now entered the tea-room; there was not a seat vacant; I was considerably fatigued, and
somewhat faint with the heat of the rotunda. I quitted the tea-room, and seated myself on a
sofa near the door. In a few minutes Lord Northington brought me a cup of tea, for Mr. Robinson
did not like to leave me alone, and at the same time presented his two inquisitive friends,
Lord Lyttelton and Captain Ayscough.[13]

I now proposed departing. Mr. Robinson accompanied me to the vestibule, and while he was seeking
the carriage Lord Lyttelton offered his services. I had never till that evening heard his name,
but there was an easy effrontery in his address that completely disgusted, while his determined
gaze distressed and embarrassed me, and I felt inexpressible satisfaction when Mr. Robinson
returned to tell me that the carriage was ready.

On the following morning Lords Northington, Lyttelton, and Colonel Ayscough made their visits
of ceremony. Mr. Robinson was not at home, but I received them, though not without some embarrassment.
I was yet a child, and wholly unacquainted with the manners of the world; yet, young as I was,
I became the traveller of its mazy and perilous paths. At an age when girls are generally at
school, or indeed scarcely emancipated from the nursery, I was presented in society as a wife--and
very nearly as a mother.

Lord Lyttelton, who was perhaps the most accomplished libertine that any age or country has
produced, with considerable artifice inquired after Mr. Robinson, professed his earnest desire
to cultivate his acquaintance, and, on the following day, sent him a card of invitation. Lyttelton
was an adept in the artifices of fashionable intrigue. He plainly perceived that both Mr. Robinson
and myself were uninitiated in its mysteries; he knew that to undermine a wife's honour he
must become master of the husband's confidence, and Mr. Robinson was too much pleased with
the society of a man whose wit was only equalled by his profligacy, to shrink from such an
association.

Fortunately for me, Lord Lyttelton was uniformly my aversion. His manners were overbearingly
insolent, his language licentious, and his person slovenly even to a degree that was disgusting.
Mr. Robinson was in every respect the very reverse of his companion: he was unassuming, neat,
and delicate in his conversation. I had not a wish to descend from the propriety of wedded
life, and I abhorred, decidedly abhorred, the acquaintance with Lord Lyttelton.

In the course of a few days his lordship presented me the works of Miss Aitken[14] (now Mrs.
Barbauld). I read them with rapture. I thought them the most beautiful poems I had ever seen,
and considered the woman who could invent such poetry as the most to be envied of human creatures.
Lord Lyttelton had some taste for poetical compositions, and wrote verses with considerable
facility.

On the following Monday I again visited the Pantheon. My dress was then white and silver. Again
I was followed with attention. Lord Lyttelton was my cavaliere servente that evening, though,
as usual, his chief attention was paid to Mr. Robinson. During the concert he presented the
Count de Belgeioso, the imperial ambassador, one of the most accomplished foreigners I ever
remember having met with. Lord Valentia was also introduced, but as his lordship had recently
made some eclat by his attentions to the celebrated Mrs. Elliot, I rather avoided than wished
to cultivate his acquaintance.

Mr. Robinson's intercourse with the world was now rapidly augmenting. Every day was productive
of some new association. Lord Lyttelton presented many of his friends; among others, Captain
O'Byrne, and Mr. William Brereton, of Drury Lane Theatre. In the course of a short time we
also became acquainted with Sir Francis Molyneux, Mr. Alderman Sayer, and the late unfortunate
George Robert Fitzgerald.[15] Lord Northington was also a constant visitor, and frequently
rallied me on what he thought my striking likeness to his family.

Among my female friends, those for whom I entertained the strongest esteem were Lady Yea, the
wife of Sir William Yea, and the sister of Sir John Trevellyan. She was a lovely and accomplished
woman. Mrs. Parry, the wife of the Rev. Doctor Parry, and the author of "Eden Vale," a novel,
was also one of my most favourite acquaintances. Mrs. Parry was a woman of considerable talents,
a wit, and of remarkably pleasing manners.

Of those who frequented our house Lord Lyttelton was most decidedly my abhorrence; I knew that
he frequently led my husband from the paths of domestic confidence to the haunts of profligate
debasement. Toward me his lordship affected great indifference. He has even in my presence
declared that no woman under thirty years of age was worth admiring; that even the antiquity
of forty was far preferable to the insipidity of sixteen; and he generally concluded his observations
by hoping he had not made "the pretty child angry."

I soon discovered that his intercourse with Lord Lyttelton produced a very considerable change
in Mr. Robinson's domestic deportment. They were constantly together, and the neglect which
I experienced began to alarm me. I dedicated all my leisure hours to poetry; I wrote verses
of all sorts; and Mr. Robinson having mentioned that I had proposed appearing on the stage,
previous to my marriage, in the character of Cordelia, Lord Lyttelton facetiously christened
me the Poetess Corry.

It was with extreme regret, and frequently with uncontrollable indignation, that I endured
the neglect of my husband and the tauntings of the profligate Lyttelton. "The child"--for so
he generally called me--was deserted for the society of the most libertine men and the most
abandoned women. Mr. Robinson became not only careless of his wife, but of his pecuniary finances,
while I was kept in total ignorance as to the resources which supported his increasing expenses.

Among my other friends, Lady Yea frequently inquired by what means my husband supported his
household disbursements. Our table was elegantly, though not profusely, served. Mr. Robinson
seldom attended to his profession, and I was too young, as well as too inexperienced, to look
after family affairs. My younger brother George, whom, upon my marriage, Mr. Robinson and myself
adopted as our own, now finding his health impaired, my mother attended him at Bristol, so
that I had no friend to advise me who felt any real interest in my welfare. Dress, parties,
adulation, occupied all my hours. Mr. Robinson's easy temper was influenced by the counsel
of his friend Lyttelton, and he every hour sunk more deeply in the gulf of dissipation.

Among the most dangerous of my husband's associates was George Robert Fitzgerald. His manners
toward women were interesting and attentive. He perceived the neglect with which I was treated
by Mr. Robinson, and the pernicious influence which Lord Lyttelton had acquired over his mind;
he professed to feel the warmest interest in my welfare, lamented the destiny which had befallen
me in being wedded to a man incapable of estimating my value, and at last confessed himself
my most ardent and devoted admirer. I shuddered at the declaration, for, amidst all the allurements
of splendid folly, my mind, the purity of my virtue, was still uncontaminated.

I repulsed the dangerous advances of this accomplished person, but I did not the less feel
the humiliation to which a husband's indifference had exposed me. God can bear witness to the
purity of my soul, even surrounded by temptations and mortified by neglect. Whenever I ventured
to inquire into pecuniary resources, Mr. Robinson silenced me by saying that he was independent;
added to this assurance, Lord Lyttelton repeatedly promised that, through his courtly interest,
he would very shortly obtain for my husband some honourable and lucrative situation.

I confess that I reposed but little confidence in the promises of such a man, though my husband
believed them inviolable. Frequent parties were made at his lordship's house in Hill Street,
and many invitations pressed for a visit to his seat at Hagley. These I peremptorily refused,
till the noble hypocrite became convinced of my aversion, and adopted a new mode of pursuing
his machinations.

One forenoon Lord Lyttelton called in Hatton Garden, as was almost his daily custom, and, on
finding teat Mr. Robinson was not at home, requested to speak with me on business of importance.
I found him seemingly much distressed. He informed me that he had a secret to communicate of
considerable moment both to my interest and happiness. I started.

"Nothing, I trust in Heaven, has befallen my husband!" said I, with a voice scarcely articulate.

Lord Lyttelton hesitated.

"How little does that husband deserve the solicitude of such a wife!" said he; "but," continued
his lordship, "I fear that I have in some degree aided in alienating his conjugal affections.
I could not bear to see such youth, such merit, so sacrificed--"

"Speak briefly, my lord," said I.

"Then," replied Lord Lyttelton, "I must inform you that your husband is the most false and
undeserving of that name! He has formed connection with a woman of abandoned character; he
lavishes on her those means of subsistence which you will shortly stand in need of."

"I do not believe it," said I, indignantly.

"Then you shall be convinced," answered his lordship; "but remember, if you betray me, your
true and zealous friend, I must fight your husband; for he never will forgive my having discovered
his infidelity."

"It cannot be true," said I. "You have been misinformed."

"Then it has been by the woman who usurps your place in the affections of your husband," replied
Lord Lyttelton. "From her I received the information. Her name is Harriet Wilmot; she resides
in Soho. Your husband daily visits her."

I thought I should have fainted; but a torrent of tears recalled the ebbing current of my heart,
and I grew proud in fortitude, though humbled in self-love.

"Now," said Lord Lyttelton, "if you are a woman of spirit, you will be revenged!" I shrunk
with horror, and would have quitted the room. "Hear me," said he. "You cannot be a stranger
to my motives for thus cultivating the friendship of your husband. My fortune is at your disposal.
Robinson is a ruined man; his debts are considerable, and nothing but destruction can await
you. Leave him! Command my powers to serve you."

I would hear no more,--broke from him, and rushed out of the apartments. My sensations, my
sufferings were indescribable.

I immediately took a hackney-coach, and proceeded to Prince's Street, Soho,--Lord Lyttelton
having given me the address of my rival. Language cannot describe what I suffered till I arrived
at the lodgings of Miss Wilmot. The coachman knocked, a dirty servant girl opened the door.
Her mistress was not at home. I quitted the coach and ascended to the drawing-room, where the
servant left me, after informing me that Miss W. would return in a very short time. I was now
left alone.

I opened the chamber door which led from the drawing-room. A new white lustring sacque and
petticoat lay on the bed. While I was examining the room, a loud knocking at the street door
alarmed me. I reentered the front apartment, and waited with a palpitating bosom till the being
whose triumph had awakened both my pride and my resentment appeared before me.

She was a handsome woman, though evidently some years older than myself. She wore a dress of
printed Irish muslin, with a black gauze cloak and a chip hat, trimmed with pale lilac ribbons;
she was tall, and had a very pleasing countenance. Her manner was timid and confused; her lips
as pale as ashes. I commiserated her distress, desired her not to be alarmed, and we took our
seats, with increased composure.

"I came to inquire whether or not you are acquainted with a Mr. Robinson," said I.

"I am," replied Miss Wilmot. "He visits me frequently." She drew off her glove as she spoke,
and passing her hand over her eyes, I observed on her finger a ring, which I knew to have been
my husband's.

"I have nothing more to say," added I, "but to request that you will favour me with Mr. Robinson's
address; I have something which I wish to convey to him."

She smiled, and cast her eyes over my figure. My dress was a morning deshabille of India muslin,
with a bonnet of straw, and a white lawn cloak bordered with lace.

"You are Mr. Robinson's wife," said she, with a trembling voice. "I am sure you are; and probably
this ring was yours; pray receive it--"

I declined taking the ring. She continued, "Had I known that Mr. Robinson was the husband of
such a woman--"

I rose to leave her. She added, "I never will see him more,--unworthy man,--I never will again
receive him."

I could make no reply, but rose and departed.

On my return to Hatton Garden, I found my husband waiting dinner. I concealed my chagrin. We
had made a party that evening to Drury Lane Theatre, and from thence to a select concert at
the Count de Belgeioso's, in Portman Square. Lord Lyttelton was to join us at both places.
We went to the play; but my agitation had produced such a violent headache that I was obliged
to send an apology for not keeping our engagement at the imperial ambassador's.

On the following morning I spoke to Mr. Robinson respecting Miss Wilmot. He did not deny that
he knew such a person, that he had visited her; but he threw all the blame of his indiscretion
on Lord Lyttelton. He requested to know who had informed me of his conduct. I refused to tell;
and he had too high an opinion of his false associate to suspect him of such treachery.

At one of Mrs. Parry's card parties I met Mrs. Abington.[16] I thought her the most lively
and bewitching woman I had ever seen; her manners were fascinating, and the peculiar tastefulness
of her dress excited universal admiration. My imagination again wandered to the stage, and
I thought the heroine of the scenic art was of all human creatures the most to be envied.

About this period I observed that Mr. Robinson had frequent visitors of the Jewish tribe; that
he was often closeted with them, and that some secret negotiation was going forward to which
I was a total stranger. Among others, Mr. King was a constant visitor; indeed, he had often
been with my husband on private business ever since the period of our marriage. I questioned
Mr. Robinson upon the subject of these strange and repeated interviews. He assured me that
the persons I had seen came merely upon law business, and that in his profession it was necessary
to be civil to all ranks of people. Whenever I urged a farther explanation, he assumed a tone
of displeasure, and requested me not to meddle with his professional occupations. I desisted;
and the parlour of our house was almost as much frequented by Jews as though it had been their
synagogue.

Mr. Robinson's mornings were devoted to his bearded friends, his evenings to his fashionable
associates; but my hours were all dedicated to sorrow, for I now heard that my husband, even
at the period of his marriage, had an attachment which he had not broken, and that his infidelities
were as public as the ruin of his finances was inevitable. I remonstrated--I was almost frantic.
My distress was useless, my wishes to retrench our expenses ineffectual. Mr. Robinson had,
previous to our union, deeply involved himself in a bond debt of considerable magnitude, and
he had from time to time borrowed money on annuity,--one sum to discharge the other,--till
every plan of liquidation appeared impracticable. During all this time my mother was at Bristol.

Lord Lyttelton, finding every plan of seduction fail, now rested his only hope of subduing
my honour in the certainty of my husband's ruin. He therefore took every step, embraced every
opportunity of involving him more deeply in calamity. Parties were made to Richmond and Salt
Hill, to Ascot Heath and Epsom races, in all of which Mr. Robinson bore his share of expense,
with the addition of post-horses. Whenever he seemed to shrink from his augmenting indiscretion,
Lord Lyttelton assured him that, through his interest, an appointment of honourable and pecuniary
importance should be obtained, though I embraced every opportunity to assure his lordship that
no consideration upon earth should ever make me the victim of his artifice.

Mr. Fitzgerald still paid me unremitting attention. His manners toward women were beautifully
interesting. He frequently cautioned me against the libertine Lyttelton, and as frequently
lamented the misguided confidence which Mr. Robinson reposed in him. Lord Lyttelton's shameless
conduct toward an amiable wife, from whom he was separated, and his cruel neglect of a lady
of the name of Dawson, who had long been attached to him, marked the unworthiness of his character.
He was the very last man in the world for whom I ever could have entertained the smallest partiality;
he was to me the most hateful of existing beings. Probably these pages will be read when the
hand that writes them moulders in the grave, when that God who judges all hearts will know
how innocent I was of the smallest conjugal infidelity. I make this solemn asseveration because
there have been malevolent spirits who, in the plenitude of their calumny, have slandered me
by suspecting my fidelity even at this early period of my existence. These pages are the pages
of truth, unadorned by romance and unembellished by the graces of phraseology, and I know that
I have been sufficiently the victim of events too well to become the tacit acquiescer where
I have been grossly misrepresented. Alas! of all created beings, I have been the most severely
subjugated by circumstances more than by inclination.

About this time a party was one evening made to Vauxhall. Mr. Fitzgerald was the person who
proposed it, and it consisted of six or eight persons. The night was warm and the gardens crowded.
We supped in the circle which has the statue of Handel in its centre. The hour growing late,--or
rather early in the morning,--our company dispersed, and no one remained excepting Mr. Robinson,
Mr. Fitzgerald, and myself. Suddenly a noise was heard near the orchestra. A crowd had assembled,
and two gentlemen were quarrelling furiously. Mr. R. and Fitzgerald ran out of the box. I rose
to follow them, but they were lost in the throng, and I thought it most prudent to resume my
place, which I had just quitted, as the only certain way of their finding me in safety. In
a moment Fitzgerald returned. "Robinson," said he, "is gone to seek you at the entrance-door.
He thought you had quitted the box."

"I did for a moment," said I, "but I was fearful of losing him in the crowd, and therefore
returned."

"Let me conduct you to the door; we shall certainly find him there," replied Mr. Fitzgerald.
"I know that he will be uneasy."

I took his arm and we ran hastily toward the entrance-door on the Vauxhall Road.

Mr. Robinson was not there. We proceeded to look for our carriage. It stood at some distance.
I was alarmed and bewildered. Mr. Fitzgerald hurried me along. "Don't be uneasy; we shall certainly
find him," said he, "for I left him here not five minutes ago." As he spoke, he stopped abruptly.
A servant opened a chaise door. There were four horses harnessed to it; and by the light of
the lamps on the side of the footpath, I plainly perceived a pistol in the pocket of the door
which was open. I drew back. Mr. Fitzgerald placed his arm around my waist, and endeavoured
to lift me up the step of the chaise, the servant watching at a little distance. I resisted,
and inquired what he meant by such conduct. His hand trembled excessively, while he said, in
a low voice, "Robinson can but fight me." I was terrified beyond all description. I made him
loose his hold, and ran toward the entrance-door. Mr. Fitzgerald now perceived Mr. Robinson.
"Here he comes!" exclaimed he, with easy nonchalance. "We had found the wrong carriage, Mr.
Robinson. We have been looking after you, and Mrs. Robinson is alarmed beyond expression."

"I am, indeed!" said I. Mr. Robinson now took my hand. We stepped into the coach, and Mr. Fitzgerald
followed. As we proceeded toward Hatton Garden, the sky incessantly flashed lightning. I was
terrified by the combination of events, and I was in a situation which rendered any alarm peculiarly
dangerous, for I was several months advanced in that state which afterward terminated by presenting
to me my only child, my darling Maria.[17]

I had often heard of Mr. Fitzgerald's propensity to duelling. I recollected my own delicate
situation; I valued my husband's safety. I therefore did not mention the adventure of the evening,
particularly as Mr. Fitzgerald observed, on our way to Hatton Garden, that he had "nearly made
a strange mistake, and taken possession of another person's carriage." This remark appeared
so plausible that nothing further was said upon the subject.

From that evening I was particularly cautious in avoiding Fitzgerald. He was too daring and
too fascinating a being to be allowed the smallest marks of confidence. Whenever he called,
I was denied to him, and at length, perceiving the impracticability of his plan, he desisted,
and seldom called, excepting to leave his name as a visitor of ceremony.

I do not recount these events, these plans for my enthralment, with a view to convey anything
like personal vanity, for I can with truth affirm that I never thought myself entitled to admiration
that could endanger my security or tempt the libertine to undermine my husband's honour. But
I attribute the snares that were laid for me to three causes: the first, my youth and inexperience,
my girlish appearance and simplicity of manners; secondly, the expensive style in which Mr.
Robinson lived, though he was not known as a man of independent fortune; and thirdly, the evident
neglect which I experienced from my husband, whom Lord Lyttelton's society had marked as a
man of universal gallantry.

I was now known by name at every public place in and near the metropolis. Our circle of acquaintances
enlarged daily. My friend Lady Yea was my constant companion. Mr. Robinson became desperate,
from a thorough conviction that no effort of economy or professional labour could arrange his
shattered finances, the large debt which he owed previous to his marriage with me having laid
the foundation of every succeeding embarrassment.

The moment now approached when the arcanum was to be developed, and an execution on Mr. Robinson's
effects, at the suit of an annuitant, decided the doubts and fears which had long afflicted
me. I was in a great degree prepared for this event by the evident inquietude of my husband's
mind, and his frequent interviews with persons of a mysterious description. Indeed, this crisis
seemed rather consolatory than appalling, for I hoped and trusted that the time was now arrived
when reason would take place of folly, and experience point out those thorns which strew the
pleasurable paths of dissipation.

At this period, had Mr. Harris generously assisted his son, I am fully and confidently persuaded
that he would have pursued a discreet and regular line of conduct. His first involvement was
the basis of all his misfortunes. The impossibility of liquidating that debt (the motive for
which it was contracted is to this hour unknown to me) rendered him desperate. Indeed, how
could a young man, well educated,[18] subsist in such a metropolis without some provision?
Mr. Harris was a man of fortune, and he ought to have known that necessity is the most dangerous
associate of youth; that folly may be reclaimed by kindness, but seldom fails to be darkened
into vice by the severity of unpitying natures.

From Hatton Garden we removed to a house which was lent to us by a friend at Finchley. Here
I hoped at least to remain tranquil till the perilous moment was passed which was to render
me a mother. I here devoted my time to making my infant's little wardrobe; my finest muslin
dresses I converted into frocks and robes, with my lace I fondly trimmed them. It was a sweetly
pleasing task, and I often smiled when I reflected that only three years before this period
I had dressed a waxen doll nearly as large as a new-born infant.

Mr. Robinson had much business to transact in London, and I was almost perpetually alone at
Finchley. Of our domestic establishment there was only one who did not desert us, and he was
a negro!--one of that despised, degraded race, who wear the colour on their features which
too often characterises the hearts of their fair and unfeeling oppressors. I have found, during
my journey through life, that the two male domestics who were most attached to my interest
and most faithful to my fortunes were both negroes!

My mother now returned from Bristol, and I had the consolation of her society. I divided my
time betwixt reading, writing, and making a little wardrobe for my expected darling. I little
regretted the busy scenes of life; I sighed not for public attention. I felt by this change
of situation as though a weighty load were taken from my heart, and solaced my mind in the
idea that the worst had happened which could befall us. Gracious Heaven! How should I have
shuddered, had I then contemplated the dark perspective of my destiny!

Mr. Robinson went almost daily to London, and sometimes my brother George, who was still a
boy, accompanied him upon a little pony. One day, after returning from one of their rides,
my brother informed me that he had been with Mr. Robinson to Marylebone, and that he had waited
and held Mr. Robinson's horse, while he made a morning visit. I had then no acquaintance that
resided at Marylebone. I questioned my brother as to the place, and he persisted in his original
story. "But," added he, "if you say anything about it to Mr. Robinson, I never will tell you
where we go in future." I promised not to mention what he had said, and my mind was deeply
engaged in a variety of conjectures.

A few days after, Mr. Robinson made another visit, and my brother was introduced to the lady.
From the manner and conversation of both parties, even a youth scarcely in his teens could
draw conclusions of no favourable nature. By the side of the chimney hung my watch, which I
had supposed lost in the general wreck of our property. It was enamelled with musical trophies,
and very remarkable for a steel chain of singular beauty. The moment my brother described it
my suspicions were confirmed; and Mr. Robinson did not even attempt to deny his infidelity.

Mr. Robinson, finding his creditors inexorable, and fearing that he might endanger his personal
liberty by remaining near London, informed me that I must, in a few days, accompany him to
Tregunter. I felt a severe pang in the idea of quitting my adored mother at a moment when I
should stand so much in need of a parent's attentions. My agony was extreme. I fancied that
I never should behold her more; that the harshness and humiliating taunts of my husband's kindred
would send me prematurely to the grave; that my infant would be left among strangers, and that
my mother would scarcely have fortitude sufficient to survive me. Then I anticipated the inconvenience
of so long a journey, for Tregunter House was within a few miles of Brecon. I dreaded to encounter
the scornful vulgarity and the keen glances of Miss Betsy and Mrs. Molly. I considered all
these things with horror; but the propriety of wedded life commanded the sacrifice, and I readily
consented to make it.

With tender regret, with agonising presentiments, I took leave of my mother and my brother.
Such a parting would but mock the powers of language! My delicate situation, my youth, my affection
for my best of mothers, all conspired to augment my sorrow; but a husband's repose, a husband's
liberty were at stake, and my Creator can bear witness that, had I been blessed with that fidelity
and affection which I deserved, my heart was disposed to the observance of every duty, every
claim which would have embellished domestic propriety.

We set out for Tregunter. On our arrival there, I instantly perceived that our misfortunes
had outstripped our speed. Miss Robinson scarcely bade us welcome, and Molly was peevish, even
to insulting displeasure.

Mr. Harris was from home when we arrived. But he returned shortly after. His greeting was harsh
and unfeeling. "Well! so you have escaped from a prison, and now you are come here to do penance
for your follies? Well! and what do you want?" I could not reply. I entered the house, and
instantly hastened to my old chamber, where my tears gave relief to that heart which was almost
bursting with agony.

Still Mr. Robinson conjured me to bear his uncle's wayward temper patiently, I did, though
every day I was taunted with idle and inhuman questions, such as, "How long do you think that
I will support you? What is to become of you in a prison? What business have beggars to marry?"
With many others, equally feeling and high-minded!

The mansion of Tregunter presented but few sources of amusement for the female mind. Mr. Harris
had acquired a considerable fortune in trade, and, however the art of accumulating wealth had
been successfully practised, the finer pursuits of mental powers had been totally neglected.
Books were unknown at Tregunter, excepting a few magazines or periodical publications, which
at different periods Miss Robinson borrowed from her juvenile neighbours. There was, however,
an old spinet in one of the parlours. Music had been one of my early delights, and I sometimes
vainly endeavoured to draw a kind of jingling harmony from this time-shaken and neglected instrument.
These attempts, however, frequently subjected me to insult. "I had better think of getting
my bread; women of no fortune had no right to follow the pursuits of fine ladies. Tom had better
married a good tradesman's daughter than the child of a ruined merchant who was not capable
of earning a living." Such were the remarks of my amiable and enlightened father-in-law!

One day, I particularly remember, Mr. Harris had invited a large party to dinner, John and
Charles Morgan, Esqrs., members of Parliament, with an old clergyman of the name of Jones,
and several others were present. I was then within a fortnight of my perilous moment. One of
the company expressed his satisfaction that I was come to give Tregunter a little stranger;
and turning to Mr. Harris, added:

"You have just finished your house in time for a nursery."

"No, no," replied Mr. Harris, laughing, "they came here because prison doors were open to receive
them."

I felt my face redden to scarlet; every person present seemed to sympathise in my chagrin,
and I was near sinking under the table with confusion. Mr. Robinson's indignation was evident;
but it was restrained by duty as well as by necessity.

The manor-house was not yet finished; and a few days after our arrival Mr. Harris informed
me that he had no accommodation for my approaching confinement. Where was I to go? was the
next question. After many family consultations, it was decided that I should remove to Trevecca
House, about a mile and a half distant, and there give to this miserable world my first-born
darling.

I removed to Trevecca; it was a spacious mansion at the foot of a stupendous mountain, which,
from its form, was called the Sugar-loaf. A part of the building was converted into a flannel
manufactory, and the inhabitants were of the Huntingdonian school. Here I enjoyed the sweet
repose of solitude; here I wandered about woods entangled by the wild luxuriance of nature,
or roved upon the mountain's side, while the blue vapours floated around its summit. Oh, God
of Nature! Sovereign of the universe of wonders! in those interesting moments how fervently
did I adore thee!

How often have I sat at my little parlour window and watched the pale moonbeams darting amidst
the sombre and venerable yew-trees that shed their solemn shade over the little garden! How
often have I strolled down the woody paths, spangled with the dew of morning, and shaken off
the briery branches that hung about me! How tranquil did I feel, escaped from kindred tyranny,
and how little did I regret the busy scenes of fashionable folly! Unquestionably the Creator
formed me with a strong propensity to adore the sublime and beautiful of his works! But it
has never been my lot to meet with an associating mind, a congenial spirit, who could (as it
were abstracted from the world) find a universe in the sacred intercourse of soul, the sublime
union of sensibility.

At Trevecca House I was tranquil, if not perfectly happy. I there avoided the low taunts of
uncultivated natures, the insolent vulgarity of pride, and the overbearing triumphs of a family,
whose loftiest branch was as inferior to my stock as the small weed is beneath the tallest
tree that overshades it. I had formed a union with a family who had neither sentiment nor sensibility;
I was doomed to bear the society of ignorance and pride; I was treated as though I had been
the most abject of beings, even at a time when my conscious spirit soared as far above their
powers to wound it as the mountain towered over the white battlements of my then solitary habitation.

After my removal to Trevecca, I seldom saw Miss Robinson or Mrs. Molly; Mr. Harris never called
on me, though I was not more than a mile and a half from Tregunter. At length the expected,
though to me most perilous, moment arrived, which awoke a new and tender interest in my bosom,
which presented to my fondly beating heart my child,--my Maria. I cannot describe the sensations
of my soul at the moment when I pressed the little darling to my bosom, my maternal bosom;
when I kissed its hands, its cheeks, its forehead, as it nestled closely to my heart, and seemed
to claim that affection which has never failed to warm it. She was the most beautiful of infants!
I thought myself the happiest of mothers; her first smile appeared like something celestial,--something
ordained to irradiate my dark and dreary prospect of existence.

Two days after my child was presented to this world of sorrow, my nurse, Mrs. Jones, a most
excellent woman, was earnestly desired by the people of the manufactory to bring the infant
among them; they wished to see the "young squire's baby, the little heiress to Tregunter."
It was in vain that I dreaded the consequences of the visit, for it was in the month of October;
but Mrs. Jones assured me that infants in that part of the world were very frequently carried
into the open air on the day of their birth; she also hinted that my refusal would hurt the
feelings of the honest people, and wear the semblance of pride more than of maternal tenderness.
This idea decided my acquiescence; and my little darling, enveloped in the manufacture of her
own romantic birthplace, made her first visit to her kind but unsophisticated countrywomen.

No sooner did Mrs. Jones enter the circle than she was surrounded by the gazing throng. The
infant was dressed with peculiar neatness, and nothing mortal could appear more lovely. A thousand
and a thousand blessings were heaped upon the "heiress of Tregunter," for so they fancifully
called her; a thousand times did they declare that the baby was the very image of her father.
Mrs. Jones returned to me; every word she uttered soothed my heart; a sweet and grateful glow,
for the first time, bespoke the indescribable gratification which a fond parent feels in hearing
the praises of a beloved offspring. Yet this little absence appeared an age; a variety of fears
presented dangers in a variety of shapes, and the object of all my care, of all my affection,
was now pressed closer to my heart than ever.

Amidst these sweet and never-to-be-forgotten sensations, Mr. Harris entered my chamber. He
abruptly inquired how I found myself, and, seating himself by the side of my bed, began to
converse family affairs. I was too feeble to say much; and he had not the delicacy to consider
that Mrs. Jones, my nurse, and almost a stranger to me, was a witness to our conversation.

"Well!" said Mr. Harris, "and what do you mean to do with your child?"

I made no answer.

"I will tell you," added he. "Tie it to your back and work for it."

I shivered with horror.

"Prison doors are open," continued Mr. Harris. "Tom will die in a gaol; and what is to become
of you?"

I remained silent.

Miss Robinson now made her visit. She looked at me without uttering a syllable; but while she
contemplated my infant's features, her innocent sleeping face, her little dimpled hands folded
on her breast, she murmured, "Poor little wretch! Poor thing! It would be a mercy if it pleased
God to take it!" My agony of mind was scarcely supportable.

About three weeks after this period, letters arrived, informing Mr. Robinson that his creditors
were still inexorable, and that the place of his concealment was known. He was cautioned not
to run the hazard of an arrest; indeed, he knew that such an event would complete his ruin
with Mr. Harris, from whom he should not receive any assistance. He communicated this intelligence
to me, and at the same time informed me that he must absolutely depart from Trevecca immediately.
I was still extremely feeble, for my mental sufferings had impaired my corporeal strength almost
as much as the perils I had recently encountered. But the idea of remaining at Trevecca without
my husband was more terrible than the prospect of annihilation, and I replied, without a hesitating
thought, "I am ready to go with you."

My good nurse, who was a very amiable woman, and under forty years of age, conjured me to delay
my journey. She informed me that it would be dangerous to undertake it in my then weak state.
My husband's liberty was in danger, and my life appeared of little importance; for even at
that early period of my days I was already weary of existence.

On the succeeding morning we departed. Mrs. Jones insisted on accompanying me on the first
day's journey. Mr. Robinson, my nurse, and myself occupied a post-chaise; my Maria was placed
on a pillow on Mrs. Jones's lap. The paleness of death overspread my countenance, and the poor
honest people of the mountains and the villages saw us depart with sorrow, though not without
their blessings. Neither Mr. Harris nor the enlightened females of Tregunter expressed the
smallest regret or solicitude on the occasion. We reached Abergavenny that evening. My little
remaining strength was exhausted, and I could proceed no farther. However singular these persecutions
may appear, Mr. Robinson knows that they are not in the smallest degree exaggerated.

At Abergavenny I parted from Mrs. Jones, and, having no domestic with me, was left to take
the entire charge of Maria. Reared in the tender lap of affluence, I had learnt but little
of domestic occupation; the adorning part of education had been lavished, but the useful had
never been bestowed upon a girl who was considered as born to independence. With these disadvantages,
I felt very awkwardly situated, under the arduous task I had to perform; but necessity soon
prevailed, with the soft voice of maternal affection, and I obeyed her dictates as the dictates
of nature.

Mrs. Jones, whose excellent heart sympathised in all I suffered, would not have parted from
me in so delicate a moment, but she was the widow of a tradesman at Brecon, and having quitted
her home, where she had left two daughters,--very pretty young women,--to attend me, she was
under the necessity of returning to them. With repeated good wishes, and some tears of regret
flowing from her feeling and gentle heart, we parted.

On the following day we proceeded to Monmouth. Some relations of my mother residing there,
particularly my grandmother, I wished to remain there till my strength was somewhat restored.
We were received with genuine affection; we were caressed with unfeigned hospitality. The good
and venerable object of my visit was delighted to embrace her great-grandchild, and the family
fireside was frequently a scene of calm and pleasing conversation. How different were these
moments from those which I had passed with the low-minded inhabitants of Tregunter!

My grandmother, though then near seventy years of age, was still a pleasing woman; she had
in her youth been delicately beautiful; and the neat simplicity of her dress, which was always
either brown or black silk, the piety of her mind, and the mildness of her nature, combined
to render her a most endearing object.

As soon as my strength recovered, I was invited to partake of many pleasant entertainments.
But the most favourite amusement I selected was that wandering by the river Wye, or of exploring
the antique remains of Monmouth Castle, a part of which reached the garden of my grandmother's
habitation. I also constantly accompanied my amiable and venerable relative to church; and
I have often observed, with a mixture of delight, and almost of envy, the tranquil resignation
which religion diffused over her mind, even at the very close of human existence. This excellent
woman expired of a gradual decay in the year 1780.

We had resided at Monmouth about a month, when I was invited to a ball. My spirits and strength
had been renovated by the change of scenery, and I was persuaded to dance. I was at that time
particularly fond of the amusement, and my partial friends flattered me by saying that I measured
the mazy figure like a sylph. I was at that period a nurse; and, during the evening, Maria
was brought to an antechamber to receive the only support she had ever yet taken. Unconscious
of the danger attendant on such an event, I gave her her accustomed nourishment immediately
after dancing. It was agitated by the violence of exercise and the heat of the ballroom, and,
on my return home, I found my infant in strong convulsions.

My distraction, my despair, was terrible; my state of mind rendered it impossible for me to
afford any internal nourishment to the child, even when her little mouth was parched, or the
fit in the smallest degree abated. I was little less than frantic; all the night I sat with
her on my arms; an eminent medical man attended. The convulsions continued, and my situation
was terrible; those who witnessed it cautiously avoided informing me that the peril of my infant
proceeded from my dancing; had I known it at that period, I really believe I should have lost
my senses.

In this desperate state, with only short intervals of rest, my darling continued till the morning.
All my friends came to make inquiries, and, among others, a clergyman who visited at my grandmother's.
He saw the child, as it was thought, expiring; he saw me still sitting where I had taken my
place of despair on the preceding night, fixed in the stupor of unutterable affliction. He
conjured me to let the child be removed. I was in a raging fever; the effects of not having
nourished my child during twelve hours began to endanger my own existence, and I looked forward
to my dissolution as the happiest event that could befall me.

Still Maria lay upon my lap, and still I resisted every attempt that was made to remove her.
Just at this period the clergyman recollected that he had seen one of his children relieved
from convulsions by a simple experiment, and he requested my permission to try its effects.
The child was given over by my medical attendant, and I replied, "However desperate the remedy,
I conjure you to administer it."

He now mixed a tablespoonful of spirit of aniseed with a small quantity of spermaceti, and
gave it to my infant. In a few minutes the convulsive spasms abated, and in less than an hour
she sunk into a sweet and tranquil slumber. What I felt may be pictured to a fond mother's
fancy, but my pen would fail in attempting to describe it.

Some circumstances now occurred which gave Mr. Robinson reason to believe that he was not safe
at Monmouth, and we prepared for a removal to some other quarter. The day was fixed for commencing
our journey, when an execution arrived for a considerable sum, and Mr. Robinson was no longer
at liberty to travel. My alarm was infinite; the sum was too large for the possibility of liquidation,
and, knowing Mr. Robinson's desperate fortune, I thought it unjust as well as ungenerous to
attempt the borrowing of it. Fortunately the sheriff for the county was a friend of the family.
He was a gentlemanly and amiable man, and offered--to avoid any unpleasant dilemma--to accompany
us to London. We set out the same evening, and never slept till we arrived in the metropolis.

I immediately hastened to my mother, who resided in Buckingham Street, York Buildings, now
the Adelphi. Her joy was boundless. She kissed me a thousand times, she kissed my beautiful
infant; while Mr. Robinson employed the day in accommodating the business which had brought
him to London. He had been arrested by a friend, with a hope that, so near a father's habitation,
such a sum would have been paid; at least, such is the reason assigned for such unfriendly
conduct![19]

The matter was, however, arranged on an explanation taking place, and Mr. Robinson engaged
a lodging near Berners Street, whither we repaired on the same evening. My little collection
of poems, which I had arranged for publication, and which had been ready ever since my marriage,
I now determined to print immediately. They were indeed trifles, very trifles; I have since
perused them with a blush of self-reproof, and wondered how I could venture on presenting them
to the public. I trust that there is not a copy remaining, excepting that which my dear, partial
mother fondly preserved, and which is now in my possession.

I had been in town a few days, when some female friends persuaded me to accompany a party which
they had formed to Ranelagh. Mr. Robinson declined going, but after much entreaty I consented.
I had now been married near two years; my person was considerably improved; I was grown taller
than when I became Mr. Robinson's wife, and I had now more the manners of a woman of the world
than those of girlish simplicity, which had hitherto characterised me, though I had been some
months absent from London, and a part of them rusticated among mountains. The dress which I
wore was plain and simple; it was composed of pale lilac lustring. My head had a wreath of
white flowers; I was complimented on my looks by the whole party, and with little relish for
public amusements, and a heart throbbing with domestic solicitude, I accompanied the party
to Ranelagh.

The first person I saw, on entering the rotunda, was George Robert Fitzgerald. He started as
if he had received a shock of electricity. I turned my head away, and would have avoided him;
but he instantly quitted two friends with whom he was walking, and presented himself to me.
He expressed great pleasure at seeing me once more in "the world;" was surprised at finding
me for the first time in public without my husband, and requested permission to pay his respects
to me at my house. I replied that I was "on a visit to some friends." He bowed, and rejoined
his companions.

During the evening, however, he never ceased to follow me. We quitted the rotunda early; and,
as we were waiting for the carriage, I again observed Fitzgerald in the antechamber. We passed
the vestibule, and at the door his own carriage was waiting.

On the following noon I was correcting a proof-sheet of my volume, when the servant abruptly
announced Mr. Fitzgerald!

I was somewhat disconcerted by this unexpected visit, and received Mr. Fitzgerald with a cold
and embarrassed mien, which evidently mortified him; I also felt a little worldly vanity in
the moment of surprise, for my morning dress was more calculated to display maternal assiduity
than elegant and tasteful deshabille. In a small basket near my chair slept my little Maria;
my table was spread with papers, and everything around me presented the mixed confusion of
a study and a nursery.

From the period of Mrs. Jones's quitting me at Abergavenny, I had made it an invariable rule
always to dress and undress my infant. I never suffered it to be placed in a cradle, or to
be fed out of my presence. A basket of an oblong shape with four handles (with a pillow and
a small bolster) was her bed by day; at night she slept with me. I had too often heard of the
neglect which servants show to young children, and I resolved never to expose an infant of
mine either to their ignorance or inattention. It was amidst the duties of a parent, that the
gay, the high-fashioned Fitzgerald now found me; and whenever either business, or, very rarely,
public amusements drew me from the occupation, my mother never failed to be my substitute.

Mr. Fitzgerald said a thousand civil things; but that which charmed me, was the admiration
of my child. He declared that he had never seen so young a mother, or so beautiful an infant.
For the first remark I sighed, but the last delighted my bosom; she indeed was one of the prettiest
little mortals that ever the sun shone upon.

The nest subject was praise of my poetry. I smile while I recollect how far the effrontery
of flattery has power to belie the judgment. Mr. Fitzgerald took up the proof-sheet and read
one of the pastorals. I inquired by what means he had discovered my place of residence; he
informed me that his carriage had followed me home on the preceding night. He now took his leave.

On the following evening he made us another visit; I say us, because Mr. Robinson was at home.
Mr. Fitzgerald drank tea with us, and proposed making a party on the next day to dine at Richmond.
To this I gave a decided negative; alleging that my duties toward my child prevented the possibility
of passing a day absent from her.

On the Wednesday following, Mr. Robinson accompanied me again to Ranelagh. There we met Lord
Northington, Lord Lyttelton, Captain O'Bryan, Captain Ayscough, Mr. Andrews, and several others,
who all, in the course of the evening, evinced their attentions. But as Mr. Robinson's deranged
state of affairs did not admit of our receiving parties at home, I made my excuses by saying
that we were at a friend's house and not yet established in a town residence. Lord Lyttelton
was particularly importunate; but he received the same answer which I had given to every other
inquirer.

A short time after, Mr. Robinson was arrested. Now came my hour of trial. He was conveyed to
the house of a sheriff's officer, and in a few days detainers were lodged against him to the
amount of twelve hundred pounds, chiefly the arrears of annuities and other demands from Jew
creditors; for I can proudly and with truth declare that he did not at that time, or at any
period since, owe fifty pounds for me, or to any tradesmen on my account whatever.

Mr. Robinson knew that it would be useless to ask Mr. Harris's assistance; indeed, his mind
was too much depressed to make an exertion for the arrangement of his affairs. He was, therefore,
after waiting three weeks in the custody of a sheriff's officer (during which time I had never
left him for a single hour, day or night), obliged to submit to the necessity of becoming a
captive.

For myself I cared but little; all my anxiety was for Mr. Robinson's repose and the health
of my child. The apartment which we obtained was in the upper part of the building, overlooking
a racket-ground. Mr. Robinson was expert in all exercises of strength or activity, and he found
that amusement daily which I could not partake of. I had other occupations of a more interesting
nature,--the care of a beloved and still helpless daughter.[20]

During nine months and three weeks, never once did I pass the threshold of our dreary habitation;
though every allurement was offered, every effort was made, to draw me from my scene of domestic
attachment. Numberless messages and letters from Lords Northington and Lyttelton, from Mr.
Fitzgerald and many others, were conveyed to me. But they all, excepting Lord Northington's,
were dictated in the language of gallantry, were replete with professions of love, and wishes
to release me from my unpleasant and humiliating situation,--and were therefore treated with
contempt, scorn, and indignation. For God can bear witness that, at that period, my mind had
never entertained a thought of violating those vows which I had made to my husband at the altar.

What I suffered during this tedious captivity! My little volume of poems sold but indifferently;
my health was considerably impaired; and the trifling income which Mr. Robinson received from
his father was scarcely sufficient to support him. I will not enter into a tedious detail of
vulgar sorrows, of vulgar scenes; I seldom quitted my apartment, and never till the evening,
when for air and exercise I walked on the racket-ground with my husband.

It was during one of these night walks that my little daughter first blessed my ears with the
articulation of words. The circumstance made a forcible and indelible impression on my mind.
It was a clear moonlight evening; the infant was in the arms of her nursery-maid; she was dancing
her up and down, and was playing with her; her eyes were fixed on the moon, to which she pointed
with her small forefinger. On a sudden a cloud passed over it, and the child, with a slow falling
of her hand, articulately sighed, "All gone!" This had been a customary expression with her
maid, whenever the infant wanted anything which it was deemed prudent to withhold or to hide
from her. These little nothings will appear insignificant to the common reader, but to the
parent whose heart is ennobled by sensibility they will become matters of important interest.
I can only add, that I walked till near midnight, watching every cloud that passed over the
moon, and as often, with a rapturous sensation, hearing my little prattler repeat her observation.

Having much leisure and many melancholy hours, I again turned my thoughts toward the muses.
I chose "Captivity" for the subject of my pen, and soon composed a quarto poem of some length;
it was superior to my former production, but it was full of defects, replete with weak or laboured
lines. I never now rend my early compositions without a suffusion on my cheek, which marks
my humble opinion of them.

At this period I was informed that the Duchess of Devonshire[21] was the admirer and patroness
of literature. With a mixture of timidity and hope I sent her Grace a neatly bound volume of
my poems, accompanied by a short letter apologising for their defects, and pleading my age
as the only excuse for their inaccuracy. My brother, who was a charming youth, was the bearer
of my first literary offering at the shrine of nobility. The duchess admitted him, and with
the most generous and amiable sensibility inquired some particulars respecting my situation,
with a request that on the following day I would make her a visit.

I knew not what to do. Her liberality claimed my compliance; yet, as I had never, during my
husband's long captivity, quitted him for half an hour, I felt a sort of reluctance that pained
the romantic firmness of my mind, while I meditated what I considered as a breach of my domestic
attachment. However, at the particular and earnest request of Mr. Robinson, I consented, and
accordingly accepted the duchess's invitation.

During my seclusion from the world, I had adapted my dress to my situation. Neatness was at
all times my pride; but now plainness was the conformity to necessity. Simple habiliments became
the abode of adversity; and the plain brown satin gown, which I wore on my first visit to the
Duchess of Devonshire, appeared to me as strange as a birthday court-suit to a newly married
citizen's daughter.

To describe the duchess's look and manner when she entered the back drawing-room of Devonshire
House would be impracticable; mildness and sensibility beamed in her eyes and irradiated her
countenance. She expressed her surprise at seeing so young a person, who had already experienced
such vicissitude of fortune; she lamented that my destiny was so little proportioned to what
she was pleased to term my desert, and with a tear of gentle sympathy requested that I would
accept a proof of her good wishes. I had not words to express my feelings, and was departing,
when the duchess requested me to call on her very often, and to bring my little daughter with me.

I made frequent visits to the amiable duchess, and was at all times received with the warmest
proofs of friendship. My little girl, to whom I was still a nurse, generally accompanied me,
and always experienced the kindest caresses from my admired patroness, my liberal and affectionate
friend. Frequently the duchess inquired most minutely into the story of my sorrows, and as
often gave me tears of the most spontaneous sympathy. But such was my destiny, that while I
cultivated the esteem of this best of women, by a conduct which was above the reach of reprobation,
my husband, even though I was the partner of his captivity, the devoted slave to his necessities,
indulged in the lowest and most degrading intrigues; frequently, during my short absence with
the duchess,--for I never quitted the prison but to obey her summons,--he was known to admit
the most abandoned of their sex, women whose low, licentious lives were such as to render them
the shame and outcasts of society. These disgraceful meetings were arranged, even while I was
in my own apartment, in a next room, and by the assistance of an Italian, who was also there
a captive. I was apprised of the proceeding, and I questioned Mr. Robinson upon the subject.
He denied the charge; but I availed myself of an opportunity that offered, and was convinced
that my husband's infidelities were both frequent and disgraceful.

Still I pursued my plan of the most rigid domestic propriety; still I preserved my faith inviolate,
my name unsullied. At times I endured the most poignant sufferings, from the pain of disappointed
hope, and the pressure of pecuniary distresses.

During my long seclusion from society, for I could not associate with those whom destiny had
placed in a similar predicament, not one of my female friends even inquired what was become
of me. Those who had been protected and received with the most cordial hospitality by me in
my more happy hours now neglected all the kind condolence of sympathetic feeling, and shunned
both me and my dreary habitation. From that hour I have never felt the affection for my own
sex which perhaps some women feel; I have never taught my heart to cherish their friendship,
or to depend on their attentions beyond the short perspective of a prosperous day. Indeed,
I have almost uniformly found my own sex my most inveterate enemies; I have experienced little
kindness from them, though my bosom has often ached with the pang inflicted by their envy,
slander, and malevolence.

The Italian whom I took occasion to mention as the cicerone of my husband's gallantries was
named Albanesi. He was the husband to a beautiful Roman woman of that name, who had some years
before attracted considerable attention in the hemisphere of gallantry, where she had shone
as a brilliant constellation. She had formerly been the mistress of a Prince de Courland, and
afterward of the Covet de Belgeioso, the imperial ambassador; but at the period in which I
first saw her she was, I believe, devoted to a life of unrestrained impropriety. She frequently
came to visit her husband, who had held a situation an the opera-house during the management
of Mr. Hobart,[22] now Earl of Buckinghamshire. I remember she was one of the handsomest women
I had ever seen, and that her dress was the most extravagantly splendid. Satins, richly embroidered,
or trimmed with point lace, were her daily habiliments; and her personal attractions were considerably
augmented by the peculiar dignity and grace with which she walked: in a few words, this woman
was a striking sample of beauty and of profligacy.

Whenever she came to visit her sposo, she never failed to obtrude herself on my seclusion.
Mr. Rabinson rather encouraged than shunned her visits, and I was obliged to receive the beautiful
Angelina (for such was her Christian name), however repugnant such an associate was to my feelings.
At every interview she took occasion to ridicule my romantic domestic attachment; laughed at
my folly in wasting my youth (for I was not then eighteen years of age) in such a disgraceful
obscurity; and pictured, in all the glow of fanciful scenery, the splendid life into which
I might enter, if I would but know my own power, and break the fetters of matrimonial restriction.
She once told me that she had mentioned to the Earl of Pembroke that there was a young married
lady in the most humiliating captivity with her husband; she said that she had described my
person, and that Lord Pembroke was ready to offer me his services.

This proposal fully proclaimed the meaning of Signora Albanesi's visits, and I resolved in
future to avoid all conversation with her. She was at that time between thirty and forty years
of age, and her day of splendour was hourly sinking to the obscurity of neglect; she was nevertheless
still reluctant to resign the dazzling meteors which fashion had scattered in her way, and,
having sacrificed every personal feeling for the gratification of her vanity, she now sought
to build a gaudy, transient fabric on the destruction of another. In addition to her persuasions,
her husband, Angelo Albanesi, constantly made the world of gallantry the subject of his conversation.
Whole evenings has he sitten in our apartment, telling long stories of intrigue, praising the
liberality of one nobleman, the romantic chivalry of another, the sacrifice which a third had
made to an adored object, and the splendid income which a fourth would bestow on any young
lady of education and mental endowments who would accept his protection, and be the partner
of his fortune. I always smiled at Albanesi's innuendoes; and I still found some amusement
in his society, when he thought fit to divest his conversation of his favourite topic. This
Italian, though neither young nor even tolerably well-looking, was uncommonly entertaining;
he could sing, likewise imitate various musical instruments, was an excellent buffoon, and
a very neat engraver; some of his plates were executed under the inspection of Sherwin, and
he was considered as a very promising artist.

Were I to describe one-half of what I suffered during fifteen months' captivity, the world
would consider it as the invention of a novel. But Mr. Robinson knows what I endured, and how
patiently, how correctly I suited my mind to the strict propriety of wedded life; he knows
that my duty as a wife was exemplary, my chastity inviolate; he knows that neither poverty
nor obscurity, neither the tauntings of the world, nor his neglect, could tempt me even to
the smallest error; he knows that I bore my afflicting humiliations with a cheerful, uncomplaining
spirit; that I toiled honourably for his comfort; and that my attentions were exclusively dedicated
to him and to my infant.

The period now arrived when Mr. Robinson, by setting aside some debts, and by giving fresh
bonds and fresh securities for others, once more obtained his liberty. I immediately conveyed
the intelligence to my lovely Duchess of Devonshire, and she wrote me a letter of kind congratulation;
she was then at Chatsworth.

The first moments of emancipation were delightful to the senses. I felt as though I had been
newly born; I longed to see all my old and intimate associates, and almost forgot that they
had so unworthily neglected me. Everything that had passed now appeared like a melancholy vision.
The gloom had dissolved, and a new perspective seemed to brighten before me.

The first place of public entertainment I went to was Vauxhall. I had frequently found occasion
to observe a mournful contrast when I had quitted the elegant apartment of Devonshire House,
to enter the dark galleries of a prison; but the sensation which I felt on hearing the music,
and beholding the gay throng, during this first visit in public after so long a seclusion,
was indescribable. During the evening we met many old acquaintances,--some who pretended ignorance
of our past embarrassments, and others who joined us with the ease of fashionable apathy; among
these was Lord Lyttelton, who insolently remarked, "that, notwithstanding all that had passed,
I was handsomer than ever." I made no reply but by a look of scornful indignation, which silenced
the bold, the unfeeling commentator, and convinced him that, though fallen in fortune; I was
still high in pride.

Mr. Robinson having once more obtained his liberty, how were we to subsist honourably and above
reproach? He applied to his father, but every aid was refused; he could not follow his profession,
because he had not completed his articles of clerkship. I resolved on turning my thoughts toward
literary labour, and projected a variety of works, by which I hoped to obtain at least a decent
independence. Alas! how little did I then know either the fatigue or the hazard of mental occupations!
How little did I foresee that the day would come when my health would be impaired, my thoughts
perpetually employed, in so destructive a pursuit! At the moment that I write this page, I
feel in every fibre of my brain the fatal conviction that it is a destroying labour.

It was at this moment of anxiety, of hope, of fear, that my thoughts once more were turned
to a dramatic life; and, walking with my husband in St. James's Park, late in the autumn, we
were accosted by Mr. Brereton, of Drury Lane Theatre. I had not seen him during the last two
years, and he seemed rejoiced in having met us. At that period we lodged at Lyne's, the confectioner,
in Old Bond Street. Mr. Brereton went home and dined with us; and after dinner the conversation
turned on my partiality to the stage, which he earnestly recommended as a scene of great promise
to what he termed my promising talents. The idea rushed like electricity through my brain.
I asked Mr. Robinson's opinion, and he now readily consented to my making the trial. He had
repeatedly written to his father, requesting even the smallest aid toward our support until
he could embark in his profession; but every letter remained unanswered, and we had no hope
but in our own mental exertions.

Some time after this period, we removed to a more quiet situation, and occupied a very neat
and comfortable suite of apartments in Newman Street. I was then some months advanced in a
state of domestic solicitude, and my health seemed in a precarious state, owing to my having
too long devoted myself to the duties of a mother in nursing my eldest daughter Maria. It was
in this lodging that, one morning, wholly unexpectedly, Mr. Brereton made us a second visit,
bringing with him a friend, whom he introduced on entering the drawing-room. This stranger
was Mr. Sheridan.[23]

I was overwhelmed with confusion. I know not why, but I felt a sense of mortification when
I observed that my appearance was carelessly deshabille, and my mind as little prepared for
what I guessed to be the motive of his visit. I, however, soon recovered my recollection, and
the theatre was consequently the topic of discourse.

At Mr. Sheridan's earnest entreaties, I recited some passages from Shakespeare. I was alarmed
and timid; but the gentleness of his manners, and the impressive encouragement he gave me,
dissipated my fears and tempted me to go on.

Mr. Sheridan had then recently purchased a share of Drury Lane Theatre, in conjunction with
Mr. Lacey and Doctor Ford; he was already celebrated as the author of "The Rivals" and "The
Duenna," and his mind was evidently portrayed in his manners, which were strikingly and bewitchingly
attractive.

The encouragement which I received in this essay, and the praises which Mr. Sheridan lavishly
bestowed, determined me to make a public trial of my talents; and several visits, which were
rapidly repeated by Mr. Sheridan, at length produced an arrangement for that period. My intention
was intimated to Mr. Garrick, who, though he had for some seasons retired from the stage, kindly
promised protection, and as kindly undertook to be my tutor.

The only objection which I felt to the idea of appearing on the stage was my then increasing
state of domestic solicitude. I was, at the period when Mr. Sheridan was first presented to
me, some months advanced in that situation which afterward, by the birth of Sophia, made me
a second time a mother. Yet such was my imprudent fondness for Maria, that I was still a nurse;
and my constitution was very considerably impaired by the effects of these combined circumstances.

An appointment was made in the greenroom of Drury Lane Theatre. Mr. Garrick, Mr. Sheridan,
Mr. Brereton, and my husband were present; I there recited the principal scenes of Juliet (Mr.
Brereton repeating those of Romeo), and Mr. Garrick, without hesitation, fixed on that character
as the trial of my debut.

It is impossible to describe the various emotions of hope and fear that possessed my mind when
the important day was announced in the playbills. I wrote to the Duchess of Devonshire at Chatsworth,
informing her of my purposed trial, and received a kind letter of approbation, sanctioning
my plan and wishing me success. Every longing of my heart seemed now to be completely gratified;
and, with zeal bordering on delight, I prepared for my approaching effort.

Mr. Garrick had been indefatigable at the rehearsals, frequently going through the whole character
of Romeo himself until he was completely exhausted with the fatigue of recitation. This was
only a short period before the death of that distinguished actor.

The theatre was crowded with fashionable spectators; the greenroom and orchestra (where Mr.
Garrick sat during the night) were thronged with critics. My dress was a pale pink satin, trimmed
with crape, richly spangled with silver; my head was ornamented with white feathers, and my
monumental suit, for the last scene, was white satin, and completely plain, excepting that
I wore a veil of the most transparent gauze, which fell quite to my feet from the back of my
head, and a string of beads around my waist, to which was suspended a cross appropriately fashioned.

When I approached the side wing, my heart throbbed convulsively; I then began to fear that
my resolution would fail, and I leaned upon the nurse's arm, almost fainting. Mr. Sheridan
and several other friends encouraged me to proceed; and at length, with trembling limbs and
fearful apprehension, I approached the audience.

The thundering applause that greeted me nearly overpowered all my faculties. I stood mute and
bending with alarm, which did not subside till I had feebly articulated the few sentences of
the first short scene, during the whole of which I had never once ventured to look at the audience.

On my return to the greenroom I was again encouraged, as far as my looks were deemed deserving
of approbation; for of my powers nothing yet could be known, my fears having as it were palsied
both my voice and action. The second scene being the masquerade, I had time to collect myself.
I never shall forget the sensation which rushed through my bosom when I first looked toward
the pit. I beheld a gradual ascent of heads. All eyes were fixed upon me, and the sensation
they conveyed was awfully impressive; but the keen, the penetrating eyes of Mr. Garrick, darting
their lustre from the centre of the orchestra, were, beyond all others, the objects most conspicuous.[24]

As I acquired courage, I found the applause augment; and the night was concluded with peals
of clamorous approbation. I was complimented on all sides; but the praise of one object, whom
most I wished to please, was flattering even to the extent of human vanity. I then experienced,
for the first time in my life, a gratification which language could not utter. I heard one
of the most fascinating men, and the most distinguished geniuses of the age, honour me with
partial approbation. A new sensation seemed to awake in my bosom; I felt that emulation which
the soul delights to encourage, where the attainment of fame will be pleasing to the esteemed
object. I had till that period known no impulse beyond that of friendship; I had been an example
of conjugal fidelity; but I had never known the perils to which the feeling heart is subjected
in a union of regard wholly uninfluenced by the affections of the soul.

The second character which I played was Amanda, in "A Trip to Scarborough."[25] The play was
altered from Vanbrugh's "Relapse;" and the audience, supposing it was a new piece, on finding
themselves deceived, expressed a considerable degree of disapprobation. I was terrified beyond
imagination when Mrs. Yates, no longer able to bear the hissing of the audience, quitted the
scene, and left me alone to encounter the critic tempest. I stood for some moments as though
I had been petrified. Mr. Sheridan, from the side wing, desired me not to quit the boards;
the late Duke of Cumberland,[26] from the stage-box, bade me take courage: "It is not you,
but the play, they hiss," said his Royal Highness. I curtseyed; and that curtsey seemed to
electrify the whole house, for a thundering appeal of encouraging applause followed. The comedy
was suffered to go on, and is to this hour a stock play at Drury Lane Theatre.

The third character I played was Statira, in "Alexander the Great." Mr. Lacey, then one of
the proprietors of Drury Lane Theatre, was the hero of the night, and the part of Roxana was
performed by Mrs. Melmoth. Again I was received with an eclat that gratified my vanity. My
dress was white and blue, made after the Persian costume; and though it was then singular on
the stage, I wore neither a hoop nor powder; my feet were bound by sandals richly ornamented,
and the whole dress was picturesque and characteristic.

Though I was always received with the most flattering approbation, the characters in which
I was most popular were Ophelia, Juliet, and Rosalind. Palmira was also one of my most approved
representations. The last character which I played was Sir Harry Revel, in Lady Craven's comedy
of "The Miniature Picture;" and the epilogue song in "The Irish Widow"[27] was my last farewell
to the labour of my profession.

Mr. Sheridan now informed me he wished that I would accustom myself to appear in comedy, because
tragedy seemed evidently, as well as my forte, to be my preference. At the same time he acquainted
me that he wished me to perform a part in "The School for Scandal." I was now so unshaped by
my increasing size that I made my excuses, informing Mr. Sheridan that probably I should be
confined to my chamber at the period when his since celebrated play would first make its appearance.
He accepted the apology, and in a short time I gave to the world my second child, Sophia. I
now resided in Southampton Street, Covent Garden.

Previous to this event I had my benefit night, on which I performed the part of Fanny, in "The
Clandestine Marriage." Mr. King, the Lord Ogleby; Miss Pope, Miss Sterling; and Mrs. Heidelberg,
Mrs. Hopkins.

Mr. Sheridan's attentions to me were unremitting. He took pleasure in promoting my consequence
at the theatre; he praised my talents, and he interested himself in my domestic comforts. I
was engaged previous to my debut, and I received what at that time was considered as a handsome
salary. My benefit was flatteringly attended. The boxes were filled with persons of the very
highest rank and fashion, and I looked forward with delight both to celebrity and to fortune.

At the end of six weeks I lost my infant. She expired in my arms in convulsions, and my distress
was indescribable. On the day of its dissolution Mr. Sheridan called on me; the little sufferer
was on my lap, and I was watching it with agonising anxiety. Five months had then elapsed since
Mr. Sheridan was first introduced to me; and though, during that period, I had seen many proofs
of his exquisite sensibility, I never had witnessed one which so strongly impressed my mind
his countenance on entering my apartment. Probably he has forgotten the feeling of the moment,
but its impression will by me be remembered for ever.

I had not power to speak. All he uttered was, "Beautiful little creature!" at the same time
looking on my infant, and sighing with a degree of sympathetic sorrow which penetrated my soul.
Had I ever heard such a sigh from a husband's bosom? Alas! I never knew the sweet, soothing
solace of wedded sympathy; I never was beloved by him whom destiny allotted to be the legal
ruler of my actions. I do not condemn Mr. Robinson; I but too well know that we cannot command
our affections. I only lament that he did not observe some decency in his infidelities; and
that while he gratified his own caprice, he forgot how much he exposed his wife to the most
degrading mortifications.

The death of Sophia so deeply affected my spirits that I was rendered totally incapable of
appearing again that season. I therefore obtained Mr. Sheridan's permission to visit Bath for
the recovery of my repose. From Bath I went to Bristol--to Bristol! Why does my pen seem suddenly
arrested while I write the word? I know not why, but an undefinable melancholy always follows
the idea of my native birthplace. I instantly behold the Gothic structure, the lonely cloisters,
the lofty aisles, of the antique minster,--for, within a few short paces of its wall, this
breast, which has never known one year of happiness, first palpitated on inhaling the air of
this bad world! Is it within its consecrated precincts that this heart shall shortly moulder?
Heaven only knows, and to its will I bow implicitly.

I transcribe this passage on the 29th of March, 1800. I feel my health decaying, my spirit
broken. I look back without regret that so many of my days are numbered; and, were it in my
power to choose, I would not wish to measure them again. But whither am I wandering? I will
resume my melancholy story.

Still restless, still perplexed with painful solicitudes, I returned to London. I had not then,
by many months, completed my nineteenth year. On my arrival I took lodgings in Leicester Square.
Mr. Sheridan came to see me on my return to town, and communicated the melancholy fate of Mr.
Thomas Linley,[28] the late brother of Mrs. Sheridan,--he was unfortunately drowned at the
Duke of Ancaster's. In a few days after, Mr. Sheridan again made me a visit, with a proposal
for an engagement to play during the summer at Mr. Colman's theatre in the Haymarket.[29] I
had refused several offers from provincial managers, and felt an almost insurmountable aversion
to the idea of strolling. Mr. Sheridan nevertheless strongly recommended me to the acceptance
of Mr. Colman's offer; and I at last agreed to it, upon condition that the characters I should
be expected to perform were selected and limited. To this Mr. Colman readily consented.

The first part which was placed in the list was Nancy Lovel, in the comedy of "The Suicide."
I received the written character, and waited the rehearsal; but my astonishment was infinite
when I saw the name of Miss Farren[30] announced in the bills. I wrote a letter to Mr. Colman,
requesting an explanation. He replied that he had promised the part to Miss Farren, who had
then performed one or two seasons at the Haymarket Theatre. I felt myself insulted. I insisted
on Mr. Colman fulfilling his engagement, or on giving me liberty to quit London: the latter
he refused. I demanded to perform the part of Nancy Lovel. Mr. Colman was too partial to Miss
Farren to hazard offending her. I refused to play till I had this first character, as by agreement,
restored to me, and the summer passed without my once performing, though my salary was paid
weekly and regularly.

During the following winter I performed, with increasing approbation, the following characters:

Ophelia, in "Hamlet."

Viola, in "Twelfth Night."

Jacintha, in "The Suspicious Husband."

Fidelia, in "The Plain Dealer."

Rosalind, in "As You Like It."

Oriana, in "The Inconstant."

Octavia, in "All for Love."

Perdita, in "The Winter's Tale."

Palmira, in "Mahomet."

Cordelia, in "King Lear."

Alinda, in "The Law of Lombardy."

The Irish Widow.

Araminta, in "The Old Bachelor."

Sir Harry Revel, in "The Miniature Picture."

Emily, in "The Runaway."

Miss Richley, in "The Discovery."

Statira, in "Alexander the Great."

Juliet, in "Romeo and Juliet."

Amanda, in "The Trip to Scarborough."

Lady Anne, in "Richard the Third."

Imogen, in "Cymbeline."

Lady Macbeth,[31] in "Macbeth," etc.

It was now that I began to know the perils attendant on a dramatic life. It was at this period
that the most alluring temptations were held out to alienate me from the paths of domestic
quiet,--domestic happiness I cannot say, for it never was my destiny to know it. But I had
still the consolation of an unsullied name. I had the highest female patronage, a circle of
the most respectable and partial friends.

During this period I was daily visited by my best of mothers. My youngest brother had, the
preceding winter, departed for Leghorn, where my eldest had been many years established as
a merchant of the first respectability.

Were I to mention the names of those who held forth the temptations of fortune at this moment
of public peril, I might create some reproaches in many families of the fashionable world.
Among others who offered most liberally to purchase my indiscretion was the late Duke of Rutland;
a settlement of six hundred pounds per annum was proposed as the means of estranging me entirely
from my husband. I refused the offer. I wished to remain, in the eyes of the public, deserving
of its patronage. I shall not enter into a minute detail of temptations which assailed my fortitude.

The flattering and zealous attentions which Mr. Sheridan evinced were strikingly contrasting
with the marked and increasing neglect of my husband. I now found that he supported two women,
in one house, in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden. The one was a figure-dancer in Drury Lane Theatre;
the other, a woman of professed libertinism. With these he passed all his hours that he could
steal from me; and I found that my salary was at times inadequate to the expenses which were
incurred by an enlarged circle of new acquaintance, which Mr. Robinson had formed since my
appearance in the dramatic scene. Added to this, the bond creditors became so clamorous, that
the whole of my benefits were appropriated to their demands; and on the second year after my
appearance at Drury Lane Theatre, Mr. Robinson once more persuaded me to make a visit at Tregunter.

I was now received with more civility, and more warmly welcomed, than I had been on any former
arrival. Though the assumed sanctity of Miss Robinson's manners condemned a dramatic life,
the labour was deemed profitable, and the supposed immorality was consequently tolerated! However
repugnant to my feelings this visit was, still I hoped that it would promote my husband's interest,
and confirm his reconciliation to his father; I therefore resolved on undertaking it. I now
felt that I could support myself honourably; and the consciousness of independence is the only
true felicity in this world of humiliations.

Mr. Harris was now established in Tregunter House, and several parties were formed, both at
home and abroad, for my amusement. I was consulted as the very oracle of fashions; I was gazed
at and examined with the most inquisitive curiosity. Mrs. Robinson, the promising young actress,
was a very different personage from Mrs. Robinson who had been overwhelmed with sorrows, and
came to ask an asylum under the roof of vulgar ostentation. I remained only a fortnight in
Wales, and then returned to London, to prepare for the opening of the theatre.

We stopped at Bath on our way to town, where Mr. Robinson met with Mr. George Brereton, with
whom, at Newmarket, he had some time before become acquainted. Mr. Brereton was a man of fortune,
and married to his beautiful cousin, the daughter of Major Brereton, then master of the ceremonies
at Bath. At a former period Mr. Robinson had owed a sum of money to Mr. George Brereton, for
which he had given a promissory note. On our arrival at Bath we received a visit from this
creditor, who assured Mr. Robinson that he was in no haste for the payment of his note, and
at the same time very earnestly pressed us to remain a few days in that fashionable city. We
were in no hurry to return to London, having still more than three weeks' holidays. We resided
at the "Three Tuns," one of the best inns, and Mr. Brereton was on all occasions particularly
attentive.

The motive of this assiduity was at length revealed to me, by a violent and fervent declaration
of love, which astonished and perplexed me. I knew that Mr. Brereton was of a most impetuous
temper; that he had fought many duels; that he was capable of any outrage; and that he had
my husband completely in his power. Every advance which he had the temerity to make was by
me rejected with indignation. I had not resolution to inform Mr. Robinson of his danger, and
I thought that the only chance of escaping it was to set out immediately for Bristol, where
I wished to pass a few days, previous to my return to the metropolis.

On the following morning, as we were quitting the inn in Temple Street, to visit Clifton, Mr.
Robinson was arrested at the suit of Mr. George Brereton, who waited himself in an upper room
in order to see the writ executed. I forget the exact sum for which Mr. Robinson had given
his promissory note, but I well remember that it was in magnitude beyond his power to pay.
Our consternation was indescribable.

In a few minutes after, I was informed that a lady wished to speak with me. Concluding that
it was some old acquaintance, and happy to feel that in this perplexing dilemma I had still
a friend to speak to, I followed the waiter into another room. Mr. Robinson was detained by
the sheriff's officer.

On entering the apartment, I beheld Mr. Brereton.

"Well, madam," said he, with a sarcastic smile, "you have involved your husband in a pretty
embarrassment! Had you not been severe toward me, not only this paltry debt would have been
cancelled, but any sum that I could command would have been at his service. He has now either
to pay me, to fight me, or to go to a prison; and all because you treat me with such unexampled
rigour."

I entreated him to reflect before he drove me to distraction.

"I have reflected," said he, "and I find that you possess the power to do with me what you
will. Promise to return to Bath--to behave more kindly--and I will this moment discharge your
husband."

I burst into tears.

"You cannot be so inhuman as to propose such terms!" said I.

"The inhumanity is on your side," answered Mr. Brereton. "But I have no time to lose; I must
return to Bath; my wife is dangerously ill; and I do not wish to have my name exposed in a
business of this nature."

"Then for Heaven's sake release my husband!" said I. Mr. Brereton smiled as he rang the bell,
and ordered the waiter to look for his carriage. I now lost all command of myself, and, with
the most severe invective, condemned the infamy of his conduct. "I will return to Bath," said
I; "but it shall be to expose your dishonourable, your barbarous machinations. I will inform
that lovely wife how treacherously you have acted. I will proclaim to the world that the common
arts of seduction are not sufficiently depraved for the mind of a libertine and a gamester."

I uttered these words in so loud a tone of voice that he changed colour, and desired me to
be discreet and patient.

"Never, while you insult me, and hold my husband in your power," said I. "You have carried
outrage almost to its fullest extent; you have awakened all the pride and all the resentment
of my soul, and I will proceed as I think proper."

He now endeavoured to soothe me. He assured me that he was actuated by a sincere regard for
me; and that, knowing how little my husband valued me, he thought it would be an act of kindness
to estrange me from him. "His neglect of you will justify any step you may take," added he;
"and it is a matter of universal astonishment that you, who upon other occasions can act with
such becoming spirit, should tamely continue to bear such infidelities from a husband." I shuddered;
for this plea had, in many instances, been urged as an excuse for libertine advances; and the
indifference with which I was treated was, in the theatre, and in all my circle of friends,
a subject of conversation.

Distressed beyond the power of utterance at this new humiliation, I paced the room with agonising
inquietude.

"How little does such a husband deserve such a wife!" continued Mr. Brereton; "how tasteless
must he be, to leave such a woman for the very lowest and most degraded of the sex! Quit him,
and fly with me. I am ready to make any sacrifice you demand. Shall I propose to Mr. Robinson
to let you go? Shall I offer him his liberty on condition that he allows you to separate yourself
from him? By his conduct he proves that he does not love you; why then labour to support him?"

I was almost frantic.

"Here, madam," continued Mr. Brereton, after pausing four or five minutes, "here is your husband's
release." So saying, he threw a written paper on the table. "Now," added he, "I rely on your
generosity."

I trembled, and was incapable of speaking. Mr. Brereton conjured me to compose my spirits,
and to conceal my distress from the people of the inn. "I will return to Bath," said he. "I
shall there expect to see you." He now quitted the room. I saw him get into his chaise and
drive from the inn door. I then hastened to my husband with the discharge; and all expenses
of the arrest being shortly after settled, we set out for Bath.

Mr. Robinson scarcely inquired what had passed; but I assured him that my persuasions had produced
so sudden a change in Mr. Brereton's conduct. I said that I hoped he would never again place
his freedom in the hands of a gamester, or his wife's repose in the power of a libertine. He
seemed insensible of the peril attending both the one and the other.

Expecting letters by the post, we waited the following day, which was Sunday, at Bath; though,
in order to avoid Mr. Brereton, we removed to the White Lion Inn. But what was my astonishment,
in the afternoon, when, standing at the window, I saw Mr. George Brereton walking on the opposite
side of the way, with his wife and her no less lovely sister! I now found that the story of
her dangerous illness was untrue, and I flattered myself that I was not seen before I retired
from the window.

We now sat down to dinner, and in a few minutes Mr. George Brereton was announced by the waiter.
He coldly bowed to me, and instantly made a thousand apologies to Mr. Robinson; declared that
he had paid the note away; that he was menaced for the money; and that he came to Bristol,
though too late, to prevent the arrest which had happened. Mr. Robinson skeptically replied
that it was now of little importance; and Mr. Brereton took his leave, saying that he should
have the honour of seeing us again in the evening. We did not wait for his company, but immediately
after dinner set out for London.

On my arrival in town I saw Mr. Sheridan, whose manner had lost nothing of its interesting
attention. He continued to visit me very frequently, and always gave me the most friendly counsel.
He knew that I was not properly protected by Mr. Robinson, but he was too generous to build
his gratification on the detraction of another. The happiest moments I then knew were passed
in the society of this distinguished being. He saw me ill-bestowed upon a man who neither loved
nor valued me; he lamented my destiny, but with such delicate propriety that it consoled while
it revealed to me the unhappiness of my situation. On my return to town the Duke of Rutland
renewed his solicitations. I also received the most unbounded professions of esteem and admiration
from several other persons. Among the list, I was addressed with proposals of libertine nature
by a royal duke, a lofty marquis, and a city merchant of considerable fortune, conveyed through
the medium of milliners, mantua-makers, etc. Just at this period my eldest brother visited
England; but such was his unconquerable aversion to my profession as an actress, that he only
once, during a residence of some months in London, attempted to see me perform. He then only
attempted it; for, on my advancing on the boards, he started from his seat in the stage-box,
and instantly quitted the theatre. My dear mother had no less a dislike to the pursuit; she
never beheld me on the stage but with a painful regret. Fortunately, my father remained some
years out of England, so that he never saw me in my professional character.

My popularity increasing every night that I appeared, my prospects, both of fame and affluence,
began to brighten. We now hired the house which is situated between the Hummums and the Bedford
Arms, in Covent Garden; it had been built (I believe) by Doctor Fisher, who married the widow
of the celebrated actor Powel; but Mr. Robinson took the premises of Mrs. Mattocks, of Covent
Garden Theatre. The house was particularly convenient in every respect; but, above all, on
account of its vicinity to Drury Lane. Here I hoped to enjoy, at least, some cheerful days,
as I found that my circle of friends increased almost hourly.

One of those who paid me most attention was Sir John Lade. The good-natured baronet, who was
then just of age, was our constant visitor, and cards contributed to beguile those evenings
that were not devoted to dramatic labour. Mr. Robinson played more deeply than was discreet,
but he was, at the end of a few weeks, a very considerable winner.

In proportion as play obtained its influence over my husband's mind, his small portion of remaining
regard for me visibly decayed. We now had horses, a phaeton and ponies; and my fashions in
dress were followed with flattering avidity. My house was thronged with visitors, and my morning
levees were crowded so that I could scarcely find a quiet hour for study. My brother by this
time had returned to Italy.

Mr. Sheridan was still my most esteemed of friends. He advised me with the gentlest anxiety,
and he warned me of the danger which expense would produce, and which might interrupt the rising
progress of my dramatic reputation. He saw the trophies which flattery strewed in my way; and
he lamented that I was on every side surrounded with temptations. There was a something beautifully
sympathetic in every word he uttered; his admonitions seemed as if dictated by a prescient
power, which told him that I was destined to be deceived!

Situated as I was at this time, the effort was difficult to avoid the society of Mr. Sheridan.
He was manager of the theatre. I could not avoid seeing and conversing with him at rehearsals
and behind the scenes, and his conversation was always such as to fascinate and charm me. The
brilliant reputation which he had justly acquired for superior talents, and the fame which
was completed by his celebrated "School for Scandal," had now rendered him so admired, that
all ranks of people courted his society. The greenroom was frequented by nobility and men of
genius; among these were Mr. Fox[32] and the Earl of Derby. The stage was now enlightened by
the very best critics, and embellished by the very highest talents; and it is not a little
remarkable that the drama was uncommonly productive, the theatre more than usually attended,
during that season when the principal dramatic characters were performed by women under the
age of twenty. Among these were Miss Farren (now Lady Derby), Miss Walpole (now Mrs. Atkins),
Miss P. Hopkins (now Mrs. John Kemble), and myself.

I had then been married more than four years; my daughter Maria Elizabeth was nearly three
years old. I had been then seen and known at all public places from the age of fifteen; yet
I knew as little of the world's deceptions as though I had been educated in the deserts of
Siberia. I believed every woman friendly, every man sincere, till I discovered proofs that
their characters were deceptive.

I had now performed two seasons, in tragedy and comedy, with Miss Farren and the late Mr. Henderson.
My first appearance in Palmira (in "Mahomet") was with the Zaphna of Mr. J. Bannister, the
preceding year; and though the extraordinary comic powers of this excellent actor and amiable
man have established his reputation as a comedian, his first essay in tragedy was considered
as a night of the most distinguished promise. The Duchess of Devonshire still honoured me with
her patronage and friendship, and I also possessed the esteem of several respectable and distinguished
females.

The play of "The Winter's Tale" was this season commanded by their Majesties.[33] I never had
performed before the royal family; and the first character in which I was destined to appear
was that of Perdita. I had frequently played the part, both with the Hermione of Mrs. Hartley
and of Miss Farren: but I felt a strange degree of alarm when I found my name announced to
perform it before the royal family.[34]

In the greenroom I was rallied on the occasion; and Mr. Smith,[35] whose gentlemanly manners
and enlightened conversation rendered him an ornament to the profession, who performed the
part of Leontes, laughingly exclaimed, "By Jove, Mrs. Robinson, you will make a conquest of
the prince, for to-night you look handsomer than ever." I smiled at the unmerited compliment,
and little foresaw the vast variety of events that would arise from that night's exhibition!

As I stood in the wing opposite the prince's box, waiting to go on the stage, Mr. Ford, the
manager's son, and now a respectable defender of the laws, presented a friend who accompanied
him; this friend was Lord Viscount Malden, now Earl of Essex.[36]

We entered into conversation during a few minutes, the Prince of Wales all the time observing
us, and frequently speaking to Colonel (now General) Lake, and to the Honourable Mr. Legge,
brother to Lord Lewisham, who was in waiting on his Royal Highness. I hurried through the first
scene, not without much embarrassment, owing to the fixed attention with which the Prince of
Wales honoured me. Indeed, some flattering remarks which were made by his Royal Highness met
my ear as I stood near his box, and I was overwhelmed with confusion.

The prince's particular attention was observed by every one, and I was again rallied at the
end of the play. On the last curtsey, the royal family condescendingly returned a bow to the
performers; but just as the curtain was falling my eyes met those of the Prince of Wales, and
with a look that I never shall forget, he gently inclined his head a second time; I felt the
compliment, and blushed my gratitude.

During the entertainment Lord Malden never ceased conversing with me. He was young, pleasing,
and perfectly accomplished. He remarked the particular applause which the prince had bestowed
on my performance; said a thousand civil things; and detained me in conversation till the evening's
performance was concluded.

I was now going to my chair, which waited, when I met the royal family crossing the stage.
I was again honoured with a very marked and low bow from the Prince of Wales. On my return
home, I had a party to supper; and the whole conversation centred in encomiums on the person,
graces, and amiable manners of the illustrious heir-apparent.

Within two or three days of this time, Lord Malden made me a morning visit. Mr. Robinson was
not at home, and I received him rather awkwardly. But his lordship's embarrassment far exceeded
mine. He attempted to speak--paused, hesitated, apologised; I knew not why. He hoped I would
pardon him; that I would not mention something he had to communicate; that I would consider
the peculiar delicacy of his situation, and then act as I thought proper. I could not comprehend
his meaning, and therefore requested that he would be explicit.

After some moments of evident rumination, he tremblingly drew a small letter from his pocket.
I took it, and knew not what to say. It was addressed to Perdita. I smiled, I believe rather
sarcastically, and opened the billet. It contained only a few words, but those expressive of
more than common civility; they were signed Florizel.[37]

"Well, my lord, and what does this mean?" said I, half angry.

"Can you not guess the writer?" said Lord Malden.

"Perhaps yourself, my lord," cried I, gravely.

"Upon my honour, no," said the viscount. "I should not have dared so to address you on so short
an acquaintance."

I pressed him to tell me from whom the letter came. He again hesitated; he seemed confused,
and sorry that he had undertaken to deliver it.

"I hope that I shall not forfeit your good opinion," said he; "but--"

"But what, my lord?"

"I could not refuse--for the letter is from the Prince of Wales."

I was astonished; I confess that I was agitated; but I was also somewhat skeptical as to the
truth of Lord Malden's assertion. I returned a formal and a doubtful answer, and his lordship
shortly after took his leave.

A thousand times did I read this short but expressive letter. Still I did not implicitly believe
that it was written by the prince; I rather considered it as an experiment made by Lord Malden,
either on my vanity or propriety of conduct. On the next evening the viscount repeated his
visit. We had a card-party of six or seven, and the Prince of Wales was again the subject of
unbounded panegyric. Lord Malden spoke of his Royal Highness's manners as the most polished
and fascinating; of his temper as the most engaging; and of his mind, the most replete with
every amiable sentiment. I heard these praises, and my heart beat with conscious pride, while
memory turned to the partial but delicately respectful letter which I had received on the preceding
morning.

The next day Lord Malden brought me a second letter. He assured me that the prince was most
unhappy lest I should be offended at his conduct, and that he conjured me to go that night
to the Oratorio, [38] where he would by some signal convince me that he was the writer of the
letters, supposing I was still skeptical as to their authenticity.

I went to the Oratorio; and, on taking my seat in the balcony-box, the prince almost instantaneously
observed me. He held the printed bill before his face, and drew his hand across his forehead,
still fixing his eyes on me. I was confused, and knew not what to do. My husband was with me,
and I was fearful of his observing what passed. Still the prince continued to make signs, such
as moving his hand on the edge of the box as if writing, then speaking to the Duke of York[39]
(then Bishop of Osnaburg), who also looked toward me with particular attention.

I now observed one of the gentlemen in waiting bring the prince a glass
of water; before he raised it to his lips he looked at me. So marked was
his Royal Highness's conduct that many of the audience observed it;
several persons in the pit directed their gaze at the place where I sat;
and, on the following day, one of the diurnal prints observed that there
was one passage in Dryden's Ode which seemed particularly interesting to
the Prince of Wales, who--
        "Gazed on the fair
        Who caused his care,
      And sigh'd, and look'd, and sigh'd again."[40]

However flattering it might have been to female vanity to know that the most admired and most
accomplished prince in Europe was devotedly attached to me; however dangerous to the heart
such idolatry as his Royal Highness, during many months, professed in almost daily letters,
which were conveyed to me by Lord Malden, still I declined any interview with his Royal Highness.
I was not insensible to all his powers of attraction; I thought him one of the most amiable
of men. There was a beautiful ingenuousness in his language, a warm and enthusiastic adoration,
expressed in every letter, which interested and charmed me. During the whole spring, till the
theatre closed, this correspondence continued, every day giving me some new assurance of inviolable
affection.

After we had corresponded some months without ever speaking to each other (for I still declined
meeting his Royal Highness, from a dread of the eclat which such a connection would produce,
and the fear of injuring him in the opinion of his royal relatives), I received, through the
hands of Lord Malden, the prince's portrait in miniature, painted by the late Mr. Meyer. This
picture is now in my possession. Within the case was a small heart cut in paper, which I also
have; on one side was written, "Je ne change qu'en mourant;" on the other, "Unalterable to
my Perdita through life."

During many months of confidential correspondence, I always offered his Royal Highness the
best advice in my power; I disclaimed every sordid and interested thought; I recommended him
to be patient till he should become his own master; to wait till he knew more of my mind and
manners, before he engaged in a public attachment to me; and, above all, to do nothing that
might incur the displeasure of his Royal Highness's family. I entreated him to recollect that
he was young, and led on by the impetuosity of passion; that should I consent to quit my profession
and my husband, I should be thrown entirely on his mercy. I strongly pictured the temptations
to which beauty would expose him; the many arts that would be practised to undermine me in
his affections; the public abuse which calumny and envy would heap upon me; and the misery
I should suffer, if, after I had given him every proof of confidence, he should change in his
sentiments toward me. To all this I received repeated assurances of inviolable affection; and
I most firmly believe that his Royal Highness meant what he professed--indeed, his soul was
too ingenuous, his mind too liberal, and his heart too susceptible, to deceive premeditatedly,
or to harbour even for a moment the idea of deliberate deception.

At every interview with Lord Maiden I perceived that he regretted the task he had undertaken;
but he assured me that the prince was almost frantic whenever he suggested a wish to decline
interfering. Once I remember his lordship's telling me that the late Duke of Cumberland had
made him a visit early in the morning, at his house in Clarges Street, informing him that the
prince was most wretched on my account, and imploring him to continue his services only a short
time longer. The prince's establishment was then in agitation; at this period his Royal Highness
still resided in Buckingham House.

A proposal was now made that I should meet his Royal Highness at his apartments, in the disguise
of male attire. I was accustomed to perform in that dress, and the prince had seen me, I believe,
in the character of the Irish Widow. To this plan I decidedly objected. The indelicacy of such
a step, as well as the danger of detection, made me shrink from the proposal. My refusal threw
his Royal Highness into the most distressing agitation, as was expressed by the letter which
I received on the following morning. Lord Malden again lamented that he had engaged himself
in the intercourse, and declared that he had himself conceived so violent a passion for me
that he was the most miserable and unfortunate of mortals.

During this period, though Mr. Robinson was a stranger to my epistolary intercourse with the
prince, his conduct was entirely neglectful. He was perfectly careless respecting my fame and
my repose; passed his leisure hours with the most abandoned women, and even my own servants
complained of his illicit advances. I remember one, who was plain even to ugliness; she was
short, ill-made, squalid, and dirty; once, on my return from a rehearsal, I found that this
woman was locked with my husband in my chamber. I also knew that Mr. Robinson continued his
connection with a female who lodged in Maiden Lane, and who was only one of the few that proved
his domestic apostacy.

His indifference naturally produced an alienation of esteem on my side, and the increasing
adoration of the most enchanting of mortals hourly reconciled my mind to the idea of a separation.
The unbounded assurances of lasting affection which I received from his Royal Highness in many
scores of the most eloquent letters, the contempt which I experienced from my husband, and
the perpetual labour which I underwent for his support, at length began to weary my fortitude.
Still I was reluctant to become the theme of public animadversion, and still I remonstrated
with my husband on the unkindness of his conduct.

       *       *       *       *       *

[The narrative of Mrs. Robinson closes here.]

CONTINUATION

BY A FRIEND

Among those persons who have at various periods attracted the attention of the public, there
are few whose virtues have been so little known, or whose characters have been so unfairly
estimated, as the subject of the preceding memoir. To compress within narrow limits the numerous
circumstances by which the later years of Mrs. Robinson's life were chequered, will be a task
of no little difficulty. The earlier periods of her existence, rendered more interesting as
narrated by her own pen, have doubtlessly been justly appreciated by the reflecting and candid
reader, whose sympathy they could not fail to awaken. That she lived not to conclude the history
of a life scarcely less eventful than unfortunate, cannot but afford a subject of sincere regret.

The conflicts which shook the mind, and the passions which succeeded to each other in the breast
of Mrs. Robinson, at the period when her narrative closes, a crisis perhaps the most important
in her life, may be more easily conceived than described. A laborious though captivating profession,
the profits of which were unequal to the expenses of her establishment, and the assiduities
of her illustrious lover, to whom she naturally looked for protection, combined to divide her
attention and bewilder her inexperienced mind. The partiality of her royal admirer had begun
to excite observation, to awaken curiosity, and to provoke the malignant passions which, under
an affected concern for decorum, assumed the guise of virtue. The daily prints teemed with
hints of the favour of Mrs. Robinson with "one whose manners were resistless, and whose smile
was victory." These circumstances, added to the constant devoirs of Lord Malden, whose attentions
were as little understood as maliciously interpreted, conspired to distract a young creature,
whose exposed situation, whose wavering and unformed character, rendered her but too obnoxious
to a thousand errors and perils.

To terminate her correspondence with the prince appeared the most painful remedy that could
be adopted by a heart fascinated with his accomplishments, and soothed by his professions of
inviolable attachment. She was aware that, in the eye of the world, the reputation of the wife
is supposed unsullied, while the husband, enduring passively his dishonour, gives to her the
sanction of his protection. The circles of fashion afforded more than one instance of this
obliging acquiescence in matrimonial turpitude. Could Mrs. Robinson have reconciled it to her
own feelings to remain under the roof of her husband, whose protection she had forfeited, and
to add insult to infidelity, the attentions of her illustrious admirer might have given to
her popularity an additional eclat. Neither might her husband have suffered in his worldly
prospects, from being to the motives of his royal visitor a little complaisantly blind. But
her ingenuous nature would not permit her to render the man for whom she had once felt an affection
an object of ridicule and contempt. She determined, therefore, to brave the world, and, for
a support against its censures, to rely on the protection and friendship of him to whom she
sacrificed its respect.

The managers of Drury Lane Theatre, suspecting that Mrs. Robinson purposed, at the conclusion
of the season, to withdraw from the stage, omitted no means that might tend to induce her to
renew her engagements. With this view, they offered a considerable advance to her salary, while
to their solicitations she returned undecisive answers. Hourly rising in a profession to which
she was enthusiastically attached, the public plaudits, which her appearance never failed to
excite, were too gratifying to be relinquished without regret.

During this irresolution she was persecuted by numerous anonymous letters, which she continued
to treat with derision or contempt. The correspondence between Mrs. Robinson and the prince
had hitherto been merely epistolary. This intercourse had lasted several months, Mrs. Robinson
not having acquired sufficient courage to venture a personal interview, and bid defiance to
the reproaches of the world.

At length, after many alternations of feeling, an interview with her royal lover was consented
to by Mrs. Robinson, and proposed, by the management of Lord Malden, to take place at his lordship's
residence in Dean Street, Mayfair. But the restricted situation of the prince, controlled by
a rigid tutor, rendered this project of difficult execution. A visit to Buckingham House was
then mentioned; to which Mrs. Robinson positively objected, as a rash attempt, abounding in
peril to her august admirer. Lord Maiden being again consulted, it was determined that the
prince should meet Mrs. Robinson for a few moments at Kew,[41] on the banks of the Thames,
opposite to the old palace, then the summer residence of the elder princes. For an account
of this incident, an extract from a letter of Mrs. Robinson, written some years afterward,
to a valued and since deceased friend, who during the period of these events resided in America,
may not be unacceptable to the reader. The date of this letter is in 1783.

"At length an evening was fixed for this long-dreaded interview. Lord Maiden and myself dined
at the inn on the island between Kew and Brentford. We waited the signal for crossing the river
in a boat which had been engaged for the purpose. Heaven can witness how many conflicts my
agitated heart endured at this most important moment! I admired the prince; I felt grateful
for his affection. He was the most engaging of created beings. I had corresponded with him
during many months, and his eloquent letters, the exquisite sensibility which breathed through
every line, his ardent professions of adoration, had combined to shake my feeble resolution.
The handkerchief was waved on the opposite shore; but the signal was, by the dusk of the evening,
rendered almost imperceptible. Lord Maiden took my hand, I stepped into the boat, and in a
few minutes we landed before the iron gates of old Kew Palace. The interview was but of a moment.
The Prince of Wales and the Duke of York (then Bishop of Osnaburg) were walking down the avenue.
They hastened to meet us. A few words, and those scarcely articulate, were uttered by the prince,
when a noise of people approaching from the palace startled us. The moon was now rising; and
the idea of being overheard, or of his Royal Highness being seen out at so unusual an hour,
terrified the whole group. After a few more words of the most affectionate nature uttered by
the prince, we parted, and Lord Maiden and myself returned to the island. The prince never
quitted the avenue, nor the presence of the Duke of York, during the whole of this short meeting.
Alas! my friend, if my mind was before influenced by esteem, it was now awakened to the, most
enthusiastic admiration. The rank of the prince no longer chilled into awe that being who now
considered him as the lover and the friend. The graces of his person, the irresistible sweetness
of his smile, the tenderness of his melodious yet manly voice, will be remembered by me till
every vision of this changing scene shall be forgotten.

"Many and frequent were the interviews which afterward took place at this romantic spot; our
walks sometimes continued till past midnight; the Duke of York and Lord Malden were always
of the party; our conversation was composed of general topics. The prince had from his infancy
been wholly secluded, and naturally took much pleasure in conversing about the busy world,
its manners and pursuits, characters and scenery. Nothing could be more delightful or more
rational than our midnight perambulations. I always wore a dark coloured habit, the rest of
our party generally wrapped themselves in greatcoats to disguise them, excepting the Duke of
York, who almost universally alarmed us by the display of a buff coat, the most conspicuous
colour he could have selected for an adventure of this nature. The polished and fascinating
ingenuousness of his Royal Highness's manners contributed not a little to enliven our promenades.
He sung with exquisite taste, and the tones of his voice breaking on the silence of the night
have often appeared to my entranced senses like more than mortal melody. Often have I lamented
the distance which destiny had placed between us. How would my soul have idolised such a husband!
Alas! how often, in the ardent enthusiasm of my soul, have I formed the wish that that being
were mine alone! to whom partial millions were to look up for protection.

"The Duke of York was now on the eve of quitting the country for Hanover; the prince was also
on the point of receiving his first establishment; and the apprehension that his attachment
to a married woman might injure his Royal Highness in the opinion of the world rendered the
caution which we invariably observed of the utmost importance. A considerable time elapsed
in these delightful scenes of visionary happiness. The prince's attachment seemed to increase
daily, and I considered myself as the most blest of human beings. During some time we had enjoyed
our meetings in the neighbourhood of Kew, and I note only looked forward to the adjusting of
his Royal Highness's establishment for the public avowal of our mutual attachment.

"I had relinquished my profession. The last night of my appearance on
the stage, I represented the character of Sir Harry Revel, in the comedy
of 'The Miniature Picture,' written by Lady Craven,[42] and 'The Irish
Widow.' On entering the greenroom, I informed Mr. Moody, who played in
the farce, that I should appear no more after that night; and,
endeavouring to smile while I sung, I repeated,--
      'Oh joy to you all in full measure,
      So wishes and prays Widow Brady!'
which were the last lines of my song in 'The Irish Widow.' This effort
to conceal the emotion I felt on quitting a profession I
enthusiastically loved was of short duration, and I burst into tears on
my appearance. My regret at recollecting that I was treading for the
last time the boards where I had so often received the must gratifying
testimonies of public approbation; where mental exertion had been
emboldened by private worth; that I was flying from a happy certainty,
perhaps to pursue the phantom disappointment, nearly overwhelmed my
faculties, and for some time deprived me of the power of articulation.
Fortunately, the person on the stage with me had to begin the scene,
which allowed me time to collect myself. I went, however, mechanically
dull through the business of the evening, and, notwithstanding the
cheering expressions and applause of the audience, I was several times
near fainting.

"The daily prints now indulged the malice of my enemies by the most scandalous paragraphs respecting
the Prince of Wales and myself. I found it was now too late to stop the hourly augmenting torrent
of abuse that was poured upon me from all quarters. Whenever I appeared in public, I was overwhelmed
by the gazing of the multitude. I was frequently obliged to quit Ranelagh, owing to the crowd
which staring curiosity had assembled around my box; and, even in the streets of the metropolis,
I scarcely ventured to enter a shop without experiencing the greatest inconvenience. Many hours
have I waited till the crowd dispersed which surrounded my carriage, in expectation of my quitting
the shop. I cannot suppress a smile at the absurdity of such proceeding, when I remember that,
during nearly three seasons, I was almost every night upon the stage, and that I had then been
near five years with Mr. Robinson at every fashionable place of entertainment. You, my dear
sir, in your quiet haunts of transatlantic simplicity, will find some difficulty in reconciling
these things to your mind--these unaccountable instances of national absurdity. Yet, so it
is. I am well assured that, were a being possessed of more than human endowments to visit this
country, it would experience indifference, if not total neglect, while a less worthy mortal
might be worshipped as the idol of its day, if whispered into notoriety by the comments of
the multitude. But, thank Heaven! my heart was not formed in the mould of callous effrontery.
I shuddered at the gulf before me, and felt small gratification in the knowledge of having
taken a step, which many who condemned would have been no less willing to imitate had they
been placed in the same situation.

"Previous to my first interview with his Royal Highness, in one of his letters I was astonished
to find a bond of the most solemn and binding nature containing a promise of the sum of twenty
thousand pounds, to be paid at the period of his Royal Highness's coming of age.

"This paper was signed by the prince, and sealed with the royal arms. It was expressed in terms
so liberal, so voluntary, so marked by true affection, that I had scarcely power to read it.
My tears, excited by the most agonising conflicts, obscured the letters, and nearly blotted
out those sentiments which will be impressed upon my mind till the latest period of my existence.
Still, I felt shocked and mortified at the indelicate idea of entering into any pecuniary engagements
with a prince, on whose establishment I relied for the enjoyment of all that would render life
desirable. I was surprised at receiving it; the idea of interest had never entered my mind.
Secure in the possession of his heart, I had in that delightful certainty counted all my future
treasure. I had refused many splendid gifts which his Royal Highness had proposed ordering
for me at Grey's and other jewellers. The prince presented to me a few trifling ornaments,
in the whole their value not exceeding one hundred guineas. Even these, on our separation,
I returned to his Royal Highness through the hands of General Lake.

"The period now approached that was to destroy all the fairy visions which had filled my mind
with dreams of happiness. At the moment when everything was preparing for his Royal Highness's
establishment, when I looked impatiently for the arrival of that day in which I might behold
my adored friend gracefully receiving the acclamations of his future subjects, when I might
enjoy the public protection of that being for whom I gave up all, I received a letter from
his Royal Highness, a cold and unkind letter--briefly informing me that 'we must meet no more!'

"And now, my friend, suffer me to call God to witness, that I was unconscious why this decision
had taken place in his Royal Highness's mind. Only two days previous to this letter being written
I had seen the prince at Kew, and his affection appeared to be boundless as it was undiminished.

"Amazed, afflicted, beyond the power of utterance, I wrote immediately to his Royal Highness,
requiring an explanation. He remained silent. Again I wrote, but received no elucidation of
this most cruel and extraordinary mystery. The prince was then at Windsor. I set out in a small
pony phaeton, wretched, and unaccompanied by any one except my postilion (a child of nine years
of age). It was near dark when we quitted Hyde Park Corner. On my arrival at Hounslow the innkeeper
informed me that every carriage which had passed the heath for the last ten nights had been
attacked and rifled. I confess the idea of personal danger had no terrors for my mind in the
state it then was, and the possibility of annihilation, divested of the crime of suicide, encouraged
rather than diminished my determination of proceeding. We had scarcely reached the middle of
the heath when my horses were startled by the sudden appearance of a man rushing from the side
of the road. The boy, on perceiving him, instantly spurred his pony, and, by a sudden bound
of our light vehicle, the ruffian missed his grasp at the front rein. We now proceeded at full
speed, while the footpad ran endeavouring to overtake us. At length, my horses fortunately
outrunning the perseverance of the assailant, we reached the first 'Magpie,' a small inn on
the heath, in safety. The alarm which, in spite of my resolution, this adventure had created,
was augmented on my recollecting, for the first time, that I had then in my black stock a brilliant
stud of very considerable value, which could only have been possessed by the robber by strangling
the wearer.

"If my heart palpitated with joy at my escape from assassination, a circumstance soon after
occurred that did not tend to quiet my emotion. This was the appearance of Mr. H. Meynell and
Mrs. A----. My foreboding soul instantly beheld a rival, and, with jealous eagerness, interpreted
the hitherto inexplicable conduct of the prince from his having frequently expressed his wish
to know that lady.

"On my arrival the prince would not see me. My agonies were now undescribable. I consulted
with Lord Malden and the Duke of Dorset, whose honourable mind and truly disinterested friendship
had on many occasions been exemplified toward me. They were both at a loss to divine any cause
of this sudden change in the prince's feelings. The Prince of Wales had hitherto assiduously
sought opportunities to distinguish me more publicly than was prudent in his Royal Highness's
situation. This was in the month of August. On the 4th of the preceding June I went, by his
desire, into the chamberlain's box at the birthnight ball; the distressing observation of the
circle was drawn toward the part of the box in which I sat by the marked and injudicious attentions
of his Royal Highness. I had not been arrived many minutes before I witnessed a singular species
of fashionable coquetry. Previous to his Highness's beginning his minuet, I perceived a woman
of high rank select from the bouquet which she wore two rosebuds, which she gave to the prince,
as he afterward informed me, emblematical of herself and him.' I observed his Royal Highness
immediately beckon to a nobleman, who has since formed a part of his establishment, and, looking
most earnestly at me, whisper a few words, at the same time presenting to him his newly acquired
trophy. In a few moments Lord C---- entered the chamberlain's box, and, giving the rosebuds
into my hands, informed me that he was commissioned by the prince to do so. I placed them in
my bosom, and, I confess, felt proud of the power by which I thus publicly mortified an exalted
rival. His Royal Highness now avowedly distinguished me at all public places of entertainment,
at the king's hunt near Windsor, at the reviews, and at the theatres. The prince only seemed
happy in evincing his affection toward me.

"How terrible, then, was the change to my feelings! And I again most solemnly repeat that I
was totally ignorant of any just cause fur so sudden an alteration.

"My 'good-natured friends' now carefully informed me of the multitude of secret enemies who
were ever employed in estranging the prince's mind from me. So fascinating, so illustrious
a lover could not fail to excite the envy of my own sex. Women of all descriptions were emulous
of attracting his Royal Highness's attention. Alas! I had neither rank nor power to oppose
such adversaries. Every engine of female malice was set in motion to destroy my repose, and
every petty calumny was repeated with tenfold embellishments. Tales of the most infamous and
glaring falsehood were invented, and I was again assailed by pamphlets, by paragraphs, and
caricatures, and all the artillery of slander, while the only being to whom I then looked up
for protection was so situated as to be unable to afford it.

"Thus perplexed, I wrote to you, my friend, and implored your advice. But you were far away;
your delighted soul was absorbed in cherishing the plant of human liberty, which has since
blossomed with independent splendour over your happy provinces. Eagerly did I wait for the
arrival of the packet, but no answer was returned. In the anguish of my soul I once more addressed
the Prince of Wales; I complained, perhaps too vehemently, of his injustice; of the calumnies
which had been by my enemies fabricated against me, of the falsehood of which he was but too
sensible. I conjured him to render me justice. He did so; he wrote me a most eloquent letter,
disclaiming the causes alleged by a calumniating world, and fully acquitting me of the charges
which had been propagated to destroy me.

"I resided now in Cork Street, Burlington Gardens. The house, which was neat, but by no means
splendid, had recently been fitted up for the reception of the Countess of Derby, on her separation
from her lord. My situation now every hour became more irksome. The prince still unkindly persisted
in withdrawing himself from my society. I was now deeply involved in debt, which I despaired
of ever having the power to discharge. I had quitted both my husband and my profession. The
retrospect was dreadful!

"My estrangement from the prince was now the theme of public animadversion, while the newly
invigorated shafts of my old enemies, the daily prints, were again hurled upon my defenceless
head with tenfold fury. The regrets of Mr. Robinson, now that he had lost me, became insupportable;
he constantly wrote to me in the language of unbounded affection, nor did he fail, when we
met, to express his agony at our separation, and even a wish for our reunion.

"I had, at one period, resolved on returning to my profession; but some friends whom I consulted
dreaded that the public would not suffer my reappearance on the stage. This idea intimidated
me, and precluded my efforts for that independence of which my romantic credulity had robbed
me. I was thus fatally induced to relinquish what would have proved an ample and honourable
resource for myself and my child. My debts accumulated to near seven thousand pounds. My creditors,
whose insulting illiberality could only be equalled by their unbounded impositions, hourly
assailed me.

"I was, in the meantime, wholly neglected by the prince, while the assiduities of Lord Malden
daily increased. I had no other friend on whom I could rely for assistance or protection. When
I say protection, I would not be understood to mean pecuniary assistance, Lord Mailden being,
at the time alluded to, even poorer than myself,--the death of his lordship's grandmother,
Lady Frances Coningsby, had not then placed him above the penury of his own small income.

"Lord Maiden's attentions to me again exposed him to all the humiliation of former periods.
The prince assured me once more of his wishes to renew our former friendship and affection,
and urged me to meet him at the house of Lord Malden in Clarges Street. I was at this period
little less than frantic, deeply involved in debt, persecuted by my enemies, and perpetually
reproached by my relations. I would joyfully have resigned an existence now become to me an
intolerable burthen; yet my pride was not less than my sorrow, and I resolved, whatever my
heart might suffer, to wear a placid countenance when I met the inquiring glances of my triumphant
enemies.

"After much hesitation, by the advice of Lord Malden, I consented to meet his Royal Highness.
He accosted me with every appearance of tender attachment, declaring that he had never for
one moment ceased to love me, but that I had many concealed enemies, who were exerting every
effort to undermine me. We passed some hours in the most friendly and delightful conversation,
and I began to flatter myself that all our differences were adjusted. But what words can express
my surprise and chagrin, when, on meeting his Royal Highness the very next day in Hyde Park,
he turned his head to avoid seeing me, and even affected not to know me!

"Overwhelmed by this blow, my distress knew no limits. Yet Heaven can witness the truth of
my assertion, even in this moment of complete despair, when oppression bowed me to the earth,
I blamed not the prince. I did then, and ever shall, consider his mind as nobly and honourably
organised, nor could I teach myself to believe that a heart, the seat of so many virtues, could
possibly become inhuman and unjust. I had been taught from my infancy to believe that elevated
stations are surrounded by delusive visions, which glitter but to dazzle, like an unsubstantial
meteor, and flatter to betray. With legions of these phantoms it has been my fate to encounter;
I have been unceasingly marked by their persecutions, and shall at length become their victim."

Here the narrative of Mrs. Robinson breaks off, with some reflections to which the recital
had given rise. Though diligent search has been made to elucidate the obscurity in which the
preceding events are involved, but little information has been gained. All that can be learned
with certainty is her final separation from the Prince of Wales in the year 1781.

The genius and engaging manners of Mrs. Robinson, who was still very young, had procured her
the friendship of many of the most enlightened men of this age and country; her house was the
rendezvous of talents. While yet unconscious of the powers of her mind, which had scarcely
then unfolded itself, she was honoured with the acquaintance and esteem of Sir Joshua Reynolds,
Messrs. Sheridan, Burke, Henderson, Wilkes, Sir John Elliot, etc., men of distinguished talents
and character. But though surrounded by the wise, the witty, and the gay, her mind, naturally
pensive, was still devoured by secret sorrow; neither could the blandishments of flattery,
nor the soothings of friendship, extract the arrow that rankled in her heart. Involved beyond
the power of extrication, she determined on quitting England, and making a tour to Paris.

To desert her country, to fly like a wretched fugitive, or to become a victim to the malice,
and swell the triumph of her enemies, were the only alternatives that seemed to present themselves.
Flight was humiliating and dreadful, but to remain in England was impracticable. The terrors
and struggles of her mind became almost intolerable, and nearly deprived her of reason. The
establishment of the prince had now taken place; to him, for whom she had made every sacrifice,
and to whom she owed her present embarrassments, she conceived herself entitled to appeal for
redress. She wrote to his Royal Highness, but her letter remained unanswered. The business
was at length submitted to the arbitration of Mr. Fox, and, in 1783, her claims were adjusted
by the grant of an annuity of five hundred pounds, the moiety of which was to descend to her
daughter at her decease. This settlement was to be considered as an equivalent for the bond
of twenty thousand pounds given by the prince to Mrs. Robinson, to be paid on his establishment,
as a consideration for the resignation of a lucrative profession at the particular request
of his Royal Highness. To many persons the assurance of an independence would have operated
as a consolation for the sufferings and difficulties by which it had been procured; but the
spirit of Mrs. Robinson bent not to a situation which the delicacy of her feelings led her
to consider as a splendid degradation.

About this period, Mrs. Robinson, notwithstanding the change in her affairs, determined to
visit Paris, to amuse her mind and beguile her thoughts from the recollection of past scenes.
Having procured letters of introduction to some agreeable French families, and also to Sir
John Lambert, resident English banker at Paris, she quitted London, with the resolution of
passing two months in the gay and brilliant metropolis of France. Sir John Lambert, on being
informed of her arrival, exerted himself to procure for her commodious apartments, a remise,
a box at the opera, with all the fashionable and expensive etceteras with which an inexperienced
English traveller is immediately provided.

This venerable chevalier united to the cordiality of the English character the bienfaisance
of a Frenchman; every hour was devoted to the amusement of his admired guest, who came to him
highly recommended. Parties were, with the most flattering assiduity, formed for the different
spectacles and places of public entertainment. A brilliant assemblage of illustrious visitors
failed not to grace at the opera the box of la belle Anglaise.

A short time after the arrival of Mrs. Robinson at Paris, the Duke of Orleans and his gallant
friend and associate, the Duke de Lauzun (afterward Duke de Biron), were presented to her by
Sir John Lambert. This unfortunate prince, with all the volatility of the national character,
disgraced human nature by his vices, while the elegance of his manners rendered him a model
to his contemporaries.

The Duke of Orleans immediately professed himself devoted to the fair stranger. His libertine
manners, the presumption with which he declared his determination to triumph over the heart
of Mrs. Robinson, assisted to defend her against him; and, while he failed to dazzle her imagination
by his magnificence, he disgusted her by his hauteur.

The most enchanting fetes were given at Mousseau, a villa belonging to the Duke of Orleans.
near Paris, at which Mrs. Robinson invariably declined to appear. Brilliant races a l'Anglaise
were exhibited on the plains des Sablons, to captivate the attention of the inexorable Anglaise.
On the birthday of Mrs. Robinson a new effort was made to subdue her aversion and to obtain
her regard. A rural fete was appointed in the gardens of Mousseau, when this beautiful pandemonium
of splendid profligacy was, at an unusual expense, decorated with boundless luxury.

In the evening, amidst a magnificent illumination, every tree displayed the initials of la
belle Anglaise, composed of coloured lamps, interwoven with wreaths of artificial flowers.
Politeness compelled Mrs. Robinson to grace with her presence a fete instituted to her honour.
She, however, took the precaution of selecting for her companion a German lady, then resident
at Paris, while the venerable chevalier Lambert attended them as a chaperon.

Some days after the celebration of this festival, the Queen of France signified her intention
of dining in public, for the first time after her accouchement with the Duke of Normandy, afterward
dauphin. The duke brought to Mrs. Robinson a message from the queen, expressing a wish that
la belle Anglaise might be induced to appear at the grand convert. Mrs. Robinson, not less
solicitous to behold the lovely Marie Antoinette, gladly availed herself of the intimation,
and immediately began to prepare for the important occasion. The most tasteful ornaments of
Mademoiselle Bertin, the reigning milliner, were procured to adorn a form that, rich in native
beauty, needed little embellishment. A pale green lustring train and body, with a tiffany petticoat,
festooned with bunches of the most delicate lilac, were chosen by Mrs. Robinson for her appearance,
while a plume of white feathers adorned her head; the native roses of her cheeks, glowing with
health and youth, were stained, in conformity to the fashion of the French court, with the
deepest rouge.

On the arrival of the fair foreigner, the Duke d'Orleans quitted the king, on whom he was then
in waiting, to procure her a place, where the queen might have an opportunity of observing
those charms by the fame of which her curiosity had been awakened.

The grand convert, at which the king acquitted himself with more alacrity than grace, afforded
a magnificent display of epicurean luxury. The queen ate nothing. The slender crimson cord,
which drew a line of separation between the royal epicures and the gazing plebeians, was at
the distance but of a few feet from the table. A small space divided the queen from Mrs. Robinson,
whom the constant observation and loudly whispered encomiums of her Majesty most oppressively
flattered. She appeared to survey, with peculiar attention, a miniature of the Prince of Wales,
which Mrs. Robinson wore on her bosom, and of which, on the ensuing day, she commissioned the
Duke of Orleans to request the loan. Perceiving Mrs. Robinson gaze with admiration on her white
and polished arms, as she drew on her gloves, the queen again uncovered them, and leaned for
a few moments on her hand. The duke, on returning the picture, gave to the fair owner a purse,
netted by the hand of Antoinette, and which she had commissioned him to present, from her,
to la belle Anglaise. Mrs. Robinson not long after these events quitted Paris, and returned
to her native country.

In 1784 her fate assumed a darker hue. She was attacked by a malady, to which she had nearly
fallen a victim. By an imprudent exposure to the night air in travelling, when, exhausted by
fatigue and mental anxiety, she slept in a chaise with the windows open, she brought on a fever,
which confined her to her bed during six months. The disorder terminated at the conclusion
of that period in a violent rheumatism, which progressively deprived her of the use of her
limbs. Thus, at four and twenty years of age, in the pride of youth and the bloom of beauty,
was this lovely and unfortunate woman reduced to a state of more than infantile helplessness.
Yet, even under so severe a calamity, the powers of her mind and the elasticity of her spirits
triumphed over the weakness of her frame. This check to the pleasures and vivacity of youth,
by depriving her of external resource, led her to the more assiduous cultivation and development
of her talents. But the resignation with which she had submitted to one of the severest of
human calamities gave place to hope, on the assurance of her physician, that by the mild air
of a more southern climate she might probably be restored to health and activity.

The favourite wish of her heart, that of beholding her relations, from whom she had been so
many years divided, it was now in her power to gratify. From her elder brother she had frequently
received invitations, the most pressing and affectionate, to quit for ever a country where
an unprotected woman rarely fails to become the victim of calumny and persecution, and to take
shelter in the bosom of domestic tranquillity, where peace, to which she had long been a stranger,
might still await her. Delighted with the idea of combining with the object of her travels
an acquisition so desirable, and after which her exhausted heart panted, she eagerly embraced
the proposal, and set out to Paris, with the resolution of proceeding to Leghorn. But a letter,
on her arrival, from her physician, prescribing the warm baths of Aix-la-Chapelle in Germany,
as a certain restorative for her complaints, frustrated her plans. Once more she proceeded
in melancholy pursuit of that blessing which she was destined never more to obtain.

During her sojourn at Aix-la-Chapelle, a dawn of comparative tranquillity soothed her spirits.
Secure from the machinations of her enemies, she determined, though happiness seemed no more
within her reach, to endeavour to be content. The assiduities and attentions shown her by all
ranks of people presented a striking medium between the volatility and libertine homage offered
to her at Paris, and the persevering malignity which had followed her in her native land. Her
beauty, the affecting state of her health, the attraction of her manners, and the powers of
her mind, interested every heart in her favour; while the meekness with which she submitted
to her fate excited an admiration not less fervent, and more genuine, than her charms in the
full blaze of their power had ever extorted.

Among the many illustrious and enlightened persons then resident at Aix-la-Chapelle, who honoured
Mrs. Robinson by their friendship, she received from the late amiable and unfortunate Duke
and Duchess du Chatelet peculiar marks of distinction. The duke had, while ambassador in England,
been the friend and associate of the learned Lord Mansfield; his duchess, the eleve of Voltaire,
claimed as her godmother Gabrielle Emilia, Baroness du Chatelet, so celebrated by that lively
and admirable writer. This inestimable family, consisting of the duke and duchess, their nephews
the Counts de Damas, and a niece married to the Duke de Simianne, were indefatigable in their
efforts to solace the affliction and amuse the mind of their fair friend. Balls, concerts,
rural breakfasts, succeeded to each other in gay and attractive variety; the happy effects
produced on the health and spirits of Mrs. Robinson were considered by this English family
as an ample compensation for their solicitude. When compelled by severer paroxysms of her malady
to seclude herself from their society, a thousand kind stratagems were planned and executed
to relieve her sufferings, or soften the dejection to which they unavoidably gave rise. Sometimes,
on entering her dark and melancholy bath, the gloom of which was increased by high grated windows,
she beheld the surface of the water covered with rose-leaves, while the vapour baths were impregnated
with aromatic odours. The younger part of the family, when pain deprived Mrs. Robinson of rest,
frequently passed the night beneath her windows, charming her sufferings and beguiling her
of her sorrows, by singing her favourite airs to the accompaniment of the mandolin.

Thus, in despite of sickness, glided away two agreeable winters, when the transient gleam of
brightness became suddenly obscured, and her prospects involved in deeper shade.

About this period Mrs. Robinson had the misfortune to lose her brave and respected father,--a
blow as forcible as unexpected, which nearly shook her faculties, and, for a time, wholly overwhelmed
her spirits. Captain Darby had, on the failure of his fortunes, been presented to the command
of a small ordnance vessel, through the interest of some of his noble associates in the Indian
expedition. Not having been regularly bred to the sea, this was the only naval appointment
which he could receive. Enthusiastically attached to his profession, he omitted no occasion
of signalising himself. The siege of Gibraltar, in the year 1783, afforded to him an opportunity
after which he had long panted, when his small vessel and gallant crew extorted by their courage
and exertions the admiration and applause of the fleet. Having fought till his rigging was
nearly destroyed, he turned his attention to the sinking Spaniards, whom he sought to snatch
from the flaming wrecks, floating around him in all directions, and had the satisfaction to
preserve, though at the hazard of his life, some hundreds of his fellow beings. The vessel
of Captain Darby was the first that reached the rock by nearly an hour. On his landing, General
Elliot received and embraced him with the plaudits due to his gallant conduct.

In the presence of his officers, the general lamented that so brave a man had not been bred
to a profession to which his intrepidity would have done distinguished honour. To this eulogium
he added, that, with the courage of a lion, Captain Darby possessed the firmness of the rock
which he had so bravely defended.

To his care was entrusted by the commander a copy of the despatches, which Captain Darby delivered
four and twenty hours before the arrival of the regular vessel. For this diligence, and the
conduct which had preceded it, he received the thanks of the Board of Admiralty, while on the
other captain was bestowed the more substantial recompense of five hundred pounds. An injustice
so glaring was not calculated to lessen Captain Darby's distaste for England, which he quitted,
after taking of his unhappy family an affectionate farewell.

At sixty-two years of age, he set out to regain in a foreign country the fortune he had sacrificed
in the service of his own. With powerful recommendations from the Duke of Dorset and the Count
de Simolin, he proceeded to Petersburg. From the Count de Simolin he continued to experience,
till the latest period of his existence, a steady and zealous friendship. Captain Darby had
been but two years in the Russian imperial service when he was promoted to the command of a
seventy-four gun ship, with a promise of the appointment of admiral on the first vacancy. On
the 5th of December, 1785, death put a stop to his career. He was buried with military honours,
and attended to the grave by his friends, Admiral Greig, the Counts Czernichef and De Simolin,
with the officers of the fleet.[43]

This honourable testimony to her father's worth was the only consolation remaining to his daughter,
whose enfeebled health and broken spirits sunk beneath these repeated strokes.

During the four succeeding years of the life of Mrs. Robinson, but few events occurred worthy
of remark. In search of lost health, which she had so long and vainly pursued, she determined
to repair to the baths of St. Amand, in Flanders, those receptacles of loathsome mud, and of
reptiles, unknown to other soils, which fasten on the bodies of those who bathe. Mrs. Robinson
made many visits to these distasteful ditches before she could prevail on herself to enter
them. Neither the example of her fellow sufferers, nor the assurance of cures performed by
their wonderful efficacy, could for a long time overcome her disgust. At length, solicitude
for the restoration of her health, added to the earnest remonstrances of her friends, determined
her on making the effort. For the purpose of being near the baths, which must be entered an
hour before the rising of the sun, she hired a small but beautiful cottage near the spring,
where she passed the summer of 1787. These peaceful vales and venerable woods were, at no distant
period, destined to become the seat of war and devastation, and the very cottage in which Mrs.
Robinson resided was converted into the headquarters of a Republican French general.[44]

Every endeavour to subdue her disorder proving ineffectual, Mrs. Robinson relinquished her
melancholy and fruitless pursuit, and resolved once more to return to her native land. Proceeding
through Paris, she reached England in the beginning of 1787, from which period may be dated
the commencement of her literary career. On her arrival in London she was affectionately received
by the few friends whose attachment neither detraction nor adverse fortunes could weaken or
estrange. During an absence of five years death had made inroads in the little circle of her
connections; many of those whose idea had been her solace in affliction, and whose welcome
she had delighted to anticipate, were now, alas! no more.[45]

Once more established in London, and surrounded by social and rational friends, Mrs. Robinson
began to experience comparative tranquillity. The Prince of Wales, with his brother the Duke
of York, frequently honoured her residence with their presence; but the state of her health,
which required more repose, added to the indisposition of her daughter, who was threatened
by a consumptive disorder, obliged her to withdraw to a situation of greater retirement. Maternal
solicitude for a beloved and only child now wholly engaged her attention; her assiduities were
incessant and exemplary for the restoration of a being to whom she had given life, and to whom
she was fondly devoted.

In the course of the summer she was ordered by her physician to Brighthelmstone, for the benefit
of sea bathing. During hours of tedious watching over the health of her suffering child, Mrs.
Robinson beguiled her anxiety by contemplating the ocean, whose successive waves, breaking
upon the shore, beat against the wall of their little garden. To a mind naturally susceptible,
and tinctured by circumstances with sadness, this occupation afforded a melancholy pleasure,
which could scarcely be relinquished without regret. Whole nights were passed by Mrs. Robinson
at her window in deep meditation, contrasting with her present situation the scenes of her
former life.

Every device which a kind and skilful nurse could invent to cheer and amuse her charge was
practised by this affectionate mother, during the melancholy period of her daughter's confinement.
In the intervals of more active exertion, the silence of a sick-chamber proving favourable
to the muse, Mrs. Robinson poured forth those poetic effusions which have done so much honour
to her genius and decked her tomb with unfading laurels. Conversing one evening with Mr. Richard
Burke,[46] respecting the facility with which modern poetry was composed, Mrs. Robinson repeated
nearly the whole of those beautiful lines, which were afterward given to the public, addressed:
"To him who will understand them."

      "LINES

      "TO HIM WHO WILL UNDERSTAND THEM

      "Thou art no more my bosom's friend;
      Here must the sweet delusion end,
      That charmed my senses many a year,
      Through smiling summers, winters drear.
      Oh, friendship! am I doomed to find
      Thou art a phantom of the mind?
      A glitt'ring shade, an empty name,
      An air-born vision's vap'rish flame?
      And yet, the dear deceit so long
      Has wak'd to joy my matin song,
      Has bid my tears forget to flow,
      Chas'd ev'ry pain, sooth'd ev'ry woe;
      That truth, unwelcome to my ear,
      Swells the deep sigh, recalls the tear,
      Gives to the sense the keenest smart,
      Checks the warm pulses of the heart,
      Darkens my fate, and steals away
      Each gleam of joy through life's sad day.

      "Britain, farewell! I quit thy shore;
      My native country charms no more;
      No guide to mark the toilsome road;
      No destin'd clime; no fix'd abode:
      Alone and sad, ordain'd to trace
      The vast expanse of endless space;
      To view, upon the mountain's height,
      Through varied shades of glimm'ring light,
      The distant landscape fade away
      In the last gleam of parting day:
      Or, on the quiv'ring lucid stream,
      To watch the pale moon's silv'ry beam;
      Or when, in sad and plaintive strains,
      The mournful Philomel complains,
      In dulcet tones bewails her fate,
      And murmurs for her absent mate;
      Inspir'd by sympathy divine,
      I'll weep her woes--for they are mine.
      Driv'n by my fate, where'er I go,
      O'er burning plains, o'er hills of snow,
      Or on the bosom of the wave,
      The howling tempest doom'd to brave,--
      Where'er my lonely course I bend,
      Thy image shall my steps attend;
      Each object I am doom'd to see,
      Shall bid remembrance picture thee.
      Yes; I shall view thee in each flow'r,
      That changes with the transient hour:
      Thy wand'ring fancy I shall find
      Borne on the wings of every wind:
      Thy wild impetuous passions trace
      O'er the white waves' tempestuous space;
      In every changing season prove
      An emblem of thy wav'ring love.

      "Torn from my country, friends, and you,
      The world lies open to my view;
      New objects shall my mind engage;
      I will explore th' historic page;
      Sweet poetry shall soothe my soul;
      Philosophy each pang control:
      The muse I'll seek--her lambent fire
      My soul's quick senses shall inspire;
      With finer nerves my heart shall beat,
      Touch'd by heav'n's own Promethean heat;
      Italia's gales shall bear my song
      In soft-link'd notes her woods among;
      Upon the blue hill's misty side,
      Thro' trackless deserts waste and wide,
      O'er craggy rocks, whose torrents flow
      Upon the silver sands below.
      Sweet land of melody! 'tis thine
      The softest passions to refine;
      Thy myrtle groves, thy melting strains,
      Shall harmonise and soothe my pains.
      Nor will I cast one thought behind,
      On foes relentless, friends unkind:
      I feel, I feel their poison'd dart
      Pierce the life-nerve within my heart;
      'Tis mingled with the vital heat
      That bids my throbbing pulses beat;
      Soon shall that vital heat be o'er,
      Those throbbing pulses beat no more!
      No--I will breathe the spicy gale;
      Plunge the clear stream, new health exhale;
      O'er my pale cheek diffuse the rose,
      And drink oblivion to my woes."

This improvisatore produced in her auditor not less surprise than admiration, when solemnly
assured by its author that this was the first time of its being repeated. Mr. Burke[47] entreated
her to commit the poem to writing, a request which was readily complied with. Mrs. Robinson
had afterward the gratification of finding this offspring of her genius inserted in the Annual
Register, with a flattering encomium from the pen of the eloquent and ingenious editor.

Mrs. Robinson continued to indulge in this solace for her dejected spirits, and in sonnets,
elegies, and odes, displayed the powers and versatility of her mind. On one of these nights
of melancholy inspiration she discovered from her window a small boat, struggling in the spray,
which dashed against the wall of her garden. Presently two fishermen brought on shore in their
arms a burthen, which, notwithstanding the distance, Mrs. Robinson perceived to be a human
body, which the fishermen, after covering with a sail from their boat, left on the land and
disappeared. But a short time elapsed before the men returned, bringing with them fuel, with
which they vainly endeavoured to reanimate their unfortunate charge. Struck with a circumstance
so affecting, which the stillness of the night rendered yet more impressive, Mrs. Robinson
remained some time at her window, motionless with horror. At length, recovering her recollection,
she alarmed the family; but before they could gain the beach the men had again departed. The
morning dawned, and day broke in upon the tragical scene. The bathers passed and reprised with
little concern, while the corpse continued extended on the shore, not twenty yards from the
Steine. During the course of the day, many persons came to look on the body, which still remained
unclaimed and unknown. Another day wore away, and the corpse was unburied, the lord of the
manor having refused to a fellow being a grave in which his bones might decently repose, alleging
as an excuse that he did not belong to that parish. Mrs. Robinson, humanely indignant at the
scene which passed, exerted herself, but without success, to procure by subscription a small
sum for performing the last duties to a wretched outcast. Unwilling, by an ostentatious display
of her name, to offend the higher and more fastidious female powers, she presented to the fishermen
her own contribution, and declined further to interfere. The affair dropped; and the body of
the stranger, being dragged to the cliff, was covered by a heap of stones, without the tribute
of a sigh or the ceremony of a prayer.

These circumstances made on the mind of Mrs. Robinson a deep and lasting impression; even at
a distant period she could not repeat them without horror and indignation. This incident gave
rise to the poem entitled "The Haunted Beach," written but a few months before her death.

In the winter of 1790, Mrs. Robinson entered into a poetical correspondence with Mr. Robert
Merry, under the fictitious names of "Laura," and "Laura Maria;" Mr. Merry assuming the title
of "Della Crusca."[48]

Mrs. Robinson now proceeded in her literary career with redoubled ardour; but, dazzled by the
false metaphors and rhapsodical extravagance of some contemporary writers, she suffered her
judgment to be misled and her taste to be perverted; an error of which she became afterward
sensible. During her poetical disguise, many complimentary poems were addressed to her; several
ladies of the Blue Stocking Club, while Mrs. Robinson remained unknown, even ventured to admire,
nay more, to recite her productions in their learned and critical coterie.

The attention which this novel species of correspondence excited, and the encomiums which were
passed on her poems, could not fail to gratify the pride of the writer, who sent her next performance,
with her own signature, to the paper published under the title of The World, avowing herself
at the same time the author of the lines signed "Laura," and "Laura Maria." This information
being received by Mr. Bell, though a professed admirer of the genius of Mrs. Robinson, with
some degree of skepticism, he replied, "That the poem with which Mrs. Robinson had honoured
him was vastly pretty; but that he was well acquainted with the author of the productions alluded
to." Mrs. Robinson, a little disgusted at this incredulity, immediately sent for Mr. Bell,
whom she found means to convince of her veracity, and of his own injustice.

In 1791 Mrs. Robinson produced her quarto poem, entitled "Ainsi va le Monde." This work, containing
three hundred and fifty lines, was written in twelve hours, as a reply to Mr. Merry's "Laurel
of Liberty," which was sent to Mrs. Robinson on a Saturday; on the Tuesday following the answer
was composed and given to the public.

Encouraged by popular approbation beyond her most sanguine hopes, Mrs. Robinson now published
her first essay in prose, in the romance of "Vancenza," of which the whole edition was sold
in one day, and of which five impressions have since followed. It must be confessed that this
production owed its popularity to the celebrity of the author's name, and the favourable impression
of her talents given to the public by her poetical compositions, rather than to its intrinsic
merit. In the same year the poems of Mrs. Robinson were collected and published in one volume.
The names of nearly six hundred subscribers, of the most distinguished rank and talents, graced
the list which precedes the work.

The mind of Mrs. Robinson, beguiled by these pursuits from preying upon itself, became gradually
reconciled to the calamitous state of her health; the mournful certainty of total and incurable
lameness, while yet in the bloom and summer of life, was alleviated by the consciousness of
intellectual resource, and by the activity of a fertile fancy. In 1791 she passed the greater
part of the summer at Bath, occupied in lighter poetical compositions. But even from this relief
she was now for awhile debarred; the perpetual exercise of the imagination and intellect, added
to a uniform and sedentary life, affected the system of her nerves, and contributed to debilitate
her frame. She was prohibited by her physician, not merely from committing her thoughts to
paper, but, had it been possible, from thinking at all. No truant, escaped from school, could
receive more pleasure in eluding a severe master, than did Mrs. Robinson, when, the vigilance
of her physician relaxing, she could once more resume her books and her pen.

As an example of the facility and rapidity with which she composed, the following anecdote
may be given. Returning one evening from the bath, she beheld, a few paces before her chair,
an elderly man, hurried along by a crowd of people, by whom he was pelted with mud and stones.
His meek and unresisting deportment exciting her attention, she inquired what were his offences,
and learned with pity and surprise that he was an unfortunate maniac, known only by the appellation
of "mad Jemmy." The situation of this miserable being seized her imagination and became the
subject of her attention. She would wait whole hours for the appearance of the poor maniac,
and, whatever were her occupations, the voice of mad Jemmy was sure to allure her to the window.
She would gaze upon his venerable but emaciated countenance with sensations of awe almost reverential,
while the barbarous persecutions of the thoughtless crowd never failed to agonise her feelings.

One night after bathing, having suffered from her disorder more than usual pain, she swallowed,
by order of her physician, near eighty drops of laudanum. Having slept for some hours, she
awoke, and calling her daughter, desired her to take a pen and write what she should dictate.
Miss Robinson, supposing that a request so unusual might proceed from the delirium excited
by the opium, endeavoured in vain to dissuade her mother from her purpose. The spirit of inspiration
was not to be subdued, and she repeated, throughout, the admirable poem of "The Maniac,"[49]
much faster than it could be committed to paper.

She lay, while dictating, with her eyes closed, apparently in the stupor which opium frequently
produces, repeating like a person talking in her sleep. This affecting performance, produced
in circumstances so singular, does no less credit to the genius than to the heart of the author.

On the ensuing morning Mrs. Robinson had only a confused idea of what had passed, nor could
be convinced of the fact till the manuscript was produced. She declared that she had been dreaming
of mad Jemmy throughout the night, but was perfectly unconscious of having been awake while
she composed the poem, or of the circumstances narrated by her daughter.

Mrs. Robinson, in the following summer, determined on another continental tour, purposing to
remain some time at Spa. She longed once more to experience the friendly greeting and liberal
kindness which even her acknowledged talents had in her native country failed to procure. She
quitted London in July, 1792, accompanied by her mother and daughter. The susceptible and energetic
mind, fortunately for its possessor, is endowed with an elastic power, that enables it to rise
again from the benumbing effects of those adverse strokes of fortune to which it is but too
vulnerable. If a lively imagination add poignancy to disappointment, it also has in itself
resources unknown to more equal temperaments. In the midst of the depressing feelings which
Mrs. Robinson experienced in once more becoming a wanderer from her home, she courted the inspiration
of the muse, and soothed, by the following beautiful stanzas, the melancholy sensations that
oppressed her heart.

      "STANZAS

      "WRITTEN BETWEEN DOVER AND CALAIS,

      "JULY 20, 1792

      "Bounding billow, cease thy motion,
        Bear me not so swiftly o'er;
      Cease thy roaring, foamy ocean,
        I will tempt thy rage no more.

      "Ah! within my bosom beating,
        Varying passions wildly reign;
      Love, with proud Resentment meeting,
        Throbs by turns, of joy and pain.

      "Joy, that far from foes I wander,
        Where their taunts can reach no more;
      Pain, that woman's heart grows fonder
        When her dream of bliss is o'er!

      "Love, by fickle fancy banish'd,
        Spurn'd by hope, indignant flies;
      Yet when love and hope are vanish'd,
        Restless mem'ry never dies.

      "Far I go, where fate shall lead me,
        Far across the troubled deep;
      Where no stranger's ear shall heed me,
        Where no eye for me shall weep.

      "Proud has been my fatal passion!
        Proud my injured heart shall be!
      While each thought, each inclination,
        Still shall prove me worthy thee!

      "Not one sigh shall tell my story;
        Not one tear my cheek shall stain;
      Silent grief shall be my glory,--
        Grief, that stoops not to complain!

      "Let the bosom prone to ranging,
        Still by ranging seek a cure;
      Mine disdains the thought of changing,
        Proudly destin'd to endure.

      "Yet, ere far from all I treasur'd,
        ----ere I bid adieu;
      Ere my days of pain are measur'd,
        Take the song that's still thy due!

      "Yet, believe, no servile passions
        Seek to charm thy vagrant mind;
      Well I know thy inclinations,
        Wav'ring as the passing wind.

      "I have lov'd thee,--dearly lov'd thee,
        Through an age of worldly woe;
      How ungrateful I have prov'd thee
        Let my mournful exile show!

      "Ten long years of anxious sorrow,
        Hour by hour I counted o'er;
      Looking forward, till to-morrow,
        Every day I lov'd thee more!

      "Pow'r and splendour could not charm me;
        I no joy in wealth could see!
      Nor could threats or fears alarm me,
        Save the fear of losing thee!

      "When the storms of fortune press'd thee,
        I have wept to see thee weep
      When relentless cares distress'd thee,
        I have lull'd those cares to sleep!

      "When with thee, what ills could harm me?
        Thou couldst every pang assuage;
      But when absent, nought could charm me;
        Every moment seem'd an age.

      "Fare thee well, ungrateful lover!
        Welcome Gallia's hostile shore:
      Now the breezes waft me over;
        Now we part--to meet no more."

On landing at Calais, Mrs. Robinson hesitated whether to proceed. To travel through Flanders,
then the seat of war, threatened too many perils to be attempted with impunity; she determined,
therefore, for some time to remain at Calais, the insipid and spiritless amusements of which
presented little either to divert her attention or engage her mind. Her time passed in listening
to the complaints of the impoverished aristocrats, or in attending to the air-built projects
of their triumphant adversaries. The arrival of travellers from England, or the return of those
from Paris, alone diversified the scene, and afforded a resource to the curious and active
inquirer.

The sudden arrival of her husband gave a turn to the feelings of Mrs. Robinson: he had crossed
the channel for the purpose of carrying back to England his daughter, whom he wished to present
to a brother newly returned from the East Indies. Maternal conflicts shook on this occasion
the mind of Mrs. Robinson, which hesitated between a concern for the interests of her beloved
child, from whom she had never been separated, and the pain of parting from her. She resolved
at length on accompanying her to England, and, with this view, quitted Calais on the memorable
2d of September, 1792,[50] a day which will reflect on the annals of the republic an indelible
stain.

They had sailed but a few hours when the arret arrived, by which every British subject throughout
France was restrained.

Mrs. Robinson rejoiced in her escape, and anticipated with delight the idea of seeing her daughter
placed in wealthy protection, the great passport in her own country to honour and esteem. Miss
Robinson received from her new relation the promise of protection and favour, upon condition
that she renounced for ever the filial tie which united her to both parents. This proposal
was rejected by the young lady with proper principle and becoming spirit.

In the year 1793 a little farce, entitled "Nobody," was written by Mrs. Robinson. This piece,
designed as a satire on female gamesters, was received at the theatre, the characters distributed,
and preparations made for its exhibition. At this period one of the principal performers gave
up her part, alleging that the piece was intended as a ridicule on her particular friend. Another
actress also, though in "herself a host," was intimidated by a letter, informing her that "'Nobody'
should be damned!" The author received likewise, on the same day, a scurrilous, indecent, and
ill-disguised scrawl, signifying to her that the farce was already condemned. On the drawing
up of the curtain, several persons in the galleries, whose liveries betrayed their employers,
were heard to declare that they were sent to do up "Nobody." Even women of distinguished rank
hissed through their fans. Notwithstanding these manoeuvres and exertions, the more rational
part of the audience seemed inclined to hear before they passed judgment, and, with a firmness
that never fails to awe, demanded that the piece should proceed. The first act was accordingly
suffered without interruption; a song in the second being unfortunately encored, the malcontents
once more ventured to raise their voices, and the malignity that had been forcibly suppressed
burst forth with redoubled violence. For three nights the theatre presented a scene of confusion,
when the authoress, after experiencing the gratification of a zealous and sturdy defence, thought
proper wholly to withdraw the cause of contention.[51]

