Such was the address with which my tutor greeted my entrance, and, during its progress, I popped
into a seat indicated by a sort of half wink from Thomas, resisting by a powerful act of self-control
a sudden impulse which seized me to bolt out of the room, and do something rash but indefinite,
between going to sea and taking prussic acid; not quite either, but partaking of the nature
of both. "Take soup, Fairlegh?" said Dr. Mildman. "Thank you, sir, if you please."

"A pleasant journey, had you?" inquired Mrs. Mildman.

"Not any, I am much obliged to you," I replied, thinking of the fish.

This produced a total silence, during which the pupils ~7~~exchanged glances, and Thomas concealed
an illicit smile behind the bread-basket.

"Does your father," began Dr. Mildman in a very grave and deliberate manner, "does your father
shoot?--boiled mutton, my dear?"

I replied that he had given it up of late years, as the fatigue was too much for him.

"Oh! I was very fond of carrying a gun-pepper-when I was-a spoon-at Oxford; I could hit a-mashed
potato-bird as well as most men; yes, I was very sorry to give up my double-barrel-ale, Thomas."

"You came inside, I believe?" questioned Mrs. Mildman, a lady possessing a shadowy outline,
indistinct features faintly characterised by an indefinite expression, long ringlets of an
almost impossible shade of whity-brown, and a complexion and general appearance only to be
described by the term "washed out".

"Yes, all the way, ma'am."

"Did you not dislike it very much? it creases one's gown so, unless it is a merino or mousseline-de-laine;
but one can't always wear them, you know."

Not being in the least prepared with a suitable answer, I merely made what I intended to be
an affirmative ahem, in doing which a crumb of bread chose to go the wrong way, producing a
violent fit of coughing, in the agonies of which I seized and drank off Dr. Mildman's tumbler
of ale, mistaking it for my own small beer. The effect of this, my crowning gaucherie, was
to call forth a languid smile on the countenance of the senior pupil, a tall young man, with
dark hair, and a rather forbidding expression of face, which struggled only too successfully
with an attempt to look exceedingly amiable; which smile was repeated with variations by all
the others.

"I'm afraid you do not distinctly perceive the difference between those important pronouns,
meum and tuum, Fairlegh? Thomas, a clean glass!" said Dr. Mildman, with a forced attempt at
drollery; but Thomas had evaporated suddenly, leaving no clue to his whereabouts, unless sundry
faint sounds of suppressed laughter outside the door, indicating, as I fancied, his extreme
appreciation of my unfortunate mistake, proceeded from him.

It is, I believe, a generally received axiom that all mortal affairs must sooner or later come
to an end; at all events, the dinner I have been describing did not form an exception to the
rule. In due time Mrs. Mildman disappeared, after which Dr. Mildman addressed a remark or two
about Greek tragedy to the tall pupil, which led to a ~8~~dissertation on the merits of a gentleman
named Prometheus, who, it seemed, was bound in some peculiar way, but whether this referred
to his apprenticeship to any trade, or to the cover of the book containing his history, did
not appear. This conversation lasted about ten minutes, at the expiration of which the senior
pupil "grinned horribly a ghastly smile" at the others, who instantly rose, and conveyed themselves
out of the room with such rapidity that I, being quite unprepared for such a proceeding, sat
for a moment in silent amazement, and then, becoming suddenly alive to a sense of my situation,
rushed frantically after them. My speed was checked somewhat abruptly by a door at the end
of the passage being violently slammed in my face, for which polite attention I was indebted
to the philanthropy of the hindmost pupil, who thereby imposed upon me the agreeable task of
feeling in the dark for a door-handle in an unknown locality. After fumbling for some time,
in a state of the greatest bewilderment I at length opened the door, and beheld the interior
of the "pupils' room," which, for the benefit of such of my readers as may never have seen
the like, I will now endeavour shortly to describe.

The parlour devoted to the pupils' use was of a good size, nearly square, and, like the cabin
of a certain "ould Irish gentleman," appeared to be fitted up with "nothing at all for show".
In three of the corners stood small tables covered with books and writing materials for the
use of Dr. Mildman and the two senior pupils; in the fourth was a book-case. The centre of
the room was occupied by a large square table, the common property of the other pupils; while
a carpet, "a little the worse for wear," and sundry veteran chairs, rather crazy from the treatment
to which many generations of pupils had subjected them (a chair being the favourite projectile
in the event of a shindy), completed the catalogue. Mr. Richard Cumberland, the senior pupil,
was lounging in an easy attitude on one side of the fireplace; on the other stood, bolt upright,
a lad rather older than myself, with a long unmeaning face, and a set of arms and legs which
appeared not to belong to one another. This worthy, as I soon learned, responded to the name
of Nathaniel Mullins, and usually served as the butt of the party in the absence of newer or
worthier game. Exactly in front of the fire, with his coat-tails under his arms, and his legs
extended like a pair of compasses, was stationed Mr. George Lawless, who, having been expelled
from one of the upper forms at Eton for some heroic exploit which the head master could not
be persuaded to ~9~~view in its proper light, was sent to vegetate for a year or two at Dr.
Mildman's ere he proceeded to one of the universities. This gentleman was of rather a short
thick-set figure, with a large head, and an expression of countenance resembling that of a
bull when the animal "means mischief," and was supposed by his friends to be more "thoroughly
wide awake" than any one of his years in the three kingdoms. The quartette was completed by
Mr. Frederick Coleman, a small lad, with a round merry face, who was perched on the back of
a chair, with his feet resting on the hob, and his person so disposed as effectually to screen
every ray of fire from Nathaniel Mullins.

"You are not cold, Fairlegh? Don't let me keep the fire from you," said Lawless, without, however,
showing the slightest intention of moving. "Not very, thank you."

"Eh! quite right--glad to hear it. It's Mildman's wish that, during the first half, no pupil
should come on the hearthrug. I made a point of conscience of it myself when I first came.
The Spartans, you know, never allowed their little boys to do so, and even the Athenians, a
much more luxurious people, always had their pinafores made of asbestos, or some such fireproof
stuff. You are well read in Walker's History of Greece, I hope?" I replied that I was afraid
I was not. "Never read Hookeyus Magnus? Your father ought to be ashamed of himself for neglecting
you so. You are aware, I suppose, that the Greeks had a different sort of fire from what we
burn nowadays? You've heard of Greek fire?"

I answered that I had, but did not exactly understand what it meant.

"Not know that, either? disgraceful! Well, it was a kind of way they had of flaring up in those
times a sort of 'light of other days,' which enabled them to give their friends a warm reception;
so much so, indeed, that their friends found it too warm sometimes, and latterly they usually
reserved it for their enemies. Mind you remember all this, for it is one of the first things
old Sam will be sure to ask you."

Did my ears deceive me? Could he have called the tutor, the dreaded tutor, "old Sam"? I trembled
as I stood--plain, unhonoured "Sam," as though he had spoken of a footman! The room turned
round with me. Alas for Sandford and Merton, and affectionate and respectful esteem!

"But how's this?" continued Lawless, "we have ~10~~forgotten to introduce you in form to your
companions, and to enter your name in the books of the establishment; why, Cumberland, what
were you thinking of?"

"Beg pardon," rejoined Cumberland, "I really was so buried in thought, trying to solve that
problem about bisecting the Siamese twins--you know it, Lawless? However, it is not too late,
is it? Allow me to introduce you, Mr. Fairplay------"

"Legh, sir," interrupted I.

"Ah, exactly; well, then, Mr. Fairlegh, let me introduce this gentleman, Mr. George Lawless,
who has, if I mistake not, been already trying, with his usual benevolence, to supply a few
of your deficiencies; he is, if he will allow me to say so, one of the most rising young men
of his generation, one of the firmest props of the glorious edifice of our rights and privileges."

"A regular brick," interposed Coleman. "Hold your tongue, Freddy: little boys should be seen
and not heard, as Tacitus tells us," said Lawless, reprovingly.

The only reply to this, if reply it could be called, was something which sounded to me like
a muttered reference to the Greek historian Walker, whom Lawless had so lately mentioned; and
Cumberland continued:--

"You will pay great attention to everything Lawless tells you, and endeavour to improve by
following his example, at a respectful distance--ahem! The gentleman on your right hand, Mr.
Mullins, who is chiefly remarkable for looking ['like a fool,' put in Coleman, sotto voce],
before he leaps, so long, that in general he postpones leaping altogether, and is in the habit
of making ['an ass of himself,' suggested Coleman]--really, Freddy, I am surprised at you--of
making two bites at a cherry--you will be better able to appreciate when you know more of him.
As to my young friend Freddy here, his naturally good abilities and amiable temper ['Draw it
mild, old fellow!' interrupted the young gentleman in question] have interested us so much
in his favour that we cannot but view with regret a habit he has of late fallen into, of turning
everything into ridicule ['What a pity!' from the same individual], together with a lamentable
addiction to the use of slang terms. I must hasten away."

And she did hasten, or, rather, she flew away.

Returning from as well as driving into Paris, the coachman put his
horses to full speed, and Cormeilles was reached before the soup was
cold.

Nevertheless, M. Moriaz had had abundant time for anxiety. He did
not take his seat at table without first questioning Mlle.

Moiseney; knowing nothing, she could give him no information; but
she responded indefinitely to his queries with that air of mystery
beneath which it was her wont to disguise her ignorance.

"Well, now for entering your name; that's important, you know," said Lawless; "you had better
ring the bell, and tell Thomas to bring the books."

I obeyed, and when Thomas made his appearance informed him of my desire to enter my name in
the books of the establishment, which I begged he would bring for that purpose. A look of bewilderment
that came over his face on hearing my request changed to an expression of intelligence, as,
after receiving some masonic sign from Lawless, he replied:--

"The books, sir; yes, sir; bring 'em directly, sir ".

After a few minutes he returned with two small, not overclean, books, ruled with blue lines.
One of these Lawless took from him, opened with much ceremony, and, covering the upper part
of the page with a bit of blotting paper, pointed to a line, and desired me to write my name
and age, as well as the date of my arrival, upon it. The .same ceremony was repeated with the
second.

"That's all right: now let's see how it reads," said he, and, removing the blotting paper,
read as follows: "'Pair of Wellingtons, £1 15s.; satin stock, 25s.; cap ribbon for Sally Duster,
2s. 6d.; box of cigars, £1 16s. (mem. shocking bad lot)--5th Nov., Francis Fairlegh, aged 15'.--So
much for that; now, let's see the next: 'Five shirts, four pair of stockings, six pocket-handkerchiefs,
two pair of white ducks--5th Nov., Francis Fairlegh, aged 15'."

Here his voice was drowned in a roar of laughter from the whole party assembled, Thomas included,
during which the true state of the case dawned upon me, viz.--that I had, with much pomp and
ceremony, entered my name, age, and the date of my arrival in Mr. George Lawless's private
account and washing books!

My thoughts, as I laid my aching head upon my pillow that night, were not of the most enviable
nature. Leaving for the first time the home where I had lived from childhood, and in which
I had met with affection and kindness from all around me, had been a trial under which my fortitude
would most assuredly have given way, but for the brilliant picture my imagination had very
obligingly sketched of the happy family of which I was about to become a member; in the foreground
of which stood a group of fellow-pupils, a united brotherhood of congenial ~12~~souls,, containing
three bosom friends at the very least, anxiously awaiting my arrival with outstretched arms
of welcome. Now, however, this last hope had failed me; for, innocent (or, as Coleman would
have termed it, green) as I then was, I could not but perceive that the tone of mock politeness
assumed towards me by Cumberland and Lawless was merely a convenient cloak for impertinence,
which could be thrown aside at any moment when a more open display of their powers of tormenting
should seem advisable. In fact (though I was little aware of the pleasures in store for me),
I had already seen enough to prove that the life of a private pupil was not exactly "all my
fancy painted it"; and, as the misery of leaving those I loved proved in its "sad reality"
a much more serious affair than I had imagined, the result of my cogitations was, that I was
a very unhappy boy (I did not feel the smallest inclination to boast myself man at that moment),
and that, if something very much to my advantage did not turn up in the course of the next
twenty-four hours, my friends would have the melancholy satisfaction of depositing a broken
heart (which, on the principle of the Kilkenny cats, was all I expected would remain of me
by that time) in an early grave. Hereabouts my feelings becoming too many for me at the thought
of my own funeral, I fairly gave up the struggle, and, bursting into a flood of tears, cried
myself to sleep, like a child.

CHAPTER II -- LOSS AND GAIN

     "And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw
     rheumatic day?"

     "His thefts were too open; his filching was like an
     unskilful singer, he kept not time.... Convey, the wise
     it call. 'Steal!' foh! a fico for the phrase!"--
     Shakspeare.

     "From Greenland's icy mountains."--Heber.

AMONGST the minor phenomena which are hourly occurring in the details of everyday life, although
we are seldom sufficiently close observers to perceive them, there is none more remarkable
than the change wrought in our feelings and ideas by a good night's rest; and never was this
change more strikingly exemplified than on the present occasion. I had fallen asleep in the
act of performing the character of chief-mourner at my own funeral, and I awoke ~13~~in the
highest possible health and spirits, with a strong determination never to "say die" under any
conceivable aspect affairs might assume. "What in the world," said I to myself, as I sprang
out of bed, and began to dress,--"What in the world was there for me to make myself so miserable
about last night? He has occasionally observed it spoken of as "an amusing and laughable" story;
but he cannot help thinking that no one will so characterize it, who may take the trouble of
reading it throughout, and be capable of comprehending its scope and object.
 As to Coleman, I am certain------Well, it's very
odd!"--this last remark was elicited by the fact that a search I had been making for some minutes,
in every place possible and impossible, for that indispensable article of male attire, my trousers,
had proved wholly ineffectual, although I had a distinct recollection of having placed them
carefully on a chair by my bedside the previous night. There, however, they certainly were
not now, nor, as far as I could discover, anywhere else in the room. Under these circumstances,
ringing the bell for Thomas seemed advisable, as it occurred to me that he had probably abstracted
the missing garment for the purpose of brushing. In a few moments he answered the summons,
and, with a face bright from the combined effects of a light heart and a severe application
of yellow soap, inquired, "if I had rung for my shaving water?"

"Why, no---I do not--that is, it was not--I seldom shave of a morning; for the fact is, I have
no beard to shave as yet."

"Oh, sir, that's no reason; there's Mr. Coleman's not got the leastest westige of a hair upon
his chin, and he's been mowing away with the greatest of persewerance for the last six months,
and sends his rashier to be ground every three weeks, regilar, in order to get a beard--but
what can I do for you, sir?"

"Why," replied I, trying to look grave, "it's very odd, but I have lost--that is, I can't find--my
trousers anywhere. I put them on this chair last night, I know."

"Umph! that's sing'lar, too; I was just a coming upstairs to brush 'em for you; you did not
hear anybody come into your room after you went to bed, did you, sir?"

"No; but then I was so tired--I slept as sound as a top."

"Ah! I shouldn't much wonder if Mr. Coleman knew something about 'em: perhaps you had better
put on another pair, and, if I can find 'em, I'll bring 'em back after breakfast."

This was very good advice, and, therefore, of course, ~14~~impossible to follow; for, on examining
my trunk, lo and behold! dress pantaloons, white ducks, et hoc genus omne, had totally disappeared,
and I seemed to stand a very good chance of making my first appearance at my tutor's breakfast-table
in an extemporary "kilt," improvised for the occasion out of two towels and a checked neckcloth.
In this extremity Thomas, as a last resource, knocked at Coleman's door, informing him that
I should be glad to speak to him--a proceeding speedily followed by the appearance of that
gentleman in propria persona.

"Good-morning, Fairlegh! hope you slept well. You are looking cold; had not you better get
some clothes on? Mildman will be down in a minute, and there will be a pretty row if we are
not all there; he's precious particular, I can tell you."

"That is exactly what I want to do," replied I; "but the fact is, somebody has taken away all
my trousers in the night."

"Bless me! you don't say so? Another case of pilfering! this is getting serious: I will call
Lawless--I say, Lawless!" "Well, what's the row?" was the reply. "Have the French landed? or
is the kitchen chimney on fire? eh! What do I behold! Fairlegh, lightly and elegantly attired
in nothing but his shirt, and Thomas standing like Niobe, the picture of woe! Here's a sight
for a father!"

"Why, it's a bad job," said Coleman; "do you know, here's another case of pilfering; Fairlegh
has had all his trousers stolen in the night."

"You don't say so!" rejoined Lawless: "what is to be done? It must be stopped somehow: we had
better tell him all we know about it. Thomas, leave the room."

Thomas obeyed, giving me a look of great intelligence, the meaning of which, however, I was
totally at a loss to conceive, as he went; and Lawless continued:--

"I am afraid you will hardly believe us,--it is really a most unheard-of thing,--but we have
lately missed a great many of our clothes, and we have every reason to suspect (I declare I
can scarcely bear to mention it) that Mildman takes them himself, fancying, of course, that,
placed by his position so entirely above suspicion, he may do it with impunity. We have suspected
this for some time; and lately one or two circumstances--old clothesmen having been observed
leaving his study, a pawn-ticket falling out of his waistcoat pocket one day as he went out
of our parlour, etc.--have put the matter beyond a doubt; but he has never gone to such an
extent as this before. Mind you don't mention a word of this to Thomas, for, bad as ~15~~Mildman
is, one would not wish to show him up before his own servant."

"Good gracious!" cried I, "but you are joking, it never can be really true!" Reading, however,
in the solemn, not to say distressed, expression of their faces indisputable evidence of the
reality of the accusation, I continued: "I had no idea such things ever could take place, and
he a clergyman, too!--dreadful! but what in the world am I to do? I have not got a pair of
trousers to put on. Oh! if he would but have taken anything else, even my watch instead, I
should not have minded--what shall I do?"

"Why really," replied Coleman, "it is not so easy to advise: you can't go down as you are,
that's certain. Suppose you were to wrap yourself up in a blanket, and go and tell him you
have found him out, and that you will call a policeman if he does not give you your clothes
instantly; have it out with him fairly, and check the thing effectually once for all--eh?"

"No, that won't do," said Lawless. "I should say, sit down quietly (how cold you must be!)
and write him a civil note, saying, that you had reason to believe he had borrowed your trousers
(that's the way I should put it), and that you would be very much gratified by his lending
you a pair to wear to-day; and then you can stick in something about your having been always
accustomed to live with people who were very particular in regard to dress, and that you are
sorry you are obliged to trouble him for such a trifle; in fact, do a bit of the respectful,
and then pull up short with 'obedient pupil,' etc."

"Ay, that's the way to do it," said Coleman, "in the shop-fellow's style, you know--much obliged
for past favours, and hope for a continuance of the same--more than you do, though, Fairlegh,
I should fancy; but there goes the bell--I am off," and away he scudded, followed by Lawless
humming:--

          "Brian O'Lynn had no breeches to wear,
          So he took an old catskin, and made him a pair."

Here was a pretty state of things: the breakfast bell had rung, and I, who considered being
too late a crime of the first magnitude, was unable even to begin dressing from the melancholy
fact that every pair of trousers I possessed in the world had disappeared; while, to complete
my misery, I was led to believe the delinquent who had abstracted them was no less a person
than the tutor, whom I had come fully prepared to regard with feelings of the utmost respect
and veneration.

~16~~However, in such a situation, thinking over my miseries was worse than useless; something
must be done at once--but what? Write the note as Lawless had advised? No, it was useless to
think of that; I felt I could not do it. "Ah! a bright idea!--I'll try it." So, suiting the
action to the word, I rang the bell, and then jumping into bed muffled myself up in the bedclothes.

"Well, sir, have you found them?" asked Thomas, entering.

"No, Thomas," replied I dolefully, "nor ever shall, I fear; but will you go to 'Dr. Mildman,
and tell him, with my respects, that I cannot get up to breakfast this morning, and, if he
asks what is the matter with me, say that I am prevented from coming down by severe cold. I
am sure that is true enough," added I, shivering.

"Well, sir, I will, if you wish it; but I don't exactly see the good of it; you must get up
some time or other."

"I don't know," replied I gloomily, "we shall see; only do you take my message."

And he accordingly left the room, muttering as he did so, "Well, I calls this a great deal
too bad, and I'll tell master of it myself, if nobody else won't".

"Tell master of it himself!"--he also suspected him then. This crushed my last faint hope that,
after all, it might turn out to be only a trick of the pupils; and, overpowered by the utter
vileness and depravity of him who was set in authority over me, I buried my face in the pillow,
feeling a strong inclination to renew the lamentations of the preceding night. Not many minutes
had elapsed when the sound of a heavy footstep slowly ascending the stairs attracted my attention.
I raised my head, and beheld the benevolent countenance (for even then it certainly did wear
a benevolent expression) of my wicked tutor, regarding me with a mingled look of scrutiny and pity. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

The Author of this Work begs gratefully to express his conviction
that no small share of any success which it may have met with, is
attributable to the circumstance of its having had the advantage of
an introduction to the public through the medium of Blackwood's Magazine--a
distinguished periodical, to which he feels it an honor to have been,
for a time, a contributor.

One word, only, he ventures to offer, with reference to the general character and tendency
of "TEN THOUSAND A-YEAR."

~17~~"I, my boy!--I'm afraid not; my pretensions to the title of doctor are based on divinity,
not physic:--however, put out your tongue--that's right enough; let me feel your hand--a little
cold or so, but nothing to signify; did this kind of seizure ever happen to you at home?"

Well, this was adding insult to injury with a vengeance; not content with stealing my clothes
himself, but actually asking me whether such things did not happen at home! The wretch! thought
I; does he suppose that everybody is as wicked as himself?

"No," I answered, my voice trembling with the anger I was scarcely able to repress; "no, sir,
such a thing never could happen in my dear father's house."

"There, don't agitate yourself; you seem excited: perhaps you had better lie in bed a little
longer; I will send you up something warm, and after that you may feel more inclined to get
up," said he kindly, adding to himself, as he left the room, "Very strange boy--I can't make
him out at all".

The door closed, and I was once more alone. "Is he guilty or not guilty?" thought I; "if he
really has taken the clothes, he is the most accomplished hypocrite I ever heard of; yet he
must have done so, everything combines to prove it--Thomas's speech--nay, even his own offer
of sending me 'something warm'; something warm, indeed! what do I want with anything warm,
except my trousers? No! the fact was beyond dispute; they were gone, and he had stolen them,
whilst I, unhappy youth, was entirely in his power, and had not therefore a chance of redress.
'But I will not bear it,' cried I, 'I'll write to my father--I'll run away--I'll------'"

"Hurrah!" shouted Thomas, rushing into the room with his arm full of clothes, "here they are,
sir; I have found the whole kit of them at last."

"Where?" exclaimed I eagerly.

"Where? why in such a queer place!" replied he, "stuffed up the chimbley in master's study;
but I have given them a good brushing, and they are none the worse for it, except them blessed
white ducks; they are almost black ducks now, though they will wash, so that don't signify none."

"Up the chimney, in master's study!" here was at last proof positive; my clothes had been actually
found in his possession--oh, the wickedness of this world!

"But how did you ever find them?" asked I.

"Why! I happened to go in to fetch something, and I see'd a little bit of the leg of one of
them hanging down ~18~~the chimbley, so I guessed how it all was, directly. I think I know
how they got there, too; they did not walk there by themselves, I should say."

"I wish they had," muttered I.

"I thought somebody was up too early this morning to be about any good," continued he; "he
is never out of bed till the last moment, without there's some mischief in the wind."

This was pretty plain speaking, however. Thomas was clearly as well aware of his master's nefarious
practices as the pupils themselves, and Lawless's amiable desire to conceal Dr. Mildman's sins
from his servant's knowledge was no longer of any avail. I hastened, therefore (the only reason
for silence being thus removed), to relieve my mind from the burden of just indignation which
was oppressing it.

"And can you, Thomas," exclaimed I, with flashing eyes, "remain the servant of a man who dares
thus to outrage every law, human and divine? one who having taken upon himself the sacred office
of a clergyman of the Church of England, and so made it his especial duty to set a good example
to all around him, can take advantage of the situation in which he is placed in regard to his
pupils, and actually demean himself by purloining the clothes of the young men" (I felt five-and-twenty
at the very least at that moment) "committed to his charge?--why, my father------"

What I imagined my father would have said or done under these circumstances was fated to remain
a mystery, as my eloquence was brought to a sudden conclusion by my consternation, when a series
of remarkable phenomena, which had been developing themselves during my harangue in the countenance
of Thomas, terminated abruptly in what appeared to me a fit of most unmitigated insanity. A
look of extreme astonishment, which he had assumed at the beginning of my speech, had given
place to an expression of mingled surprise and anger as I continued; which again in its turn
had yielded to a grin of intense amusement, growing every moment broader and broader, accompanied
by a spasmodic twitching of his whole person; and, as I mentioned his master's purloining my
trousers, he suddenly sprang up from the floor nearly a yard high, and commenced an extempore
pas seul of a Jim Crow character, which he continued with unabated vigour during several minutes.
This "Mazurka d'ecstase," or whatever a ballet-master would have called it, having at length,
to my great joy, concluded, the performer of it sank exhausted into a chair, and regarding
me with a face still ~19~~somewhat the worse for his late violent exertions favoured me with
the following geographical remark:--

"Well, I never did believe in the existence of sich a place as Greenland before, but there's
nowhere else as you could have come from, sir, I am certain."

"Eh! why! what's the matter with you? have I done anything particularly 'green,' as you call
it? what are you talking about?" said I, not feeling exactly pleased at the reception my virtuous
indignation had met with.

"Oh! don't be angry, sir; I am sure I did not mean to offend you; but really I could not help
it, when I heard you say about master's having stole your things. Oh lor!" he added, holding
his sides with both hands, "how my precious sides do ache, sure-ly!"

"Do you consider that any laughing matter?" said I, still in the dark.

"Oh! don't, sir, don't say it again, or you will be the death of me," replied Thomas, struggling
against a relapse; "why, bless your innocence, what could ever make you think master would
take your clothes?"

"Make me think? why, Lawless told me so," answered I, "and he also said it was not the first
time such a thing had occurred either."

"You'll have enough to do, sir, if you believe all our young gents tell you; why, master would
as soon think of flying as of stealing anything. It was Mr. Coleman as put them up the chimbley;
he's always a playing some trick or another for everlasting."

A pause ensued, during which the whole affair in its true bearings became for the first time
clear to my mind's eye; the result of my cogitations may be gathered from the following remark,
which escaped me as it were involuntarily--"What a confounded ass I have made of myself, to
be sure!"

Should any of my readers be rude enough to agree with me in this particular, let them reflect
for a moment on the peculiar position in which I was placed. Having lived from childhood in
a quiet country parsonage, with my father and mother, and a sister younger than myself, as
my sole companions, "mystification"--that is, telling deliberate falsehoods by way of a joke--was
a perfectly novel idea to me; and, when that joke involved the possibility of such serious
consequences as offending the tutor under whose care we were placed, I (wholly ignorant of
the impudence and recklessness of public school boys) considered such a solution of the mystery
inconceivable. Moreover, everything around me was so strange, and so entirely ~20~~different
from the habits of life in which I had been hitherto brought up, that for the time my mind
was completely bewildered. I appeared to have lost my powers of judgment, and to have relapsed,
as far as intellect was concerned, into childhood again. My readers must excuse this digression,
but it appeared to me necessary to explain how it was possible for a lad of fifteen to have
been made the victim of such a palpably absurd deception without its involving the necessity
of his not being "so sharp as he should be".

The promised "something warm" made its appearance ere long, in the shape of tea and toast,
which, despite my alarming seizure, I demolished with great gusto in bed (for I did not dare
to get up), feeling, from the fact of my having obtained it under false pretences, very like
a culprit all the while. Having finished my breakfast, and allowed sufficient time to elapse
for my recovery, I got up, and, selecting a pair of trousers which appeared to have suffered
less from their sojourn in the chimney than the others, dressed myself, and soon after eleven
o'clock made my appearance in the pupils' room, where I found Dr. Mildman seated at his desk,
and the pupils apparently very hard at work.

"How do you find yourself now you are up, Fairlegh?" inquired my tutor kindly.

"Quite well, sir, thank you," I replied, feeling like an impostor.

"Quite recovered?" continued he.

"Everything--entirely, I mean," stammered I, thinking of my trousers.

"That's well, and now let us see what kind of Latin and Greek lining you have got to your head."

