So Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe became almost as tired of England as his royal master Richard was,
(who always quitted the country when he had squeezed from his loyal nobles, commons, clergy,
and Jews, all the money which he could get,) and when the lion-hearted Prince began to make
war against the French King, in Normandy and Guienne, Sir Wilfrid pined like a true servant
to be in company of the good champion, alongside of whom he had shivered so many lances, and
dealt such woundy blows of sword and battle-axe on the plains of Jaffa or the breaches of Acre.
Travellers were welcome at Rotherwood that brought news from the camp of the good King: and
I warrant me that the knight listened with all his might when Father Drono, the chaplain, read
in the St. James's Chronykyll (which was the paper of news he of Ivanhoe took in) of "another
glorious triumph"--"Defeat of the French near Blois"--"Splendid victory at Epte, and narrow
escape of the French King:" the which deeds of arms the learned scribes had to narrate.

However such tales might excite him during the reading, they left the Knight of Ivanhoe only
the more melancholy after listening: and the more moody as he sat in his great hall silently
draining his Gascony wine. Silently sat he and looked at his coats-of-mail hanging vacant on
the wall, his banner covered with spider-webs, and his sword and axe rusting there. "Ah, dear
axe," sighed he (into his drinking-horn)--"ah, gentle steel! that was a merry time when I sent
thee crashing into the pate of the Emir Abdul Melik as he rode on the right of Saladin. Ah,
my sword, my dainty headsman? my sweet split-rib? my razor of infidel beards! is the rust to
eat thine edge off, and am I never more to wield thee in battle? What is the use of a shield
on a wall, or a lance that has a cobweb for a pennon? O Richard, my good king, would I could
hear once more thy voice in the front of the onset! Bones of Brian the Templar? would ye could
rise from your grave at Templestowe, and that we might break another spear for honor and--and--"
. . .

"And REBECCA," he would have said; but the knight paused here in rather a guilty panic: and
her Royal Highness the Princess Rowena (as she chose to style herself at home) looked so hard
at him out of her china-blue eyes, that Sir Wilfrid felt as if she was reading his thoughts,
and was fain to drop his own eyes into his flagon.

In a word, his life was intolerable. The dinner hour of the twelfth century, it is known, was
very early; in fact, people dined at ten o'clock in the morning: and after dinner Rowena sat
mum under her canopy, embroidered with the arms of Edward the Confessor, working with her maidens
at the most hideous pieces of tapestry, representing the tortures and martyrdoms of her favorite
saints, and not allowing a soul to speak above his breath, except when she chose to cry out
in her own shrill voice when a handmaid made a wrong stitch, or let fall a ball of worsted.
It was a dreary life. Wamba, we have said, never ventured to crack a joke, save in a whisper,
when he was ten miles from home; and then Sir Wilfrid Ivanhoe was too weary and blue-devilled
to laugh; but hunted in silence, moodily bringing down deer and wild-boar with shaft and quarrel.

Then he besought Robin of Huntingdon, the jolly outlaw, nathless, to join him, and go to the
help of their fair sire King Richard, with a score or two of lances. But the Earl of Huntingdon
was a very different character from Robin Hood the forester. There was no more conscientious
magistrate in all the county than his lordship: he was never known to miss church or quarter-sessions;
he was the strictest game-proprietor in all the Riding, and sent scores of poachers to Botany
Bay. "A man who has a stake in the country, my good Sir Wilfrid," Lord Huntingdon said, with
rather a patronizing air (his lordship had grown immensely fat since the King had taken him
into grace, and required a horse as strong as an elephant to mount him)--"a man with a stake
in the country ought to stay IN the country. Property has its duties as well as its privileges,
and a person of my rank is bound to live on the land from which he gets his living."

"'Amen!" sang out the Reverend ---- Tuck, his lordship's domestic chaplain, who had also grown
as sleek as the Abbot of Jorvaulx, who was as prim as a lady in his dress, wore bergamot in
his handkerchief, and had his poll shaved and his beard curled every day. And so sanctified
was his Reverence grown, that he thought it was a shame to kill the pretty deer, (though he
ate of them still hugely, both in pasties and with French beans and currant-jelly,) and being
shown a quarter-staff upon a certain occasion, handled it curiously, and asked "what that ugly
great stick was?"

Lady Huntingdon, late Maid Marian, had still some of her old fun and spirits, and poor Ivanhoe
begged and prayed that she would come and stay at Rotherwood occasionally, and egayer the general
dulness of that castle. But her ladyship said that Rowena gave herself such airs, and bored
her so intolerably with stories of King Edward the Confessor, that she preferred any place
rather than Rotherwood, which was as dull as if it had been at the top of Mount Athos.

The only person who visited it was Athelstane. "His Royal Highness the Prince" Rowena of course
called him, whom the lady received with royal honors. She had the guns fired, and the footmen
turned out with presented arms when he arrived; helped him to all Ivanhoe's favorite cuts of
the mutton or the turkey, and forced her poor husband to light him to the state bedroom, walking
backwards, holding a pair of wax-candles. At this hour of bedtime the Thane used to be in such
a condition, that he saw two pair of candles and two Ivanhoes reeling before him. Let us hope
it was not Ivanhoe that was reeling, but only his kinsman's brains muddled with the quantities
of drink which it was his daily custom to consume. Rowena said it was the crack which the wicked
Bois Guilbert, "the Jewess's OTHER lover, Wilfrid my dear," gave him on his royal skull, which
caused the Prince to be disturbed so easily; but added, that drinking became a person of royal
blood, and was but one of the duties of his station.

Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe saw it would be of no avail to ask this man to bear him company on his
projected tour abroad; but still he himself was every day more and more bent upon going, and
he long cast about for some means of breaking to his Rowena his firm resolution to join the
King. He thought she would certainty fall ill if he communicated the news too abruptly to her:
he would pretend a journey to York to attend a grand jury; then a call to London on law business
or to buy stock; then he would slip over to Calais by the packet, by degrees as it were; and
so be with the King before his wife knew that he was out of sight of Westminster Hall.

"Suppose your honor says you are going as your honor would say Bo! to a goose, plump, short,
and to the point," said Wamba the Jester--who was Sir Wilfrid's chief counsellor and attendant--"depend
on't her Highness would bear the news like a Christian woman."

"Tush, malapert! I will give thee the strap," said Sir Wilfrid, in a fine tone of high-tragedy
indignation. "Thou knowest not the delicacy of the nerves of high-born ladies. An she faint
not, write me down Hollander."

"I will wager my bauble against an Irish billet of exchange that she will let your honor go
off readily: that is, if you press not the matter too strongly," Wamba answered, knowingly.
And this Ivanhoe found to his discomfiture: for one morning at breakfast, adopting a degage
air, as he sipped his tea, he said, "My love, I was thinking of going over to pay his Majesty
a visit in Normandy." Upon which, laying down her muffin, (which, since the royal Alfred baked
those cakes, had been the chosen breakfast cate of noble Anglo-Saxons, and which a kneeling
page tendered to her on a salver, chased by the Florentine, Benvenuto Cellini,)--"When do you
think of going, Wilfrid my dear?" the lady said; and the moment the tea-things were removed,
and the tables and their trestles put away, she set about mending his linen, and getting ready
his carpet-bag.

So Sir Wilfrid was as disgusted at her readiness to part with him as he had been weary of staying
at home, which caused Wamba the Fool to say, "Marry, gossip, thou art like the man on ship-board,
who, when the boatswain flogged him, did cry out 'Oh!' wherever the rope's-end fell on him:
which caused Master Boatswain to say, 'Plague on thee, fellow, and a pize on thee, knave, wherever
I hit thee there is no pleasing thee.'"

"And truly there are some backs which Fortune is always belaboring," thought Sir Wilfrid with
a groan, "and mine is one that is ever sore."

So, with a moderate retinue, whereof the knave Wamba made one, and a large woollen comforter
round his neck, which his wife's own white fingers had woven, Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe left home
to join the King his master. Rowena, standing on the steps, poured out a series of prayers
and blessings, most edifying to hear, as her lord mounted his charger, which his squires led
to the door. "It was the duty of the British female of rank," she said, "to suffer all--ALL
in the cause of her sovereign. SHE would not fear loneliness during the campaign: she would
bear up against widowhood, desertion, and an unprotected situation."

"My cousin Athelstane will protect thee," said Ivanhoe, with profound emotion, as the tears
trickled down his basenet; and bestowing a chaste salute upon the steel-clad warrior, Rowena
modestly said "she hoped his Highness would be so kind."

Then Ivanhoe's trumpet blew: then Rowena waved her pocket-handkerchief: then the household
gave a shout: then the pursuivant of the good Knight, Sir Wilfrid the Crusader, flung out his
banner (which was argent, a gules cramoisy with three Moors impaled sable): then Wamba gave
a lash on his mule's haunch, and Ivanhoe, heaving a great sigh, turned the tail of his war-horse
upon the castle of his fathers.

As they rode along the forest, they met Athelstane the Thane powdering along the road in the
direction of Rotherwood on his great dray-horse of a charger. "Good-by, good luck to you, old
brick," cried the Prince, using the vernacular Saxon. "Pitch into those Frenchmen; give it
'em over the face and eyes; and I'll stop at home and take care of Mrs. I."

"Thank you, kinsman," said Ivanhoe--looking, however, not particularly well pleased; and the
chiefs shaking hands, the train of each took its different way--Athelstane's to Rotherwood,
Ivanhoe's towards his place of embarkation.

The poor knight had his wish, and yet his face was a yard long and as yellow as a lawyer's
parchment; and having longed to quit home any time these three years past, he found himself
envying Athelstane, because, forsooth, he was going to Rotherwood: which symptoms of discontent
being observed by the witless Wamba, caused that absurd madman to bring his rebeck over his
shoulder from his back, and to sing--

               "ATRA CURA.

     "Before I lost my five poor wits,
     I mind me of a Romish clerk,
     Who sang how Care, the phantom dark,
     Beside the belted horseman sits.
     Methought I saw the griesly sprite
     Jump up but now behind my Knight."

"Perhaps thou didst, knave," said Ivanhoe, looking over his shoulder; and the knave went on
with his jingle:

     "And though he gallop as he may,
     I mark that cursed monster black
     Still sits behind his honor's back,
     Tight squeezing of his heart alway.
     Like two black Templars sit they there,
     Beside one crupper, Knight and Care.

     "No knight am I with pennoned spear,
     To prance upon a bold destrere:
     I will not have black Care prevail
     Upon my long-eared charger's tail,
     For lo, I am a witless fool,
     And laugh at Grief and ride a mule."

And his bells rattled as he kicked his mule's sides.

"Silence, fool!" said Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, in a voice both majestic and wrathful. "If thou
knowest not care and grief, it is because thou knowest not love, whereof they are the companions.
Who can love without an anxious heart? How shall there be joy at meeting, without tears at
parting?" ("I did not see that his honor or my lady shed many anon," thought Wamba the Fool;
but he was only a zany, and his mind was not right.) "I would not exchange my very sorrows
for thine indifference," the knight continued. "Where there is a sun, there must be a shadow.
If the shadow offend me, shall I put out my eyes and live in the dark? No! I am content with
my fate, even such as it is. The Care of which thou speakest, hard though it may vex him, never
yet rode down an honest man. I can bear him on my shoulders, and make my way through the world's
press in spite of him; for my arm is strong, and my sword is keen, and my shield has no stain
on it; and my heart, though it is sad, knows no guile." And here, taking a locket out of his
waistcoat (which was made of chain-mail), the knight kissed the token, put it back under the
waistcoat again, heaved a profound sigh, and stuck spurs into his horse.

As for Wamba, he was munching a black pudding whilst Sir Wilfrid was making the above speech,
(which implied some secret grief on the knight's part, that must have been perfectly unintelligible
to the fool,) and so did not listen to a single word of Ivanhoe's pompous remarks. They travelled
on by slow stages through the whole kingdom, until they came to Dover, whence they took shipping
for Calais. And in this little voyage, being exceedingly sea-sick, and besides elated at the
thought of meeting his sovereign, the good knight cast away that profound melancholy which
had accompanied him during the whole of his land journey.

CHAPTER II.

THE LAST DAYS OF THE LION.

From Calais Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe took the diligence across country to Limoges, sending on
Gurth, his squire, with the horses and the rest of his attendants: with the exception of Wamba,
who travelled not only as the knight's fool, but as his valet, and who, perched on the roof
of the carriage, amused himself by blowing tunes upon the conducteur's French horn. The good
King Richard was, as Ivanhoe learned, in the Limousin, encamped before a little place called
Chalus; the lord whereof, though a vassal of the King's, was holding the castle against his
sovereign with a resolution and valor which caused a great fury and annoyance on the part of
the Monarch with the Lion Heart. For brave and magnanimous as he was, the Lion-hearted one
did not love to be balked any more than another; and, like the royal animal whom he was said
to resemble, he commonly tore his adversary to pieces, and then, perchance, had leisure to
think how brave the latter had been. The Count of Chalus had found, it was said, a pot of money;
the royal Richard wanted it. As the count denied that he had it, why did he not open the gates
of his castle at once? It was a clear proof that he was guilty; and the King was determined
to punish this rebel, and have his money and his life too.

He had naturally brought no breaching guns with him, because those instruments were not yet
invented: and though he had assaulted the place a score of times with the utmost fury, his
Majesty had been beaten back on every occasion, until he was so savage that it was dangerous
to approach the British Lion. The Lion's wife, the lovely Berengaria, scarcely ventured to
come near him. He flung the joint-stools in his tent at the heads of the officers of state,
and kicked his aides-de-camp round his pavilion; and, in fact, a maid of honor, who brought
a sack-posset in to his Majesty from the Queen after he came in from the assault, came spinning
like a football out of the royal tent just as Ivanhoe entered it.

"Send me my drum-major to flog that woman!" roared out the infuriate King. "By the bones of
St. Barnabas she has burned the sack! By St. Wittikind, I will have her flayed alive. Ha, St.
George! ha, St. Richard! whom have we here?" And he lifted up his demi-culverin, or curtal-axe--a
weapon weighing about thirteen hundredweight--and was about to fling it at the intruder's head,
when the latter, kneeling gracefully on one knee, said calmly, "It is I, my good liege, Wilfrid
of Ivanhoe."

"What, Wilfrid of Templestowe, Wilfrid the married man, Wilfrid the henpecked!" cried the King
with a sudden burst of good-humor, flinging away the culverin from him, as though it had been
a reed (it lighted three hundred yards off, on the foot of Hugo de Bunyon, who was smoking
a cigar at the door of his tent, and caused that redoubted warrior to limp for some days after).
"What, Wilfrid my gossip? Art come to see the lion's den? There are bones in it, man, bones
and carcasses, and the lion is angry," said the King, with a terrific glare of his eyes. "But
tush! we will talk of that anon. Ho! bring two gallons of hypocras for the King and the good
Knight, Wilfrid of Ivanhoe. Thou art come in time, Wilfrid, for, by St. Richard and St. George,
we will give a grand assault to-morrow. There will be bones broken, ha!"

"I care not, my liege," said Ivanhoe, pledging the sovereign respectfully, and tossing off
the whole contents of the bowl of hypocras to his Highness's good health. And he at once appeared
to be taken into high favor; not a little to the envy of many of the persons surrounding the King.

As his Majesty said, there was fighting and feasting in plenty before Chalus. Day after day,
the besiegers made assaults upon the castle, but it was held so stoutly by the Count of Chalus
and his gallant garrison, that each afternoon beheld the attacking-parties returning disconsolately
to their tents, leaving behind them many of their own slain, and bringing back with them store
of broken heads and maimed limbs, received in the unsuccessful onset. The valor displayed by
Ivanhoe in all these contests was prodigious; and the way in which he escaped death from the
discharges of mangonels, catapults, battering-rams, twenty-four pounders, boiling oil, and
other artillery, with which the besieged received their enemies, was remarkable. After a day's
fighting, Gurth and Wamba used to pick the arrows out of their intrepid master's coat-of-mail,
as if they had been so many almonds in a pudding. 'Twas well for the good knight, that under
his first coat-of armor he wore a choice suit of Toledan steel, perfectly impervious to arrow-shots,
and given to him by a certain Jew, named Isaac of York, to whom he had done some considerable
services a few years back.

If King Richard had not been in such a rage at the repeated failures of his attacks upon the
castle, that all sense of justice was blinded in the lion-hearted monarch, he would have been
the first to acknowledge the valor of Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, and would have given him a Peerage
and the Grand Cross of the Bath at least a dozen times in the course of the siege: for Ivanhoe
led more than a dozen storming parties, and with his own hand killed as many men (viz, two
thousand three hundred and fifty-one) within six, as were slain by the lion-hearted monarch
himself. But his Majesty was rather disgusted than pleased by his faithful servant's prowess;
and all the courtiers, who hated Ivanhoe for his superior valor and dexterity (for he would
kill you off a couple of hundreds of them of Chalus, whilst the strongest champions of the
Kings host could not finish more than their two dozen of a day), poisoned the royal mind against
Sir Wilfrid, and made the King look upon his feats of arms with an evil eye. Roger de Backbite
sneeringly told the King that Sir Wilfrid had offered to bet an equal bet that he would kill
more men than Richard himself in the next assault: Peter de Toadhole said that Ivanhoe stated
everywhere that his Majesty was not the man he used to be; that pleasures and drink had enervated
him; that he could neither ride, nor strike a blow with sword or axe, as he had been enabled
to do in the old times in Palestine: and finally, in the twenty-fifth assault, in which they
had very nearly carried the place, and in which onset Ivanhoe slew seven, and his Majesty six,
of the sons of the Count de Chalus, its defender, Ivanhoe almost did for himself, by planting
his banner before the King's upon the wall; and only rescued himself from utter disgrace by
saving his Majesty's life several times in the course of this most desperate onslaught.

Then the luckless knight's very virtues (as, no doubt, my respected readers know,) made him
enemies amongst the men--nor was Ivanhoe liked by the women frequenting the camp of the gay
King Richard. His young Queen, and a brilliant court of ladies, attended the pleasure-loving
monarch. His Majesty would transact business in the morning, then fight severely from after
breakfast till about three o'clock in the afternoon; from which time, until after midnight,
there was nothing but jigging and singing, feasting and revelry, in the royal tents. Ivanhoe,
who was asked as a matter of ceremony, and forced to attend these entertainments, not caring
about the blandishments of any of the ladies present, looked on at their ogling and dancing
with a countenance as glum as an undertaker's, and was a perfect wet-blanket in the midst of
the festivities. His favorite resort and conversation were with a remarkably austere hermit,
who lived in the neighborhood of Chalus, and with whom Ivanhoe loved to talk about Palestine,
and the Jews, and other grave matters of import, better than to mingle in the gayest amusements
of the court of King Richard. Many a night, when the Queen and the ladies were dancing quadrilles
and polkas (in which his Majesty, who was enormously stout as well as tall, insisted upon figuring,
and in which he was about as graceful as an elephant dancing a hornpipe), Ivanhoe would steal
away from the ball, and come and have a night's chat under the moon with his reverend friend.
It pained him to see a man of the King's age and size dancing about with the young folks. They
laughed at his Majesty whilst they flattered him: the pages and maids of honor mimicked the
royal mountebank almost to his face; and, if Ivanhoe ever could have laughed, he certainly
would one night when the King, in light-blue satin inexpressibles, with his hair in powder,
chose to dance the minuet de la cour with the little Queen Berangeria.

Then, after dancing, his Majesty must needs order a guitar, and begin to sing. He was said
to compose his own songs--words and music--but those who have read Lord Campobello's "Lives
of the Lord Chancellors" are aware that there was a person by the name of Blondel, who, in
fact, did all the musical part of the King's performances; and as for the words, when a king
writes verses, we may be sure there will be plenty of people to admire his poetry. His Majesty
would sing you a ballad, of which he had stolen every idea, to an air that was ringing on all
the barrel-organs of Christendom, and, turning round to his courtiers, would say, "How do you
like that? I dashed it off this morning." Or, "Blondel, what do you think of this movement
in B flat?" or what not; and the courtiers and Blondel, you may be sure, would applaud with
all their might, like hypocrites as they were.

One evening--it was the evening of the 27th March, 1199, indeed--his Majesty, who was in the
musical mood, treated the court with a quantity of his so-called composition, until the people
were fairly tired of clapping with their hands and laughing in their sleeves. First he sang
an ORIGINAL air and poem, beginning

     "Cherries nice, cherries nice, nice, come choose,
     Fresh and fair ones, who'll refuse?" &c.

The which he was ready to take his affidavit he had composed the day before yesterday. Then
he sang an equally ORIGINAL heroic melody, of which the chorus was

     "Rule Britannia, Britannia rules the sea,
     For Britons never, never, never slaves shall be," &c.

The courtiers applauded this song as they did the other, all except Ivanhoe, who sat without
changing a muscle of his features, until the King questioned him, when the knight, with a bow
said "he thought he had heard something very like the air and the words elsewhere." His Majesty
scowled at him a savage glance from under his red bushy eyebrows; but Ivanhoe had saved the
royal life that day, and the King, therefore, with difficulty controlled his indignation.

"Well," said he, "by St. Richard and St. George, but ye never heard THIS song, for I composed
it this very afternoon as I took my bath after the melee. Did I not, Blondel?"

Blondel, of course, was ready to take an affidavit that his Majesty had done as he said, and
the King, thrumming on his guitar with his great red fingers and thumbs, began to sing out
of tune and as follows:--

     "COMMANDERS OF THE FAITHFUL.

     "The Pope he is a happy man,
     His Palace is the Vatican,
     And there he sits and drains his can:
     The Pope he is a happy man.
     I often say when I'm at home,
     I'd like to be the Pope of Rome.

     "And then there's Sultan Saladin,
     That Turkish Soldan full of sin;
     He has a hundred wives at least,
     By which his pleasure is increased:
     I've often wished, I hope no sin,
     That I were Sultan Saladin.

     "But no, the Pope no wife may choose,
     And so I would not wear his shoes;
     No wine may drink the proud Paynim,
     And so I'd rather not be him:
     My wife, my wine, I love I hope,
     And would be neither Turk nor Pope."

"Encore! Encore! Bravo! Bis!" Everybody applauded the King's song with all his might: everybody
except Ivanhoe, who preserved his abominable gravity: and when asked aloud by Roger de Backbite
whether he had heard that too, said firmly, "Yes, Roger de Backbite; and so hast thou if thou
darest but tell the truth."

"Now, by St. Cicely, may I never touch gittern again," bawled the King in a fury, "if every
note, word, and thought be not mine; may I die in to-morrow's onslaught if the song be not
my song. Sing thyself, Wilfrid of the Lanthorn Jaws; thou could'st sing a good song in old
times." And with all his might, and with a forced laugh, the King, who loved brutal practical
jests, flung his guitar at the head of Ivanhoe.

Sir Wilfrid caught it gracefully with one hand, and making an elegant bow to the sovereign,
began to chant as follows:--

                             "KING CANUTE.

     "King Canute was weary-hearted; he had reigned for years a score,
     Battling, struggling, pushing, fighting, killing much and robbing
     more;
     And he thought upon his actions, walking by the wild sea-shore.

     "'Twixt the Chancellor and Bishop walked the King with steps
          sedate,
     Chamberlains and grooms came after, silversticks and goldsticks
          great,
     Chaplains, aides-de-camp, and pages,--all the officers of state.

     "Sliding after like his shadow, pausing when he chose to pause,
     If a frown his face contracted, straight the courtiers dropped
          their jaws;
     If to laugh the King was minded, out they burst in loud hee-haws.

     "But that day a something vexed him, that was clear to old and
        young:
     Thrice his Grace had yawned at table, when his favorite gleemen
        sung,
     Once the Queen would have consoled him, but he bade her hold her
        tongue.

     "'Something ails my gracious master,' cried the Keeper of the Seal.
     'Sure, my lord, it is the lampreys served at dinner, or the veal?'
     'Psha!' exclaimed the angry monarch.  'Keeper, 'tis not that I
          feel.

     "''Tis the HEART, and not the dinner, fool, that doth my rest
          impair:
     Can a King be great as I am, prithee, and yet know no care?
     Oh, I'm sick, and tired, and weary.'--Some one cried, 'The King's
        arm-chair?'

     "Then towards the lackeys turning, quick my Lord the Keeper nodded,
     Straight the King's great chair was brought him, by two footmen
        able-bodied;
     Languidly he sank into it: it was comfortably wadded.

     "'Leading on my fierce companions,' cried be, 'over storm and
          brine,
     I have fought and I have conquered!  Where was glory like to mine?'
     Loudly all the courtiers echoed: 'Where is glory like to thine?'

     "'What avail me all my kingdoms?  Weary am I now, and old;
     Those fair sons I have begotten, long to see me dead and cold;
     Would I were, and quiet buried, underneath the silent mould!

     "'Oh, remorse, the writhing serpent! at my bosom tears and bites;
     Horrid, horrid things I look on, though I put out all the lights;
     Ghosts of ghastly recollections troop about my bed of nights.

     "'Cities burning, convents blazing, red with sacrilegious fires;
     Mothers weeping, virgins screaming, vainly for their slaughtered
     sires.'--Such a tender conscience,' cries the Bishop, 'every
          one admires.

     "'But for such unpleasant bygones, cease, my gracious lord, to
         search,
     They're forgotten and forgiven by our Holy Mother Church;
     Never, never does she leave her benefactors in the lurch.

     "'Look! the land is crowned with minsters, which your Grace's
          bounty raised;
     Abbeys filled with holy men, where you and Heaven are daily
          praised:
     YOU, my lord, to think of dying? on my conscience I'm amazed!'

     "'Nay, I feel,' replied King Canute, 'that my end is drawing near.'
     'Don't say so,' exclaimed the courtiers (striving each to squeeze a
     tear).
     'Sure your Grace is strong and lusty, and may live this fifty
          year.'

     "'Live these fifty years!' the Bishop roared, with actions made to
          suit.
     'Are you mad, my good Lord Keeper, thus to speak of King Canute!
     Men have lived a thousand years, and sure his Majesty will do't.

     "'Adam, Enoch, Lamech, Cainan, Mahaleel, Methusela,
     Lived nine hundred years apiece, and mayn't the King as well as
     they?'
     'Fervently,' exclaimed the Keeper, 'fervently I trust he may.'

     "'HE to die?' resumed the Bishop.  'He a mortal like to US?
     Death was not for him intended, though communis omnibus:
     Keeper, you are irreligious, for to talk and cavil thus.

     "'With his wondrous skill in healing ne'er a doctor can compete,
     Loathsome lepers, if he touch them, start up clean upon their feet;
     Surely he could raise the dead up, did his Highness think it meet.

     "'Did not once the Jewish captain stay the sun upon the hill,
     And, the while he slew the foemen, bid the silver moon stand still?
     So, no doubt, could gracious Canute, if it were his sacred will.'

     "'Might I stay the sun above us, good Sir Bishop?' Canute cried;
     'Could I bid the silver moon to pause upon her heavenly ride?
     If the moon obeys my orders, sure I can command the tide.

     "'Will the advancing waves obey me, Bishop, if I make the sign?'
     Said the Bishop, bowing lowly, 'Land and sea, my lord, are thine.'
     Canute turned towards the ocean--'Back!' he said, 'thou foaming
     brine

     "'From the sacred shore I stand on, I command thee to retreat;
     Venture not, thou stormy rebel, to approach thy master's seat:
     Ocean, be thou still! I bid thee come not nearer to my feet!'

     "But the sullen ocean answered with a louder, deeper roar,
     And the rapid waves drew nearer, falling sounding on the shore;
     Back the Keeper and the Bishop, back the King and courtiers bore.

     "And he sternly bade them never more to kneel to human clay,
     But alone to praise and worship That which earth and seas obey:
     And his golden crown of empire never wore he from that day.
     King Canute is dead and gone: Parasites exist alway."

At this ballad, which, to be sure, was awfully long, and as grave as a sermon, some of the
courtiers tittered, some yawned, and some affected to be asleep and snore outright. But Roger
de Backbite thinking to curry favor with the King by this piece of vulgarity, his Majesty fetched
him a knock on the nose and a buffet on the ear, which, I warrant me, wakened Master Roger;
to whom the King said, "Listen and be civil, slave; Wilfrid is singing about thee.--Wilfrid,
thy ballad is long, but it is to the purpose, and I have grown cool during thy homily. Give
me thy hand, honest friend. Ladies, good night. Gentlemen, we give the grand assault to-morrow;
when I promise thee, Wilfrid, thy banner shall not be before mine."--And the King, giving his
arm to her Majesty, retired into the private pavilion.

CHAPTER III.

ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND.

Whilst the royal Richard and his court were feasting in the camp outside the walls of Chalus,
they of the castle were in the most miserable plight that may be conceived. Hunger, as well
as the fierce assaults of the besiegers, had made dire ravages in the place. The garrison's
provisions of corn and cattle, their very horses, dogs, and donkeys had been eaten up--so that
it might well be said by Wamba "that famine, as well as slaughter, had THINNED the garrison."
When the men of Chalus came on the walls to defend it against the scaling-parties of King Richard,
they were like so many skeletons in armor; they could hardly pull their bowstrings at last,
or pitch down stones on the heads of his Majesty's party, so weak had their arms become; and
the gigantic Count of Chalus--a warrior as redoubtable for his size and strength as Richard
Plantagenet himself--was scarcely able to lift up his battle-axe upon the day of that last
assault, when Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe ran him through the--but we are advancing matters.

