“And after all this, her husband was only released on condition that another should be shot
in his place.”

“Young Smith was selected.”

“And then ensued a contest without a parallel in all the six thousand years of human history.”

“Humphrey refused to let any man die in his stead, declaring he should feel himself a murderer
if he did.”

“Smith protested that he was only a poor orphan boy, and so far as he knew there was not a
soul on earth to grieve for him; that Humphrey had a large family entirely dependent upon him
for daily bread, and it was his duty to live while he could.”

“And Smith, the simple country lad, only seventeen years old, the Hero without a peer on all
Fame’s mighty scroll, took his seat on a rough box—and was shot!”

“Will not God eternally damn his murderers?”

“We might dwell for hours on the incidents connected with this most frightful butchery of ancient
or modern ages.”

“But why go on?”

“The murder was done!”

“The Confederate government talked of demanding the murderer McNeil.”

“Then a ‘memorial’ was gotten up, and signed by two thousand Missourians, recommending the
heaven-earth-and-hell-accursed old monster, on account of his Palmyra massacre, to special
favor and he was promoted to a brigadier-generalship.”

14. LAWRENCE

Disguised as a cattle trader, Lieutenant Fletcher Taylor, now a prominent and wealthy citizen
of Joplin, Mo., spent a week at the Eldridge house in Lawrence, Kansas, from which place had
gone out the Jayhawkers who in three months just previous had slain 200 men and boys, taken
many women prisoners, and stolen no one knows how many horses.

At the house of Capt. Purdee on the Blackwater in Johnson county, 310 men answered August 16,
1863, to the summons of Capt. Quantrell to hear the report of Lieut. Taylor’s reconnaissance.

The lieutenant’s report was encouraging. The city itself was poorly garrisoned; the camp beyond
was not formidable; the streets were wide.

“You have heard the report,” said Quantrell when the lieutenant finished. “It is a long march;
we march through soldiers; we attack soldiers; we must retreat through soldiers.  What shall
it be?  Speak out. Anderson!”

“Lawrence or hell,” relied Anderson, instantly.  With fire flashing in his eyes as he recalled
the recent wreck from which his sister had been taken in Kansas City, he added: “But with one
proviso, that we kill every male thing.”

“Todd?” called Quantrell.

“Lawrence, if I knew that not a man would get back alive.”    “Gregg?”

This was Capt. William Gregg, who still lives in Kansas City, one of the bravest men that ever
faced powder, and in action the coolest, probably, in the entire command.

                              William Gregg

“Lawrence,” he relied.  “It is the home of Jim Lane; the nurse of Jayhawkers.”

“Jarrette?”

“Lawrence, by all means,” my brother-in-law answered.  “It is the head devil of the killing
and burning in Jackson county.  I vote to fight it and with fire burn it before we leave.”

Shepherd, Dick Maddox, so on, Quantrell called the roll.

“Have you all voted?” shouted Quantrell.

There was no word.

“Then Lawrence it is; saddle up.”

We reached Lawrence the morning of the 21st.  Quantrell sent me to quiz an old farmer who was
feeding his hogs as to whether there had been any material changes in Lawrence since Lieut.
Taylor had been there.  He thought there were 75 soldiers in Lawrence; there were really 200.

Four abreast, the column dashed into the town with the cry:

“The camp first!”

It was a day of butchery.  Bill Anderson claimed to have killed fourteen and the count was
allowed.  But it is not true that women were killed. One negro woman leaned out of a window
and shouted:

“You—of—.”

She toppled out dead before it was seen she was a woman.

The death list that day is variously estimated at from 143 to 216 and the property loss by
the firing of the town, the sacking of the bank, and the rest, at $1,500.000.

Maj. John N. Edwards, in his Noted Guerrillas, says:

“Cole Younger saved at least a dozen lives this day.  Indeed, he killed none save in open and
manly battle. Information for Emigrants; Number of Emigrants arrived; with extracts from Papers
issued by Government Emigration Agents, &c. III. Abstract of the
American Passengers' Act, of Session 1835. IV. Transfer of Capital.
V. Canadian Currency. VI. Canada Company.  The notorious Gen. James H. Lane, to get whom Quantrell
would gladly have left and sacrificed all the balance of the victims, made his escape through
a corn-field, hotly pursued but too splendidly mounted to be captured.”

My second lieutenant, Lon Railey, and a detachment gave Jim Lane a hot chase that day but in vain.

When I joined Brother-in-law Jarrette’s company, he said:

“Cole, your mother and your sister told me to take care of you.”

That day it was reversed.  Coming out of Lawrence his horse was shot under him.  He took the
saddle off and tried to put it on a mustang that one of the boys was leading.  Some of the
boys say he had $8,000 in the saddle bags for the benefit of the widows and orphans of Missouri,
but whether that is true or not I have no knowledge.  While he was trying to saddle the mustang,
he was nearly surrounded by the enemy.  I dashed back and made him get up behind me.  The saddle
was left for the Kansas men.

One of the treasures that we did bring out of Lawrence that day, however, was Jim Lane’s “black
flag,” with the inscription “Presented to Gen. James H. Lane by the ladies of Leavenworth”.

That is the only black flag that I knew anything about in connection with the Lawrence raid.

Lawrence was followed by a feverish demand from the North for vengeance. Quantrell was to be
hanged, drawn and quartered, his band annihilated; nothing was too terrible for his punishment.

Four days after the raid, Gen. Thomas Ewing at St. Louis issued his celebrated General Order
No. 11.  This required that all persons living in Jackson, Cass and Bates counties, except
one township, or within one mile of a military post, should remove within fifteen days.  Those
establishing their loyalty were permitted to go within the lines of any military post, or to
Kansas, but all others were to remove without the bounds of the military district.  All grain
and hay in the proscribed district was to be turned into the military post before Sept. 9,
and any grain or hay not so turned in was to be destroyed.

It was the depopulation of western Missouri.  Any citizen not within the limits of the military
post after Sept. 9 was regarded as an outlaw.

Pursued by 6,000 soldiers, the Confederates in that vicinity must ultimately rejoin their army
farther south, but they harassed their pursuers for weeks in little bands rarely exceeding ten.

The horrors of guerrilla warfare before the raid at Lawrence, were eclipsed after it. Scalping,
for the first time, was resorted to.

Andy Blunt found Ab. Haller’s body, so mutilated, in the woods near Texas Prairie on the eastern
edge of Jackson county.

“We had something to learn yet,” said Blunt to his companions, “and we have learned it. Scalp
for scalp hereafter.”

Among the brave fighters who were participants in the fight at Lawrence were Tom Maupin, Dick
Yager, Payne Jones, Frank Shepherd, Harrison Trow, Dick Burns, Andy McGuire and Ben Broomfield.

15. CHASING COTTON THIEVES

In the fall of 1863, in the absence of Capt. Jarrette, who had rejoined Shelby’s command, I
became, at 19, captain of the company.  Joe Lea was first lieutenant and Lon Railey second
lieutenant.

When Capt. Jarrette came north again, I again became lieutenant, but when Capts. Jarrette and
Poole reported to Gen. Shelby on the Red river, they were sent into Louisiana, and I again
became captain of the company, so reporting to Gen. Henry E. McCulloch in command of Northern
Texas at Bonham.  All my orders on the commissary and quartermaster’s departments were signed
by me as Capt. C.S.A. and duly honored.

Around Bonham I did scout service for Gen. McCulloch, and in November he sent me with a very
flattering letter to report to Gen. E. Kirby Smith, at Shreveport, Louisiana, the headquarters
of the Trans-Mississippi department.  Capts. Jarrette and Poole were at Shreveport and Gen.
Smith gave us minute orders for a campaign against the cotton thieves and speculators who infested
the Mississippi river bottom.  An expedition to get rid of these was planned by Gen. Smith
with Capt. Poole commanding one company, myself the other, and Capt. Jarrette over us both.

Five miles from Tester’s ferry on Bayou Macon we met a cotton train convoyed by 50 cavalry.
We charged them on sight.  The convoy got away with ten survivors, but every driver was shot,
and four cotton buyers who were close behind in an ambulance were hung in a cotton gin near
at hand. They had $180,000 on them, which, with the cotton and wagons, was sent back to Bastrop
in charge of Lieut. Greenwood.

A more exciting experience was mine at Bayou Monticello, a stream that was deeper than it looked.
Observing a cotton train on a plantation across the bayou, I called to my men to follow me
and plunged in.

Seeing me floundering in the deep water, however, they went higher up to a bridge, and when
I landed I found myself alone.  I was hard pressed for a time, till they came up and relieved
me.  There were 52 soldiers killed here.  Other charges near Goodrich’s Landing and at Omega
put an end to the cotton speculation in that locality.

The Confederate army in that section was not well armed, and our company, each man with a pair
of dragoon pistols and a Sharpe’s rifle, was the envy of the Southern army.  Gen. Kirby Smith
told me he had not seen during the war a band so well armed.  Consequently when, in February,
1864, Gen. Marmaduke sent to Gen. Shelby for an officer and 40 of the best mounted and best
armed men he had, it was but natural that Shelby’s adjutant-general, John N. Edwards, should
recommend a part of the Missouri boys, and told me to select my men and report to Gen. Shelby,
who in turn ordered me to report for special service to Gen. Marmaduke at Warren, Ark.

Only twenty, and a beardless boy, Gen. Marmaduke looked me over rather dubiously, as I thought,
but finally told me what he wanted—to find out whether or not it was true that Gen. Steele,
at Little Rock, was preparing to move against Price at Camden, and to make the grand round
of the picket posts from Warren to the Mississippi river, up the Arkansas to Pine Bluff and
Little Rock, and returning by way of the western outpost at Hot Springs.

We were to intercept all messages between Price and Marmaduke, and govern our movements by
their contents.

About half way between Pine Bluff and Little Rock we came up with a train of wagons, followed
by an ambulance carrying several women and accompanied by mounted Federal soldiers.  The soldiers
got away into Pine Bluff, but we captured the wagons and ambulance, but finding nothing of
importance let them proceed.

We made a thorough examination of the interior of Little Rock, and satisfied ourselves that
no movement on Price was imminent, and were on our way out before we became involved in a little
shooting match with the patrol, from which no harm resulted to our side, however, except a
shot in my leg.

