"Shy child, Judge--very shy. Emma let her gather the eggs this morning, she loves to hunt eggs,"
chuckled the Captain, "and she went to the loft just before you came in. I clean forgot she
hadn't come down."

The Captain went on with his work.

"I suppose, Cap," said Van Dorn quietly, "she heard more or less of what I said." The Captain
nodded.

"How much did she understand?" the Judge asked.

"More'n you'd think, Judge--more'n you'd think. But," added Captain Morton after a pause, "I
know the little skite like a top, Judge--and there's one thing about her: She's a loyal little
body. She'll never tell; you needn't be worrying about that."

The Judge sighed and added sadly: "It wasn't that, Cap--it was--" But the Judge left his sentence
in the air. The mending was done. The Judge paid the old man and gave him a dollar more than
he asked, and went chugging off in a cloud of smoke, while the Captain, thinking over what
the Judge had said, sighed, shook his head, and bending over his work, cackled in an undertone,
snatches of a tune that told of a land that is fairer than day. He had put together three sprockets
and was working on the fourth when he looked up and saw his daughter Emma sitting on the box
that the Judge had vacated. The Captain put his hand to his back and stood up, looking at his
eldest daughter with loving pride.

"Emma," he said at length, "Judge Tom says women are like God." He stood near her and smoothed
her hair, and patted her cheek as he pressed her head against his side. "I guess he's right--eh?
Lila was in the loft getting eggs and she overheard a lot of his fool talk." The daughter made
no reply. The Captain worked on and finally said: "It kind of hit Tom hard to have Lila hear
him; took the tuck out of him, eh?"

Emma still waited. "My dear, the more I know of women the better I think of God, and the surer
I am of God, the better I think of women--what say?" He sat on the box beside her and took
her hand in his hard, cracked, grimy hand, "'Y gory, girl, I tell you, give me a line on a
man's idea of God and I can tell you to a tee what he thinks of women--eh?" The Captain dropped
the hand for a moment and looked out of the door into the alley.

"Well, Father, I agree with you in general about women but in particular I don't care about
Mrs. Herdicker and I wish Martha had another job, though I suppose it's better than teaching
school." The daughter sighed. "Honest, father, sometimes when I've been on my feet all day,
and the children have been mean, and the janitor sticks his head in and grins, so I'll know
the superintendent is in the building and get the work off the board that the rules don't allow
me to put on, or one of the other girls sends a note up to watch for my spelling for he's cranky
on spelling to-day, I just think, 'Lordee, if I had a job in some one's kitchen, I'd be too
happy to breathe.' But then--"

"Yes--yes, child--I know it's hard work now--but 'y gory, Emmy, when I get this sprocket introduced
and going, I'll buy you six superintendents in a brass cage and let you feed 'em biled eggs
to make 'em sing--eh?" He smiled and patted his daughter's hair and rose to go back to work.
The girl plucked at his coat and said: "Now sit down, father, I want to talk to you," she hesitated.
"It's about Mr. Brotherton. You know he's been coming out here for years and I thought he was
coming to see me, and now Martha thinks he comes to see her, and Martha always stays there
and so does Ruth, and if he is coming to see me--" she stopped. Her father looked at her in
astonishment. "Why, father," she went on,--"why not? I'm twenty-five, and Martha's twenty-two
and even Ruth is seventeen--he might even be coming to see Ruth," she added bitterly.

"Yes, or Epaminondas--the cat--eh?" cut in the old man. Then he added, indignantly, "Well,
how about this singing Jasper Adams--who's he coming to see? Or Amos--he comes around here
sometimes Saturday night after G. A. R. meeting, with me--what say? Would you want us all to
clear out and leave you the front room with him?" demanded the perturbed Captain.

Then the father put his arm about his child tenderly: "Twenty-five years old--twenty-five years--why,
girl, in my time a girl was an old maid laid on the shelf at twenty-five--and here you are,"
he mused, "just thinking of your first beau and here I am needing your mother worse than I
ever did in my life. Law-see' girl--how do I know what to do--what say?" But he did know enough
to draw her to him and kiss her and sigh. "Well--maybe I can do something--maybe--we'll see."
And then she left him and he went to his work. And as he worked the thought struck him suddenly
that if he could put one of his sprockets in the Judge's automobile where he had seen a chain,
that it would save power and stop much of the noise. So as he worked he dreamed that his sprocket
was adopted by the makers of the new machines, and that he was rich--exceedingly rich and that
he took the girls to visit the Ohio kin, and that Emma had her trip to the Grand Canyon, that
Martha went to Europe and that Ruthie "took vocal" of a teacher in France whose name he could
not pronounce.

As he hammered away at his bench he heard a shuffling at the door and looking up saw Dr. Nesbit
in the threshold.

"Come in, Doctor; sit down and talk," shrilled the Doctor before the Captain could speak, and
when the Doctor had seated himself upon the box by the workbench, the Captain managed to say:
"Surely--come right in, I'm kind of lonesome anyhow."

"And I'm mad," cried the Doctor. "Just let me sit here and blow off a little to my old army
friend."

"Well--well, Doctor, it's queer to see you hot under the collar--eh?" The Doctor began digging
out his pipe and filling it, without speaking. The Captain asked: "What's gone wrong? Politics
ain't biling? what say?"

"Well," returned the Doctor, "you know Laura works at her kindergarten down there in South
Harvey, and she got me to pass that hours-of-service law for the smelter men at the extra session
last summer. Good law! Those men working there in the fumes shouldn't work over six hours a
day--it will kill them. I managed by trading off my hide and my chances of Heaven to get a
law through, cutting them down to eight hours in smelter work. Denny Hogan, who works on the
slag dump, is going to die if he has to do it another year on a ten-hour shift. He's been up
and down for two years now--the Hogans live neighbors to Laura's school and I've been watching
him. Well," and here the Doctor thumped on the floor with his cane, "this Judge--this vain,
strutting peacock of a Judge, this cat-chasing Judge that was once my son-in-law, has gone
and knocked the law galley west so far as it affects the slag dump. I've just been reading
his decision, and I'm hot--good and hot."

The Captain interrupted:

"I saw Violet Hogan and the children--dressed like princesses, walking out to-day--past the
Judge's house--showing it to them--what say? My, how old she looks, Doctor!"

"Well--the damned villain--the infernal scoundrel--" piped the Doctor. "I just been reading
that decision. The men showed in their lawsuit that the month before the law took effect the
company, knowing the law had been passed, went out and sold their switch and sold the slag
dump, to a fake railroad company that bought a switch engine and two or three cars, and incorporated
as a railroad, and then--the same people owning the smelter and the railroad, they set all
the men in the smelter that they could working on the slag dump, so the men were working for
the railroad and not for the smelter company and didn't come within the eight hour law. And
now the Judge stands by that farce; he says that the men working there under the very chimney
of the smelter on the slag dump where the fumes are worst, are not subject to the law because
the law says that men working for the smelters shall not work more than eight hours, and these
men are working for a cheating, swindling subterfuge of a railroad. That's judge-made law.
That's the kind of law that makes anarchists. Law!" snorted the Doctor, "Law!--made by judges
who have graduated out of the employ of corporations--law!--is just what the Judge on the bench
dares to read into the statute. I tell you, Cap, if the doctors and engineers and preachers
were as subservient to greed and big money as the lawyers are, we would soon lose our standing.
But when a lawyer commits some flagrant malpractice like that of Tom Van Dorn's--the lawyers
remind us that the courts are sacred institutions."

The Doctor's pipe was out and in filling it again, he jabbed viciously at the bowl with his
knife, and in the meantime the Captain was saying:

"Well, I suppose he found the body of the decisions leaning that way, Doc--you know Judges
are bound by the body of the law."

"The body of the law--yes, damn 'em, I've bought 'em to find the body of the law myself."

The Doctor sputtered along with his pipe and cried out in his high treble--"I never had any
more trouble buying a court than a Senator. And lawyers have no shame about hiring themselves
to crooks and notorious lawbreakers. And some lawyers hire themselves body and soul to great
corporations for life and we all know that those corporations are merely evading the laws and
not obeying them; and lawyers--at the very top of the profession--brazenly hire out for life
to that kind of business. What if the top of the medical profession was composed of men who
devoted themselves to fighting the public welfare for life! We have that kind of doctors--but
we call them quacks. We don't allow 'em in our medical societies. We punish them by ostracism.
But the quack lawyers who devote themselves to skinning the public--they are at the head of
the bar. They are made judges. They are promoted to supreme courts. A damn nice howdy-do we're
coming to when the quacks run a whole profession. And Tom Van Dorn is a quack--a hair-splitting,
owl-eyed, venal quack--who doles out the bread pills of injustice, and the strychnine stimulants
of injustice and the deadening laudanum of injustice, and falls back on the body of the decisions
to uphold him in his quackery. Justice demands that he take that fake corporation, made solely
to evade the law, and shake its guts out and tell the men who put up this job, that he'll put
them all in jail for contempt of court if they try any such shenanigan in his jurisdiction
again. That would be justice. This--this decision--is humbug and every one knows it. What's
more--it may be murder. For men can't work on that slag dump ten hours a day without losing
their lives."

The captain tapped away at his sprocket. He had his own ideas about the sanctity of the courts.
They were not to be overthrown so easily. The Doctor snorted: "Burn their bodies, and blear
their minds, and then wail about our vicious lower classes--I'm getting to be an anarchist."

He prodded his cane among the débris on the floor and then he began to twitch the loose skin
of his lower face and smiled. "Thank you, Cap," he chirped. "How good and beautiful a thing
it is to blow off steam in a barn to your old army friend."

The Captain looked around and smiled and the Doctor asked: "What was that you were saying about
Violet Hogan?"

"I said I saw her to-day and she looked faded and old--she's not so much older than my Emma--eh?"

"Still," said the Doctor, "Violet's had a tough time--a mighty tough time; three children in
six years. The last one took most of her teeth; young horse doctor gave her some dope that
about killed her; she's done all the cooking, washing, scrubbing and made garden for the family
in that time--up every morning at five, seven days in the week to get breakfast for Dennis--Emma
would look broken if she'd had that." The Doctor paused. "Like her mother--weak--vain--puts
all of Denny's wages on the children's backs--Laura says Violet spends more on frills for those
kids than we spend for groceries--and Violet goes around herself looking like the Devil before
breakfast." The Doctor rested his chin on his cane. "Remember her mother--Mrs. Mauling--funny
how it breeds that way. The human critter, Cap, is a curious beast--but he does breed true--mostly."
The Doctor loafed, whistling, around the work shop, prodding at things with his cane, and wound
up leaning against one end of the bench.

"Last day of the century," he piped, "makes a fellow pause and study. I've seen fifty-three
years of the old century--seen the electric light, the telephone, the phonograph, the fast
printing press, the transcontinental railroad, the steam thresher, the gasoline engine--and
all its wonders clear down to Judge Tom's devil wagon. That's a good deal for one short life.
I've seen industry revolutionized--leaving the homes of the people, and herding into the great
factories. I've seen steam revolutionize the daily habits of men, and distort their thoughts;
one man can't run a steam engine; it takes more than one man to own one. So have I seen capital
rise in the world until it is greater than kings, greater than courts, greater than governments--greater
than God himself as matters stand, Cap--I'm terribly afraid that's true."

The Doctor was serious. His high voice was calm, and he smoked a while in peace. "But," he
added reflectively--"Cap, I want to tell you something more wonderful than all; I've seen seven
absolutely honest men elected this year to the State Senate--I've sounded them, felt them out,
had all kinds of reports from all kinds of people on those seven men. Each man thinks he's
alone, and there are seven."

The Doctor leaned over to the Captain and said confidentially, "Cap--we meet next week. Listen
here. I was elected without a dollar of the old spider's money. He fought me for that smelter
law on the quiet. Now look here; you watch my smoke. I'm going to organize those seven, and
make eight and you're going to see some fighting."

"You ain't going to fight the party, are you, Doc?" asked the amazed Captain, as though he
feared that the Doctor would fall dead if he answered yes. But the Doctor grinned and said:
"Maybe--if it fights me."

"Well, Doc--" cried the Captain, "don't you think--"

"You bet I think--that's what's the matter. The smelter lawsuit's made me think. They want
to control government so they can have a license to murder. That's what it means. Watch 'em
blight Denny Hogan's lungs down on the dump; watch 'em burn 'em up and crush 'em in the mines--by
evading the mining laws; watch 'em slaughter 'em on the railroads; murder is cheap in this
country--if you control government and get a slaughter license."

The Doctor laughed. "That's the old century--and say, Cap--I'm with the new. You know old Browning--he
says:

          "It makes me mad
    To think what men will do an' I am dead."

The Doctor waved his cane furiously, and grinned as he threw back his head, laughed silently,
kicked out one leg, and stood with one eye cocked, looking at the speechless Captain. "Well,
Cap--speak up--what are you going to do about it?"

"'Y gory, Doc, you certainly do talk like a Populist--eh?" was all the Captain could reply.
The Doctor toddled to the door, and standing there sang back: "Well, Cap--do you think the
Lord Almighty laid off all the angels and quit work on the world when he invented Tom Van Dorn's
automobile--that it is the last new thing that will ever be tried?"

And with that, the Doctor went out into the alley and through his alley gate into his house.
But the Captain's mind was set going by the Doctor's parting words. He was considering what
might follow the invention of Tom Van Dorn's automobile. There was that chain, and there was
his sprocket. It would work--he knew it would work and save much power and much noise. But
the sprocket must be longer, and stronger. Then, he thought, if the wire spokes and the ball-bearing
and rubber tires of the bicycle had made the automobile possible, and now that they were getting
the gasoline engine of the automobile perfected so that it would generate such vast power in
such a small space--what if they could conserve and apply that power through his invention--what
if the gasoline engine might not through his Household Horse some day generate and use a power
that would lift a man off the earth? What then? As he tapped the bolts and turned the screws
and put his little device together, he dreamed big dreams of the future when men should fly,
and the boundaries of nations would disappear and tariffs would be impossible. This shocked
him, and he tried to figure out how to prevent smuggling by flying machines; but as he could
not, he dreamed on about the time when war would be abolished among civilized men, because
of his invention.

So while he was dreaming in matter--forming the first vague nebulæ of coming events, the infinite
intelligence washing around us all, floating this earth, and holding the stars in their courses,
sent a long, thin fleck of a wave into the mind of this man who stood working and dreaming
in the twilight while the old century was passing. And while he saw his vision, other minds
in other parts of the earth saw their visions. Some of these myriad visions formed part of
his, and his formed part of theirs, and all were part of the great vision that was brooding
upon the bourne of time and space. And other visions, parts of the great vision of the Creator,
were moving with quickening life in other minds and hearts. The disturbed vision of justice
that flashed through the Doctor's mind was a part of the vast cycle of visions that were hovering
about this earth. It was not his alone, millions held part of it; millions aspired, they knew
not why, and staked their lives upon their faith that there is a power outside ourselves that
makes for righteousness. And as the waves of infinite, resistless, all-encompassing love laved
the world that New Year's night that cast the new Century upon the strange shores of time,
let us hope that the dreams of strong men stirred them deeply that they might move wisely upon
that mysterious tide that is drawing humanity to its unknown goal. The trolley cars went creaking
and moaning around the curves through the mean, dirty, squalid, little streets of the mining
and manufacturing towns. They whined impatiently as they sailed across the prairie grass under
the befogged sunshine between the settlements, but always they brought up with their loads
at Harvey. So Harvey grew to be a prosperous inland city, and the Palace Hotel with its onyx
and marble office, once the town's pride, found itself with all its striving but a third-class
hostelry, while the three-story building of the Traders' Bank looked low and squatty beside
its six and seven storied neighbors. The tin cornices of Market Street were wiped away, and
yellow brick and terra cotta and marble took the place of the old ornaments of which the young
town had been so proud. The thread of wires and pipes that made the web of the spider behind
the brass sign, multiplied and the pipes and the rails and the cables that carried his power
grew taut and strong. New people by thousands had come into the town and gradually the big
house, the Temple of Love on Hill Crest, that had been deserted during the first years of its
occupancy, filled up. Judge Thomas Van Dorn and his handsome wife were seen in the great hotels
of New York and Boston, and in Europe more or less, though the acquaintances they made in Europe
and in the East were no longer needed to fill their home. But the old settlers of Harvey maintained
their siege. It was at a Twelfth Night festivity when young people from all over the Valley
and from all over the West were masqueing in the great house, that Judge Van Dorn, to please
a pretty girl from Baltimore whom the Van Dorns had met in Italy, shaved his mustache and appeared
before the guests with a naked lip. The pursed, shrunken, sensuous lips of the cruel mouth
showed him so mercilessly that Mrs. Van Dorn could not keep back a little scream of horror
the first time he stood before her with his shaved lip. But she changed her scream to a baby
giggle, and he did not know how he was revealed. So he went about ever after, preening himself
that his smooth face gave him youth, and strutting inordinately because some of the women he
knew told him he looked like a boy of twenty-five--instead of a man in his forties. He was
always suave, always creakingly debonaire, always, even in his meannesses, punctilious and airy.

So the old settlers sometimes were fooled by his attitude toward Margaret, his wife. He bore
toward her in public that shallow polish of attention, which puzzled those who knew that they
were never together by themselves when he could help it, that he spent his evenings at the
City Club, and that often at the theater they sat almost back to back unconsciously during
the whole performance. But after the curtain was down, the polite husband was the soul of attendance
upon the beautiful wife--her coat, her opera glasses, her trappings of various sorts flew in
and out of his eager hands as though he were a conjurer playing with them for an audience.
For he was a proud man, and she was a vain woman, and they were striving to prove to a disapproving
world that the bargain they had made was a good one.

Yet the old settlers of Harvey felt instinctively that the price of their Judge's bargain was
not so trifling a matter as at first the happy couple had esteemed it. The older people saw
the big house glow with light as the town spread over the hill and prosperity blackened the
Valley. The older people played their quiet games of bridge, by night, and said little. Judge
Van Dorn polished the periods of his orations, kept himself like a race horse, strutted like
a gobbler, showed his naked mouth, held himself always tightly in hand, kept his eye out for
a pretty face, wherever it might be found, drank a little too much at night at the City Club;
not much too much but a very little too much--so much that he needed something to brighten
his eyes in the morning.

But whatever the Judge's views were on the chess game of the cosmos, Margaret, his wife, had
no desire to beat God at his own game. She was a seeker, who always was looking for a new God.
God after God had passed in weary review before her. She was always ready to tune up with the
infinite, and to ignore the past--a most comfortable thing to do under the circumstances.

As she turned into Market Street one February morning of the New Year in the New Century, leading
her dachshund, she was revolving a deep problem in her head. She was trying to get enough faith
to believe that her complexion did not need a renovation. She knew that the skin-thought she
kept holding was earth-bound and she had tried to shake it, but it wouldn't shake. She had
progressed far enough in the moment's cult to overcome a food-thought when her stomach hurt
her, by playing a stiff game of bridge for a little stake. But the skin-thought was with her,
and she was nervous and irritable and upon the verge of tears for nothing at all. Moreover,
her dog kept pulling at his leash, so altogether her cup was running over and she went into
Mr. Brotherton's store to ask him to try to find an English translation of a highly improper
German book with a pious title about which she had heard from a woman from Chicago who had
been visiting her.

Now Mr. Brotherton had felt the impulse of the town's prosperity in his business. The cigar
stand was gone. In its place was a handsome plain glass case containing expensive books--books
bound in vellum, books in hand-tooled leather, books with wide, ragged margins of heavy linen
paper around deep black types with illuminated initials at the chapter heads; books filled
with extravagant illustrations, books so beautiful that Mr. Brotherton licked his chops with
joy when he considered the difference between the cost mark and the price mark. The Amen Corner
was gone--the legend that had come down from the pool room, "Better go to bed lonesome than
wake up in debt," had been carted to the alley. While the corner formerly occupied by the old
walnut bench still held a corner seat, it was a corner seat with sharp angles, with black stain
upon it, and upholstered in rich red leather, and red leather pillows lounged luxuriously in
the corners of the seat; a black, angular table and a red, angular shade over a green angular
lamp sat where the sawdust box had been. True--a green angular smoker's set also was upon the
table--the only masculine appurtenance in the corner; but it was clearly a sop thrown out to
offended and exiled mankind--a mere mockery of the solid comfort of the sawdust box, filled
with cigar stubs and ashes that had made the corner a haven for weary man for nearly a score
of years. Above the black-stained seat ran a red dado and upon that in fine old English script,
where once the old sign of the Corner had been nailed, there ran this legend:

            "'The sweet serenity of Books' and Wallpaper,
                  Stationery and Office Supplies."

For Mr. Brotherton's commercial spirit could not permit him to withhold the fact that he had
enlarged his business by adding such household necessities as wall paper and such business
necessities as stationery and office supplies. Thus the town referred ever after to Mr. Brotherton's
"Sweet serenity of Books and Wallpaper," and so it was known of men in Harvey.

When Mrs. Van Dorn entered, she was surprised; for while she had heard casually of the changes
in Mr. Brotherton's establishment, she was not prepared for the effulgence of refined and suppressed
grandeur that greeted her.

Mr. Brotherton, in a three buttoned frock coat, a rich black ascot tie and suitable gray trousers,
came forward to meet her.

"Ah, George," she exclaimed in her baby voice, "really what a lit-ry," that also was from her
Chicago friend, "what a lit-ry atmosphere you have given us."

Mr. Brotherton's smile pleaded guilty for him. He waved her to a seat among the red cushions.
"How elegant," she simpered, "I just think it's perfectly swell. Just like Marshall Field's.
I must bring Mrs. Merrifield in when she comes down--Mrs. Merrifield of Chicago. You know,
Mr. Brotherton," it was the wife of the Judge who spoke, "I think we should try to cultivate
those whose wide advantages make our association with them a liberal education. What is it
Emerson says about Friendship--in that wonderful essay--I'm sure you'll recall it."

And Mr. Brotherton was sure he would too, and indicated as much, for as he had often said to
Mr. Fenn in their literary confidences, "Emerson is one of my best moving lines." And Mrs.
Van Dorn continued confidentially: "Now there's a book, a German book--aren't those Germans
candid--you know I'm of German extraction, and I tell the Judge that's where I get my candor.
Well, there's a German book--I can't pronounce it, so I've written it out--there; will you
kindly order it?" Mr. Brotherton took the slip and went to the back of the store to make a
memorandum of the order. He left the book counter in charge of Miss Calvin--Miss Ave Calvin--yes,
Miss Ave Maria Calvin, if you must know her full name, which she is properly ashamed of. But
it pleased her mother twenty years before and as Mr. Calvin was glad to get into the house
on any terms when the baby was named, it went Ave Maria Calvin, and Ave Maria Calvin stood
behind the counter reading the Bookman and trying to remember the names of the six best sellers
so that she could order them for stock.

Mrs. Van Dorn, who kept Mrs. Calvin's one card conspicuously displayed in her silver card case
in the front hall, saw an opportunity to make a little social hay, so she addressed Miss Calvin
graciously: "Good morning, Ave--how is your dear mother? What a charming effect Mr. Brotherton
has produced!" Then Mrs. Van Dorn dropped the carefully modulated voice a trifle lower: "When
the book comes that I just ordered, kindly slip it to one side; I wouldn't have Mr. Brotherton--he
might misunderstand. But you can read it if you wish--take it home over night. It's very broadening."

When Mr. Brotherton returned the baby voice prattled at him. The voice was saying, "I was just
telling Ave how dead swell it is here. I just can't get over it--in Harvey--dear old Harvey;
do you remember when I was a little school teacher down in the Prospect schoolhouse and you
used to order Chautauqua books--such an innocent little school girl--don't you remember? We
wouldn't say how long ago that was, would we, Mr. Brotherton? Oh, dear, no. Isn't it nice to
talk over old times? Did you know the Jared Thurstons have left Colorado and have moved to
Iowa where Jared has started another paper? Lizzie and I used to be such chums--she and Violet
and I--where is Violet now, Mr. Brotherton? Oh, yes, I remember Mrs. Herdicker said she lives
next door to the kindergarten--down in South Harvey. Isn't it terrible the way Anne Sands did--just
broke her father's heart. And Nate Perry quarrelling with ten million dollars. Isn't this a
strange world, Mr. Brotherton?"

Mr. Brotherton confessed for the world and Mrs. Van Dorn shook her over-curled head sadly.
She made some other talk with Mr. Brotherton which he paraphrased later for Henry Fenn and
when Mrs. Van Dorn went out, Mr. Brotherton left the door open to rid the room of the scent
of attar of roses and said to Miss Calvin:

"Well, s--," but checked himself and went on in his new character of custodian of "The Sweet
Serenity of Books and Wall Paper," but he added as a compromise:

"'And for bonnie Annie Laurie' I certainly would make a quick get-away!"

After which reflection, Mr. Brotherton walked down the long store room to his dark stained
desk, turned on the electric under the square copper shade, and began to figure up his accounts.
But a little social problem kept revolving in his head. It was suggested by Mrs. Van Dorn and
by something she had said. Beside Mrs. Van Dorn in her tailored gown and seal-skin, with her
spanking new midwinter hat to match her coat, dragging the useless dog after her, he saw the
picture of another woman who had come in the day before--a woman no older than Margaret Van
Dorn--yet a broken woman, with rounded shoulders who rarely smiled, wishing to hide her broken
teeth, who wheeled one baby and led another, and shooed a third and slipped into the corner
near the magazine counter and thumbed over the children's fashions in the Delineator eagerly
and looked wistfully at the beautiful things in the store. Her red hands and brown skin showed
that she had lived a rough, hard life, and that it had spent her and wasted her and taken everything
she prized--and given her nothing--nothing but three overdressed children and a husband whose
industrial status had put its heavy mark on her.

Mr. Brotherton's memory went back ten years, and recalled the two girls together--Violet and
Margaret. Both were light-headed and vain; so far as their relations with Van Dorn were concerned,
one was as blamable as the other. Yet one had prospered and the other had not--and the one
who had apparently suffered most had upon the whole lived the cleaner, more normal life--and
Mr. Brotherton drummed his penholder upon the black desk before him and questioned the justice
of life.

But, indeed, if we must judge life's awards and benefits from the material side there is no
justice in life. If there was any difference between the two women whom Tom Van Dorn had wronged--difference
in rewards or punishments, it must have been in their hearts. It is possible that in her life
of motherhood and wifehood, in the sacrifices that broke her body and scarred her face, Violet
Mauling may have been compensated by the love she bore the children upon whom she lavished
her life. For she had that love, and she did squander--in blind vain folly--the strength of
her body, afterwards the price of her soul--upon her children. As for Margaret Van Dorn--Mr.
Brotherton was no philosopher. He could not pity her. Yet she too had given all. She had given
her mind--and it was gone. She had given her heart and it was gone also, and she had given
that elusive blending of the heart and mind we call her soul--and that was gone, too. Mr. Brotherton
could see that they were gone--all gone. But he could not see that her loss was greater than
Violet's.

That night when Dennis Hogan came in for his weekly Fireside Companion as he said, "for the
good woman," Mr. Brotherton, for old sake's sake, put in something in paper backs by Marie
Corelli, and a novel by Ouida; and then, that he might give until it hurt, he tied up a brand
new Ladies' Home Journal, and said, as he locked up the store and stepped into the chill night
air with Mr. Hogan: "Dennis--tell Violet--I sent 'em in return for the good turns she used
to do me when I was mayor and she was in Van Dorn's office and drew up the city ordinances--she'll
remember."

"Indeed she will, George Brotherton--that she will. Many's the night she's talked me to sleep
of them golden days of her splendor--indeed she will."

They walked on together and Hogan said: "Well--I turn at the next crossin'. I'm goin' home
and I'm glad of it. Up in the mornin' at five; off on the six-ten train, climbin' the slag
dump at seven, workin' till six, home on the six-fifteen train, into the house at seven; to
bed at ten, up at five, eat and work and sleep--sleep and eat and work, fightin' the dump by
day and fightin' the fumes in me chist by night--all for a dollar and sixty a day; and if we
jine a union, we get canned, and if we would seek dissipation, we're invited to go down to
the Company hall and listen to Tommy Van Dorn norate upon what he calls the 'de-hig-nity of
luh-ay-bor.' Damn sight of dignity labor has, lopin' three laps ahead of the garnishee from
one year's end to the other."

He laughed a good-natured, creaking laugh, and said as he waved his hand to part with Mr. Brotherton--"Well,
annyhow, the good woman will thank you for the extra readin'; not that she has time to read
it, God knows, but it gives the place a tone when Laura Nesbit drops in for a bit of a word
of help about the makin' of the little white things she's doin' for the Polish family on 'D'
Street these days." In another minute Brotherton heard the car moaning at the curve, and saw
Hogan get in. It was nearly midnight when Hogan got to sleep; for the papers that Brotherton
sent brought back "the grandeur that was Greece," and he had to hear how Mr. Van Dorn had made
Mr. Brotherton mayor and how they had both made Dr. Nesbit Senator, and how ungrateful the
Doctor was to turn against the hand that fed him, and many other incidents and tales that pointed
to the renown of the unimpeachable Judge, who for seven years had reigned in the humble house
of Hogan as a first-rate god.

That night Hogan tossed as the fumes in his lungs burned the tissues and at five he got up,
made the fire, helped to dress the oldest child while his wife prepared the breakfast. He missed
the six-ten car, and being late at work stopped in to take a drink at the Hot Dog, near the
dump on the company ground, thinking it would put some ginger into him for the day's work.
For two hours or so the whiskey livened him up, but as the forenoon grew old, he began to yawn
and was tired.

"Hogan," called the dump-boss, "go down to the powder house and bring up a box of persuaders."

The slag was hard and needed blasting. Hogan looked up, said "What?" and before the dump boss
could speak again Hogan had started down and around the dump to the powder house, near the
saloon. He went into the powder house, and then came out, carrying a heavy box. At the sidewalk
edge, Hogan, who was yawning, stumbled--they saw him stumble, two men standing in the door
of the Hot Dog saloon a block away, and they told the people at the inquest that that was the
last they saw. A great explosion followed. The men about the dump huddled for a long minute
under freight cars, then crawled out, and the dump boss called the roll; Hogan was missing.
In an hour they came and took Mrs. Hogan to the undertaker's room near the smelter--where so
many women had stood beside death in its most awful forms. She had her baby in her arms, with
another plucking at her skirts and she stood mutely beside the coffin that they would not open.
For she knew what other women knew about the smelter, knew that when they will not open the
coffin, it must not be opened. So the little procession rode to the Hogan home, where Laura
Van Dorn was waiting. Perhaps it was because she could not see the face of the dead that it
seemed unreal to the widow. But she did not moan nor cry--after the first scream that came
when she knew the worst. Stolidly she went through her tasks until after the funeral.

Then she called Laura into the kitchen and said, as she pressed out her black satin and tried
to hide the threadbare seams that had been showing for years: "Mrs. Van Dorn, I'm going to
do something you won't like." To Laura's questioning eyes Violet answered: "I know your ma,
or some one else has told you all about me--but," she shut her mouth tightly and said slowly:

"But no matter what they say--I'm going to the Judge; he's got to make the railroad company
pay and pay well. It's all I've got on earth--for the children. We have three dollars in my
pocketbook and will have to wait until the fifteenth before I get his last month's wages, and
I know they'll dock him up to the very minute of the day--that day! I wouldn't do it for anything
else on earth, Mrs. Van Dorn--wild horses couldn't drag me there--but I'm going to the Judge--for
the children. He can help."

So, putting on her bedraggled black picture hat with the red ripped off, Violet Hogan mounted
the courthouse steps and went to the office of the Judge. A sorry, broken, haggard figure she
cut there in the Judge's office. She would have told him her story--but he interrupted: "Yes,
Violet--I read it in the Times. But what can I do--you know I'm not allowed to take a case
and, besides, he was working for the railroad, and you know, Violet, he assumed the risk. What
do they offer you?"

"Judge--for God's sake don't talk that way to me. That's the way you used to talk to those
miners' wives--ugh!" she cried. "I remember it all--that assumed risk. Only this--he was working
ten hours a day on a job that wouldn't let him sleep, and he oughtn't to be working but eight
hours, if they hadn't sneaked under the law. They've offered me five hundred, Judge--five hundred--for
a man, five hundred for our three children--and me. You can make them do better--oh, I know
you can. Oh, please for the sake--oh!"

She looked at him with her battered face, and as her mouth quivered, she tried to hide her
broken teeth. To me, however, the question of the times resolved itself into a practical question
of the conduct of life. How shall I live? We are incompetent to solve
the times.

Our geometry cannot span the huge orbits of the prevailing ideas, behold their return, and reconcile
their opposition. We can only obey our own polarity. 'Tis fine for us to speculate and elect
our course, if we must accept an irresistible dictation.

In our first steps to gain our wishes, we come upon immovable limitations. We are fired with the
hope to reform men. After many experiments, we find that we must begin earlier--at school. But
the boys and girls are not docile; we can make nothing of them. We decide that they are not
of good stock.

    We must begin our reform earlier still--at generation: that
    is to say, there is Fate, or laws of the world.
    

But, if there be irresistible dictation, this dictation understands
itself.

This is true, and that other is true. But our geometry cannot span
these extreme points, and reconcile them.

What to do? By obeying each thought frankly, by harping, or, if you will, pounding on each
string, we learn at last its power. By the same obedience to other thoughts, we learn theirs,
and then comes some reasonable hope of harmonizing them. The riddle of the age has for each
a private solution.

If one would study his own time, it must be by this method of taking up in turn each of the leading
topics which belong to our scheme of human life, and, by firmly stating all that is agreeable
to experience on one, and doing the same justice to the opposing
facts in the others, the true limitations will appear.

Any excess of emphasis, on one part, would be corrected, and a just balance would be made.

But
let us honestly state the facts. The Spartan, embodying his religion in his country, dies before
its majesty without a question. The Turk, who believes his doom is written on the iron leaf
in the moment when he entered the world, rushes on the enemy's sabre with undivided will. The
Turk, the Arab, the Persian, accepts the fore-ordained fate.

The Hindoo, under the wheel, is as firm. Our Calvinists, in the last generation, had something
of the same dignity. They felt that the weight of the Universe held them down to their place.
What could they do?

Wise men feel that there is something which cannot be talked or voted away--a strap or belt which
girds the world.

The Destiny, minister general, That executeth in the world o'er all, The purveyance which God
hath seen beforne, So strong it is that tho' the world had sworn The contrary of a thing by yea
or nay, Yet sometime it shall fallen on a day That falleth not oft in a thousand year, For, certainly,
our appetites here, Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love, All
this is rulèd by the sight above.

CHAUCER: The Knighte's Tale.

The Greek Tragedy expressed the same sense: "Whatever is fated, that will take place. The great
immense mind of Jove is not to be transgressed."

Savages cling to a local god of one tribe or town.

The broad ethics of Jesus were quickly narrowed to village theologies, which preach an election
or favoritism. And, now and then, an amiable parson, like Jung Stilling, or Robert Huntington,
believes in a pistareen-Providence, which, whenever the good man wants a dinner, makes that somebody
shall knock at his door, and leave a half-dollar. The cold, inconsiderate of persons, tingles
your blood, benumbs your feet, freezes a man like an apple. The diseases, the elements, fortune,
gravity, lightning, respect no persons. The planet is liable to shocks from comets, perturbations
from planets, rendings from earthquake and volcano, alterations of climate, precessions of equinoxes.
Rivers dry up by opening of the forest. The sea changes its bed. Towns and counties fall into
it. At Lisbon, an earthquake killed men like flies. At Naples, three years ago, ten thousand
persons were crushed in a few minutes.

The scurvy at sea; the sword of the climate in the west of Africa, at Cayenne, at Panama,
at New Orleans, cut off men like a massacre. Our Western prairie shakes with fever and ague.
The cholera, the small-pox, have proved as mortal to some tribes, as a frost to the crickets,
which, having filled the summer with noise, are silenced by a fall of the temperature of one night.
Without uncovering what does not concern us; or counting how many species of parasites hang on a
bombyx; or groping after intestinal parasites, or infusory biters, or the obscurities of alternate
generation;--the forms of the shark, the labrus, the jaw of the sea-wolf paved with crushing teeth,
the weapons of the grampus, and other warriors hidden in the sea--are
hints of ferocity in the interiors of nature.

Will you say, the disasters which threaten mankind are exceptional,
and one need not lay his account for cataclysms every day?

Ay, but what happens once, may happen again, and so long as these strokes are not to be parried
by us, they must be feared.

But these shocks and ruins are less destructive to us than the stealthy power of other laws
which act on us daily.

An expense of ends to means is fate--organization tyrannizing over character. The menagerie,
or forms and powers of the spine, is a book of fate: the bill of the bird, the skull of the
snake, determines tyrannically its limits. So is the scale of races, of temperaments; so is sex;
so is climate; so is the reaction of talents imprisoning the vital power in certain directions.
Every spirit makes its house; but afterwards the house confines the spirit.

The gross lines are legible to the dull: the cabman is phrenologist
so far: he looks in your face to see if his shilling is sure.

A dome of brow denotes one thing; a pot-belly another; a squint, a pug-nose, mats of hair,
the pigment of the epidermis, betray character. People seem sheathed in their tough organization.
Ask Spurzheim, ask the doctors, ask Quetelet, if temperaments decide
nothing? or if there be anything they do not decide?

Read the description in medical books of the four temperaments, and
you will think you are reading your own thoughts which you had not
yet told.

Find the part which black eyes, and which blue eyes, play severally
in the company.

How shall a man escape from his ancestors, or draw off from his veins the black drop which
he drew from his father's or his mother's life? It often appears in a family, as if all the qualities
of the progenitors were potted in several jars--some ruling quality
in each son or daughter of the house--and sometimes the unmixed temperament,
the rank unmitigated elixir, the family vice, is drawn off in a separate
individual, and the others are proportionally relieved.

We sometimes see a change of expression in our companion, and say, his father, or his mother, comes
to the windows of his eyes, and sometimes a remote relative.

In different hours, a man represents each of several of his ancestors,
as if there were seven or eight of us rolled up in each man's skin,--seven
or eight ancestors at least,--and they constitute the variety of notes
for that new piece of music which his life is.

At the corner of the street, you read the possibility of each passenger, in the facial angle, in
the complexion, in the depth of his eye. His parentage determines it. Men are what their mothers
made them.

Ask the digger in the ditch to explain Newton's laws: the fine organs of his brains have been
pinched by overwork and squalid poverty from father to son, for a hundred years. When each
comes forth from his mother's womb, the gate of gifts closes behind
him.

Let him value his hands and feet, he has but one pair. So he has but one future, and that is
already predetermined in his lobes, and described in that little
fatty face, pig-eye, and squat form.

All the privilege and all the legislation of the world cannot meddle or help to make a poet or a
prince of him.

Jesus said, "When he looketh on her, he hath committed adultery." But he is an adulterer before
he has yet looked on the woman, by the superfluity of animal, and the defect of thought, in his
constitution.

Who meets him, or who meets her, in the street, sees that they are
ripe to be each other's victim.

In certain men, digestion and sex absorb the vital force, and the stronger these are, the individual
is so much weaker.

The more of these drones perish, the better for the hive. If, later, they give birth to some
superior individual, with force enough to add to this animal a new aim, and a complete apparatus
to work it out, all the ancestors are gladly forgotten. Most men and most women are merely one couple
more. Now and then, one has a new cell or camarilla opened in his brain--an architectural, a musical,
or a philological knack, some stray taste or talent for flowers,
or chemistry, or pigments, or story-telling, a good hand for drawing,
a good foot for dancing, an athletic frame for wide journeying, etc.--which
skill nowise alters rank in the scale of nature, but serves to pass
the time, the life of sensation going on as before.

At last, these hints and tendencies are fixed in one, or in a succession.

Each absorbs so much food and force as to become itself a new centre.

The new talent draws off so rapidly the vital force, that not enough remains for the animal
functions, hardly enough for health; so that, in the second generation, if the like genius appear,
the health is visibly deteriorated, and the generative force impaired.

It was a poetic attempt to lift this mountain of Fate, to reconcile this despotism of race with liberty,
which led the Hindoos to say, "Fate is nothing but the deeds committed in a prior state of existence."
I find the coincidence of the extremes of eastern and western speculation in the daring statement
of Schelling, "There is in every man a certain feeling, that he has been what he is from all eternity,
and by no means became such in time." To say it less sublimely--in the history of the individual
is always an account of his condition, and he knows himself to be a party to his present estate.

A
good deal of our politics is physiological. Now and then, a man of wealth in the heyday of youth
adopts the tenet of broadest freedom. In England, there is always some man of wealth and large
connection planting himself, during all his years of health, on the side of progress, who,
as soon as he begins to die, checks his forward play, calls in his troops, and becomes conservative.
But strong natures, backwoodsmen, New Hampshire giants, Napoleons, Burkes, Broughams, Websters,
Kossuths, are inevitable patriots, until their life ebbs, and their defects and gout, palsy and
money, warp them.

The strongest idea incarnates itself in majorities and nations, in the healthiest and strongest.
Probably, the election goes by avoirdupois weight, and, if you could weigh bodily the tonnage
of any hundred of the Whig and the Democratic party in a town, on the Dearborn balance, as
they passed the hay scales, you could predict with certainty which party would carry it. On the
whole, it would be rather the speediest way of deciding the vote,
to put the selectmen or the mayor and aldermen at the hayscales.

In science, we have to consider two things: power and circumstance. All we know of the egg,
from each successive discovery, is, another vesicle; and if, after five hundred years, you get a better
observer, or a better glass, he finds within the last observed another. In vegetable and animal
tissue, it is just alike, and all that the primary power or spasm operates, is, still, vesicles,
vesicles. Yes--but the tyrannical Circumstance! A vesicle in new circumstances, a vesicle
lodged in darkness, Oken thought, became animal; in light, a plant.

Lodged in the parent animal, it suffers changes, which end in unsheathing miraculous capability
in the unaltered vesicle, and it unlocks itself to fish, bird, or quadruped, head and foot,
eye and claw. The Circumstance is Nature.

Nature is, what you may do. There is much you may not. We have two things--the circumstance,
and the life. Once we thought, positive power was all. Now we learn, that negative power, or
circumstance, is half. Nature is the tyrannous circumstance, the thick skull, the sheathed snake,
the ponderous, rock-like jaw; necessitated activity; violent direction; the conditions of
a tool, like the locomotive, strong enough on its track, but which can do nothing but mischief
off it; or skates, which are wings on the ice, but fetters on the ground.

The book of Nature is the book of Fate. She turns the gigantic pages--leaf after leaf--never re-turning
one. One leaf she lays down, a floor of granite; then a thousand ages, and a bed of slate;
a thousand ages, and a measure of coal; a thousand ages, and a layer of marl and mud; vegetable
forms appear; her first misshapen animals, zoöphyte, trilobium, fish, then, saurians--rude
forms, in which she has only blocked her future statue, concealing under these unwieldy monsters
the fine type of her coming king. The face of the planet cools and dries, the races meliorate,
and man is born. But when a race has lived its term, it comes no more again.

The population of the world is a conditional population; not the best, but the best that could
live now; and the scale of tribes, and the steadiness with which victory adheres to one tribe,
and defeat to another, is as uniform as the superposition of strata.

We know in history what weight belongs to race. We see the English, French, and Germans, planting
themselves on every shore and market of America and Australia, and monopolizing the commerce of these
countries. We like the nervous and victorious habit of our own branch of the family. We follow
the step of the Jew, of the Indian, of the Negro. We see how much will has been expended to extinguish
the Jew, in vain. Look at the unpalatable conclusions of Knox, in his "Fragment of Races,"--a
rash and unsatisfactory writer, but charged with pungent and unforgettable truths. "Nature respects
race, and not hybrids." "Every race has its own habitat." "Detach a colony from the race, and
it deteriorates to the crab." See the shades of the picture. The German and Irish millions, like
the negro, have a great deal of guano in their destiny. They are ferried over the Atlantic,
and carted over America, to ditch and to drudge, to make corn cheap,
and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on
the prairie.

    
    
    One more faggot of these adamantine bandages, is, the new science
    of Statistics. It is a rule, that the most casual and extraordinary
    events--if the basis of population is broad enough--become matter
    of fixed calculation. It would not be safe to say when a captain
    like Bonaparte, a singer like Jenny Lind, or a navigator like Bowditch,
    would be born in Boston: but, on a population of twenty
    or two hundred millions, something like accuracy may be had.[17]

'Tis
frivolous to fix pedantically the date of particular inventions.

    They have all been invented over and over fifty times. Man is the
    arch machine, of which all these shifts drawn from himself are
    toy models. He helps himself on each emergency by copying or
    duplicating his own structure, just so far as the need is. 'Tis
    hard to find the right Homer, Zoroaster, or Menu; harder still to
    find the Tubal Cain, or Vulcan, or Cadmus, or Copernicus, or
    Fust, or Fulton, the indisputable inventor. There are scores
    and centuries of them.

    "The air is full of men." This kind of talent so abounds, this
    constructive tool-making efficiency, as if it adhered to the chemic
    atoms, as if the air he breathes were made of Vaucansons, Franklins,
    and Watts.
    
    Doubtless, in every million there will be an astronomer, a mathematician,
    a comic poet, a mystic. No one can read the history of astronomy,
    without perceiving that Copernicus, Newton, Laplace, are not new
    men, or a new kind of men, but that Thales, Anaximenes, Hipparchus,
Empedocles, Aristarchus, Pythagoras, OEnopides, had anticipated them;
each had the same tense geometrical brain, apt for the same vigorous
computation and logic, a mind parallel to the movement of the world.

    The Roman mile probably rested on a measure of a degree of
    the meridian. Mahometan and Chinese know what we know of leap-year,
    of the Gregorian calendar, and of the precession of the equinoxes.
    As, in every barrel of cowries, brought to New Bedford,
    there shall be one orangia, so there will, in a dozen
    millions of Malays and Mahometans, be one or two astronomical skulls.
    In a large city, the most casual things, and things whose beauty
    lies in their casualty, are produced as punctually and to order
    as the baker's muffin for breakfast.

"Punch" makes exactly one capital joke a week; and the journals contrive to furnish one good
piece of news every day.

And not less work the laws of repression, the penalties of violated functions. Famine, typhus, frost,
war, suicide, and effete races, must be reckoned calculable parts of the system of the world.

These
are pebbles from the mountain, hints of the terms by which our life is walled up, and which show
a kind of mechanical exactness, as of a loom or mill, in what we call casual or fortuitous events.

The
force with which we resist these torrents of tendency looks so ridiculously
inadequate, that it amounts to little more than a criticism or a protest
made by a minority of one, under compulsion of millions. I seemed,
in the height of a tempest, to see men overboard struggling in the
waves, and driven about here and there. They glanced intelligently
at each other, but 'twas little they could do for one another; 'twas
much if each could keep afloat alone. Well, they had a right to their
eye-beams, and all the rest was Fate.

* * * * *

We cannot trifle
with this reality, this cropping out in our planted gardens of the
core of the world. No picture of life can have any veracity that does
not admit the odious facts. A man's power is hooped in by a necessity
which, by many experiments, he touches on every side, until he learns
its arc.

The element running through entire nature, which we popularly
call Fate, is known to us as limitation. Whatever limits us, we call
Fate. If we are brute and barbarous, the fate takes a brute and dreadful
shape.

Often Grant walked home from these discussions with his heart hot and rebellious. He saw life
only in its spiritual aspect and the logic of Nathan Perry angered him with its conclusiveness.

Often as he walked Kenyon was upon his heart and he wondered if Margaret missed the boy; or
if the small fame that the boy was making with his music had touched her vanity with a sense
of loss. He wondered if she ever wished to help the child. The whole town knew that the Nesbits
were sending Kenyon to Boston to study music, and that Amos Adams and Grant could contribute
little to the child's support. Grant wondered, considering the relations between the Van Dorns
and Nesbits, whether sometimes Margaret did not feel a twinge of irritation or regret at the
course of things.

He could not know that even as he walked through the November night, Margaret Van Dorn, was
sitting in her room holding in her hand a tiny watch, a watch to delight a little girl's heart.
On the inside of the back of the watch was engraved:

    "To Lila
    from her
    Father, for
    Her 10th birthday."

And opposite the inscription in the watch was pasted the photograph of the unhappy face of
the donor. Margaret sat gazing at the trinket and wondering vaguely what would delight a little
boy's heart as a watch would warm the heart of a little girl. It was not a sense of loss, not
regret, certainly not remorse that moved her heart as she sat alone holding the trinket--discovered
on her husband's dresser; it was a weak and footless longing, and a sense of personal wrong
that rose against her husband. He had something which she had not. He could give jeweled watches,
and she--

But if she only could have read life aright she would have pitied him that he could give only
jeweled watches, only paper images of a dissatisfied face, only material things, the token
of a material philosophy--all that he knew and all that he had, to the one thing in the world
that he really could love. And as for Margaret, his wife, who lived his life and his philosophy,
she, too, had nothing with which to satisfy the dull, empty feeling in her heart when she thought
of Kenyon, save to make peace with it in hard metal and stupid stones. Thus does what we think
crust over our souls and make us what we are.

Grant Adams, plodding homeward that night, turned from the thought of Margaret to the thought
of Kenyon with a wave of joy, counting the days and weeks and the months until the boy should
return for the summer. At home Grant sat down before the kitchen table and began a long talk
that kept him until midnight. He had undertaken to organize all the unions of the place into
a central labor council; the miners, the smeltermen, the teamsters, the cement factory workers,
the workers in the building trades. It was an experimental plan, under the auspices of the
national union officers. Only a man like Grant Adams, with something more than a local reputation
as a leader, would have been intrusted with the work. And so, after his day's toil for bread,
he sat at his kitchen table, elaborately working his dream into reality.

That season the devil, if there is a devil who seeks to swerve us from what we deem our noblest
purposes, came to Grant Adams disguised in an offer of a considerable sum of money to Grant
for a year's work in the lecture field. The letter bearing the offer explained that by going
out and preaching the cause of labor to the people, Grant would be doing his cause more good
than by staying in Harvey and fighting alone. The thought came to him that the wider field
of work would give him greater personal fame, to be used ultimately for a wider influence.
All one long day as he worked with hammer and saw at his trade, Grant turned the matter over
in his mind. He could see himself in a larger canvas, working a greater good. Perhaps some
fleeting unformed idea came to him of a home and a normal life as other men live; for at noon,
without consciously connecting her with his dream, he took his problem to Laura Van Dorn at
her kindergarten. That afternoon he decided to accept the offer, and put much of his reason
for acceptance upon Kenyon and the boy's needs. That night he penned a letter of acceptance
to the lecture bureau and went to bed, disturbed and unsatisfied. Before he slept he turned
and twisted, and finally threshed himself to sleep. It was a light fragmentary sleep, that
moves in and out of some strange hypnoidal state where the lower consciousness and the normal
consciousness wrestle for the control of reason. Then after a long period of half-waking dreams,
toward morning, Grant sank into a profound sleep. In that sleep his soul, released from all
that is material, rose and took command of his will.

When Grant awoke, it was still black night. For a few seconds he did not know where he was--nor
even who he was, nor what. He was a mere consciousness. The first glimmer of identity that
came to him came with a roaring "No," that repeated itself over and over, "No--no," cried the
voice of his soul--"you are no mere word spinner; you are a fighter; you are pledged, body
and soul; you are bought with a price--no, no, no."

And then he knew where he was and he knew surely and without doubt or quaver of faith that
he must not give up his place in the fight. When he thought of Kenyon living on the bounty
of the Nesbits, he thought also of Dick Bowman, ordering his own son under the sliding earth
to hold the shovel over Grant's face in the mine.

So Grant Adams bent his shoulders to this familiar burden. In the early morning, before his
father and Jasper were up, the gaunt, ungainly figure hurried with his letter of refusal to
the South Harvey Station and put the letter on the seven-ten train for Chicago.

That evening, sitting on their front porch, the Dexters talked over Grant's decision. "Well,"
said John Dexter, looking up into the mild November sky, and seeing the brown gray smudge of
the smelter there, "so Grant has sidled by another devil in his road. We have seen that women
won't stop him; it's plain that money nor fame won't stop him, though they clearly tore his
coat tails. I imagine from what Laura says he must have decided once to accept."

"Yes," answered his wife, "but it does seem to me, if my old father needed care as his does,
and my brother had to accept charity, I'd give that particular devil my whole coat and see
if I couldn't make a bargain with him for a little money, at some small cost."

"Mother Eve--Mother Eve," smiled the minister, "you women are so practical--we men are the
real idealists--the only dreamers who stand by our dreams in this wicked, weary world."

He leaned back in his chair. "There is still one more big black devil waiting for Grant: Power--the
love of power which is the lust of usefulness--power may catch Grant after he has escaped from
women and money and fame. Vanity--vanity, saith the preacher--Heaven help Grant in the final
struggle with the big, black devil of vanity."

Yet, after all, vanity has in it the seed of a saving grace that has lifted humanity over many
pitfalls in the world. For vanity is only self-respect multiplied; and when that goes--when
men and women lose their right to lift their faces to God, they have fallen upon bad times
indeed. It was even so good a man as John Dexter himself, who tried to put self-respect into
the soul of Violet Hogan, and was mocked for it.

"What do they care for me?" she cried, as he sat talking to her in her miserable home one chill
November day. "Why should I pay any attention to them? Once I chummed with Mag Müller, before
she married Henry Fenn, and I was as good as she was then--and am now for that matter. She
knew what I was, and I knew what she was going to be--we made no bones of it. We hunted in
pairs--as women like to. And I know Mag Müller. So why should I keep up for her?"

The woman laughed and showed her hollow mouth and all the wrinkles of her broken face, that
the paint hid at night. "And as for Tom Van Dorn--I was a decent girl before I met him, Mr.
Dexter--and why in God's name should I try to keep up for him?"

She shuddered and would have sobbed but he stopped her with: "Well, Violet--wife and I have
always been your friends; we are now. The church will help you."

"Oh, the church--the church," she laughed. "It can't help me. Fancy me in church--with all
the wives looking sideways at all the husbands to see that they didn't look too long at me.
The church is for those who haven't been caught! God knows if there is a place for any one
who has been caught--and I've been caught and caught and caught." She cried. "Only the children
don't know--not yet, though little Tom--he's the oldest, he came to me and asked me yesterday
why the other children yelled when I went out. Oh, hell--" she moaned, "what's the use--what's
the use--what's the use!" and fell to sobbing with her head upon her arms resting upon the
bare, dirty table.

It was rather a difficult question for John Dexter. Only one other minister in the world ever
answered it successfully, and He brought public opinion down on Him. The Rev. John Dexter rose,
and stood looking at the shattered thing that once had been a graceful, beautiful human body
enclosing an aspiring soul. He saw what society had done to break and twist the body; what
society had neglected to do in the youth of the soul--to guide and environ it right--he saw
what poverty had done and what South Harvey had done to cheat her of her womanhood even when
she had tried to rise and sin no more; he remembered how the court-made law had cheated her
of her rightful patrimony and cast her into the streets to spread the social cancer of her
trade; and he had no answer. If he could have put vanity into her heart--the vanity which he
feared for Grant Adams, he would have been glad. But her vanity was the vanity of motherhood;
for herself she had spent it all. So he left her without answering her question. Money was
all he could give her and money seemed to him a kind of curse. Yet he gave it and gave all he had.

When she saw that he was gone, Violet fell upon the tumbled, unmade bed and cried with all
the vehemence of her unrestrained, shallow nature. For she was sick and weary and hungry. She
had given her last dollar to a policeman the night before to keep from arrest. The oldest boy
had gone to school without breakfast. The little children were playing in the street--they
had begged food at the neighbors' and she had no heart to stop them. At noon when little Tom
came in he found his mother sitting before a number of paper sacks upon the table waiting for
him. Then the family ate out of the sacks the cold meal she had bought at the grocery store
with John Dexter's money.

That night Violet shivered out into the cold over her usual route. She was walking through
the railroad yards in Magnus when suddenly she came upon a man who dropped stealthily out of
a dead engine. He carried something shining and tried to slip it under his coat when he saw
her. She knew he was stealing brass, but she did not care; she called as they passed through
the light from an arc lamp:

"Hello, sweetheart--where you going?"

The man looked up ashamed, and she turned a brazen, painted face at him and tried to smile
without opening her lips.

Their eyes met, and the man caught her by the arm and cried:

"God, Violet--is this you--have you--" She cut him off with:

"Henry Fenn--why--Henry--"

The brass fell at his feet. He did not pick it up. They stood between the box cars in speechless
astonishment. It was the man who found voice.

"Violet--Violet," he cried. "This is hell. I'm a thief and you--"

"Say it--say it--don't spare me," she cried. "That's what I am, Henry. It's all right about
me, but how about you, how about you, Henry? This is no place for you! Why, you," she exclaimed--"why,
you are--"

"I'm a drunken thief stealing brass couplings to get another drink, Violet."

He picked up the brass and threw it up into the engine, still clutching her arm so that she
could not run away.

"But, girl--" he cried, "you've got to quit this--this is no way for you to live."

She looked at him to see what was in his mind. She broke away, and scrambled into the engine
cab and put the brass where it could not fall out.

"You don't want that brass falling out, and them tracing you down here and jugging you--you
fool," she panted as she climbed to the ground.

"Lookee here, Henry Fenn," she cried, "you're too good a man for this. You've had a dirty deal.
I knew it when she married you--the snake; I know it--I've always known it."

The woman's voice was shrill with emotion. Fenn saw that she was verging on the hysterical,
and took her arm and led her down the dark alley between the cars. The man's heart was touched--partly
by the wreck he saw, and partly by her words. They brought back the days when he and she had
seen their visions. The liquor had left his head, and he was a tremble. He felt her cold, hard
hand, and took it in his own dirty, shaken hand to warm it.

"How are you living?" he asked.

"This way," she replied. "I got my children--they've got to live someway. I can't leave them
day times and see 'em run wild on the streets--the little girls need me."

She looked up into his face as they hurried past an arc lamp, and she saw tears there.

"Oh, you got a dirty deal, Henry--how could she do it?" cried the woman.

He did not answer and they walked up a dingy street. A car came howling by.

"Got car fare," he asked. She nodded.

"Well, I haven't," he said, "but I'm going with you." 

I must look at it again when it comes around; she carries it well, too--belle of Richmond.
And, see there; there's one of the prettiest girls in the South--belle
of Macon.

And that handsome woman--Nashville?--Louisville? See, that's the new-comer from Ohio." And so
the procession went on, and the enumeration--belle of Montgomery, belle of Augusta, belle of
Charleston, belle of Savannah, belle of Atlanta--always the belle
of some place.

"No, I don't expect you to say that these are prettier than Northern women; but just between
friends, Mr. King, don't you think the North might make a little more of their beautiful women?
Yes, you are right; she is handsome" (King was bowing to Irene, who was on the arm of Mr. Meigs),
"and has something besides beauty.

I see what you mean" (King had not intimated that he meant anything), "but don't you dare to
say it."

"Oh, I'm quite subdued."

"I wouldn't trust you. I suppose you Yankees cannot help your critical spirit."

"Critical?

Why, I've heard more criticism in the last half-hour from these spectators than in a year before.
And--I wonder if you will let me say it?"

"Say on."

"Seems to me that the chief topic here is physical beauty--about the shape, the style, the dress,
of women, and whether this or that one is well made and handsome."

"Well, suppose beauty is worshiped in the South--we worship what we
have; we haven't much money now, you know.

Would you mind my saying that Mr. Meigs is a very presentable man?"

"You may say what you like about Mr. Meigs."

"That's the reason I took him away this morning."

"Thank you."

"He is full of information, and so unobtrusive--"

"I hadn't noticed that."

"And I think he ought to be encouraged.

I'll tell you what you ought to do, Mr. King: you ought to give a german. If you do not, I
shall put Mr. Meigs up to it--it is the thing to do here."

"Mr. Meigs give a german!"--[Dance, cotillion--always lively. D.W.]

"Why not?

You see that old beau there, the one smiling and bending towards her as he walks with the belle
of Macon? He does not look any older than Mr. Meigs.

He has been coming here for fifty years; he owns up to sixty-five and the Mexican war; it's my
firm belief that he was out in 1812. Well, he has led the german here for years. You will find
Colonel Fane in the ballroom every night. Yes, I shall speak to Mr. Meigs."

The room was thinning out. King found himself in front of a row of dowagers, whose tongues were
still going about the departing beauties.

"No mercy there," he heard a lady say to her companion; "that's a
jury for conviction every time." What confidential communication Mrs.
Farquhar made to Mr. Meigs, King never knew, but he took advantage
of the diversion in his favor to lead Miss Benson off to the ballroom.

IX.
OLD SWEET AND WHITE SULFUR

The days went by at the White Sulphur
on the wings of incessant gayety. Literally the nights were filled
with music, and the only cares that infested the day appeared in the
anxious faces of the mothers as the campaign became more intricate
and uncertain. King watched this with the double interest of spectator
and player. The artist threw himself into the melee with abandon,
and pacified his conscience by an occasional letter to Miss Lamont,
in which he confessed just as many of his conquests and defeats as
he thought it would be good for her to know.

The colored people,
who are a conspicuous part of the establishment, are a source of never-failing
interest and amusement. Every morning the mammies and nurses with
their charges were seated in a long, shining row on a part of the
veranda where there was most passing and repassing, holding a sort
of baby show, the social consequence of each one depending upon the
rank of the family who employed her, and the dress of the children
in her charge. High-toned conversation on these topics occupied these
dignified and faithful mammies, upon whom seemed to rest to a considerable
extent the maintenance of the aristocratic social traditions. Forbes
had heard that while the colored people of the South had suspended
several of the ten commandments, the eighth was especially regarded
as nonapplicable in the present state of society. But he was compelled
to revise this opinion as to the White Sulphur. "Now, here, George--it's like this: I don't want any woman; I've washed
most of that monkey business out of me with whisky--it's not in me any more. And I know she's
had enough of men. And I've brought her here--we've come here to tell you that part is straight--decent--square.
I wanted you to know that--and Violet would, too--wouldn't you, Violet?" She nodded.

"Now, then, George--I'm her man! Do you understand--her man. I'm going to see that she doesn't
have to go on the streets. Why, when she was a girl I used to beau her around, and if she isn't
ashamed of a drunken thief--then in Christ's name, I'm going to help her."

He smiled out of his leaden eyes the ghost of his glittering, old, self-deprecatory smile.
The woman remembered it, and bent over and kissed his dirty hand. She rose, and put her fingers
gently upon his head, and sobbed:

"Oh, God, forgive me and make me worthy of this!"

There was an awkward pause. When the woman had controlled herself Fenn said: "What I want is
to keep right on sleeping in the basement here--until I can get ahead enough to pay for my
room. I'm not going to make any scandal for Violet, here. But we both feel better to talk it
out with you."

They started for the back door. The front of the store was dark. Brotherton saw the man hesitate,
and look down the alley to see if any one was in sight.

"Henry," said Brotherton, "here's a dollar. You might just as well begin fighting it out to-night.
You go to the basement. I'll take Violet home."

The woman would have protested, but the big man said gently: "No, Violet--you were Denny Hogan's
wife. He was my friend. You are Henry's ward--he is my friend. Let's go out the front way, Violet."

When they were gone, and the lights were out in the office of the bookstore, Henry Fenn slipped
through the alley, went to the nearest saloon, walked in, stood looking at the whiskey sparkling
brown and devilishly in the thick-bottomed cut glasses, saw the beer foaming upon the mahogany
board, breathed it all in deeply, felt of the hard silver dollar in his pocket, shook as one
in a palsy, set his teeth and while the tears came into his eyes stood and silently counted
one hundred and another hundred; grinning foolishly when the loafers joked with him, and finally
shuffled weakly out into the night, and ran to his cellar. And if Mr. Left's theory of angels
is correct, then all the angels in heaven had their harps in their hands waving them for Henry,
and cheering for joy! For the wicked go unscathed of material punishments in this naughty world.
And so the idea of Heaven is a logical sequence of the idea that only spiritual rewards come
to men for spiritual services. Not that Heaven is needed to balance the accounts of good men
after death--not at all. Good men get all that is coming to them here--whether it is a crucifixion
or a crown--that makes no difference; crowns and crosses are mere material counters. They do
not win or lose the game--nor even justly mark its loss or winning.

"The reason why Heaven is needed in the scheme of a neighborly man," said the Peach Blow Philosopher
as he stood at his gate and reviewed the procession of pilgrims through the wilderness, "is
this: The man who leads a decent life, is building a great soul. Obviously, this world is not
the natural final habitat of great souls; for they occur here sporadically--though perhaps
more and more frequently every trip around the sun. But Heaven is needed in any scheme of general
decency for decency's sake, so that the decent soul for whose primary development the earth
was hung in the sky, may have a place to find further usefulness, and a far more exceeding
glory than may be enjoyed in this material dwelling place. So as we grow better and kinder
in this world, hell sloughs off and Heaven is more real."

There is more of this dissertation--if the reader cares to pursue it, and it may be found in
the files of the Harvey Tribune. It also appears as a footnote to an article by an eminent
authority on Abnormal Psychology in a report on Mr. Left, Vol. XXXII, p. 2126, of the Report
of the Psychological Association. The remarks of the Peach Blow Philosopher credited in the
Report of the Proceedings above noted, to Mr. Left, appeared in the Harvey Tribune Jan. 14,
1903. They may have been called forth by an editorial in the Harvey Times of January 9 of that
same year. So as that editorial has a proper place in this narrative, it may be set down here
at the outset of this chapter. The article from the Times is headed: "A Successful Career"
and it follows:

"To-day Judge Thomas Van Dorn retires from ten years of faithful service as district judge
of this district. He was appointed by the Governor and has been twice elected to this position
by the people, and feeling that the honor should go to some other county in the district, the
Judge was not a candidate for a third nomination or election. During the ten years of his service
he has grown steadily in legal and intellectual attainments. He has been president of the state
bar association, delegate from that body to the National Bar Association, member of several
important committees in that organization, and now is at the head of that branch of the National
Bar Association organized to secure a more strict interpretation of the Federal Constitution,
as a bulwark of commercial liberty. Judge Van Dorn also has been selected as a member of a
subcommittee to draft a new state constitution to be submitted to the legislature by the state
bar association. So much for the recognition of his legal ability.

"As an orator he has won similar and enviable fame. His speech at the dedication of the state
monument at Vicksburg will be a classic in American oratory for years. At the Marquette Club
Banquet in Chicago last month his oration was reprinted in New York and Boston with flattering
comment. Recently he has been engaged--though his term of service has just ended--in every
important criminal action now pending west of the Mississippi. As a jury lawyer he has no equal
in all the West.

"But while this practice is highly interesting, and in a sense remunerative, the Judge feels
that the criminal practice makes too much of a drain upon his mind and body, and while he will
defend certain great lumber operators and will appear for the defense in the famous Yarborrough
murder case, and is considering accepting an almost unbelievably large retainer in the Skelton
divorce case with its ramifications leading into at least three criminal prosecutions, and
four suits to change or perfect certain land titles, yet this kind of practice is distasteful
to the Judge, and he will probably confine himself after this year to what is known as corporation
practice. He has been retained as general counsel for all the industrial interests in the Wahoo
Valley. The mine operators, the smelter owners, the cement manufacturers, the glass factories
have seen in Judge Van Dorn a man in whom they all may safely trust their interests--amicably
settling all differences between themselves in his office, and presenting for the Wahoo Valley
an unbroken front in all future disputes--industrial or otherwise. This arrangement has been
perfected by our giant of finance, Hon. Daniel Sands of the Traders' State Bank, who is, as
every one knows, heavily interested in every concern in the Valley--excepting the Independent
Coal Company, which by the way has preferred to remain outside of the united commercial union,
and do business under its own flag--however dark that flag may be.

"This new career of Judge Van Dorn will be highly gratifying to his friends--and who is there
who is not his friend?

"Courteous, knightly, impetuous, gallant Tom Van Dorn? What a career he has builded for himself
in Harvey and the West.

"Scorning his enemies with the quiet contempt of the intellectual gladiator that he is, Tom
Van Dorn has risen in this community as no other man young or old since its founding. His spacious
home is the temple of hospitality; his magnificent talent is given freely, often to the poor
and needy to whom his money flows in a generous stream whenever the call comes. His shrewd
investment of his savings in the Valley have made him rich; his beautiful wife and his widening
circle of friends have made him happy--his fine, active brain has made him great.

"The Times extends to the Judge upon his retirement from the bench the congratulations of an
admiring community, and best wishes for future success."

Now perhaps it was not this article that inspired the Peach Blow Philosopher. It may have been
another item in the same paper hidden away in the want column.

"Wanted--All the sewing and mending, quilt patching, sheet making, or other plain sewing that
the good women of Harvey have to give out. I know certain worthy women with families, who need
this work. Also wood-sawing orders promptly filled by competent men out of work. I will bring
work and the workers together. H. Fenn, care Brotherton Book & Stationery Co., 1127 Market Street."

Or if it was not that item, perhaps it was this one from the South Harvey Derrick of January
7, that called forth the Peach Blow Philosopher's remarks on Heaven:

"Mrs. Violet Hogan and family have rented the rooms adjoining Mrs. Van Dorn's kindergarten.
Mrs. Hogan has made arrangements to provide ladies of South Harvey and the Valley in general
with plain sewing by the piece. A day nursery for children has been fitted up by our genial
George Brotherton, former mayor of Harvey, where mothers sewing may leave their children in
an adjoining room."

Now the Heaven of the Peach Blow Philosopher is not gained at one bound. Even the painted,
canvas Heaven of Thomas Van Dorn cost him something--to be exact, $100, which he took in "stock"
of the Times company--which always had stock for sale, issued by a Price & Chanler Gordon job
press whenever it was required. And the negotiations for the Judge's painted Heaven made by
his partner, Mr. Joseph Calvin, of the renewed and reunited firm of Van Dorn & Calvin, were
not without their painful moments. As, for instance, when the editor of the Times complained
bitterly at having it agreed that he would have to mention in the article the Judge's "beautiful
wife," specifically and in terms, the editor was for raising the price to $150, by reason of
the laughing stock it would make of the paper, but compromised upon the promise of legal notices
from the firm amounting to $100 within the following six months. Also there was a hitch in
the negotiations hereinbefore mentioned when the Times was required to refer to the National
Bar Association meeting at all. For it was notorious that the Judge's flourishing signature
with "and wife" had been photographed upon the register of a New York Hotel when he attended
that meeting, whereas every one knew that Mrs. Van Dorn was in Europe that summer, and the
photograph of the Judge's beautifully flourishing signature aforesaid was one of the things
that persuaded the Judge to enter the active practice and leave the shades and solitudes of
the bench for more strenuous affairs. To allude to the Judge's wife, and to mention the National
Bar Association in the same article, struck the editor of the Times as so inauspicious that
it required considerable persuasion on the part of the diplomatic Mr. Calvin, to arrange the
matter.

So the Judge's Heaven bellied on its canvas, full of vain east wind, and fooled no one--not
even the Judge, least of all his beautiful wife, who, knowing of the Bar Association incident,
laughed a ribald laugh. Moreover, having abandoned mental healing for the Episcopalian faith
and having killed her mental healing dog with caramels and finding surcease in a white poodle,
she gave herself over to a riot of earth thoughts--together with language thereunto appertaining
of so plain a texture that the Judge all but limped in his strut for several hours.

But when the strut did come back, and the mocking echoes of the strident tones of "his beautiful
wife" were stilled by several rounds of Scotch whisky at the Club, the Judge went forth into
the town, waving his hands right and left, bowing punctiliously to women, and spending an hour
in police court getting out of trouble some of his gambler friends who had supported him in
politics.

He told every one that it was good to be off the bench and to be "plain Tom Van Dorn" again,
and he shook hands up and down Market Street. And as "plain Tom Van Dorn" he sat down in the
shop of the Paris Millinery Company, Mrs. Herdicker, Prop., and talked to the amiable Prop.
for half an hour--casting sly glances at the handsome Miss Morton, who got behind him and made
faces over his back for Mrs. Herdicker's edification.

But as Mrs. Herdicker, Prop., made it a point--and kept it--never to talk against the cash
drawer, "plain Tom Van Dorn" didn't learn the truth from her. So he pranced up and down before
his scenic representation of Heaven in the Times, and did not know that the whole town knew
that his stage Heaven was the masque for as hot and cozy a little hell as any respectable gentleman
of middle years could endure.

However clear he made it to the public, that he and Mrs. Van Dorn were passionately fond of
each other; however evident he intended it to be that he was more than satisfied with the bargain
that he had made when he took her, and put away his first wife; however strongly he played
the card of the gallant husband and "dearied" her, and however she smirked at him and "dawlinged"
him in public when the town was looking, every one knew the truth.

"We may," says the Peach Blow Philosopher in one of his dissertations on the Illusion of Time,
"counterfeit everything in this world--but sincerity." So Judge Thomas Van Dorn--"plain Tom
Van Dorn," went along Market Street, and through the world, handing out his leaden gratuities.
But people felt how greasy they were, how heavy they were, how soft they were; and threw them
aside, and sneered.

As for the Heaven which the Peach Blow Philosopher may have found for Henry Fenn and Violet
Hogan, it was a different affair, but of slow and uncertain growth. Henry Fenn went into the
sewer gang the day after he found Violet in the railroad yards, and for two weeks he worked
ten hours a day with the negroes and Mexicans in the ditch. It took him a month to get enough
money ahead to pay for a room. Leaving the sewer gang, he was made timekeeper on a small paving
contract. But every day he sent through the mails to Violet enough to pay her rent and feed
the children--a little sum, but all he could spare. He did not see her. He did not write to
her. He only knew that the money he was making was keeping her out of the night, so he bent
to his work with a will.

And at night,--it was not easy for Violet to stay in the house. She needed a thousand little
things--or thought she did. And there was the old track and the easy money. But she knew what
the pittance that came from Henry Fenn meant to him, so in pride and in shame one night she
turned back home when she had slipped clear to the corner of the street with her paint on. So
each man, like each plant, has his parasites. A strong, astringent, bilious nature, has more
truculent enemies than the slugs and moths that fret my leaves. Such an one has curculios,
borers, knife-worms: a swindler ate him first, then a client, then a quack, then a smooth, plausible
gentleman, bitter and selfish as Moloch.

This correlation really existing can be divined. If the threads are there, thought can follow
and show them. Especially when a soul is quick and docile; as Chaucer sings,--

Or if the soul of proper kind Be so perfect as men find, That it wot
what is to come, And that he warneth all and some, Of every of their
aventures, By previsions or figures; But that our flesh hath not might
It to understand aright, For it is warned too darkly.

Some people are made up of rhyme, coincidence, omen, periodicity, and presage: they meet the
person they seek: what their companion prepares to say to them, they first say to him; and
a hundred signs apprise them of what is about to befall.

Wonderful intricacy in the web, wonderful constancy in the design, this vagabond life admits.
We wonder how the fly finds its mate, and yet year after year we find two men, two women, without
legal or carnal tie, spend a great part of their best time within
a few feet of each other.

And the moral is, that what we seek we shall find; what we flee from flees from us; as Goethe
said, "what we wish for in youth, comes in heaps on us in old age,"
too often cursed with the granting of our prayer; and hence the high
caution, that, since we are sure of having what we wish, we beware
to ask only for high things.

One key, one solution to the mysteries of human condition, one solution to the old knots of
fate, freedom, and foreknowledge, exists, the propounding, namely,
of the double consciousness.

A man must ride alternately on the horses of his private and his public nature, as the equestrians
in the circus throw themselves nimbly from horse to horse, or plant
one foot on the back of one, and the other foot on the back of the
other.

So when a man is the victim of his fate, has sciatica in his loins,
and cramp in his mind; a club-foot and a club in his wit; a sour face,
and a selfish temper; a strut in his gait, and a conceit in his affection;
or is ground to powder by the vice of his race; he is to rally on
his relation to the universe which his ruin benefits.

Leaving the dæmon who suffers, he is to take sides with the Deity
who secures universal benefit by his pain.

To offset the drag of temperament and race, which pulls down, learn
this lesson--namely, that by the cunning co-presence of two elements,
which is throughout nature, whatever lames or paralyzes you draws
in with it the divinity, in some form, to repay.

A good intention clothes itself with sudden power.

When a god wishes to ride, any chip or pebble will bud and shoot
out winged feet, and serve him for a horse.

Let us build altars to the Blessed Unity which holds nature and souls in perfect solution,
and compels every atom to serve an universal end. I do not wonder at a snow-flake, a shell, a
summer landscape, or the glory of the stars; but at the necessity of beauty under which the universe
lies; that all is and must be pictorial; that the rainbow, and the
curve of the horizon, and the arch of the blue vault, are only results
from the organism of the eye.

 One new coat. He hoped and so indicated to the firm, to be able to afford a vest
in the spring and perhaps trousers by summer, and because of the cutlery transaction above
mentioned, the firm indicated

Item Ten. That Mr. Fenn's credit was good for the whole suit. But Mr. Fenn waved a proud hand
and said he had

Item Eleven. No desire to become involved in the devious ways of high finance, and took only
the coat.

But, nevertheless, no small part of his Heaven lies in the serene knowledge that the whole
suit is waiting for him, carefully put aside by the head of the house until Mr. Fenn cares
to call for it. That is perhaps a material Heaven but it is a part of Mr. Fenn's Heaven, and
as he goes about from door to door soliciting for sewing, the knowledge that if he should cease
or falter four women might be on the street the next night, keeps him happy, and not even when
he was county attorney or in the real estate business nor writing insurance, nor disporting
himself as an auctioneer was Mr. Fenn ever in his own mind a person of so much use and consequence.
So his Heaven needs no east wind to belly it out. Mr. Fenn's Heaven is full and fat and prosperous--even
on two meals a day and in a three-dollar-a-month room.

And now that we may balance up the Heaven account in these books, we should come to some conclusion
as to what Heaven is. Let us call it, for the sake of our hypothesis, the most work one can
do for the least self-interest, and let it go at that and get on with the story. For this story
has to do with large and real affairs. It must not dally here with the sordid affairs of a
lady who certainly was no better than she should be and of a gentleman who was as the hereinbefore
mentioned receipts will show, much worse than he might have been. In May a young gentleman
in a high hat and a suit of exquisite gray twill cut with a long frock coat, appeared at the
Hotel Sands--and took the bridal suite on the second floor. He brought letters to the Traders'
Bank and from the Bank took letters to the smelters, and with a notebook in hand the young
man in exquisite gray twill went about for three or four days smiling affably, and asking many
questions. Then he left and in due course--that is to say, in a fortnight--Mr. Sands called
the managing officials of all the smelters into his back room and read them a letter from a
New York firm offering to trade stock in a holding company, taking over smelters of the class
and kind in the Wahoo Valley for the stocks and bonds of the Harvey Smelters Company. The letterhead
was so awe-inspiring and the proposition was so convincing by reason of the terror inherent
in the letterhead that the smelters went into the holding company, and thereafter the managing
officials who had been men of power and consequence in Harvey became clerks. About the same
time the coal properties went the same way, and the cement concerns saw their finish as individual
competing concerns. The glass factories were also gobbled up. So when the Fourth of July came
and the youngest Miss Morton, under great protest, but at her father's stern command, wrapped
an American flag about her--and sang the "Star Spangled Banner" to the Veterans of Persifer
F. Smith Post of the G.A.R. in Sands'

Park, the land of the free and the home of the brave in Harvey was somewhat abridged.

Daniel Sands felt the abridgement more than any one else. For a generation he had been a spider,
weaving his own web for his own nest. All his webs and filaments and wires and pipes and cables
went out and brought back things for him to dispose of. He was the center of the universe for
himself and for Harvey. He was the beginning and the end. His bank was the first and the last
word in business and in politics in that great valley. What he spun was his; what he drew into
the web was his. When he invited the fly into his parlor, it was for the delectation of the
spider, not to be passed on to some other larger web and fatter spider. But that day as he
sat, a withered, yellow-skinned, red-eyed, rattle-toothed, old man with a palsied head that
never stopped wagging, as he sat under his skull cap, blinking out at a fat, little world that
always had been his prey, Daniel Sands felt that he had ceased to be an end, and had become
a means.

His bank, his mines, his smelters, even his municipal utilities, all were slipping from under
his control. He could feel the pull of the rope from the outside around his own foot. He could
feel that he was not a generator of power. He was merely a pumping station, gathering up all
the fat of the little land that once was his, and passing it out in pipes that ran he knew
not where, to go to some one else--he knew not whom. True, his commissions came back, and his
dividends came back, and they were rich and sweet, and worth while. But--he was shocked when
he found courage to ask it--if they did not come back, what could he do? He was part of a great
web--a little filament in one obscure corner, and he was spinning a fabric whose faintest plan
he could not conceive.

This angered him, and the spider spat in vain rage. The power he loved was gone; he was the
mere shell of a spider; he was dead. Some man might come into the bank to-morrow and take even
the semblance of his power from him. They might, indeed, shut up every mill, close every mine,
lock every factory, douse the fire in every smelter in the Wahoo Valley, and the man who believed
he had opened the mills, dug the mines, builded the factories and lighted the smelter fires
with all but his own hands, could only rage and fume, or be polite and pretend it was his desire.

The town that he believed that he had made out of sunshine and prairie grass, for all he could
do, might be condemned as a bat roost, and the wires and cables, that ran from his desk all
over the Wahoo Valley, might grow rusty and jangle in the prairie winds, while the pipes rotted
under the sunflowers and he could only make a wry face. Spiders must have some instinctive
constructive imagination to build their marvelous webs; surely this old spider had an imagination
that in Elizabeth's day would have made him more than a minor poet. Yet in the beginning of
the Twentieth Century he felt himself a bound prisoner in his decaying web. So he showed his
blue mouth, and red eyelids in fury, and was silent lest even his shadow should find how impotent
a thing he was.

But he knew that one man knew. "How about your politics down here?" asked the affable young
man in exquisite gray twill, when he closed the gas-works deal. And Dan'l Sands said that until
recently he and Dr. Nesbit had been cronies, but that some way the Doctor had been getting
high notions, and hadn't been around the bank lately. The young man in the exquisite gray twill
asked a few questions, catalogued the Doctor, and then said:

"This man Van Dorn, it appears, is local attorney for all the mines and smelters--he hasn't
the reform bug, has he?"

The old spider grinned and shook his head.

"All right," said the polite young man in the exquisite gray twill, as he picked up his gray,
high hat, and flicked a speck of dust from his exquisite gray frock coat, "I'll take matters
of politics up with him."

So the spider knew that the servant had been put over the master, and again he opened his mouth
in malice, but spoke no word.

And thus it was that Judge Thomas Van Dorn formed a strong New York connection that stood him
in stead in after years. For the web that the old spider of Market Street had been weaving
all these years, was at its strongest but a rope of sand compared with the steel links of the
chain that was wrapped about the town, with one end in the Judge's hand, but with the chain
reaching out into some distant, mysterious hawser that moved it with a power of which even
the Judge knew little or nothing.

So he was profoundly impressed, and accordingly proud, and added half an inch to the high-knee
action of his strut. He felt himself a part of the world of affairs--and he was indeed a part.
He was one of a thousand men who, whether they knew it or not, had been bought, body and soul--though
the soul was thrown in for good measure in the Judge's case--to serve the great, greedy spider
of organized capital at whatever cost of public welfare or of private faith. He was indeed
a man of affairs--was Thomas Van Dorn--a part of a vast business and political cabal, that
knew no party and no creed but dividends and still more dividends, impersonal, automatic, soulless--the
materialization of the spirit of commerce.

And strangely enough, just as Tom Van Dorn worshiped the power that bought him, so the old
spider, peering through the broken, rotting meshes of what was once his web, felt the power
to which it was fastened, felt the power that moved him as a mere pawn in a game whose direction
he did not conceive; and Dan'l Sands, in spite of his silent rage, worshiped the power like
a groveling idolater.

But the worm never lacks for a bud; that also is a part of God's plan. Thus, while the forces
of egoism, the powers of capital, were concentrating in a vast organization of socialized individualism,
the other forces and powers of society which were pointing toward a socialized altruism, were
forming also. There was the man in the exquisite gray twill, harnessing Judge Van Dorn and
Market Street to his will; and there was Grant Adams in faded overalls, harnessing labor to
other wheels that were grinding another grist. Slowly but persistently had Grant Adams been
forming his Amalgamation of the Unions of the valley. Slowly and awkwardly his unwieldy machinery
was creaking its way round. In spite of handicaps of opposing interests among the men of different
unions, his Wahoo Valley Labor Council was shaping itself into an effective machine. If the
shares of stock in the mills and the mines and the smelters all ran their dividends through
one great hopper, so the units of labor in the Valley were connected with a common source of
direction. God does not plant the organizing spirit in the world for one group; it is the common
heritage of the time. So the sinister power of organized capital loomed before Market Street
with its terrible threat of extinction for the town if the town displeased organized capital;
so also rose in the town a dread feeling of uneasiness that labor also had power. The personification
of that power was Grant Adams. And when the young man in exquisite gray twill had become only
a memory, Tom Van Dorn squarely faced Grant Adams. Market Street was behind the Judge. The
Valley was back of Grant. For a time there was a truce, but it was not peace. The truce was
a time of waiting; waiting and arming for battle.

During the year of the truce, Nathan Perry was busy. Nathan Perry saw the power that was organizing
about him and the Independent mine among the employers in the district, and intuitively he
felt the resistlessness of the power. But he did not shrink. He advised his owners to join
the combination as a business proposition. But his advice was a dead fly fed to the old spider's
senile vanity. For Daniel Sands had been able to dictate as a part of his acceptance of the
proposition, this one concession: That the Independent mine be kept out of the agreement. Nathan
Perry suspected this. But most of his owners were game men, and they decided not even to apply
for admission to the organization. They found that the young man's management of the mine was
paying well; that the labor problem was working satisfactorily; that the safety devices, while
expensive, produced a feeling of good-will among the men that was worth more even in dividends
than the interest on the money.

But after he had warned his employers of the wrath to come, Nathan Perry did not spend much
time in unavailing regret at their decision. He was, upon the whole, glad they had made it.
And having a serious problem in philology to work out--namely, to discover whether Esperanto,
Chinese or Dutch is the natural language of man, through study of the conversational tendencies
of Daniel Kyle Perry, the young superintendent of the Independent mine gave serious thought
to that problem. 

Had we not reason to hope such an issue in the person of the late Bishop of Orleans, the Sieur de
Morvilliers?

[An able negotiator, who, though protected by the Guises, and strongly supporting them, was yet
very far from persecuting the Reformists. He died 1577.]

And I know, amongst those who behave themselves most bravely in the present war, some whose manners
are so gentle, obliging, and just, that they will certainly stand firm, whatever event Heaven
is preparing for us. I am of opinion that it properly belongs to kings only to quarrel with
kings; and I laugh at those spirits who, out of lightness of heart, lend themselves to so disproportioned
disputes; for a man has never the more particular quarrel with a prince, by marching openly
and boldly against him for his own honour and according to his duty; if he does not love such
a person, he does better, he esteems him. And notably the cause of the laws and of the ancient
government of a kingdom, has this always annexed to it, that even those who, for their own
private interest, invade them, excuse, if they do not honour, the defenders.

But we are not, as we nowadays do, to call peevishness and inward
discontent, that spring from private interest and passion, duty, nor
a treacherous and malicious conduct, courage; they call their proneness
to mischief and violence zeal; 'tis not the cause, but their interest,
that inflames them; they kindle and begin a war, not because it is
just, but because it is war.

A man may very well behave himself commodiously and loyally too amongst those of the adverse party;
carry yourself, if not with the same equal affection (for that is capable of different measure),
at least with an affection moderate, well tempered, and such as shall not so engage you to one
party, that it may demand all you are able to do for that side, content yourself with a moderate
proportion of their, favour and goodwill; and to swim in troubled waters without fishing in
them.

The other way, of offering a man's self and the utmost service he is able to do, both to one
party and the other, has still less of prudence in it than conscience. Does not he to whom you betray
another, to whom you were as welcome as to himself, know that you will at another time do as much
for him? He holds you for a villain; and in the meantime hears what you will say, gathers
intelligence from you, and works his own ends out of your disloyalty; double-dealing men are
useful for bringing in, but we must have a care they carry out as
little as is possible.

I say nothing to one party that I may not, upon occasion, say to the other, with a little alteration
of accent; and report nothing but things either indifferent or known, or what is of common
consequence. I cannot permit myself, for any consideration, to tell them a lie. What is intrusted
to my secrecy, I religiously conceal; but I take as few trusts of that nature upon me as I can.
The secrets of princes are a troublesome burthen to such as are not interested in them. I very
willingly bargain that they trust me with little, but confidently
rely upon what I tell them.

I have ever known more than I desired. One open way of speaking introduces another open way of speaking,
and draws out discoveries, like wine and love. Philippides, in my opinion, answered King Lysimachus
very discreetly, who, asking him what of his estate he should bestow upon him? "What you will,"
said he, "provided it be none of your secrets." I see every one is displeased if the bottom
of the affair be concealed from him wherein he is employed, or that
there be any reservation in the thing; for my part, I am content to
know no more of the business than what they would have me employ myself
in, nor desire that my knowledge should exceed or restrict what I
have to say.

If I must serve for an instrument of deceit, let it be at least with a safe conscience: I will
not be reputed a servant either so affectionate or so loyal as to be fit to betray any one:
he who is unfaithful to himself, is excusably so to his master. But they are princes who do not
accept men by halves, and despise limited and conditional services: I cannot help it: I frankly
tell them how far I can go; for a slave I should not be, but to reason, and I can hardly submit
even to that. And they also are to blame to exact from a freeman the same subjection and obligation
to their service that they do from him they have made and bought, or whose fortune particularly
and expressly depends upon theirs.

The laws have delivered me from a great anxiety; they have chosen a side for me, and given me a
master; all other superiority and obligation ought to be relative to that, and cut, off from all
other. Yet this is not to say, that if my affection should otherwise incline me, my hand should
presently obey it; the will and desire are a law to themselves; but actions must receive commission
from the public appointment.

All this proceeding of mine is a little dissonant from the ordinary forms; it would produce no
great effects, nor be of any long duration; innocence itself could not, in this age of ours, either
negotiate without dissimulation, or traffic without lying; and, indeed, public employments are
by no means for my palate: what my profession requires, I perform
after the most private manner that I can.

Being young, I was engaged up to the ears in business, and it succeeded well; but I disengaged
myself in good time. I have often since avoided meddling in it, rarely accepted, and never asked
it; keeping my back still turned to ambition; but if not like rowers who so advance backward,
yet so, at the same time, that I am less obliged to my resolution than to my good fortune,
that I was not wholly embarked in it. For there are ways less displeasing to my taste, and
more suitable to my ability, by which, if she had formerly called me to the public service,
and my own advancement towards the world's opinion, I know I should, in spite of all my own arguments
to the contrary, have pursued them. Such as commonly say, in opposition to what I profess, that what
I call freedom, simplicity, and plainness in my manners, is art and subtlety, and rather prudence
than goodness, industry than nature, good sense than good luck, do me more honour than disgrace:
but, certainly, they make my subtlety too subtle; and whoever has followed me close, and pryed
narrowly into me, I will give him the victory, if he does not confess that there is no rule
in their school that could match this natural motion, and maintain
an appearance of liberty and licence, so equal and inflexible, through
so many various and crooked paths, and that all their wit and endeavour
could never have led them through.

The way of truth is one and simple; that of particular profit, and the commodity of affairs a
man is entrusted with, is double, unequal, and casual.

["That best becomes every man which belongs most to him;" --Cicero, De Offic., i. 31.]

I will not deprive deceit of its due; that were but ill to understand the world: I know it has
often been of great use, and that it maintains and supplies most men's employment. There are vices
that are lawful, as there are many actions, either good or excusable, that are not lawful in themselves.

The
justice which in itself is natural and universal is otherwise and
more nobly ordered than that other justice which is special, national,
and constrained to the ends of government,

"Veri juris germanaeque
justitiae solidam et expressam effigiem nullam tenemus; umbra et imaginibus
utimur;"

["We retain no solid and express portraiture of true right and germane justice; we have only the shadow
and image of it." --Cicero, De Offic., iii.

["Crimes are committed by the decrees of the Senate and the popular assembly."--Seneca, Ep., 95.]

I
follow the common phrase that distinguishes betwixt profitable and honest things, so as to call
some natural actions, that are not only profitable but necessary, dishonest and foul.

But let us proceed in our examples of treachery two pretenders to
the kingdom of Thrace--[Rhescuporis and Cotys.

Tacitus, Annal., ii. 65]-- were fallen into dispute about their title; the emperor hindered them
from proceeding to blows: but one of them, under colour of bringing things to a friendly issue
by an interview, having invited his competitor to an entertainment in his own house, imprisoned
and killed him. Justice required that the Romans should have satisfaction for this offence;
but there was a difficulty in obtaining it by ordinary ways; what,
therefore, they could not do legitimately, without war and without
danger, they resolved to do by treachery; and what they could not
honestly do, they did profitably.

For which end, one Pomponius Flaccus was found to be a fit instrument.

This man, by dissembled words and assurances, having drawn the other into his toils, instead
of the honour and favour he had promised him, sent him bound hand and foot to Rome. Here one
traitor betrayed another, contrary to common custom: for they are
full of mistrust, and 'tis hard to overreach them in their own art:
witness the sad experience we have lately had.--[Montaigne here probably
refers to the feigned reconciliation between Catherine de Medici and
Henri, Duc de Guise, in 1588.]

Let who will be Pomponius Flaccus,
and there are enough who would: for my part, both my word and my faith
are, like all the rest, parts of this common body: their best effect
is the public service; this I take for presupposed.

But should one command me to take charge of the courts of law and lawsuits, I should make answer,
that I understood it not; or the place of a leader of pioneers, I would say, that I was called to
a more honourable employment; so likewise, he that would employ me to lie, betray, and forswear myself,
though not to assassinate or to poison, for some notable service, I should say, "If I have robbed
or stolen anything from any man, send me rather to the galleys." For it is permissible in a man
of honour to say, as the Lacedaemonians did,--[Plutarch, Difference between a Flatterer and a Friend,
c. 21.]--having been defeated by Antipater, when just upon concluding an agreement: "You may
impose as heavy and ruinous taxes upon us as you please, but to command
us to do shameful and dishonest things, you will lose your time, for
it is to no purpose."

Every one ought to make the same vow to himself that the kings of Egypt made their judges solemnly
swear, that they would not do anything contrary to their consciences,
though never so much commanded to it by themselves.

In such commissions there is evident mark of ignominy and condemnation; and he who gives it at
the same time accuses you, and gives it, if you understand it right, for a burden and a punishment.
As much as the public affairs are bettered by your exploit, so much
are your own the worse, and the better you behave yourself in it,
'tis so much the worse for yourself; and it will be no new thing,
nor, peradventure, without some colour of justice, if the same person
ruin you who set you on work.

If treachery can be in any case excusable, it must be only so when
it is practised to chastise and betray treachery.

There are examples enough of treacheries, not only rejected, but
chastised and punished by those in favour of whom they were undertaken.

Who is ignorant of Fabricius sentence against the physician of Pyrrhus?

But this we also find recorded, that some persons have commanded a thing, who afterward have severely
avenged the execution of it upon him they had employed, rejecting the reputation of so unbridled
an authority, and disowning so abandoned and base a servitude and
obedience.

Jaropelk, Duke of Russia, tampered with a gentleman of Hungary to betray Boleslaus, king of Poland,
either by killing him, or by giving the Russians opportunity to do him some notable mischief.
This worthy went ably to work: he was more assiduous than before
in the service of that king, so that he obtained the honour to be
of his council, and one of the chiefest in his trust.

With these advantages, and taking an opportune occasion of his master's absence, he betrayed
Vislicza, a great and rich city, to the Russians, which was entirely
sacked and burned, and not only all the inhabitants of both sexes,
young and old, put to the sword, but moreover a great number of neighbouring
gentry, whom he had drawn thither to that end.

Jaropelk, his revenge being thus satisfied and his anger appeased, which was not, indeed,
without pretence (for Boleslaus had highly offended him, and after the same manner), and sated
with the fruit of this treachery, coming to consider the fulness of it, with a sound judgment and
clear from passion, looked upon what had been done with so much horror
and remorse that he caused the eyes to be bored out and the tongue
and shameful parts to be cut off of him who had performed it.

Antigonus persuaded the Argyraspides to betray Eumenes, their general, his adversary, into
his hands; but after he had caused him, so delivered, to be slain, he would himself be the
commissioner of the divine justice for the punishment of so detestable a crime, and committed
them into the hands of the governor of the province, with express command, by whatever means,
to destroy and bring them all to an evil end, so that of that great number of men, not so much as one
ever returned again into Macedonia: the better he had been served, the more wickedly he judged
it to be, and meriting greater punishment.

The slave who betrayed the place where his master, P. Sulpicius, lay
concealed, was, according to the promise of Sylla's proscription,
manumitted for his pains; but according to the promise of the public
justice, which was free from any such engagement, he was thrown headlong
from the Tarpeian rock.

Our King Clovis, instead of the arms of gold he had promised them, caused three of Cararie's servants
to be hanged after they had betrayed their master to him, though
he had debauched them to it: he hanged them with the purse of their
reward about their necks; after having satisfied his second and special
faith, he satisfied the general and first.

Mohammed II. having resolved to rid himself of his brother, out of jealousy of state, according
to the practice of the Ottoman family, he employed one of his officers
in the execution, who, pouring a quantity of water too fast into him,
choked him.

This being done, to expiate the murder, he delivered the murderer into the hands of the mother
of him he had so caused to be put to death, for they were only brothers by the father's side;
she, in his presence, ripped up the murderer's bosom, and with her own hands rifled his breast for
his heart, tore it out, and threw it to the dogs. And even to the worst people it is the sweetest
thing imaginable, having once gained their end by a vicious action, to foist, in all security,
into it some show of virtue and justice, as by way of compensation and conscientious correction;
to which may be added, that they look upon the ministers of such horrid crimes as upon men who
reproach them with them, and think by their deaths to erase the memory
and testimony of such proceedings.

Or if, perhaps, you are rewarded, not to frustrate the public necessity for that extreme and desperate
remedy, he who does it cannot for all that, if he be not such himself, but look upon you as
an accursed and execrable fellow, and conclude you a greater traitor than he does, against
whom you are so: for he tries the malignity of your disposition by your own hands, where he cannot
possibly be deceived, you having no object of preceding hatred to move you to such an act; but
he employs you as they do condemned malefactors in executions of justice, an office as necessary
as dishonourable. Besides the baseness of such commissions, there is, moreover, a prostitution
of conscience. Seeing that the daughter of Sejanus could not be put to death by the law of
Rome, because she was a virgin, she was, to make it lawful, first ravished by the hangman and then
strangled: not only his hand but his soul is slave to the public convenience.

When Amurath I., more grievously to punish his subjects who had taken part in the parricide rebellion
of his son, ordained that their nearest kindred should assist in the execution, I find it
very handsome in some of them to have rather chosen to be unjustly
thought guilty of the parricide of another than to serve justice by
a parricide of their own.

And where I have seen, at the taking of some little fort by assault
in my time, some rascals who, to save their own lives, would consent
to hang their friends and companions, I have looked upon them to be
of worse condition than those who were hanged.

'Tis said, that Witold, Prince of Lithuania, introduced into the nation the practice that the criminal
condemned to death should with his own hand execute the sentence, thinking it strange that a
third person, innocent of the fault, should be made guilty of homicide.

A

prince, when by some urgent circumstance or some impetuous and unforeseen accident that very much
concerns his state, compelled to forfeit his word and break his faith, or otherwise forced from
his ordinary duty, ought to attribute this necessity to a lash of the divine rod: vice it is
not, for he has given up his own reason to a more universal and more powerful reason; but
certainly 'tis a misfortune: so that if any one should ask me what remedy? "None," say I, "if
he were really racked between these two extremes: 'sed videat, ne quoeratur latebya perjurio',
he must do it: but if he did it without regret, if it did not weigh on him to do it, 'tis a sign
his conscience is in a sorry condition." If there be a person to be found of so tender a conscience
as to think no cure whatever worth so important a remedy, I shall
like him never the worse; he could not more excusably or more decently
perish.

We cannot do all we would, so that we must often, as the last anchorage, commit the protection
of our vessels to the simple conduct of heaven. To what more just necessity does he reserve
himself? What is less possible for him to do than what he cannot do but at the expense of his
faith and honour, things that, perhaps, ought to be dearer to him than his own safety, or even
the safety of his people. Though he should, with folded arms, only call God to his assistance,
has he not reason to hope that the divine goodness will not refuse the favour of an extraordinary
arm to just and pure hands? These are dangerous examples, rare and sickly exceptions to our natural rules: we
must yield to them, but with great moderation and circumspection: no private utility is of such importance
that we should upon that account strain our consciences to such a degree: the public may be,
when very manifest and of very great concern.

Timoleon made a timely expiation for his strange exploit by the tears he shed, calling to mind
that it was with a fraternal hand that he had slain the tyrant; and it justly pricked his conscience
that he had been necessitated to purchase the public utility at so great a price as the violation
of his private morality. Even the Senate itself, by his means delivered from slavery, durst
not positively determine of so high a fact, and divided into two so important and contrary
aspects; but the Syracusans, sending at the same time to the Corinthians to solicit their
protection, and to require of them a captain fit to re-establish their city in its former dignity
and to clear Sicily of several little tyrants by whom it was oppressed,
they deputed Timoleon for that service, with this cunning declaration;
"that according as he should behave himself well or ill in his employment,
their sentence should incline either to favour the deliverer of his
country, or to disfavour the murderer of his brother."

This fantastic conclusion carries along with it some excuse, by reason
of the danger of the example, and the importance of so strange an
action: and they did well to discharge their own judgment of it, and
to refer it to others who were not so much concerned.

But Timoleon's comportment in this expedition soon made his cause more clear, so worthily and virtuously
he demeaned himself upon all occasions; and the good fortune that
accompanied him in the difficulties he had to overcome in this noble
employment, seemed to be strewed in his way by the gods, favourably
conspiring for his justification.

The end of this matter is excusable, if any can be so; but the profit of the augmentation of the
public revenue, that served the Roman Senate for a pretence to the foul conclusion I am going
to relate, is not sufficient to warrant any such injustice.

Certain cities had redeemed themselves and their liberty by money, by the order and consent of
the Senate, out of the hands of L. Sylla: the business coming again
in question, the Senate condemned them to be taxable as they were
before, and that the money they had disbursed for their redemption
should be lost to them.

Civil war often produces such villainous examples; that we punish
private men for confiding in us when we were public ministers: and
the self-same magistrate makes another man pay the penalty of his
change that has nothing to do with it; the pedagogue whips his scholar
for his docility; and the guide beats the blind man whom he leads
by the hand; a horrid image of justice.

There are rules in philosophy that are both false and weak.

The example that is proposed to us for preferring private utility
before faith given, has not weight enough by the circumstances they
put to it; robbers have seized you, and after having made you swear
to pay them a certain sum of money, dismiss you.

'Tis not well done to say, that an honest man can be quit of his oath without payment, being
out of their hands.

'Tis no such thing: what fear has once made me willing to do, I am
obliged to do it when I am no longer in fear; and though that fear
only prevailed with my tongue without forcing my will, yet am I bound
to keep my word.

For my part, when my tongue has sometimes inconsiderately said something that I did not think, I
have made a conscience of disowning it: otherwise, by degrees, we shall abolish all the right
another derives from our promises and oaths:

"Quasi vero forti viro vis possit adhiberi."

["As though a man of true courage could be compelled." --Cicero, De
Offic., iii.

30.]

And 'tis only lawful, upon the account of private interest, to excuse
breach of promise, when we have promised something that is unlawful
and wicked in itself; for the right of virtue ought to take place
of the right of any obligation of ours.

I have formerly placed Epaminondas in the first rank of excellent men, and do not repent it. How
high did he stretch the consideration of his own particular duty? he who never killed a man whom
he had overcome; who, for the inestimable benefit of restoring the
liberty of his country, made conscience of killing a tyrant or his
accomplices without due form of justice: and who concluded him to
be a wicked man, how good a citizen soever otherwise, who amongst
his enemies in battle spared not his friend and his guest.

This was a soul of a rich composition: he married goodness and humanity, nay, even the tenderest
and most delicate in the whole school of philosophy, to the roughest and most violent human
actions. Was it nature or art that had intenerated that great courage of his, so full, so obstinate
against pain and death and poverty, to such an extreme degree of sweetness and compassion? Dreadful
in arms and blood, he overran and subdued a nation invincible by all others but by him alone;
and yet in the heat of an encounter, could turn aside from his friend
and guest.

Certainly he was fit to command in war who could so rein himself
with the curb of good nature, in the height and heat of his fury,
a fury inflamed and foaming with blood and slaughter.

'Tis a miracle to be able to mix any image of justice with such violent actions: and it was
only possible for such a steadfastness of mind as that of Epaminondas
therein to mix sweetness and the facility of the gentlest manners
and purest innocence.

And whereas one told the Mamertini that statutes were of no efficacy against armed men; and
another told the tribune of the people that the time of justice and
of war were distinct things; and a third said that the noise of arms
deafened the voice of laws, this man was not precluded from listening
to the laws of civility and pure courtesy.

 The fanatic light was gone from Grant's eyes, and the soft glow in them revealed
a man that George Brotherton had not seen in years. "Mr. Brotherton," continued Grant, "father
is getting too old to do much for Kenyon. The Nesbits have borne practically all the expense
of educating him. But the Doctor won't always be here." Again he hesitated. Then he went ahead
as if he had decided for the last time. "George Brotherton, if I should be snuffed out, I want
you to look after Kenyon--if ever he needs it. You have no one, and--" Grant leaned forward
and grasped Brotherton's great hands and cried, "George Brotherton, if you knew the gold in
that boy's heart, and what he can do with a violin, and how his soul is unfolding under the
spell of his music. He's so dumb and tongue-tied and unformed now; and yet--"

"Well--say!" It came out of Mr. Brotherton with a crash like a falling tree, "Grant--well,
say! Through sickness and health, for better or for worse, till death do us part--if that will
satisfy you." He put his big paw over and grabbed Grant's steel hook and jerked him to his
feet. "You've sure sold Kenyon into bondage. When I saw him last night--honest to God, man--I
thought I'd run into a picture roaming around out of stock without a frame! Him and me together
can do Ariel and Prospero without a scratch of make-up." Grant beamed, but when Brotherton
exclaimed as an afterthought, "Say, man, what about that boy's eyes?" Grant's features mantled
and the old grim look overcast his face, as Brotherton went on: "Why, them eyes would make
a madonna's look like fried eggs! Where did he get 'em--they're not Sands and they're not Adams.
He must take back to some Peri that blew into Massachusetts from an enchanted isle." Brotherton
saw that he was annoying Grant in some way. Often he realized that his language was not producing
the desired effect; so he veered about and said gently, "You're not in any danger, Grant; but
so long as I'm wearing clothes that button up the front--don't worry about Kenyon, I'll look
after him."

Five minutes later, Grant was standing in the front door of Brotherton's store, gazing into
Market Street. He saw Daniel Sands and Kyle Perry and Tom Van Dorn walking out of one store
and into the next. He saw John Kollander in a new blue soldier uniform stalking through the
street. He saw the merchants gathering in small, volatile groups that kept forming and re-forming,
and he knew that Mr. Brotherton's classic language was approximately correct when he said there
was a hen on. Grant eyed the crowd that was hurrying past him to the meeting like a hungry
hound watching a drove of chickens. Finally, when Grant saw that the last straggler was in
the hall, he turned and stalked heavily to the Commercial Club rooms, yet he moved with the
self-consciousness of one urged by a great purpose. His head was bent in reflection. His hand
held his claw behind him, and his shoulders stooped. He knew his goal, but the way was hard
and uncertain, and he realized the peril of a strategic misstep at the outset. Heavily he mounted
the steps to the hall, entered, and took a seat in the rear. He sat with his head bowed and
his gaze on the floor. He was aware that Judge Van Dorn was speaking; but what the Judge was
saying did not interest Grant. His mind seemed aloof from the proceedings. Suddenly what he
had prepared to say slipped out of his consciousness completely, as he heard the Judge declare,
"We deem this, sir, a life and death struggle for our individual liberties; a life and death
struggle for our social order; a life and death struggle for our continuance to exist as individuals."
There was a long repetition of the terms "life and death." They appealed to some tin-pan rhythmic
sense in the Judge's oratorical mind. But the phrase struck fire in Grant Adams's heart. Life
and death, life and death, rang through his soul like a clamor of bells. "We have given our
all," bellowed the Judge, "to make this Valley an industrial hive, where labor may find employment--all
of our savings, all of our heritage of Anglo-Saxon organizing skill, and we view this life
and death struggle for its perpetuity--" But all Grant Adams heard of that sentence was "life
and death," as the great bell of his soul clanged its alarm. "We are a happy, industrial family,"
intoned the Judge, the suave Judge, who was something more than owner; who was Authority without
responsibility, who was the voice of the absentee master; the voice, it seemed to Grant, of
an enchanted peacock squawking in the garden of a dream; the voice that cried: "and to him
who would overthrow all this contentment, all this admirable adjustment of industrial equilibrium
we offer the life and death alternative that is given to him who would violate a peaceful home."

But all that Grant Adams sensed of his doom in the Judge's pronouncement was the combat of
death with life. Life and death were meeting for their eternal struggle, and as the words resounded
again and again in the Judge's oratory, there rushed into Grant Adams's mind the phrase, "I
am the resurrection and the life," and he knew that in the life and death struggle for progress,
for justice, for a more abundant life on this planet, it would be finally life and not death
that would win.

As he sat blindly glaring at the floor, there may have stolen into his being some ember from
the strange flame burning about our earth, whose touch makes men mad with the madness that
men have, who come from the wildernesses of life, from the lowly walks and waste places--the
madness of those who feed on locusts and wild honey; who, like St. Francis and Savonarola,
go forth on hopeless quests for the unattainable ideal, or like John Brown, who burn in the
scorching flame all the wisdom of the schools and the courts, and for one glorious day shine
forth with their burning lives a beacon by which the world is lighted to its own sad shame.

Grant never remembered what he said by way of introduction as he stood staring at the crowd.
It was a different crowd from audiences he knew. To Grant it was the market place; merchants,
professional men; clerks, bankers,--well-dressed men, with pale, upturned faces stretched before
him to the rear of the hall. It was all black and white, and as his soul cried "life and death"
back of his conscious speech, the image came to him that all these pale, black-clad figures
were in their shrouds, and that he was talking to the visible body of death--laid out stiffly
before him.

What answer he made to Van Dorn does not matter. Grant Adams could not recall it when he had
finished. But ever as he spoke through his being throbbed the electrical beat of the words,
"I am the resurrection and the life." And he was exultant in the consciousness that in the
struggle of "life and death," life would surely win. So he stood and spoke with a tongue of flame.

"If you have given all--and you have, we also have given all. But our all is more vitally our
all--than yours; for it is our bodies, our food and clothing; our comfortable homes; our children's
education, our wives' strength; our babies' heritage; many of us have indeed given our sons'
integrity and our daughters' virtue. All these we have put into the bargain with you. We have
put them into the common hopper of this industrial life, and you have taken the grain and we
the chaff. It is indeed a life and death struggle. And this happy family, this well-balanced
industrial adjustment, this hell of labor run through your mills like grist, this is death;
death is the name for all your wicked system, that shrinks and cringes before God's ancient
justice. 'I am the resurrection and the life' was not spoken across the veil that rises from
the grave. It was spoken for men here in the flesh who shall soon come into a more abundant
life. Life and death, life and death are struggling here this very hour, and you--you," he
leaned forward shaking his steel claw in their faces, "you and your greedy system of capital
are the doomed; you are death's embodiment."

Then came the outburst. All over the house rose cries. Men jumped from their chairs and waved
their arms. But Judge Van Dorn quieted them. He knew that to attack Grant Adams physically
at that meeting would inflame the man's followers in the Valley. So he pounded the gavel for
quiet. To Adams he thundered, "Sit down, you villain!" Still the crowd hissed and jeered. A
great six-footer in new blue overalls, whom Grant knew as one of the recent spies, one of the
sluggers sent to the Valley, came crowding to the front of the room. But Judge Van Dorn nodded
him back. When the Judge had stilled the tumult, he said in his sternest judicial manner, "Now,
Adams--we have heard enough of you. Leave this district. Get out of this Valley. You have threatened
us; we shall not protect you in life or limb. You are given two hours to leave the Valley,
and after that you stay here at your own peril. If you try to hold your labor council, don't
ask us, whom you have scorned, to surround you with the protection of the society you would
overthrow in bloodshed. Now, go--get out of here," he cried, with all the fire and fury that
an outraged respectability could muster. But Grant, turning, twisted his hook in the Judge's
coat, held him at arm's length, and leaning toward the crowd, with the Judge all but dangling
from his steel arm, cried: "I shall speak in South Harvey to-night. This is indeed a life and
death struggle, and I shall preach the gospel of life. Life," he cried with a trumpet voice,
"life--the life of society, and its eternal resurrection out of the forces of life that flow
from the everlasting divine spring!"

After the crowd had left the hall, Grant hurried toward the street leading to South Harvey.
As he turned the corner, the man whom Grant had seen in the hall met him, the man whom Grant
recognized as a puddler in one of the smelters. He came up, touched Grant on the shoulder and
asked:

"Adams?" Grant nodded.

"Are you going down to South Harvey?"

Grant replied, "Yes, I'm going to hold a meeting there to-night."

"Well, if you try," said the man, pushing his face close to Grant's, "you'll get your head
knocked off--that's all. We don't like your kind--understand?" Grant looked at the man, took
his measure physically and returned:

"All right, there'll be some one around to pick it up--maybe!"

The man walked away, but turned to say:

"Mind now--you show up in South Harvey, and we'll fix you right!"

As Grant turned to board a South Harvey car, Judge Van Dorn caught his arm, and said:

"Wait a minute, the next car will do."

The Judge's wife was with him, and Grant was shocked to see how doll-like her face had become,
how the lines of character had been smoothed out, the eyelids stained, the eyebrows penciled,
the lips colored, until she had a bisque look that made him shudder. He had seen faces like
hers, and fancied that he knew their story.

"I would like to speak with you just a minute. Come up to the office. Margaret, dearie," said
Van Dorn, "you wait for me at Brotherton's." In the office, Van Dorn squared himself before
Grant and said:

"It's no use, sir. You can't hold a meeting there to-night--the thing's set against you. I
can't stop them, but I know the rough element there will kill you if you try. You've done your
best--why risk your head, man--for no purpose? You can't make it--and it's dangerous for you
to try."

Grant looked at Van Dorn. Then he asked:

"You represent the Harvey Fuel Company, Judge?"

"Yes," replied the Judge with much pride of authority, "and we--"

Grant stopped him. "Judge," he said, "if you blow your horn--I'll ring my bell and--If I don't
hold my meeting to-night, your mines won't open to-morrow morning." The Judge rose and led
the way to the door.

"Oh, well," he sneered, "if you won't take advice, there's no need of wasting time on you."

"No," answered Grant, "only remember what I've said."

When Grant alighted from the car in South Harvey, he found his puddler friend waiting for him.
The two went into the Vanderbilt House, where Grant greeted Mrs. Williams, the landlady, as
an old friend, and the puddler cried: "Say, lady--if you keep this man--we'll burn your house."

"Well, burn it--it wouldn't be much loss," retorted the landlady, who turned her back upon
the puddler and said to Grant: "We've given you the front room upstairs, Grant, for the committee.
It has the outside staircase. Your room is ready. You know the Local No. 10 boys from the Independent
are all coming around this afternoon--as soon as they learn where the meeting is."

The puddler walked away and Grant went out into the street; looked up at the wooden structure
with the stairway rising from the sidewalk and splitting the house in two. Mounting the stairs,
he found a narrow hall, leading down a long line of bedrooms. He realized that he must view
his location as a general looks over a battlefield.

The closing of the public halls to Grant and his cause had not discouraged him. He knew that
he still had the great free out-of-doors, and he had thought that an open air meeting would
give the cause dramatic setting. He felt that to be barred from the halls of the Valley helped
rather than hurt his meeting. The barring proved to the workers the righteousness of their
demands. So Grant sallied forth to locate a vacant lot; he shot out of his room full of the
force of his enthusiasm, but his force met another force as strong as his, and ruthless. God's
free out of doors, known and beloved of Grant from his boyhood, was preëmpted: What he found
in his quest for a meeting place was a large red sign, "No trespassing," upon the nearest vacant
lot, and a special policeman parading back and forth in front of the lot on the sidewalk. He
found a score of lots similarly placarded and patrolled. He sent men to Magnus and Foley scurrying
like ants through the Valley, but no lot was available.

Up town in Harvey, the ants also were busy. The company was sending men over Market Street,
picking out the few individuals who owned vacant lots, leasing them for the month and preparing
to justify the placarding and patrolling that already had been done. One of the ants that went
hurrying out of the Sands hill on this errand, was John Kollander, and after he had seen Wright
& Perry and the few other merchants who owned South Harvey real estate, he encountered Captain
Ezra Morton, who happened to have a vacant lot, given to the Captain in the first flush of
the South Harvey boom, in return for some service to Daniel Sands. John Kollander explained
his errand to the Captain, who nodded wisely, and stroked his goatee meditatively.

"I got to think it over," he bawled, and walked away, leaving John Kollander puzzled and dismayed.
But Captain Morton spent no time in academic debate. In half an hour he was in South Harvey,
climbing the stairs of the Vanderbilt House, and knocking at Grant Adams's door. Throwing open
the door Grant found Captain Morton, standing to attention with a shotgun in his hands. The
Captain marched in, turned a square corner to a chair, but slumped into it with a relieved sigh.

"Well, Grant--I heard your speech this morning to the Merchants' Association. You're crazy
as a bed bug--eh? That's what I told 'em all. And then they said to let you go to it--you couldn't
get a hall, and the company could keep you off the lots all over the Valley, and if you tried
to speak on the streets they'd run you in--what say?" His old eyes snapped with some virility,
and he lifted up his voice and cried:

"But 'y gory--is that the way to do a man, I says? No--why, that ain't free speech! I remember
when they done Garrison and Lovejoy and those old boys that way before the war. I fit, bled
and died for that, Grant--eh? And I says to the girls this noon: 'Girls--your pa's got a lot
in South Harvey, over there next to the Red Dog saloon, that he got way back when they were
cheap, and now that the company's got all their buildings up and don't want to buy any lots--why,
they're cheaper still--what say?'

"And 'y gory, I says to the girls--'If your ma was living I know what she'd say. She'd say,
"You just go over there and tell that Adams boy that lot's hisn, and if any one tries to molest
him, you blow 'em to hell"--that's what your ma'd say'--only words to that effect--eh? And
so by the jumping John Rogers, Grant--here I am!"

He looked at the shotgun. "One load's bird shot--real fine and soft, with a small charge of
powder." He put his hand to his mouth sheepishly and added apologetically, "I suppose I won't
need it,--but I just put the blamedest load of buck shot and powder in that right barrel you
ever saw--what say?"

Grant said: "Well, Captain--this isn't your fight. You don't believe in what I'm talking about--you've
proved your patriotism in a great war. Don't get into this, Captain."

"Grant Adams," barked the Captain as if he were drilling his company, "I believe if you're
not a Socialist, you're just as bad. But 'y gory, I fought for the right of free speech, and
free meetings, and Socialist or no Socialist, that's your right. I'm going to defend you on
my own lot." He rose again, straightened up in rheumatic pain, marched to the door, saluted,
and said:

"I brought my supper along with me. It's in my coat pocket. I'm going over to the lot and sit
there till you come. I know this class of people down here. They ain't worth hell room, Grant,"
admonished the Captain earnestly. "But if I'm not there, the company will crowd their men in
on that lot as sure as guns, when they know you are to meet there. And I'm going there to guard
it till you come. Good day--sir."

And with that he thumped limpingly down the narrow stairs, across the little landing, out of
the door and into the street.

Grant stood at the top of the stairs and watched him out of sight. Then Grant pulled himself
together, and went out to see the gathering members of the Labor Council in the hotel office
and the men of Local No. 10 to announce the place of meeting. Later in the afternoon he met
Nathan Perry. When he told Nathan of the meeting, the young man cried in his rasping Yankee voice:

"Good--you're no piker. They said they had scared the filling out of you at the meeting this
morning, and they've bragged they were going to beat you up this afternoon and kill you to-night.
You look pretty husky--but watch out. They really are greatly excited."

"Well," replied Grant grimly, "I'll be there to-night."

"Nevertheless," returned Nathan, snapping off his words as though he was cutting them with
steel scissors, "Anne and I agreed to-day, that I must come to Mrs. Williams's and take you
to the meeting. They may get ugly after dark."

Half an hour later on the street, Grant was passing his cousin Anne, wheeling Daniel Kyle Perry
out to take the air. He checked his hurried step when he caught her smile and said, "Well,
Anne, Nate told me that you wish to send him over to the meeting to-night, as my body guard.
I don't need a body guard, and you keep Nate at home." He smiled down on his cousin and for
a moment all of the emotional storm in his face was melted by the gentleness of that smile.
"Anne," he said--"what a brick you are!"

She laughed and gave him the full voltage of her joyous eyes and answered:

"Grant, I'd rather be the widow of a man who would stand by you and what you are doing, than
to be the wife of a man who shrank from it." She lowered her voice, "And Grant, here's a curious
thing: this second Mrs. Van Dorn called me up on the phone a little bit ago, and said she knew
you and I were cousins and that you and Nate were such friends, but would I tell Nate to keep
you away from any meeting to-night? She said she couldn't tell me, but she had just learned
some perfectly awful things they were going to do, and she didn't want to see any trouble.
Wasn't that queer?"

Grant shook his head. "Well, what did you say?" he asked.

"Oh, I said that while they were doing such perfectly awful things to you, your friends wouldn't
be making lace doilies! And she rang off. What do you think of it?" she asked.

"Just throwing a scare into me--under orders," responded the man and hurried on.

When Grant returned to the hotel at supper time, he found Mr. Brotherton sitting in a ramshackle
rocking chair in the upstairs bedroom, waiting.

"I thought I'd come over and bring a couple of friends," explained Mr. Brotherton, pointing
to the corner, where two shotguns leaned against the wall.

"Why, man," exclaimed Grant, "that's good of you, but in all the time I've been in the work
of organization, I've never carried a gun, nor had one around. I don't want a gun, Mr. Brotherton."

"I do," returned the elder man, "and I'm here to say that moral force is a grand thing, but
in these latitudes when you poke Betsy Jane under the nose of an erring comrade, he sees the
truth with much more clearness than otherwise. I stick to the gun--and you can go in hard for
moral suasion.

"Also," he added, "I've just taken a survey of these premises, and told the missus to bring
the supper up here. There may be an early curtain raiser on this entertainment, and if they
are going to chase you out of town to-night, I want a good seat at the performance." He grinned.
"Nate Perry will join us in a little quiet social manslaughter. I called him up an hour ago,
and he said he'd be here at six-thirty. I think he's coming now." In another minute the slim
Yankee figure of Nathan was in the room. It was scarcely dusk outside. Mrs. Williams came up
with a tray of food. As she set it down she said:

"There's a crowd around at the Hot Dog, you can see them through the window."

Nate and Grant looked. Mr. Brotherton went into the supper. "Crowd all right," assented Nate.
There was no mistaking the crowd and its intention. There were new men from the day shift at
the smelter, imported by the company to oppose the unions. A thousand such men had been brought
into the district within a few months.

"There's another saloon across the road here," said Mr. Brotherton, looking up from his food.
"My understanding is that they're going to make headquarters across the street in Dick's Place.
You know I got a pipe-line in on the enemy through the Calvin girl. She gets it at home, and
her father gets it at the office. Our estimable natty little friend Joe will be down here--he
says to keep the peace. That's what he tells at home. I know what he's coming for. Tom Van
Dorn will sit in the back room of that saloon and no one will know he's there, and Joseph will
issue Tom's orders. Lord," cried Mr. Brotherton, waving a triangle of pie in his hand, "don't
I know 'em like a book."

While he was talking the crowd slowly was swelling in front of the Hot Dog saloon. It was a
drinking and noisy crowd. Men who appeared to be leaders were taking other men in to the bar,
treating them, then bringing them out again, and talking excitedly to them. The crowd grew
rapidly, and the noise multiplied. Another crowd was gathering--just a knot of men down the
street by the Company's store, in the opposite direction from the Hot Dog crowd. Grant and
Nate noticed the second crowd at the same time. It was Local No. 10. Grant left the window
and lighted the lamp. He wrote on a piece of paper, a few lines, handed it to Nathan, saying:

"Here, sign it with me." It read:

"Boys--whatever you do, don't start anything--of any kind--no matter what happens to us. We
can take care of ourselves."

Nathan Perry signed it, slipped down the stairs into the hall, and beckoned to his men at the
Company's store. The crowd at the Hot Dog saw him and yelled, but Evan Evans came running for
the note and took it back. Little Tom Williams came up the stairs with Nathan, saying:

"Well--they're getting ready for business. I brought a gun up to No. 3 this afternoon. I'm
with Grant in this."

The little landlord went into No. 3, appeared with a rifle, and came bobbing into the room.

Grant at the window could see the crowd marching from the Hot Dog to Dick's Place, yelling
and cursing as it went. The group in the bedroom over the street opened the street windows
to see better and hear better. An incandescent over the door of the saloon lighted the narrow
street. In front of the saloon and under the light the mob halted. The men in the room with
Grant were at the windows watching. Suddenly--as by some prearranged order, four men with revolvers
in their hands ran across the street towards the hotel. Brotherton, Williams and Perry ran
to the head of the stairs, guns in hand. Grant followed them. There they stood when the door
below was thrown open, and the four men below rushed across the small landing to the bottom
of the stairs. It was dark in the upper hall, but a light from the street flooded the lower
hall. The men below did not look up; they were on the stairs.

"Stop," shouted Brotherton with his great voice.

That halted them. They looked up into darkness. They could see no faces--only four gun barrels.
The men farthest up the stairs literally fell into the arms of those below. Then the four men
below scrambled down the stairs as Mr. Brotherton roared:

"I'll kill the first man who puts his foot on the bottom step again."

With a cry of terror they rushed out. The crowd at the Company store hooted, and the mob before
the saloon jeered. But the four men scurried across the street, and told the crowd what had
happened. For a few minutes no move was made. Then Grant, who had left the hallway and was
looking through the window, saw the little figure of Joseph Calvin moving officiously among
the men. He went into the saloon, and came out again after a time. Then Grant cried to Brotherton
at the head of the stairs:

"Watch out--they're coming; more of them this time." And half a dozen armed men rushed across
the street and appeared at the door of the hallway.

"Stop," yelled Brotherton--whose great voice itself sounded a terrifying alarm in the darkened
hallway. The feet of two men were on the first steps of the stairs--they looked up and saw
three gun barrels pointing down at them, and heard Brotherton call "one--two--three," but before
he could say "fire" the men fell back panic stricken and ran out of the place.

The crowd left the sidewalk and moved into the saloon, and the street was deserted for a time.
Local No. 10 held its post down by the Company Store. It seemed like an age to the men at the
head of the stairs. Yet Mr. Brotherton's easy running fire of ribaldry never stopped. He was
excited and language came from his throat without restraint.

Then Grant's quick ear caught a sound that made him shudder. It was far away, a shrill high
note; in a few seconds the note was repeated, and with it the animal cry one never mistakes
who hears it--the cry of an angry mob. They could hear it roaring over the bridge upon the
Wahoo and they knew it was the mob from Magnus, Plain Valley and Foley coming. On it came,
with its high-keyed horror growing louder and louder. It turned into the street and came roaring
and whining down to the meeting place at the saloon. It filled the street. Then appeared Mr.
Calvin following a saloon porter, who was rolling a whiskey barrel from the saloon. The porter
knocked in the head, and threw tin cups to the crowd.

"What do you think of that for a praying Christian?" snarled Mr. Brotherton. No one answered
Mr. Brotherton, for the whiskey soon began to make the crowd noisy. But the leaders waited
for the whiskey to make the crowd brave. The next moment, Van Dorn's automobile--the old one,
not the new one--came chugging up. Grant, at the window, looked out and turned deathly sick.
For he saw the puddler who had bullied him during the day get out of the car, and in the puddler's
grasp was Kenyon--with white face, but not whimpering.

The men made way for the puddler, who hurried the boy into the saloon. Grant did not speak,
but stood unnerved and horror-stricken staring at the saloon door which had swallowed up the boy.

"Well, for God--" cried Brotherton.

"A screen--they're going to use the boy as a shield--the damn cowards!" rasped Nathan Perry.

The little Welshman moaned. And the three men stood staring at Grant whose eyes did not shift
from the saloon door. He was rigid and his face, which trembled for a moment, set like molten
bronze.

"If I surrender now, if they beat me here with anything less than my death, the whole work
of years is gone--the long struggle of these men for their rights." He spoke not to his companions,
but through them to himself. "I can't give up--not even for Kenyon," he cried. "Tom--Tom,"
Grant turned to the little Welshman. "You stood by and heard Dick Bowman order Mugs to hold
the shovel over my face! Did he shrink? Well, this cause is the life and death struggle of
all the Dicks in the Valley--not for just this week, but for always."

Below the crowd was hushed. Joe Calvin had appeared and was giving orders in a low tone. The
hulking figure of the puddler could be seen picking out his men; he had three set off in a
squad. The men in the room could see the big beads of sweat stand out on Grant's forehead.
"Kenyon--Kenyon," he cried in agony. Then George Brotherton let out his bellow, "Grant--look
here--do you think I'm going to fire on--"

But the next minute the group at the window saw something that made even George Brotherton's
bull voice stop. Into the drab street below flashed something all red. It was the Van Dorn
motor car, the new one. But the red of the car was subdued beside the scarlet of the woman
in the back seat--a woman without hat or coat, holding something in her arms. The men at the
window could not see what those saw in the street; but they could see Joe Calvin fall back;
could see the consternation on his face, could see him waving his hands to the crowd to clear
the way. And then those at the window above saw Margaret Van Dorn rise in the car and they
heard her call, "Joe Calvin! Joe Calvin--" she screamed, "bring my husband out from behind
that wine room door--quick--quick," she shrieked, "quick, I say."

The mob parted for her. The men at the hotel window could not see what she had in her arms.
She made the driver wheel, drive to the opposite side of the street directly under the hotel
window--directly in front of the besieged door. In another instant Van Dorn, ghastly with rage,
came bare-headed out of the saloon. He ran across the street crying:

"You she devil, what do you--"

But he stopped without finishing his sentence. The men above looked down at what he was looking
at and saw a child--Tom Van Dorn's child, Lila, in the car.

"My God, Margaret--what does this mean?" he almost whispered in terror.

"It means," returned the strident voice of the woman, "that when you sent for your car and
the driver told me he was going to Adamses--I knew why--from what you said, and now, by God,"
she screamed, "give me that boy--or this girl goes to the union men as their shield."

Van Dorn did not speak. His mouth seemed about to begin, but she stopped him, crying:

"And if you touch her I'll kill you both. And the child goes first."

The woman had lost control of her voice. She swung a pistol toward the child.

"Give me that boy!" she shrieked, and Van Dorn, dumb and amazed, stood staring at her. "Tell
them to bring that boy before I count five: One, two," she shouted, "three--"

"Oh, Joe," called Van Dorn as his whole body began to tremble, "bring the Adams boy quick--here!"
His voice broke into a shriek with nervous agitation and the word "here" was uttered with a
piercing yell, that made the crowd wince.

Calvin brought Kenyon out and sent him across the street. Grant opened a window and called
out: "Get into the car with Lila, Kenyon--please."

The woman in the car cried: "Grant, Grant, is that you up there? They were going to murder
the boy, Grant. Do you want his child up there?"

She looked up and the arc light before the hotel revealed her tragic, shattered face--a wreck
of a face, crumpled and all out of line and focus as the flickering glare of the arc-light
fell upon it. "Shall I send you his child?" she babbled hysterically, keeping the revolver
pointed at Lila--"His child that he's silly about?"

Van Dorn started for her car, but Brotherton at the window bellowed across a gun sight: "Move
an inch and I'll shoot."

Grant called down: "Margaret, take Lila and Kenyon home, please."

Then, with Mr. Brotherton's gun covering the father in the street below, the driver of the
car turned it carefully through the parting crowd, and was gone as mysteriously and as quickly
as he came.

"Now," cried Mr. Brotherton, still sighting down the gun barrel pointed at Van Dorn, standing
alone in the middle of the street, "you make tracks, and don't you go to that saloon either--you
go home to the bosom of your family. Stop," roared Mr. Brotherton, as the man tried to break
into a run. Van Dorn stopped. "Go down to the Company store where the union men are," commanded
Mr. Brotherton. "They will take you home.

"Hey--you Local No. 10," howled the great bull voice of Brotherton. "You fellows take this
man home to his own vine and fig tree."

Van Dorn, looking ever behind him for help that did not come, edged down the street and into
the arms of Local No. 10, and was swallowed up in that crowd. A rock from across the street
crashed through the window where the gun barrels were protruding, but there was no fire in
return. Another rock and another came. But there was no firing.

Grant, who knew something of mobs, felt instinctively that the trouble was over. Nathan and
Brotherton agreed. They stood for a time--a long time it seemed to them--guarding the stairs.
Then some one struck a match and looked at his watch. It was half past eight. It was too late
for Grant to hold his meeting. But he felt strongly that the exit of Van Dorn had left the
crowd without a leader and that the fight of the night was won.

"Well," said Grant, drawing a deep breath. "They'll not run me out of town to-night. I could
go to the lot now and hold the meeting; but it's late and it will be better to wait until to-morrow
night. They should sleep this off--I'm going to talk to them."

He stepped to an iron balcony outside the window and putting his hands to his mouth uttered
a long horn-like blast. The men saw him across the street. "Come over here, all of you--" he
called. "I want to talk to you--just a minute."

The crowd moved, first one or two, then three or four, then by tens. Soon the crowd stood below
looking up half curiously--half angrily.

"You see, men," he smiled as he shoved his hand in his pocket, and put his head humorously
on one side:

"We are more hospitable when you all come than when you send your delegations. It's more democratic
this way--just to kind of meet out here like a big family and talk it over. Some way," he laughed,
"your delegates were in a hurry to go back and report. Well, now, that was right. That is true
representative government. You sent 'em, they came; were satisfied and went back and told you
all about it." The crowd laughed. He knew when they laughed that he could talk on. "But you
see, I believe in democratic government. I want you all to come and talk this matter over--not
just a few."

He paused; then began again: "Now, men, it's late. I've got so much to say I don't want to
begin now. I don't like to have Tom Van Dorn and Joe Calvin divide time with me. I want the
whole evening to myself. And," he leaned over clicking his iron claw on the balcony railing
while his jaw showed the play of muscles in the light from below, "what's more I'm going to
have it, if it takes all summer. Now then," he cried: "The Labor Council of the Wahoo Valley
will hold its meeting to-morrow night at seven-thirty sharp on Captain Morton's vacant lot
just the other side of the Hot Dog saloon. I'll talk to that meeting. I want you to come to
that meeting and hear what we have to say about what we are trying to do."

A few men clapped their hands. Grant Adams turned back into the room and in due course the
crowd slowly dissolved. At ten o'clock he was standing in the door of the Vanderbilt House
looking at his watch, ready to turn in for the night. Suddenly he remembered the Captain. He
hurried around to the Hot Dog, and there peering into the darkness of the vacant lot saw the
Captain with his gun on his shoulder pacing back and forth, a silent, faithful sentry, unrelieved
from duty.

When Grant had relieved him and told him that the trouble was over, the little old man looked
up with his snappy eyes and his dried, weazened smile and said: "'Y gory, man--I'm glad you
come. I was just a-thinking I bet them girls of mine haven't cooked any potatoes to go with
the meat to make hash for breakfast--eh? and I'm strong for hash."

CHAPTER XXXVII

IN WHICH WE WITNESS A CEREMONY IN THE TEMPLE OF LOVE

George Brotherton took the Captain to the street car that night. They rode face to face and
all that the Captain had seen and more, outside the Vanderbilt House, and all that George Brotherton
had seen within its portals, a street car load of Harvey people heard with much "'Y gorying"
and "Well--saying," as the car rattled through the fields and into Market Street. Amiable satisfaction
with the night's work beamed in the moon-face of Mr. Brotherton and the Captain was drunk with
martial spirit. He shouldered his gun and marched down the full length of the car and off,
dragging Brotherton at his chariot wheels like a spoil of battle.

"Come on, George," called the Captain as the audience in the car smiled. "Young man, I need
you to tell the girls that their pa ain't gone stark, staring mad--eh? And I want to show 'em
a hero!--What say? A genuine hee-ro!"

It was half an hour after the Captain bursting upon his hearthstone like a martial sky rocket,
had exploded the last of his blue and green candles. The three girls, sitting around the cold
base burner, beside and above which Mr. Brotherton stood in statuesque repose, heard the Captain's
tale and the protests of Mr. Brotherton much as Desdemona heard of Othello's perils. And when
the story was finished and retold and refinished and the Captain was rising with what the girls
called the hash-look in his snappy little eyes, Martha saw Ruth swallow a vast yawn and Martha
turned to Emma an appreciative smile at Ruth's discomfiture.

But Emma's eyes were fixed upon Mr. Brotherton and her face turned toward him with an aspect
of tender adoration. Mr. Brotherton, who was not without appreciation of his own heroic caste,
saw the yawn and the smile and then he saw the face of Emma Morton.

It came over him in a flash of surprise that Ruth and Martha were young things, not of his
world; and that Emma was of his world and very much for him in his world. It got to him through
the busy guard of his outer consciousness with a great rush of tenderness that Emma really
cared for the dangers he had faced and was proud of the part he had played. And Mr. Brotherton
knew that, with Ruth and Martha, it was a tale that was told.

As he saw her standing among her sisters, his heart hid from him the little school teacher
with crow's feet at her eyes, but revealed instead the glowing heart of an exalted woman, who
did not realize that she was uncovering her love, a woman who in the story she had heard was
living for a moment in high romance. Her beloved, imperiled, was restored to her; the lost
was found and the journey which ends so happily in lovers' meetings was closing.

His eyes filled and his voice needed a cough to prime it. The fire, glowing in Emma Morton's
eyes, steamed up George Brotherton's will--the will which had sent him crashing forward in
life from a train peddler to a purveyor of literature and the arts in Harvey. Deeds followed
impulses with him swiftly, so in an instant the floor of the Morton cottage was shaking under
his tread and with rash indifference, high and heroic, ignoring with equal disdain two tittering
girls, an astonished little old man and a cold base burner, the big man stalked across the
room and cried:

"Well, say--why, Emma--my dear!" He had her hands in his and was putting his arm about her
as he bellowed: "Girls--" his voice broke under its heavy emotional load. "Why, dammit all,
I'm your long-lost brother George! Cap, kick me, kick me--me the prize jackass--the grand sweepstake
prize all these years!"

"No, no, George," protested the wriggling maiden. "Not--not here! Not--"

"Don't you 'no--no' me, Emmy Morton," roared the big man, pulling her to his side. "Girl--girl,
what do we care?" He gave her a resounding kiss and gazed proudly around and exclaimed, "Ruthie,
run and call up the Times and give 'em the news. Martha, call up old man Adams--and I'll take
a bell to-morrow and go calling it up and down Market Street. Then, Cap, you tell Mrs. Herdicker.
This is the big news." As he spoke he was gathering the amazed Ruth and Martha under his wing
and kissing them, crying, "Take that one for luck--and that to grow on." Then he let out his
laugh. But in vain did Emma Morton try to squirm from his grasp; in vain she tried to quiet
his clatter. "Say, girls, cluster around Brother George's knee--or knees--and let's plan the
wedding."

"You are going to have a wedding, aren't you, Emma?" burst in Ruth, and George cut in:

"Wedding--why, this is to be the big show--the laughing show, all the wonders of the world
and marvels of the deep under one canvas. Why, girls--"

"Well, Emma, you've just got to wear a veil," laughed Martha hysterically.

"Veil nothing--shame on you, Martha Morton. Why, George hasn't asked--"

"Now ain't it the truth!" roared Brotherton. "Why veil! Veil?" he exclaimed. "She's going to
wear seven veils and forty flower girls--forty--count 'em--forty! And Morty Sands best man--"

"Keep still, George," interrupted Ruth. "Now, Emma, when--when, I say, are you going to resign
your school?"

Mr. Brotherton gave the youngest and most practical Miss Morton a look of quick intelligence.
"Don't you fret; Ruthie, I'm hog tied by the silken skein of love. She's going to resign her
school to-morrow."

"Indeed I am not, George Brotherton--and if you people don't hush--"

But Mr. Brotherton interrupted the bride-to-be, incidentally kissing her by way of punctuation,
and boomed on in his poster tone, "Morty Sands best man with his gym class from South Harvey
doing ground and lofty tumbling up and down the aisles in pink tights. Doc Jim in linen pants
whistling the Wedding March to Kenyon Adams's violin obligato, with the General hitting the
bones at the organ! The greatest show on earth and the baby elephant in evening clothes prancing
down the aisle like the behemoth of holy writ! Well, say--say, I tell you!"

The Captain touched the big man on the shoulder apologetically. "George, of course, if you
could wait a year till the Household Horse gets going good, I could stake you for a trip to
the Grand Canyon myself, but just now, 'y gory, man!"

"Grand Canyon!" laughed Brotherton. "Why, Cap, we're going to go seven times around the world
and twice to the moon before we turn up in Harvey. Grand Canyon--"

"Well, at least, father," cried Martha, "we'll get her that tan traveling dress and hat she's
always wanted."

"But I tell you girls to keep still," protested the bride-to-be, still in the prospective groom's
arms and proud as Punch of her position. "Why, George hasn't even asked me and--"

"Neither have you asked me, Emma, ''eathen idol made of mud what she called the Great God Buhd.'"
He stooped over tenderly and when his face rose, he said softly, "And a plucky lot she cared
for tan traveling dresses when I kissed her where she stud!" And then and there before the
Morton family assembled, he kissed his sweetheart again, a middle-aged man unashamed in his joy.

It was a tremendous event in the Morton family and the Captain felt his responsibility heavily.
The excited girls, half-shocked and half-amused and wholly delighted, tried to lead the Captain
away and leave the lovers alone after George had hugged them all around and kissed them again
for luck. But the Captain refused to be led. He had many things to say. He had to impress upon
Mr. Brotherton, now that he was about to enter the family, the great fact that the Mortons
were about to come into riches. Hence a dissertation on the Household Horse and its growing
popularity among makers of automobiles; Nate Perry's plans in blue print for the new factory
were brought in, and a wilderness of detail spread before an ardent lover, keen for his first
hour alone with the woman who had touched his bachelor heart. A hundred speeches came to his
lips and dissolved--first formal and ardent love vows--while the Captain rattled on recounting
familiar details of his dream.

Then Ruth and Martha rose in their might and literally dragged their father from the room and
upstairs. Half an hour later the two lovers in the doorway heard a stir in the house behind
them. They heard the Captain cry:

"The hash--George, she's the best girl--'Y gory, the best girl in the world. But she will forget
to chop the hash over night!"

As George Brotherton, bumping his head upon the eternal stars, turned into the street, he saw
the great black hulk of the Van Dorn house among the trees. He smiled as he wondered how the
ceremonies were proceeding in the Temple of Love that night.

It was not a ceremony fit for smiles, but rather for the tears of gods and men, that the priest
and priestess had performed. Margaret Van Dorn had taken Kenyon home, then dropped Lila at
the Nesbit door as she returned from South Harvey. When she found that her husband had not
reached home, she ran to her room to fortify herself for the meeting with him. And she found
her fortifications in the farthest corner of the bottom drawer of her dresser. From its hiding
place she brought forth a little black box and from the box a brown pellet. This fortification
had been her refuge for over a year when the stress of life in the Temple of Love was about
to overcome her. It gave her courage, quickened her wits and loosened her tongue. Always she
retired to her fortress when the combat in the Temple threatened to strain her nerves. So she
had worn a beaten path of habit to her refuge.

Then she made herself presentable; took care of her hair, smoothed her face at the mirror and
behind the shield of the drug she waited. She heard the old car rattling up the street, and
braced herself for the struggle. She knew--she had learned by bitter experience that the first
blow in a rough and tumble was half the battle. As he came raging through the door, slamming
it behind him, she faced him, and before he could speak, she sneered:

"Ah, you coward--you sneaking, cur coward--who would murder a child to win--Ach!" she cried.
"You are loathsome--get away from me!"

The furious man rushed toward her with his hands clinched. She stood with her arms akimbo and
said slowly:

"You try that--just try that."

He stopped. She came over and rubbed her body against his, purring, with a pause after each word:

"You are a coward--aren't you?"

She put her fingers under his jaw, and sneered, "If ever you lay hands on me--just one finger
on me, Tom Van Dorn--" She did not finish her sentence.

The man uttered a shrill, insane cry of fury and whirled and would have run, but she caught
him, and with a gross physical power, that he knew and dreaded, she swung him by force into
a chair.

"Now," she panted, "sit down like a man and tell me what you are going to do about it? Look
up--dawling!" she cried, as Van Dorn slumped in the chair.

The man gave her a look of hate. His eyes, that showed his soul, burned with rage and from
his face, so mobile and expressive, a devil of malice gaped impotently at his wife, as he sat,
a heap of weak vanity, before her. He pulled himself up and exclaimed:

"Well, there's one thing damn sure, I'll not live with you any more--no man would respect me
if I did after to-night."

"And no man," she smiled and said in her mocking voice, "will respect you if you leave me.
How Laura's friends will laugh when you go, and say that Tom Van Dorn simply can't live with
any one. How the Nesbit crowd will titter when you leave me, and say Tom Van Dorn got just
what he had coming! Why--go on--leave me--if you dare! You know you don't dare to. It's for
better or worse, Tom, until death do us part--dawling!"

She laughed and winked indecently at him.

"I will leave you, I tell you, I will leave you," he burst forth, half rising. "All the devils
of hell can't keep me here."

"Except just this one," she mocked. "Oh, you might leave me and go with your present mistress!
By the way, who is our latest conquest--dawling? I'm sure that would be fine. Wouldn't they
cackle--the dear old hens whose claws scratch your heart so every day?" She leaned over, caressing
him devilishly, and cried, "For you know when you get loose from me, you'll pretty nearly have
to marry the other lady--wouldn't that be nice? 'Through sickness and health, for good or for
ill,'--isn't it nice?" she scoffed. Then she turned on him savagely, "So you will try to hide
behind a child, and use him for a shield--Oh, you cur--you despicable dog," she scorned. Then
she drew herself up and spoke in a passion that all but hissed at him. "I tell you, Tom Van
Dorn, if you ever, in this row that's coming, harm a hair of that boy's head--you'll carry
the scar of that hair to your grave. I mean it."

Van Dorn sprang up. He cried: "What business is it of yours? You she devil, what's the boy
to you? Can't I run my own business? Why do you care so much for the Adams brat? Answer me,
I tell you--answer me," he cried, his wrath filling his voice.

"Oh, nothing, dawling," she made a wicked, obscene eye at him, and simpered: "Oh, nothing,
Tom--only you see I might be his mother!"

She played with the vulgar diamonds that hid her fingers and looked down coyly as she smiled
into his gray face.

"Great God," he whispered, "were you born a--" he stopped, ashamed of the word in his mouth.

The woman kept twinkling her indecent eyes at him and put her head on one side as she replied:
"Whatever I am, I'm the wife of Judge Van Dorn; so I'm quite respectable now--whatever I was
once. Isn't that lawvly, dawling!" She began talking in her baby manner.

Her husband was staring at her with doubt and fear and weak, footless wrath playing like scurrying
clouds across his proud, shamed face.

"Oh, Margaret, tell me the truth," he moaned, as the fear of the truth baffled him--a thousand
little incidents that had attracted his notice and passed to be stirred up by a puzzled consciousness
came rushing into his memory--and the doubt and dread overcame even his hate for a moment and
he begged. But she laughed, and scouted the idea and then called out in anguish:

"Why--why have you a child to love--to love and live for even if you cannot be with her--why
can I have none?"

Her voice had broken and she felt she was losing her grip on herself, and she knew that her
time was limited, that her fortifications were about to crumble. She sat down before her husband.

"Tom," she said coldly, "no matter why I'm fond of Kenyon Adams--that's my business; Lila is
your business, and I don't interfere, do I? Well," she said, looking the man in the eyes with
a hard, mean, significant stare, "you let the boy alone--do you understand? Do what you please
with Grant or Jasper or the old man; but Kenyon--hands off!"

She rose, slipped quickly to the stairway, and as she ran up she called, "Good night, dawling."
Before he was on his feet he heard the lock click in her door, and with a horrible doubt, an
impotent rage, and a mantling shame stifling him, he went upstairs and from her distant room
she heard the bolt click in the door of his room. And behind the bolted doors stood two ghosts--the
ghosts of rejected children, calling across the years, while the smudge of the extinguished
torch of life choked two angry hearts.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

GRANT ADAMS VISITS THE SONS OF ESAU

"My dear," quoth the Doctor to his daughter as he sat poking his feet with his cane in her
little office at the Kindergarten, after they had discussed Lila's adventure of the night before,
"I saw Tom up town this morning and he didn't seem to be exactly happy. I says, 'Tom, I hear
you beat God at his own game last night!' and," the Doctor chuckled, "Laura, do you know, he
wouldn't speak to me!" As he laughed, the daughter interrupted:

"Why, father--that was mean--"

"Of course it was mean. Why--considering everything, I'd lick a man if he'd talk that mean
to me. But my Eenjiany devil kind of got control of my forbearing Christian spirit and I cut
loose."

The daughter smiled, then she sighed, and asked: "Father--tell me, why did that woman object
to Tom's use of Kenyon in the riot last night?"

Doctor Nesbit opened his mouth as if to answer her. Then he smiled and said, "Don't ask me,
child. She's a bad egg!"

"Lila says," continued the daughter, "that Margaret appears at every public place where Kenyon
plays. She seems eager to talk to him about his accomplishments, and has a sort of fascinated
interest in whatever he does, as nearly as I can understand it? Why, father? What do you suppose
it is? I asked Grant, who was here this morning with a Croatian baby whose mother is in the
glass works, and Grant only shook his head." The father looked at his daughter over his glasses
and asked:

"Croatians, eh? That's what the new colony is down in Magnus. Well, we've got Letts and Lithuanians
and why not Croatians? What a mix we have here in the Valley! I wouldn't wash 'em for 'em!"

"Well, father, I would. And when you get the dirt off they're mostly just folks--just Indiany,
as you call it. They all take my flower seeds. And they all love bright colors in their windows.
And they are spreading the glow of blooms across the district, just as well as the Germans
and the French and the Belgians and the Irish. And they are here for exactly the same thing
which we are here for, father. We're all in the same game."

He looked at her blankly, and ventured, "Money?"

"No--you stupid. You know better. It's children. They're here for their children--to lift their
children out of poverty. It's the children who carry the banner of civilization, the hope of
progress, the real sunrise. These people are all confused and more or less dumb and loggy about
everything else in life but this one thing; they all hope greatly for their children. For their
children they joyfully endure the hardships of poverty; the injustice of it; to live here in
these conditions that seem to us awful, and to work terrible hours that their children may
rise out of the worse condition that they left in Europe. And they have left Europe, father,
spiritually as well as physically. Here they are reborn into America. The first generation
may seem foreign, may hold foreign ways--on the outside. But these American born boys and girls,
they are American--as much as we are, with all their foreign names. They are of our spirit.
When America calls they will hear and follow. Whatever blood they will shed will be real American
blood, because as children, born under the same aspiring genius for freedom under which we
were born, as children they became Americans. Oh, father, it's for the children that these
people here in Harvey--these exploited people everywhere in this country,--plant the flowers
and brighten up their homes. It's for their children that they are going with Grant to organize
for better things. The fire of life runs ahead of us in hope for our children, and if we haven't
children or the love of them in our hearts--why, father, that's what's eating Tom's heart out,
and blasting this miserable woman's life! Grant said to-day: 'This baby here symbolizes all
that I stand for, all that I hope to do, all that the race dreams!"

The Doctor had lighted his pipe, and was puffing meditatively. He liked to hear his daughter
talk. He took little stock in what she said. But when she asked him for help--he gave it to
her unstinted, but often with a large, tolerant disbelief in the wisdom of her request. As
she paused he turned to her quickly, "Laura--tell me, what do you make out of Grant?"

He eyed her sharply as she replied: "Father, Grant is a lonely soul without chick or child,
and I'm sorry for him. He goes--"

"Well, now, Laura," piped the little man, "don't be too sorry. Sorrow is a dangerous emotion."

The daughter turned her face to her father frankly and said: "I realize that, father. Don't
concern yourself about that. But I see Grant some way, eating the locusts and wild honey in
the wilderness, calling out to a stiff-necked generation to repent. His eyes are focussed on
to-morrow. He expects an immediate millennium. But he is at least looking forward, not back.
And the world back of us is so full of change, that I am sure the world before us also must
be full of change, and maybe sometime we shall arrive at Grant's goal. He's not working for
himself, either in fame or in power, or in any personal thing. He's just following the light
as it is given him to see it, here among the poor."

The daughter lifted a face full of enthusiasm to her father. He puffed in silence. "Well, my
dear, that's a fine speech. But when I asked you about Grant I was rising to a sort of question
of personal privilege. I thought perhaps I would mix around at his meeting to-night! If you
think I should, just kind of stand around to give him countenance--and," he chuckled and squeaked:
"To bundle up a few votes!"

"Do, father--do--you must!"

"Well," squeaked the little voice, "so long as I must I'm glad to know that Tom made it easy
for me, by turning all of Harvey and the Valley over to Grant at the riot last night. Why,
if Tom tried to stop Grant's meeting to-night Market Street itself would mob Tom--mob the very
Temple of Love." The Doctor chuckled and returned to his own affairs. "Being on the winning
side isn't really important. But it's like carrying a potato in your pocket for rheumatism:
it gives a feller confidence. And after all, the devil's rich and God's poor have all got votes.
And votes count!" He grinned and revived his pipe.

He was about to speak again when Laura interrupted him, "Oh, father--they're not God's poor,
whose ever they are. Don't say that. They're Daniel Sands's poor, and the Smelter Trust's poor,
and the Coal Trust's poor, and the Glass and Cement and Steel company's poor. I've learned
that down here. Why, if the employers would only treat the workers as fairly as they treat
the machines, keeping them fit, and modern and bright, God would have no poor!"

The Doctor rose and stretched and smiled indulgently at his daughter. "Heigh-ho the green holly,"
he droned. "Well, have it your way. God's poor or Dan's poor, they're my votes, if I can get
'em. So we'll come to the meeting to-night and blow a few mouthfuls on the fires of revolution,
for the good of the order!"

He would have gone, but his daughter begged him to stay and dine with her in South Harvey,
before they went to the meeting. So for an hour the Doctor sat in his daughter's office by
the window, sometimes giving attention to the drab flood of humanity passing along the street
as the shifts changed for evening in the mines and smelters, and then listening to the day's
stragglers who came and went through his daughter's office: A father for medicine for a child,
a mother for advice, a breaker boy for a book, a little girl from the glass works for a bright
bit of sewing upon which she was working, a woman from Violet Hogan's room with a heartbreak
in her problem, a group of women from little Italy with a complaint about a disorderly neighbor
in their tenement, a cripple from the mines to talk over his career, whether it should be pencils
or shoe strings, or a hand organ, or some attempt at handicraft; the head of a local labor
union paying some pittance to Laura, voted by the men to help her with her work; a shy foreign
woman with a badly spelled note from her neighbor, asking for flower seeds and directions translated
by Laura into the woman's own language telling how to plant the seeds; a belated working mother
calling for the last little tot in the nursery and explaining her delay. Laura heard them all
and so far as she could, she served them all. The Doctor was vastly proud of the effective
way in which she dispatched her work.

It was six o'clock, but the summer sun still was high and the traffic in the street was thick.
For a time, while a woman with a child with shriveled legs was talking to Laura about the child's
education, the Doctor sat gazing into the street. When the room was empty, he exclaimed, "It's
a long weary way from the sunshine and prairie grass, child! How it all has changed with the
years! Ten years ago I knew 'em all, the men and the employers. Now they are all newcomers--men
and masters. Why, I don't even know their nationalities; I don't even know what part of the
earth they come from. And such sad-faced droves of them; so many little scamps, underfed, badly
housed for generations. The big, strapping Irish and Germans and Scotch and the wide-chested
little Welshmen, and the agile French--how few of them there are compared with this slow-moving
horde of runts from God knows where! It's been a long time since I've been down here to see
a shift change, Laura. Lord--Lord have mercy on these people--for no one else seems to care!"

"Amen, and Amen, father," answered the daughter. "These are the people that Grant is trying
to stir to consciousness. These are the people who--"

"Well, yes," he turned a sardonic look upon his daughter, "they're the boys who voted against
me the last time because Tom and Dan hired a man in every precinct to spread the story that
I was a teetotaler, and that your mother gave a party on Good Friday--and all because Tom and
Dan were mad at me for pushing that workingmen's compensation bill! But now I look at 'em--I
don't blame 'em! What do they know about workingmen's compensation!" The Doctor stopped and
chuckled; then he burst out: "I tell you, Laura, when a man gets enough sense to stand by his
friends--he no longer needs friends. When these people get wise enough not to be fooled by
Tom and old Dan, they won't need Grant! In the meantime--just look at 'em--look at 'em paying
twice as much for rent as they pay up town: gouged at the company stores down here for their
food and clothing; held up by loan sharks when they borrow money; doped with aloes in their
beer, and fusil oil in their whiskey, wrapped up in shoddy clothes and paper shoes, having
their pockets picked by weighing frauds at the mines, and their bodies mashed in speed-up devices
in the mills; stabled in filthy shacks without water or sewers or electricity which we uptown
people demand and get for the same money that they pay for these hog-pens--why, hell's afire
and the cows are out--Laura! by Godfrey's diamonds, if I lived down here I'd get me some frisky
dynamite and blow the whole place into kindling." He sat blinking his indignation; then began
to smile. "Instead of which," he squeaked, "I shall endeavor by my winning ways to get their
votes." He waved a gay hand and added, "And with God be the rest!"

Towering above a group of workers from the South of Europe--a delegation from the new wire
mill in Plain Valley, Grant Adams came swinging down the street, a Gulliver among his Lilliputians.
Although it was not even twilight, it was evident to the Doctor that something more than the
changing shifts in the mills was thickening the crowds in the street. Little groups were forming
at the corners, good-natured groups who seemed to know that they were not to be molested. And
the Doctor at his window watched Grant passing group after group, receiving its unconscious
homage; just a look, or a waving hand, or an affectionate, half-abashed little cheer, or the
turning of a group of heads all one way to catch Grant's eyes as he passed.

At the Captain's vacant lot, Grant rose before a cheering throng that filled the lot, and overflowed
the sidewalk and crowded far down the street. Two flickering torches flared at his head. An
electric in front of the Hot Dog and a big arc-light over the door of the smelter lighted the
upturned faces of the multitude. When the crowd had ceased cheering, Grant, looking into as
many eyes of his hearers as he could catch, began:

"I have come to talk to Esau--the disinherited--to Esau who has forfeited his birthright. I
am here to speak to those who are toiling in the world's rough work unrequited--I am here,
one of the poor to talk to the poor."

His voice held back so much of his strength, his gaunt, awkward figure under the uncertain
torches, his wide, impassioned gestures, with the carpenter's nail claw always before his hearers,
made him a strange kind of specter in the night. Yet the simplicity of his manner and the directness
of his appeal went to the hearts of his hearers. The first part of his message was one of peace.
He told the workers that every inch they gained they lost when they tried to overcome cunning
with force. "The dynamiter tears the ground from under labor--not from under capital; he strengthens
capital," said Grant. "Every time I hear of a bomb exploding in a strike, or of a scab being
killed I think of the long, hard march back that organized labor must make to retrieve its
lost ground. And then," he cried passionately, and the mad fanatic glare lighted his face,
"my soul revolts at the iniquity of those who, by craft and cunning while we work, teach us
the false doctrine of the strength of force, and then when we use what they have taught us,
point us out in scorn as lawbreakers. Whether they pay cash to the man who touched the fuse
or fired the gun or whether they merely taught us to use bombs and guns by the example of their
own lawlessness, theirs is the sin, and ours the punishment. Esau still has lost his birthright--still
is disinherited."

He spoke for a time upon the aims of organization, and set forth the doctrine of class solidarity.
He told labor that in its ranks altruism, neighborly kindness that is the surest basis of progress,
has a thousand disintegrated expressions. "The kindness of the poor to the poor, if expressed
in terms of money, would pay the National debt over night," he said, and, letting out his voice,
and releasing his strength, he begged the men and women who work and sweat at their work to
give that altruism some form and direction, to put it into harness--to form it into ranks,
drilled for usefulness. Then he spoke of the day when class consciousness would not be needed,
when the unions would have served their mission, when the class wrong that makes the class
suffering and thus marks the class line, would disappear just as they have disappeared in the
classes that have risen during the last two centuries.

"Oh, Esau," he cried in the voice that men called insane because of its intensity, "your birthright
is not gone. It lies in your own heart. Quicken your heart with love--and no matter what you
have lost, nor what you have mourned in despair, in so much as you love shall it all be restored
to you."

They did not cheer as he talked. But they stood leaning forward intently listening. Some of
his hearers had expected to hear class hatred preached. Others were expecting to hear the man
lash his enemies and many had assumed that he would denounce those who had committed the mistakes
of the night before. Instead of giving his hearers these things, he preached a gospel of peace
and love and hope. His hearers did not understand that the maimed, lean, red-faced man before
them was dipping deeply into their souls and that they were considering many things which they
had not questioned before.

When he plunged into the practical part of his speech, an explanation of the allied unions
of the Valley, he told in detail something of the ten years' struggle to bring all the unions
together under one industrial council in the Wahoo Valley, and listed something of the strength
of the organization. He declared that the time had come for the organization to make a public
fight for recognition; that organization in secret and under cover was no longer honorable.
"The employers are frankly and publicly allied," said Grant. "They have their meetings to talk
over matters of common interest. Why should not the unions do the same thing? The smelter men,
the teamsters, the miners, the carpenters, the steel workers, the painters, the glass workers,
the printers--all the organized men and women in this district have the same common interests
that their employers have, and we should in no wise be ashamed of our organization. This meeting
is held to proclaim our pride in the common ground upon which organized labor stands with organized
capital in the Wahoo Valley."

He called the rolls of the unions in the trades council and for an hour men stood and responded
and reported conditions among workers in their respective trades. It was an impressive roll
call. After their organization had been completed, a great roar of pride rose and Grant Adams
threw out his steel claw and leaning forward cried:

"We have come to bring brotherhood into this earth. For in the union every man sacrifices something
to the common good; mutual help means mutual sacrifice, and self-denial is brotherly love.
Fraternity and democracy are synonymous. We must rise together by self-help. I know how easy
it is for the rich man to become poor. I know that often the poor man becomes rich. But when
Esau throws off the yoke of Jacob, when the poor shall rise and come into their own, the rise
shall not be as individuals, but as a class. The glass workers are better paid than the teamsters;
but their interests are common, and the better paid workers cannot rise except their poorly
paid fellow workmen rise with them. It is a class problem and it must have a class solution."

Grant Adams stood staring at the crowd. Then he spread out his two gaunt arms and closed his
eyes and cried: "Oh, Esau, Esau, you were faint and hungry in that elder day when you drank
the red pottage and sold your birthright. But did you know when you bartered it away, that
in that bargain went your children's souls? Down here in the Valley, five babies die in infancy
where one dies up there on the hill. Ninety per cent. of the boys in jail come from the homes
in the Valley and ten per cent. from the homes on the hill. And the girls who go out in the
night, never to come home--poor girls always. Crime and shame and death were in that red pottage,
and its bitterness still burns our hearts. And why--why in the name of our loving Christ who
knew the wicked bargain Jacob made--why is our birthright gone? Why does Esau still serve his
brother unrequited?" Then he opened his eyes and cried stridently--"I'll tell you why. The
poor are poor because the rich are rich. We have been working a decade and a half in this Valley,
and profits, not new capital, have developed it. Profits that should have been divided with
labor in wages have gone to buy new machines--miles and miles of new machines have come here,
bought and paid for with the money that labor earned, and because we have not the machines
which our labor has bought, we are poor--we are working long hours amid squalor surrounded
with death and crime and shame. Oh, Esau, Esau, what a pottage it was that you drank in the
elder day! Oh, Jacob, Jacob, wrestle, wrestle with thy conscience; wrestle with thy accusing
Lord; wrestle, Jacob, wrestle, for the day is breaking and we will not let thee go! How long,
O Lord, how long will you hold us to that cruel bargain!"

He paused as one looking for an answer--hesitant, eager, expectant. Then he drew a long breath,
turned slowly and sadly and walked away.

No cheer followed him. The crowd was stirred too deeply for cheers. But the seed he had sown
quickened in a thousand hearts even if in some hearts it fell among thorns, even if in some
it fell upon stony ground. The sower had gone forth to sow.

CHAPTER XXXIX

BEING NO CHAPTER AT ALL BUT AN INTERMEZZO BEFORE THE LAST MOVEMENT

The stage is dark. In the dim distance something is moving. It is a world hurrying through
space. Somewhat in the foreground but enveloped in the murk sit three figures. They are tending
a vast loom. Its myriad threads run through illimitable space and the woof of the loom is time.
The three figures weaving through the dark do not know whence comes the power that moves the
loom eternally. They have not asked. They work in the pitch of night.

From afar in the earth comes a voice--high-keyed and gentle:

A Voice, pianissimo:

"This business of governing a sovereign people is losing its savor. I must be getting some
kind of spiritual necrosis. Generally speaking, about all the real pleasure a grand llama of
politics finds in life, is in counting his ingrates--his governors and senators and congressmen!
Why, George, it's been nearly ten years since I've cussed out a senator or a governor, yet
I read Browning with joy and the last time I heard Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, I went stark
mad. But woe is me, George! Woe is me. When the Judge and Dan Sands named the postmaster last
month without consulting me, I didn't care. I tell you, George, I must be getting old!"

Second Voice, fortissimo:

"No, Doc--you're not getting old--why, you're not sixty--a mere spring chicken yet--and Dan
Sands is seventy-five if he's a day. What's the matter with you in this here Zeitgeist that
Carlyle talks about! It's this restless little time spirit that's the matter with you. You're
all broke out and sick abed with the Zeitgeist. You've got no more necrosis than a Belgian
hare's got paresis--I'm right here to tell you and my diagnosis goes."

Third Voice, adagio:

"James, my guides say that we're beginning a great movement from the few to the many. That
is their expression. Cromwell thinks it means economic changes; but I was talking with Jefferson
the other night and he says no--it means political changes in order to get economic. He says
Tilden tells him--"

The Second Voice, fortissimo:

"Who cares what Tilden says! My noodle tells me that there's to be a big do in this world,
and my control tinkles the cash register, pops into the profit account, eats up ten cent magazines,
and gets away with five feet of literary dynamite fuse every week. I'm that old Commodore Noah
that's telling you to get out your rubbers for the flood."

The First Voice, andante con expression:

"It's a queer world--a mighty queer world. Here's Laura's kindergarten growing until it joins
with Violet Hogan's day nursery and Laura's flower seeds splashing color out of God's sunshine
in front yards clear down to Plain Valley. Money coming in about as they need it. Dan Sands
and Morty, Wright and Perry and the Dago saloon keeper, Joe Calvin, John Dexter and the gamblers--all
the robbers, high and low, dividing their booty. With all the prosperity we are having, with
all the opening of mills and factories--it's getting easier to make money and consequently
harder to respect it. The more money there is, the less it buys, and that is true in public
sentiment just as it is in groceries and furniture. Do you fellows realize that it's been ten
years since the Times has run any of those 'Pen Portraits of Self-Made Men'?" A silence, then
the voice continues:

"George, I honestly believe, if money keeps getting crowded farther and farther into the background
of life--we'll develop an honest politician. We know that to give a bribe is just as bad as
to take one. Think of the men debauched with money disguised as campaign expenses, or with
offices or with franks and passes and pull and power! Think of all the bad government fostered,
all the injustices legalized, just to win a sordid game! The best I can do now is to cry, 'Lord
have mercy on me, a sinner! The harlot and the thief are my betters.'"

The voices cease. The earth whirls on. The brooding spirits at the loom muse in silence, for
they need no voices.

The First Fate: "The birds! The birds! I seemed to hear the night birds twittering to bring
in the dawn."

The Second Fate: "The birds do not bring in the dawn. The dawn comes."

The First Fate: "But always and always before the day, we hear these voices."

The Third Fate: "World after world threads its time through our loom. We watch the pattern
grow. Days and eras and ages pass. We know nothing of meanings. We only weave. We know that
the pattern brightens as new days come and always voices in the dark tell us of the changing
pattern of a new day."

The First Fate: "But the birds--the birds! I seem to hear the night birds' voices that make
the dawn."

The Second Fate: "They are not birds calling, but the whistle of shot and shell and the shrill,
far cries of man in air. But still I say the dawn comes, the voices do not bring it."

The Third Fate: "We do not know how the awakening voices in the dark know that the light is
coming. We do not know what power moves the loom. We do not know who dreams the pattern. We
only weave and muse and listen for the voices of change as a world threads its events through
the woof of time on our loom."

                   *       *       *       *       *

The stage is dark. The weavers weave time into circumstances and in the blackness the world
moves on. Slowly it grays. A thousand voices rise. Then circumstance begins to run brightly
on the loom, and a million voices join in the din of the dawn. The loom goes. The weavers fade.
The light in the world pales the thread of time and the whirl of the earth no longer is seen.
But instead we see only a town. Half of it shines in the morning sun--half of it hides in the
smoke. In the sun on the street is a man.

CHAPTER XL

HERE WE HAVE THE FELLOW AND THE GIRL BEGINNING TO PREPARE FOR THE LAST CHAPTER

A tall, spare, middle-aged person was Thomas Van Dorn in the latter years of the first decade
of the twentieth century; tall and spare and tight-skinned. The youthful olive texture of the
skin was worn off and had been replaced by a leathery finish--rather reddish brown in color.
The slight squint of his eyes was due somewhat to the little puffs under them, and a suspicious,
crafty air had grown into the full orbs, which once glowed with emotion, when the younger man
mounted in his oratorical flights. His hands were gloved to match his exactly formal clothes,
and his hat--a top-hat when Judge Van Dorn was in the East, and a sawed-off compromise with
the local prejudice against top-hats when he was in Harvey--was always in the latest mode.
Often the hat was made to match his clothes. He had become rigorous in his taste in neckties
and only grays and blacks and browns adorned the almost monkish severity of his garb. Harsh,
vertical lines had begun to appear at the sides of the sensuous mouth, and horizontal lines--perhaps
of hurt pride and shame--were pressed into his wide, handsome forehead and the zigzag scar
was set white in a reddening field.

All these things a photograph would show. But there was that about his carriage, about his
mien, about the personality that emerged from all these things which the photograph would not
show. For to the eyes of those who had known him in the flush of his youth, something--perhaps
it was time, perhaps the burden of the years--seemed to be sapping him, seemed to be drying
him out, fruitless, pod-laden, dry and listless, with a bleached soul, naked to the winds that
blow across the world. The myriad criss-crosses of minute red veins that marked his cheek often
were wet with water from the eyes that used to glow out of a very volcano of a personality
behind them. But after many hours of charging up and down the earth in his great noisy motor,
red rims began to form about the watery eyes and they peered furtively and savagely at the
world, like wolves from a falling temple.

As he stood by the fire in Mr. Brotherton's sanctuary, holding his Harper's Weekly in his hand,
and glancing idly over the new books carelessly arranged on the level of the eye upon the wide
oak mantel, the Judge came to be conscious of the presence of Amos Adams on a settee near by.

"How do you do, sir?" The habit of speaking to every one persisted, but the suave manner was
affected, and the voice was mechanical. The old man looked up from his book--one of Professor
Hyslop's volumes, and answered, "Why, hello, Tom--how are you?" and ducked back to his browsing.

"That son of yours doesn't seem to have set the Wahoo afire with his unions in the last two
or three years, does he?" said Van Dorn. He could not resist taking this poke at the old man,
who replied without looking up:

"Probably not."

Then fearing that he might have been curt the old man lifted his eyes from his book and looking
kindly over his glasses continued: "The Wahoo isn't ablaze, Tom, but you know as well as I
that the wage scale has been raised twice in the mines, and once in the glass factory and once
in the smelter in the past three years without strikes--and that's what Grant is trying to
do. More than that, every concern in the Valley now recognizes the union in conferring with
the men about work conditions. That's something--that's worth all his time for three years
or so, if he had done nothing else."

"Well, what else has he done?" asked Van Dorn quickly.

"Well, Tom, for one thing the men are getting class conscious, and in a strike that will be
a strong cement to make them stick."

Van Dorn's neck reddened, as he replied: "Yes--the damn anarchists--class consciousness is
what undermines patriotism."

"And patriotism," replied the old man, thumbing the lapel of his coat that held his loyal legion
button, "patriotism is the last resort--of plutocrats!"

He laughed good-naturedly and silently. Then he rose and said as he started to go:

"Well, Tom,--we won't quarrel over a little thing like our beloved country. Why, Lila--" the
old man looked up and saw the girl, "bless my eyes, child, how you do grow, and how pretty
you look in your new ginghams--just like your mother, twenty years ago!" Amos Adams was talking
to a shy young girl--blue-eyed and brown-haired, who was walking out of the store after buying
a bottle of ink of Miss Calvin. Lila spoke to the old man and would have gone with him, but
for the booming voice of Mr. Brotherton, the gray-clad benedict, who looked not unlike the
huge, pot-bellied gray jars which adorned "the sweet serenity of books and wall paper."

Mr. Brotherton had glanced up from his ledger at Amos Adams's mention of Lila's name. Coming
forward, he saw her in her new dress, a bright gingham dress that reached so nearly to her
shoe tops that Mr. Brotherton cried: "Well, look who's here--if it isn't Miss Van Dorn! And
a great pleasure it is to see and know you, Miss Van Dorn."

He repeated the name two or three times gently, while Lila smiled in shy appreciation of Mr.
Brotherton's ambushed joke. Her father, standing by a squash-necked lavender jug in the "serenity,"
did not entirely grasp Mr. Brotherton's point. But while the father was groping for it, Mr.
Brotherton went on:

"Miss Van Dorn, once I had a dear friend--such a dear little friend named Lila. Perhaps you
may see her sometimes? Maybe sometimes at night she comes to see you--maybe she peeps in when
you are alone and asks to play. Well, say--Lila," called Mr. Brotherton as gently as a fog
horn tooting a nocturne, "if she ever comes, if you ever see her, will you give her my love?
It would be highly improper for a married gentleman with asthmatic tendencies and too much
waistband to send his love or anything like it to Miss Van Dorn; it would surely cause comment.
But if Lila ever comes, Miss Van Dorn," frolicked the elephant, "give her my love and tell
her that often here in the serenity, I shut my eyes and see her playing out on Elm Street,
a teenty, weenty girl--with blue hair and curly eyes--or maybe it was the other way around,"
Mr. Brotherton heaved a prodigious sigh and waved a weary, fat hand--"and here, my lords and
gentlemen, is Miss Van Dorn with her dresses down to her shoe tops!"

The girl was smiling and blushing, sheepishly and happily, while Mr. Brotherton was mentally
calculating that he would be in his middle fifties before a possible little girl of his might
be putting on her first long dresses. It saddened him a little, and he turned, rather subdued,
and called into the alcove to the Judge and said:

"Tom, this is our friend, Miss Van Dorn--I was just sending a message by her to a dear--a very
dear friend I used to have, named Lila, who is gone. Miss Van Dorn knows Lila, and sees her
sometimes. So now that you are here, I'm going to send this to Lila," he raised the girl's
hand to his lips and awkwardly kissed it, as he said clumsily, "well, say, my dear--will you
see that Lila gets that?"

Her father stepped toward the embarrassed girl and spoke:

"Lila--Lila--can't you come here a moment, dear?"

He was standing by the smoldering fire, brushing a rolled newspaper against his leg. Something
within him--perhaps Mr. Brotherton's awkward kiss stirred it--was trying to soften the proud,
hard face that was losing the mobility which once had been its charm. He held out a hand, and
leaned toward the girl. She stepped toward him and asked, "What is it?"

An awkward pause followed, which the man broke with, "Well--nothing in particular, child; only
I thought maybe you'd like--well, tell me how are you getting along in High School, little girl."

"Oh, very well; I believe," she answered, but did not lift her eyes to his. Mr. Brotherton
moved back to his desk. Again there was silence. The girl did not move away, though the father
feared through every painful second that she would. Finally he said: "I hear your mother is
getting on famously down in South Harvey. Our people down there say she is doing wonders with
her cooking club for girls."

Lila smiled and answered: "She'll be glad to know it, I'm sure." Again she paused, and waited.

"Lila," he cried, "won't you let me help you--do something for you?--I wish so much--so much
to fill a father's place with you, my dear--so much."

He stepped toward her, felt for her hand, but could not find it. She looked up at him, and
in her eyes there rose the old cloud of sadness that came only once in a long time. It was
a puzzled face that he saw looking steadily into his.

"I don't know what you could do," she answered simply.

Something about the pathetic loneliness of his unfathered child, evidenced by the sadness that
flitted across her face, touched a remote, unsullied part of his nature, and moved him to say:

"Oh, Lila--Lila--Lila--I need you--I need you--God knows, dear, how I do need you. Won't you
come to me sometimes? Won't your mother ever relent--won't she? If she knew, she would be kind.
Oh, Lila, Lila," he called as the two stood together there in the twilight with the glow of
the coals in the fireplace upon them, "Lila, won't you let me take you home even--in my car?
Surely your mother wouldn't care for that, would she?"

The girl looked into the fire and answered, "No," and shook her head. "No--mother would be
pleased, I think. She has always told me to be kind to you--to be respectful to you, sir. I've
tried to be, sir?"

Her voice rose in a question. He answered by taking her arm and pleading, "Oh, come--won't
you let me take you home in my car, Lila--it's getting late--won't you, Lila?"

But the girl turned away; he let her arm drop. She answered, shaking her head:

"I think, sir, if you don't mind--I'd rather walk." 

It is the man of genius speaking with authority to those of his own time who is here presented.
In such a setting his voice has still its ancient power. The rules may be given in one word;
by being disinterested. And how is it to be disinterested?

SIR MICHAEL FOSTER

THE GROWTH OF SCIENCE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY[2]

The eyes of the young look ever forward; they take little heed of the short though ever-lengthening
fragment of life which lies behind them; they are wholly bent on that which is to come. The
eyes of the aged turn wistfully again and again to the past; as the old glide down the inevitable
slope, their present becomes a living over again the life which has gone before, and the future
takes on the shape of a brief lengthening of the past. May I this evening venture to give rein
to the impulses of advancing years? May I, at this last meeting of the association in the eighteen
hundreds, dare to dwell for a while upon the past, and to call to mind a few of the changes which
have taken place in the world since those autumn days in which men were saying to each other
that the last of the seventeen hundreds was drawing toward its end?

Dover, in the year of our Lord 1799, was in many ways unlike the Dover of to-day. On moonless
nights men groped their way in its narrow streets by the help of swinging lanterns and smoky
torches, for no lamps lit the ways. By day the light of the sun struggled into the houses through
narrow panes of blurred glass. Though the town then, as now, was one of the chief portals to and
from the countries beyond the seas, the means of travel was scanty and dear, available for the
most part to the rich alone, and for all beset with discomfort and risk. Slow and uncertain
was the carriage of goods, and the news of the world outside came to the town (though it, from its
position, learned more than most towns) tardily, fitfully, and often falsely. The people of Dover
sat then much in dimness, if not in darkness, and lived in large
measure on themselves.

They who study the phenomena of living beings tell us that light is the great stimulus of life,
and that the fullness of the life of a being or of any of its members may be measured by the
variety, the swiftness, and the certainty of the means by which it is in touch with its surroundings.
Judged from this standpoint, life at Dover then, as indeed elsewhere, must have fallen far
short of the life of to-day.

The same study of living beings, however, teaches us that while from
one point of view the environment seems to mould the organism, from
another point the organism seems to be master of its environment.

Going behind the change of circumstances, we may raise the question, the old question, Was
life in its essence worth more then than now? Has there been a real advance?

Let me at once relieve your minds by saying that I propose to leave this question in the main
unanswered. It may be, or it may not be, that man's grasp of the beautiful and of the good, if
not looser, is not firmer than it was a hundred years ago. It may be, or it may not be, that
man is no nearer to absolute truth, to seeing things as they really are, than he was then.
I will merely ask you to consider with me for a few minutes how far
and in what ways man's laying hold of that aspect of, or part of,
truth which we call natural knowledge, or sometimes science, differed
in 1799 from what it is to-day, and whether that change must not be
accounted a real advance, a real improvement in man.

I do not propose to weary you by what in my hands would be the rash effort of attempting a survey
of all the scientific results of the nineteenth century. It will be enough if for a little
while I dwell on some few of the salient features distinguishing
the way in which we nowadays look upon, and during the coming week
shall speak of, the works of nature around us--though those works
themselves, save for the slight shifting involved in a secular change,
remain exactly the same--from the way in which they were looked upon
and might have been spoken of at a gathering of philosophers at Dover
in 1799, and I ask your leave to do so.

In the philosophy of the ancients earth, fire, air, and water were called "the elements." It
was thought, and rightly thought, that a knowledge of them and of their attributes was a necessary
basis of a knowledge of the ways of nature. Translated into modern language, a knowledge of
these "elements" of old means a knowledge of the composition of the
atmosphere, of water, and of all the other things which we call matter,
as well as a knowledge of the general properties of gases, liquids,
and solids, and of the nature and effects of combustion.

Of all these things our knowledge to-day is large and exact, and,
though ever enlarging, in some respects complete.

When did that knowledge begin to become exact?

To-day the children in our schools know that the air which wraps round the globe is not a single
thing, but is made up of two things, oxygen and nitrogen,[3] mingled together. They know, again,
that water is not a single thing, but the product of two things, oxygen and hydrogen, joined
together.

They know that when the air makes the fire burn and gives the animal
life, it is the oxygen in it which does the work.

They know that all round them things are undergoing that union with oxygen which we call oxidation,
and that oxidation is the ordinary source of heat and light. Let me ask you to picture to
yourselves what confusion there would be to-morrow, not only in the discussions at the sectional
meetings of our association, but in the world at large, if it should happen that in the coming
night some destroying touch should wither up certain tender structures
in all our brains and wipe out from our memories all traces of the
ideas which cluster in our minds around the verbal tokens, oxygen
and oxidation.

How could any of us--not the so-called man of science alone, but even the man of business and
the man of pleasure--go about his ways lacking those ideas?

Yet those ideas were, in 1799, lacking to all but a few.

Although in the third quarter of the seventeenth century the light of truth about oxidation
and combustion had flashed out in the writings of John Mayow, it came as a flash only, and died
away as soon as it had come. For the rest of that century, and for the greater part of the
next, philosophers stumbled about in darkness, misled for most of
the time by the phantom conception which they called phlogiston.

It was not until the end of the third quarter of the eighteenth century that the new light,
which has burned steadily ever since, lit up the minds of the men
of science.

The light came at nearly the same time from England and from France. Rounding off the sharp
corners of controversy, and joining, as we may fitly do to-day, the two countries as twin bearers
of a common crown, we may say that we owe the truth to Priestley, to Lavoisier, and to Cavendish.
If it was Priestley who was the first to demonstrate the existence
of what we now call oxygen, it is to Lavoisier that we owe the true
conception of the nature of oxidation and the clear exposition of
the full meaning of Priestley's discovery; while the knowledge of
the composition of water, the necessity complement of the knowledge
of oxygen, came to us through Cavendish and, we may perhaps add, through
Watt.

The date of Priestley's discovery of oxygen is 1774; Lavoisier's classic memoir "On the nature
of the principle which enters into combination with metals during calcination" appeared in
1775, and Cavendish's paper on the composition of water did not see the light until 1784.

During the last quarter of the eighteenth century this new idea of
oxygen and oxidation was struggling into existence.

How new was the idea, is illustrated by the fact that Lavoisier himself at first spoke of that
which he was afterwards, namely, in 1778, led to call oxygen, the
name by which it has since been known, as "the principle which enters
into combination."

What difficulties its acceptance met with is illustrated by the fact that Priestley himself
refused to the end of his life to grasp the true bearings of the discovery which he had made.

In
the year 1799 the knowledge of oxygen, of the nature of water and
of air, and indeed the true conception of chemical composition and
chemical change, was hardly more than beginning to be; and the century
had to pass wholly away before the next great chemical idea, which
we know by the name of the atomic theory of John Dalton, was made
known.

We have only to read the scientific literature of the time to recognize that a truth which
is now not only woven as a master-thread into all our scientific
conceptions, but even enters largely into the everyday talk and thoughts
of educated people, was, a hundred years ago, struggling into existence
among the philosophers themselves.

It was all but absolutely unknown to the large world outside those
select few.

If there be one word of science which is writ large on the life of the present time, it is the
word "electricity." It is, I take it, writ larger than any other word. The knowledge which it denotes
has carried its practical results far and wide into our daily life, while the theoretical conceptions
which it signifies pierce deep into the nature of things. We are to-day proud, and justly proud,
both of the material triumphs and of the intellectual gains which it has brought us, and we
are full of even larger hopes of it in the future.

At what time did this bright child of the nineteenth century have its birth?

He who listened to the small group of philosophers of Dover, who in 1799 might have discoursed
of natural knowledge, would perhaps have heard much of electric machines,
of electric sparks, of the electric fluid, and even of positive and
negative electricity; for frictional electricity had long been known
and even carefully studied.

Probably one or more of the group, dwelling on the observations which Galvani, an Italian, had
made known some twenty years before, developed views on the connection of electricity with
the phenomena of living bodies. Possibly one of them was exciting the rest by telling how he
had just heard that a professor at Pavia, one Volta, had discovered that electricity could
be produced, not only by rubbing together particular bodies, but
by the simple contact of two metals, and had thereby explained Galvani's
remarkable results.

For, indeed, as we shall hear from Professor Fleming, it was in that
very year, 1799, that electricity as we now know it took its birth.

It was then that Volta brought to light the apparently simple truths
out of which so much has sprung.

The world, it is true, had to wait for yet some twenty years before both the practical and
theoretic worth of Volta's discovery became truly pregnant under the fertilizing influence
of another discovery. The loadstone and its magnetic virtues had, like the electrifying power
of rubbed amber, long been an old story. But, save for the compass, not much had come from
it. And even Volta's discovery might have long remained relatively barren had it been left
to itself. When, however, in 1819, Oersted made known his remarkable observations on the relations
of electricity to magnetism, he made the contact needed for the flow of a new current of ideas.
And it is perhaps not too much to say that those ideas, developing
during the years of the rest of the century with an ever-accelerating
swiftness, have wholly changed man's material relations to the circumstances
of life, and at the same time carried him far in his knowledge of
the nature of things.

Of all the various branches of science, none perhaps is to-day, none for these many years past
has been, so well known to, even if not understood by, most people as that of geology. Its
practical lessons have brought wealth to many; its fairy tales have brought delight to more; and
round it hovers the charm of danger, for the conclusions to which it leads touch on the nature of man's
beginning.

In 1799 the science of geology, as we now know it, was struggling into birth. There had been from
of old cosmogonies, theories as to how the world had taken shape out of primeval chaos. In
that fresh spirit which marked the zealous search after natural knowledge pursued in the middle and
latter part of the seventeenth century, the brilliant Stenson, in Italy, and Hooke, in England,
had laid hold of some of the problems presented by fossil remains, and Woodward, with others, had labored
in the same field. In the eighteenth century, especially in its latter half, men's minds were
busy about the physical agencies determining or modifying the features of the earth's crust;
water and fire, subsidence from a primeval ocean and transformation by outbursts of the central
heat, Neptune and Pluto were being appealed to, by Werner on the
one hand and by Demarest on the other, in explanation of the earth's
phenomena.

The way was being prepared, theories and views were abundant, and many sound observations had
been made; and yet the science of geology, properly so called, the exact and proved knowledge
of the successive phases of the world's life, may be said to date from the closing years of
the eighteenth century.

In 1783 James Hutton put forward in a brief memoir his Theory of the Earth, which, in 1795, two
years before his death, he expanded into a book; but his ideas failed to lay hold of men's minds
until the century had passed away, when, in 1802, they found an able expositor in John Playfair.
The very same year that Hutton published his book, Cuvier came to
Paris and almost forthwith began, with Brongniart, his immortal researches
into the fossils of Paris and its neighborhood.

And four years later, in the year 1799 itself, William Smith's tabular list of strata and
fossils saw the light. It is, I believe, not too much to say that out of these, geology, as we
now know it, sprang.

It was thus in the closing years of the eighteenth century that was
begun the work which the nineteenth century has carried forward to
such great results; but at this time only the select few had grasped
the truth, and even they only the beginning of it.

Outside a narrow circle the thoughts even of the educated about the history of the globe were bounded
by the story of the Deluge,--though the story was often told in a strange fashion,--or were
guided by fantastic views of the plastic forces of a sportive nature.

In another branch of science, in that which deals with the problems presented by living beings,
the thoughts of men in 1799 were also very different from the thoughts of men to-day. It is
a very old quest, the quest after the knowledge of the nature of living beings, one of the earliest
on which man set out; for it promised to lead him to a knowledge
of himself--a promise which perhaps is still before us, but the fulfillment
of which is yet far off.

As time has gone on, the pursuit of natural knowledge has seemed to lead man away from himself
into the furthermost parts of the universe, and into secret workings of Nature in which he appears
to be of little or no account; and his knowledge of the nature of living things, and so of his
own nature, has advanced slowly, waiting till the progress of other branches of natural knowledge
can bring it aid. Yet in the past hundred years the biologic sciences, as we now call them,
have marched rapidly onward.

We may look upon a living body as a machine doing work in accordance with certain laws, and
may seek to trace out the working of the inner wheels: how these raise up the lifeless dust
into living matter, and let the living matter fall away again into dust, giving out movement and
heat. Or we may look upon the individual life as a link in a long chain, joining something
which went before to something about to come, a chain whose beginning lies hid in the farthest past,
and may seek to know the ties which bind one life to another.

As we call up to view the long series of living forms, living now or flitting like shadows
on the screen of the past, we may strive to lay hold of the influences which fashion the garment
of life. Whether the problems of life are looked upon from the one point of view or the other,
we to-day, not biologists only, but all of us, have gained a knowledge hidden even from the
philosophers a hundred years ago.

Of the problems presented by the living body viewed as a machine, some may be spoken of as
mechanical, others as physical, and yet others as chemical, while some are, apparently at least,
none of these. In the seventeenth century William Harvey, laying hold of the central mechanism
of the blood stream, opened up a path of inquiry which his own age and the century which followed
trod with marked success.

The knowledge of the mechanism of the animal and of the plant advanced apace, but the physical
and chemical problems had yet to wait. The eighteenth century, it is true, had its physics
and its chemistry; but, in relation at least to the problems of the living being, a chemistry which
knew not oxygen and a physics which knew not the electricity of chemical action were of little
avail.

The philosopher of 1799, when he discussed the functions of the animal or of the plant involving
chemical changes, was fain, for the most part, as were his predecessors in the century before, to
have recourse to such vague terms as "fermentation" and the like; to-day our treatises on physiology
are largely made up of precise and exact expositions of the play of physical agencies and chemical bodies
in the living organisms. He made use of the words "vital force" or "vital principle," not as an
occasional, but as a common, explanation of the phenomena of the living body. During the present
century, especially during its latter half, the idea embodied in those words has been driven
away from one seat after another; if we use it now when we are dealing with the chemical and
physical events of life, we use it with reluctance, as a deus ex machina to be appealed to
only when everything else has failed.

Some of the problems--and those, perhaps, the chief problems--of the living body have to be solved,
neither by physical nor by chemical methods, but by methods of their own. Such are the problems
of the nervous system.

In respect to these the men of 1799 were on the threshold of a pregnant discovery. During the
latter part of this nineteenth century, especially during its last quarter, the analysis of the
mysterious processes in the nervous system, and especially in the
brain, which issue as feeling, thought, and the power to move, has
been pushed forward with a success conspicuous in its practical, and
full of promise in its theoretical, gains.

That analysis may be briefly described as a following up of threads. We now know that what takes
place along a tiny thread which we call a nerve fibre differs from that which takes place along
its fellow threads, that differing nervous impulses travel along different nervous fibres, and
that nervous and physical events are the outcome of the clashing of nervous impulses as they
sweep along the closely woven web of living threads of which the brain is made. We have learned
by experiment and by observation that the pattern of the web determines the play of the impulses,
and we can already explain many of the obscure problems, not only of nervous disease, but of
nervous life, by an analysis which is a tracking out of the devious and linked path of nervous
threads.

The very beginning of this analysis was unknown in 1799. Men knew that nerves were the agents
of feeling and of the movements of muscles; they had learned much
about what this part or that part of the brain could do; but they
did not know that one nerve fibre differed from another in the very
essence of its work.

It was just about the end of the eighteenth century, or the beginning of the nineteenth, that an
English surgeon began to ponder over a conception which, however, he did not make known until
some years later, and which did not gain complete demonstration and full acceptance until
still more years had passed away. It was in 1811, in a tiny pamphlet published privately,
that Charles Bell put forth his New Idea, that the nervous system is constructed on the principle
that "the nerves are not single nerves possessing various powers, but bundles of different nerves,
whose filaments are united for the convenience of distribution, but which are distinct in office,
as they are in origin, from the brain."

Our present knowledge of the nervous system is to a large extent only an exemplification and expansion of Charles
Bell's New Idea, and has its origin in that.

If we pass from the problems of the living organism viewed as a machine to those presented by
the varied features of the different creatures who have lived or who still live on the earth,
we at once call to mind that the middle years of the nineteenth century mark an epoch in biologic
thought such as never came before; for it was then that Charles Darwin gave to the world the "Origin
of Species."

That work, however, with all the far-reaching effects which it has had, could have had little
or no effect, or, rather, could not have come into existence, had
not the earlier half of the century been in travail preparing for
its coming.

For the germinal idea of Darwin appeals, as to witnesses, to the results of two lines of biologic
investigation which were almost unknown to the men of the eighteenth century.

To one of these lines I have already referred. Darwin, as we know, appealed to the geological record;
and we also know how that record, imperfect as it was then, and imperfect as it must always remain,
has since his time yielded the most striking proofs of at least one part of his general conception.
In 1799 there was, as we have seen, no geological record at all.

Of the other line I must say a few words.

To-day the merest beginner in biologic study, or even that exemplar of acquaintance without
knowledge, the general reader, is aware that every living being,
even man himself, begins its independent existence as a tiny ball,
of which we can, even acknowledging to the full the limits of the
optical analysis at our command, assert with confidence that in structure,
using that word in its ordinary sense, it is in all cases absolutely
simple.

It is equally well known that the features of form which supply the characters of a grown-up living
being, all the many and varied features of even the most complex organism, are reached as the
goal of a road, at times a long road, of successive changes; that the life of every being, from
the ovum to its full estate, is a series of shifting scenes, which come and go, sometimes changing
abruptly, sometimes melting the one into the other, like dissolving views--all so ordained that
often the final shape with which the creature seems to begin, or
is said to begin, its life in the world is the outcome of many shapes,
clothed with which it in turn has lived many lives before its seeming
birth.

All, or nearly all, the exact knowledge of the labored way in which
each living creature puts on its proper shape and structure is the
heritage of the present century.

Although the way in which the chick is moulded in the egg was not wholly unknown even to the
ancients, and in later years had been told, first in the sixteenth
century by Fabricius, then in the seventeenth century, in a more clear
and striking manner, by the great Italian naturalist, Malpighi, the
teaching thus offered had been neglected or misinterpreted.

At the close of the eighteenth century the dominant view was that in the making of a creature
out of the egg there was no putting on of wholly new parts, no epigenesis. It was taught that
the entire creature lay hidden in the egg, hidden by reason of the very transparency of its substance;
lay ready-made, but folded up, as it were; and that the process of development within the egg or
within the womb was a mere unfolding, a simple evolution.

Nor did men shrink from accepting the logical outcome of such a view--namely, that within the
unborn creature itself lay in like manner, hidden and folded up, its offspring also, and within
that, again, its offspring in turn, after the fashion of a cluster
of ivory balls carved by Chinese hands, one within the other.

 I sha'n't go and see Dan and Tom. I'm willing to go
as far as any man in the forgiving and forgetting business, but the Lord himself hasn't quit
on them. Look at 'em. The devil's mortgage is recorded all over their faces and he's getting
about ready to foreclose on old Dan! And every time Dan hears poor Morty cough, the devil collects
his compound interest. Poor, dear, gay Morty--if he could only put up a fight!"

But he could not put up a fight and his temperature rose in the afternoon and he could not
meet with his gymnasium class in South Harvey in the evening, but sent a trainer instead. So
often weeks passed during which Laura Van Dorn did not see Morty and the daily boxes of flowers
that came punctiliously with his cards to the kindergarten and to Violet Hogan's day nursery,
were their only reminders of the sorry, lonely, footless struggle Morty was making.

It was inevitable that the lives of Violet Hogan and Laura Van Dorn in South Harvey should
meet and merge. And when they met and merged, Violet Hogan found herself devoting but a few
hours a day to her day nursery, while she worked six long, happy hours as a stenographer for
Grant Adams in his office at the Vanderbilt House. For, after all, it was as a stenographer
that she remembered herself in the grandeur and the glory of her past. So Henry Fenn and Laura
Van Dorn carried on the work that Violet began, and for them souls and flowers and happiness
bloomed over the Valley in the dark, unwholesome places which death had all but taken for his own.

It was that spring when Dr. Nesbit went to the capital and took his last fling at State politics.
For two months he had deadlocked his party caucus in the election of a United States Senator
with hardly more than a dozen legislative votes. And he was going out of his dictatorship in
a golden glow of glory.

And this was the beginning of the golden age for Captain Morton. The Morton-Perry Axle Works
were thriving. Three eight-hour shifts kept the little plant booming, and by agreement with
the directors of the Independent mine, Nathan Perry spent five hours a day in the works. He
and the Captain, and the youngest Miss Morton, who was keeping books, believed that it would
go over the line from loss to profit before grass came. The Captain hovered about the plant
like an earth-bound spirit day and night, interrupting the work of the men, disorganizing the
system that Nathan had installed, and persuading himself that but for him the furnaces would
go dead and the works shut down.

It was one beautiful day in late March, after the November election wherein the Doctor's law
had won and the Doctor himself had lost, that Grant Adams was in Harvey figuring with Mr. Brotherton
on supplies for his office. Captain Morton came tramping down the clouds before him as he swept
into the Serenity and jabbed a spike through the wheels of commerce with the remark: "Well,
George--what do you think of my regalia--eh?"

Mr. Brotherton and Grant looked up from their work. They beheld the Captain arrayed in a dazzling
light gray spring suit--an exceedingly light gray suit, with a hat of the same color and gloves
and shoe spats to match, with a red tie so red that it all but crackled. "First profits of
the business. We got over the line yesterday noon, and I had a thousand to go on, and this
morning I just went on this spree--what say?"

"Well, Cap, when Morty Sands sees you he will die of envy. You're certainly the lily of the
Valley and the bright and morning star--the fairest of ten thousand to my soul! Grant," said
Brotherton as he turned to his customer, "behold the plute!"

The Captain stood grinning in pride as the men looked him over.

"'Y gory, boys, you'd be surprised the way that Household Horse has hit the trade. Orders coming
in from automobile makers, and last week we decided to give up making the little power saver
and make the whole rear axle. We're going to call it the Morton-Perry Axle, and put in a big
plant, and I was telling Ruthy this morning, I says, 'Ruth,' says I, 'if we make the axle business
go, I'll just telephone down to Wright & Perry and have them send you out something nobby in
husbands, and, 'y gory, a nice thousand-mile wedding trip and maybe your pa will go along for
company--what say?'"

He was an odd figure in his clothes--for they were ready-made--made for the figure of youth,
and although he had been in them but a few hours, the padding was bulging at the wrong places;
and they were wrinkled where they should be tight. His bony old figure stuck out at the knees,
and the shoulders and elbows, and the high collar would not fit his skinny neck. But he was
happy, and fancied he looked like the pictures of college boys in the back of magazines. So
he answered Mr. Brotherton's question about the opinion of the younger daughter as to the clothes
by a profound wink.

"Scared--scared plumb stiff--what say? I caught Marthy nodding at Ruth and Ruthy looking hard
at Marthy, and then both of 'em went to the kitchen to talk over calling up Emmy and putting
out fly poison for the women that are lying in wait for their pa. Scared--why, scared's no
name for it--what say?"

"Well, Captain," answered Mr. Brotherton, "you are certainly voluptuous enough in your new
stage setting to have your picture on a cigar box as a Cuban beauty or a Spanish señorita."

The Captain was turning about, trying to see how the coat set in the back and at the same time
watching the hang of the trousers. Evidently he was satisfied with it. For he said: "Well--guess
I'll be going. I'll just mosey down to Mrs. Herdicker's to give Emmy and Marthy and Ruthy something
to keep 'em from thinking of their real troubles--eh?" And with a flourish he was gone.

When Grant's order was filled, he said, "Violet will call for this, George; I have some other
matters to attend to."

As he assembled the goods for the order, Mr. Brotherton called out, "Well, how is Violet, anyway?"
Grant smiled. "Violet is doing well. She is blooming over again, and when she found herself
before a typewriter--it really seemed to take the curve out of her back. Henry declares that
the typewriter put ribbon in her hair. Laura Van Dorn, I believe, is responsible for Violet's
shirt waists. Henry Fenn comes to the office twice a day, to make reports on the sewing business.
But what he's really doing, George, is to let her smell his breath to prove that he's sober,
and so she runs the two jobs at once. Have you seen Henry recently?"

"Well," replied Brotherton, "he was in a month or so ago to borrow ten to buy a coat--so that
he could catch up with the trousers of that suit before they grew too old. He still buys his
clothes that way."

Grant threw back his red head and grinned a grim, silent grin: "Well, that's funny. Didn't
you know what is keeping him away?" Again Grant grinned. "The day he was here he came wagging
down with that ten-dollar bill, but his conscience got the best of him for lavishing so much
money on himself, so he slipped it to Violet and told her to buy her some new teeth--you know
she's been ashamed to open her mouth now for years. Violet promised she would get the teeth
in time for Easter. And pretty soon in walks Mrs. Maurice Stromsky--who scrubs in the Wright
& Perry Building, whose baby died last summer and had to be buried in the Potter's field--she
came in; and she and Violet got to talking about the baby--and Violet up and gave that ten
to Mrs. Stromsky, to get the baby out of the Potter's field."

Mr. Brotherton laughed his great laugh. Grant went on:

"But that isn't all. The next day in walks Mrs. Maurice Stromsky, penitent as a dog, and I
heard her squaring herself with Violet for giving that old saw-buck of yours to the Delaneys,
whose second little girl had diphtheria and who had no money for antitoxin. I never saw your
ten again, George," said Grant. "It seemed to be going down for the last time." He looked at
Brotherton quizzically for a second and asked:

"So old Henry hasn't been around since--isn't that joyous? Well--anyway, he'll show up to-day
or to-morrow, for he's got the new coat; he got it this morning. Jasper was telling me."

In an hour Grant, returning after his morning's errands, was standing by the puny little blaze
that John Dexter had stirred out of the logs in the Serenity. The two were standing together.
Mr. Brotherton, reading his Kansas City paper at his desk, called to them: "Well, I see Doc
Jim's still holding his deadlock and they can't elect a United States Senator without him!"

A telegraph messenger boy came in, looked into the Serenity, and said, "Mr. Adams, I was looking
for you."

Grant signed the boy's book, read the telegram, and stood dumbly gazing at the fire, as he
held the sheet in his hand.

The fire popped and snapped and the little blaze grew stronger when a log dropped in two. A
customer came in--picked up a magazine--called, "Charge it, please," then went out. The door
slammed. Another customer came and went. Miss Calvin stepped back to Mr. Brotherton. The bell
of the cash register tinkled. Then Grant Adams turned, looked at the minister absently for
a moment, and handed him the sheet. It read:

    "I have pledged in writing five more votes than are needed to
    make you the caucus nominee and give you a majority on the joint
    ballot to-night for United States Senator. Come up first train."

It was signed "James Nesbit." The preacher dropped his hand still holding the yellow sheet,
and looked into the fire.

"Well?" asked Grant.

"You say," returned John Dexter, and added: "It would be a great opportunity--give you the
greatest forum for your cause in Christendom--give you more power than any other labor advocate
ever held in the world before."

He said all this tentatively and as one asking a question. Grant did not reply. He sat pounding
his leg with his claw, abstractedly.

"You needn't be a mere theorist in the Senate. You could get labor laws enacted that would
put forward the cause of labor. Grant, really, it looks as though this was your life's chance."

Grant reached for the telegram and read it again. The telegram fluttering in his hands dropped
to the floor. He reached for it--picked it up, folded it on his claw carefully, and put it
away. Then he turned to the preacher and said harshly:

"There's nothing in it. To begin: you say I'll have more power than any other labor leader
in the world. I tell you, labor leaders don't need personal power. We don't need labor laws--that
is, primarily. What we need is sentiment--a public love of the under dog that will make our
present laws intolerable. It isn't power for me, it isn't clean politics for the State, it
isn't labor laws that's my job. My job, dearly beloved," he hooked the minister's hand and
tossed it gently, "my job, oh, thou of little faith," he cried, as a flaming torch of emotion
seemed to brush his face and kindle the fanatic glow in his countenance while his voice lifted,
"is to stay right down here in the Wahoo Valley, pile up money in the war chest, pile up class
feeling among the men--comradeship--harness this love of the poor for the poor into an engine,
and then some day slip the belt on that engine--turn on the juice and pull and pull and pull
for some simple, elemental piece of justice that will show the world one phase of the truth
about labor."

Grant's face was glowing with emotion. "I tell you, the day of the Kingdom is here--only it
isn't a kingdom, it's Democracy--the great Democracy. It's coming. I must go out and meet it.
In the dark down in the mines I saw the Holy Ghost rise into the lives of a score of men. And
now I see the Holy Ghost coming into a great class. And I must go--go with neither purse nor
script to meet it, to live for it, and maybe to die for it." He shook his head and cried vehemently:

"What a saphead I'd be if I fell to that bait!" He turned to the store and called to Miss Calvin.
"Ave--is there a telegraph blank in the desk?"

Mr. Brotherton threw it, skidding, across the long counter. Grant fumbled in his vest for a
pen, held the sheet firmly with his claw and wrote:

    "You are kindness itself. But the place doesn't interest me.
    Moreover, no man should go to the Senate representing all of a
    State, whose job it is to preach class consciousness to a part
    of the State. Get a bigger man. I thank you, however, with all
    my heart."

Grant watched the preacher read the telegram. He read it twice, then he said: "Well--of course,
that's right. That's right--I can see that. But I don't know--don't you think--I mean aren't
you kind of--well, I can't just express it; but--"

"Well, don't try, then," returned Grant.

However, Doctor Nesbit, having something rather more than the ethics of the case at stake,
was aided by his emotions in expressing himself. He made his views clear, and as Grant sat
at his desk that afternoon, he read this in a telegram from the Doctor:

    "Well, of all the damn fools!"

That was one view of the situation. There was this other. It may be found in one of those stated
communications from perhaps Ruskin or Kingsley, which the Peach Blow Philosopher sometimes
vouchsafed to the earth and it read:

"A great life may be lived by any one who is strong enough to fail for an ideal."

Still another view may be had by setting down what John Dexter said to his wife, and what she
said to him. Said he, when he had recounted the renunciation of Grant Adams:

"There goes the third devil. First he conquered the temptation to marry and be comfortable;
next he put fame behind him, and now he renounces power."

And she said: "It had never occurred to me to consider Laura Van Dorn, or national reputation,
or a genuine chance for great usefulness as a devil. I'm not sure that I like your taste in
devils."

To which answer may be made again by Mr. Left in a communication he received from George Meredith,
who had recently passed over. It was verified by certain details as to the arrangement of the
books on the little table in the little room in the little house on a little hill where he
was wont to write, and it ran thus:

    "Women, always star-hungry, ever uncompromising in their demand
    for rainbows, nibbling at the entre' and pushing aside the
    roast, though often adoring primitive men who gorge on it, but
    ever in the end rewarding abstinence and thus selecting a race
    of spiritually-minded men for mates, are after all the world's
    materialists."

This story, first of all, and last of all, is a love story. The emotion called love and its
twin desire hunger, are the two primal passions of life. From love have developed somewhat
the great altruistic institutions of humanity--the family, the tribe, the State, the nation,
and the varied social activities--religion, patriotism, philanthropy, brotherhood. While from
hunger have developed war and trade and property and wealth. Often it happens in the growth
of life that men have small choice in matters of living that are motived by hunger or its descendant
concerns; for necessity narrows the choice. But in affairs of the heart, there comes wide latitudes
of choice. It is reasonably just therefore to judge a man, a nation, a race, a civilization,
an era, by its love affairs. So a book that would tell of life, that would paint the manners
of men, and thus show their hearts, must be a love story. "As a man thinketh in his heart,
so is he," runs the proverb, and, mind you, it says heart--not head, not mind, but heart; as
a man thinketh in his heart, in that part of his nature where reside his altruistic emotions--so
is he.

It is the sham and shame of the autobiographies that flood and dishearten the world, that they
are so uncandid in their relation of those emotional episodes in life--episodes which have
to do with what we know for some curious reason as "the softer passions." Cæsar's Gaelic wars,
his bridges, his trouble with the impedimenta, his fights with the Helvetians--who cares for
them? Who cares greatly for Napoleon's expedition against the Allies? Of what human interest
is Grant's tale of the Wilderness fighting? But to know of Calpurnia, of her predecessors,
and her heirs and assigns in Cæsar's heart; to know the truth about Josephine and the crash
in Napoleon's life that came with her heartbreak--if a crash did come, or if not, to know frankly
what did come; to know how Grant got on with Julia Dent through poverty and riches, through
sickness and in health, for better or for worse--with all the strain and stress and struggle
that life puts upon the yoke that binds the commonplace man to the commonplace woman rising
to eminence by some unimportant quirk of his genius reacting on the times--these indeed would
be memoirs worth reading.

And whatever worth this story holds must come from its value as a love-story,--the narrative
of how love rose or fell, grew or withered, bloomed and fruited, or rotted at the core in the
lives of those men and women who move through the scenes painted upon this canvas. After all,
who cares that Thomas Van Dorn waxed fat in the land, that he received academic degrees from
great universities which his masters supported, that he told men to go and they went, to come
and they came? These things are of no consequence. Men are doing such things every minute of
every day in all the year.

But here sits Thomas Van Dorn, one summer afternoon, with a young broker from New York--one
of those young brokers with not too nice a conscience, who laughs too easily at the wrong times.
He and Thomas Van Dorn are upon the east veranda of the new Country Club building in Harvey--the
pride of the town--and Thomas is squinting across the golf course at a landscape rolling away
for miles like a sea, a landscape rich in homely wealth. The young New Yorker comes with letters
to Judge Van Dorn from his employers in Broad Street, and as the two sip their long cool glasses,
and betimes smoke their long black cigars, the former judge falls into one of those self-revealing
philosophical moods that may be called the hypnoidal semi-conscious state of common sense.
Said Van Dorn:

"Well, boy--what do you think of the greatest thing in the world?" And not waiting for an answer
the older man continued as he held his cigar at arm's length and looked between his elevated
feet at the landscape: "'Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love.'
Great old lover--Solomon. Rather out of the amateur class--with his thousand wives and concubines;
perhaps a virtuous man withal, but hardly a fanatic on the subject; and when he said he was
sick of love--probably somewhere in his fifties,--Solomon voiced a profound man's truth. Most
of us are. Speaking generally of love, my boy, I am with Solomon. There is nothing in it."

The cigar in his finely curved mouth--the sensuous mouth of youth, that had pursed up dryly
in middle age--was pointed upward. It stood out from a reddish lean face and moved when the
muscles of the face worked viciously in response to some inward reflection of Tom Van Dorn.

He drawled on, "Think of the time men fool away chasing calico. I've gone all the gaits, and
I know what I'm talking about. Ladies and Judy O'Gradies, married and single, decent and indecent--it's
all the same. I tell you, young man, there's nothing in it! Love," he laughed a little laugh:
"Love--why, when I was in the business," he sniffed, "I never had any trouble loving any lady
I desired, nor getting her if I loved her long enough and strong enough. When I was a young
cub like you," Van Dorn waved his weed grandly toward the young broker, "I used to keep myself
awake, cutting notches in my memory--naming over my conquests. But now I use it as a man does
the sheep over the fence, to put me to sleep, and I haven't been able to pass my fortieth birthday
in the list for two years, without snoozing. What a fool a man can make of himself over calico!
The ladies, God bless 'em, have got old John Barleycorn beaten a mile, when it comes to playing
hell with a man's life. Again speaking broadly, and allowing for certain exceptions, I should
say--" he paused to give the judicial pomp of reflection to his utterances--"the bigger fool
the woman is, the greater fool a man makes of himself for her. And all for what?"

His young guest interjected the word "Love?" in the pause. The Judge made a wry face and continued:

"Love? Love--why, man, you talk like a school girl. There is no love. Love and God are twin
myths by which we explain the relation of our fates to our follies. The only thing about me
that will live is the blood I transmit to my children! We live in posterity. As for love and
all the mysteries of the temple--waugh--woof!" he shuddered.

He put back his cigar into the corner of his hard mouth. He was squinting cynically across
the rolling golf course. What he saw there checked his talk. He opened his eyes to get a clearer
view. His impression grew definite and unmistakable. There, half playing and half sporting,
like young lambs upon the close-cropped turf, were Kenyon Adams and Lila Van Dorn! They were
unconscious of all that their gay antics disclosed. They were happy, and were trying only to
express happiness as they ran together after the ball, that flew in front of them like a mad
butterfly. But in the sad lore of his bleak heart, the father read the meaning of their happiness.
Youth in love was never innocent for him. Looking at Lila romping with her lover, he turned
sick at heart. But he held himself in hand. Only the zigzag scar on his forehead flashing white
in the pink of his brow betrayed the turmoil within him. He tried to keep his eyes off the
golf course. A sharp dread that he might transmit himself in nature to posterity only through
the base blood of the Adamses, struck him. He closed his eyes. But the wind brought to him
the merriment of the young voices. A jealousy of Kenyon, and an anger at him, flared up in
the father. So Tom Van Dorn drew down the corners of his mouth--and batted his furtive eyes,
and put on his bony knee a mottled, nervous hand, with brown splotches at the wrist, coming
up over the veined furrows that led to his tapering fingers, as he cried harshly in a tone
that once had been soft and mellifluous, and still was deep and chesty: "Still me with flagons,
comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love!"

He would have gone away from the torture that came, as he stared at the lovers, but his devil
held him there. He was glad when a noise of saw and hammer at the lake drowned the voices on
the lawn. His gladness lasted but a moment. For soon he saw the young people quit chasing their
crazy butterfly of a golf ball, and wander half way up the hill from the lake, to sit in the
snug shade of a wide-spreading, low-branched elm tree. Then the father was nervous, because
he could not hear their voices. As he sat with the young broker, snarling at the anonymous
phantoms of his past which were bedeviling him, a gray doubt kept brushing across his mind.
He realized clearly that he had no legal right to question Lila's choice of companions. He
understood that the law would not justify anything that he might do, or say, or think, concerning
her and her fortunes. Yet there unmistakably was the Van Dorn set to her pretty head and a
Van Dorn gesture in her gay hands that had come down from at least four generations in family
tradition. And he had no right even to be offended when she would merge that Van Dorn blood
with the miserable Adams heredity. His impotence in the situation baffled him, and angered
him. The law was final to his mind; but it did not satisfy his wrathful questioning heart.
For in his heart, he realized that denial was not escape from the responsibility he had renounced
when he tripped down the steps of their home and left Lila pleading for him in her mother's
arms. He bit his ragged cigar and cursed his God, while the young man with Tom Van Dorn thought,
"Well, what a dour old Turk he is!"

The hammering and sawing, which drowned the voices of the young people under the tree, came
from the new bathing pavilion near by. Grant Adams was working on a two days' job putting up
the pavilion for the summer. He was out of Van Dorn's view, facing another angle of the long
three-faced veranda. Grant saw Kenyon lying upon the turf, slim and graceful and with the beauty
of youth radiating from him, and Grant wondered, as he worked, why his son should be there
playing among the hills, while the sons of other men, making much more money than he--much
more money indeed than many of the others who flitted over the green--should toil in the fumes
of South Harvey and in the great industrial Valley through long hard hours of work, that sapped
their heads and hearts by its monotony of motion, and lack of purpose. As he gazed at the lovers,
their love did not stick in his consciousness--even if he realized it. Their presence under
the elm tree at midday rose as a problem which deepened a furrow here and there in his seamed
face and he hammered and sawed away with a will, working out in his muscles the satisfaction
which his mind could not bring him.

As the two fathers from different vistas looked upon their children, Kenyon and Lila beneath
the elm tree were shyly toying with vagrant dreams that trailed across their hearts. He was
looking up at her and saying:

"Lila--who are we--you and I? I have been gazing at you three minutes while you were talking,
and I see some one quite different from the you I knew before. Looking up at you, instead of
down at you, is like transposing you. You are strangely new in this other key."

The girl did not try to respond in kind--with her lips at least. She began teasing the youth
about his crinkly hair. Breaking a twig as she spoke, she threw it carelessly at his hair,
and it stuck in the closely curled locks. She laughed gayly at him. Perhaps in some way rather
subtly than suddenly, as by a ghostly messenger from afar, he may have been made aware of her
beautiful body, of the exquisite lines of her figure, of the pink of her radiant skin, or the
red of her girlish lips. For the consciousness of these things seemed to spend his soul in joy.

The blazing eyes of Tom Van Dorn, squinting down upon the couple under the tree, could see
the grace that shone from a thousand reactions of their bodies and faces. He opened his mouth
to voice something from the bitterness of his heart but did not speak. Instead he yawned and
cried: "And so we rot and we rot and we rot."

Now it matters little what the lovers chattered about there under the elm tree, as they played
with sticks and pebbles. It was what they would have said that counts--or perhaps what they
should have said, if they had been able to voice their sense of the gift which the gods were
bestowing. But they were dumb humans, who threw pebbles at each other's toes, though in the
deep places of their souls, far below the surface waves of bashful patter, heart might have
spoken to heart in passing thus:

"Oh, Lila, what is beauty? What is it in the soul, running out glad to meet beauty, whether
of line, of tone, of color, of form, of motion, of harmony?"

And the answer might have been trumpeted back through the deep:

"Maybe beauty is the God that is everywhere and everything, releasing himself in matter. Perhaps
for our eyes and ears and fingers, the immanent God had an equation, whose answer is locked
in our souls that are also a part of God--created in his image. And when in curve or line,
in sequence of notes or harmony, or in thrilling touch sense, the equation is stated in terms
of radiation, God seeking our soul's answer, speaks to us."

But none of this trumpet call of souls reached the two fathers who were watching the lovers.
For one man was too old in selfishness to understand, and the other had grown too old in bearing
others' burdens to know what voices speak through the soul's trumpet, when love first comes
into the heart. So the hammers hammered and the saws groaned in the pavilion, and a hard heart
hammered and a soul groaned and a tongue babbled folly on the veranda. But under the elm tree,
eyes met, and across space went the message that binds lives forever. She picked up a twig
longer than most twigs about her, reached with it and touched his forehead furtively, stroked
his crinkled hair, blushing at her boldness. His head sank to the earth, he put his face upon
the grass, and for a second he found joy in the rush of tears. They heard voices, bringing
the planet back to them; but voices far away. On the hill across the little valley they could
see two earnest golfers, working along the sky-line.

The couple on the sky-line hurried along in the heat. The man mopped his face, and his brown,
hairy arms, and his big sinewy neck. The woman, rather thin, but fresh and with the maidenly
look of one who isn't entirely sure what that man will do next, kept well in the lead.

"Well, Emma--there's love's young dream all right." He stopped to puff, and waved at the couple
by the tree. Then he hitched up his loose, baggy trousers, gave a jerk to his big flowing blue
necktie, let fly at the ball and cried "Fore." When he came up to the ball again, he was red
and winded. "Emma," he said, "let's go have something to eat at the house--my figure'll do
for an emeritus bridegroom--won't it?" And thus they strolled over the fields and out of the game.

But on another hill, another couple in the midst of a flock of children attracted by one of
Mr. Brotherton's smashing laughs, looked down and saw Lila and Kenyon. The quick eyes of love
caught the meaning of the figures under the tree.

"Look, mamma--look," said Nathan Perry, pointing toward the tree.

"Oh, Nate," cried Anne, "--isn't it nice! Lila and Kenyon!"

"Well, mamma--are you happy?" asked Nathan, as he leaned against the tree beside her. She nodded
and directed their glances to the children and said gently, "And they justify it--don't they?"

He looked at her for a moment, and said, "Yes, dear--I suppose that's what the Lord gave us
love for. That is why love makes the world go around."

"And don't the people who don't have them miss it--my! Nate, if they only knew--if these bridge-playing,
childless ones knew how dear they are--what joy they bring--just as children--not for anything
else--do you suppose they would--"

"Oh, you can't tell," answered the young father. "Perhaps selfish people shouldn't have children;
or perhaps it's the children that make us unselfish, and so keep us happy. Maybe it's one of
those intricate psychical reactions, like a chemical change--I don't know! But I do know the
kids are the best things in the world."

She put her hand in his and squeezed it. "You know, Nate, I was just thinking to-day as I put
up the lunch--I'm a mighty lucky woman. I've had all these children and kept every one so far;
I've had such joy in them--such joy, and we haven't had death. Even little Annie's long sickness,
and everything--Oh, dear, Nate--but isn't she worth it--isn't she worth it?"

He kissed her hand and replied, "You know I'm so glad we went down to South Harvey to live,
Anne. I can see--well, here's the way it is. Lots of families down there--families that didn't
have any more to go on than we had then, started out, as we did. They had a raft of kids--"
he laughed, "just as we did. But, mamma--they're dead--or worse, they're growing up underfed,
and are hurrying into the works or the breaker bins. I tell you, Anne--here's the thing. Those
fathers and mothers didn't have any more money than we had--but we did have more and better
training than they had. You knew better than to feed our kids trash, you knew how to care for
them--we knew how to spend our little, so that it would count. They didn't. We have ours, and
they have doctors' and undertakers' bills. It isn't blood that counts so much--as the difference
in bringing up. We're lovers because of our bringing up. Otherwise, we'd be fighting like cats
and dogs, I'd be drinking, you'd be slommicking around in wrappers, and the kids would be on
the streets."

The children playing on the gravel bank were having a gay time. The mother called to them to
be careful of their clothes, and then replied:

"Nate, honestly I believe if I had two or three million dollars, and could give every girl
in South Harvey a good education--teach her how to cook and keep house and care for babies
before she is eighteen, that we could change the whole aspect of South Harvey in a generation.
If I had just two or three million dollars to spend--I could fill that town just as full as
Harvey of happy couples like us. Of course there'd be the other kind--some of them--just as
there are the other kind in Harvey--people like the Van Dorns--but they would be the exception
in South Harvey, as the Van Dorns are the exception in Harvey. And two or three million dollars
would do it."

"Yes, mamma,--that's the hell of it--the very hell of it that grinds my gizzard--your father
and my father and the others who haven't done a lick of the work--and who are entitled only
to a decent interest and promoters' profits, have taken out twenty million dollars from South
Harvey in dividends in the last thirty years--and this is the result. Hell for forty thousand
people down there, and--you and I and a few dozen educated happy people are the fruit of it.
Sometimes, Anne, I look at our little flock and look at you so beautiful, and think of our
life so glorious, and wonder how a just God can permit it."

They looked at the waving acres of blue-grass, dotted with trees, at the creek winding its
way through the cornfields, dark green and all but ready to tassle, then up at the clear sky,
untainted with the smoke of Harvey.

Then they considered the years that lay back of them. "I think, Nate," she answered, "that
to love really and truly one man or one woman makes one love all men and women. I feel that
way even about the little fellow that's coming. I love him so, that even he makes me love everything.
And so I can't just pray for him--I have to pray for all the mothers carrying babies and all
the babies in the world. I think when love comes into the world it is immortal. We die, but
the sum of love we live, we leave; it goes on; it grows. It is the way God gets into the world.
Oh, Nate," she cried, "I want to live in the next world--personally--with you--to know the
very you. I don't want the impersonal immortality--I want just you. But, dear--I--why, I'd
give up even that if I could be sure that the love we live would never leave this earth. Think
what the love of Christ did for the earth and He is still with us in spirit. And I know when
we go away--when any lovers go away, the love they have lived will never leave this earth.
It will live and joy--yes, and agonize too at the injustice of the world--live and be crucified
over and over again, so long as injustice exists. Only as love grows in the world, and is hurt--is
crucified--will wrongs be righted, will the world be saved."

He patted her hand for a minute.

"Kyle, Nate, Annie--come here, children," cried the father. After some repetition of the calling,
they came trooping up, asking: "What is it?"

"Nothing at all," answered the father, "we just wanted to kiss you and feel and see if your
wings were sprouting, so that we could break them off before you fly away," whereupon there
was a hugging bee all around, and while every one was loving every one else, a golf ball flew
by them, and a moment later the white-clad, unbent figure of Mrs. Bedelia Satterthwaite Nesbit
appeared, bare-headed and bare-armed, and behind her trotted the devoted white figure of the
Doctor, carrying two golf sticks.

"Chained to her chariot--to make a Roman holiday," piped the Doctor. "She's taking this exercise
for my health."

"Well, James," replied his wife rather definitely, "I know you need it!"

"And that settles it," cried the little man shrilly, "say, Nate, if we men ever get the ballot,
I'm going to take a stand for liberty."

"I'm with you, Doctor," replied the young man.

"Nate," he mocked in his comical falsetto, "as you grow older and get further and further from
your mother's loving care, you'll find that there was some deep-seated natural reason why we
men should lead the sheltered life and leave the hurly-burly of existence to the women."

From long habit, in such cases Mrs. Nesbit tried not to smile and, from long habit, failed.
"Doctor Jim," she cried as he picked up her ball, and set it for her, "don't make a fool of
yourself."

The little man patted the earth under the ball, and looked up and said as he took her hand,
and obviously squeezed it for the spectators, as he rose.

"My dear--it's unnecessary. You have made one of me every happy minute for forty years," and
smiling at the lovers and their children, he took the hand held out for him after she had sent
the ball over the hill, and they went away as he chuckled over his shoulder and cheeped: "Into
the twilight's purple rim--through all the world she followed him," and trotting behind her
as she went striding into the sunset, they disappeared over the hill.

When they had disappeared Anne began thinking of her picnic. She and Nathan left the children
at the lake, and walked to the club house for the baskets. On the veranda they met Captain
Morton in white flannels with a gorgeous purple necktie and a panama hat of a price that made
Anne gasp. He came bustling up to Anne and Nathan and said:

"Surprise party--I'm going to give the girls a little surprise party next week--next Tuesday,
and I want you to come--what say? Out here--next Tuesday night--going to have all the old friends--every
one that ever bought a window hanger, or a churn, or a sewing machine, or a Peerless cooker,
or a Household Horse--but keep it quiet--surprise on the girls, eh?"

When they had accepted, the Captain lowered his voice and said mysteriously: "'Y gory--the
old man's got some ginger in him yet--eh?" and bustled away with a card in his hands containing
the names of the invited guests, checking the Perrys from the list as he went.

As Captain Morton rounded the corner of the veranda and came into the out-of-door dining room,
he found Margaret Van Dorn, sitting at a table by a window with Ahab Wright--flowing white
side whiskers and white necktie inviolate and pristine in their perfection. Ahab was clearly
confused when the Captain sailed into the room. For there was a breeziness about the Captain's
manner, and although Ahab respected the Captain's new wealth, still his years of poverty and
the meanness of his former calling as a peddler of insignificant things, made Ahab Wright feel
a certain squeamishness when he had to receive Captain Morton upon the term which, in Ahab's
mind, a man of so much money should be received.

Mrs. Van Dorn was using her eyes on Ahab. Perhaps they cast the spell. She was leaning forward
with her chin in her hands, with both elbows on the table, and Ahab Wright, of the proud, prosperous
and highly respectable firm of Wright & Perry, was in much the mental and moral attitude of
the bird when the cat creeps up to the tree-trunk. He was not unhappy; not terrorized--just
curious and rather resistless, knowing that if danger ever came he could fly. And Mrs. Van
Dorn, who had tired of the toys at hand, was adventuring rather aimlessly into the cold blue
eyes of Ahab, to see what might be in them.

"For many years," she was saying, and pronounced it "yee-ahs," having remembered at the moment
to soften her "r's," "I have been living on a highah plane wheyah one ignoahs the futuah and
foahgets the pahst. On this plane one rises to his full capacity of soul strength, without
the hampah of remoahs or the terror of a vindictive Providence."

She might as well have been reciting the alphabet backwards so far as Ahab understood or cared
what she said. He was fascinated by her resemblance to a pink and white marshmallow--rather
over-powdered. But she was still fortifying herself from that little black box in the farthest
corner in the bottom drawer of her dresser--and fortifying herself with two brown pellets instead
of one. So she ogled Ahab Wright by way of diversion, and sat in the recesses of her soul and
wondered what she would say next.

The Captain pulling his panama off made a tremendous bow as Margaret was saying: "Those who
grahsp the great Basic Truths in the Science of Being--" and just as the Captain was about
to open his mouth to invite Ahab Wright to his party, plumb came the ghastly consciousness
to him that the Van Dorns were not on his list. For the Van Dorns, however securely they were
entrenched socially among the new people who had no part in the town's old quarrel with Tom,
however the oil and gas and smelter people and the coal magnates may have received the Van
Dorns--still they were under the social ban of the only social Harvey that Captain Morton knew.
So as a man falling from a balloon gets his balance, the Captain gasped as he came up from
his low bow and said:

"Madam, I says to myself just now as I looks over to that elm tree yonder," he pointed to the
place where Kenyon and Lila were sitting, "soon we'll be having the fourth generation here
in Harvey, and I says, that will interest Tom! An 'y gory, ma'am, as I saw you sitting here,
I says as it was well in my mind, 'Here's Tom's lady love, and I'll just go over and pass my
congratulations on to Tom through the apple of his eye, as you may say, and not bother him
and the young man around the corner there in their boss trade, eh?' What say?" He was flushed
and red, and he did not know exactly where to stop, but it was out--and after a few sparring
sentences, he broke away from the clutch of his bungling intrusion and was gone. But as the
Captain left the couple at the table, the spell was broken. Life had intruded, and Ahab rose
hastily and went his way.

Margaret Van Dorn sat looking out at a dreary world. Even the lovers by the elm tree did not
quicken her pulse. Scarcely more did they interest her than her vapid adventure with Ahab Wright.
All romantic adventure, personal or vicarious, was as ashes on her lips. But emotion was not
all dead in her. As she gazed at Lila and Kenyon, Margaret wondered if her husband could see
the pair. Her first emotional reaction was a gloating sense that he would be boiling with humiliation
and rage when he saw his child so obviously and publicly, even if unconsciously, adoring an
Adams. So she exulted in the Van Dorn discomfiture. As her first spiteful impulse wore away,
a sense of desolation overcame Margaret Van Dorn. Probably she had no regrets that she had
abandoned Kenyon. For years she had nursed a daily horror that the door which hid her secret
might swing open, but that horror was growing stale. She felt that the door was forever sealed
by time. So in the midst of a world at its spring, a budding world, a world of young mating,
a gay world going out on its vast yearly voyage to hunt new life in new joy, a quest for ever
new yet old as God's first smile on a world unborn, this woman sat in a drab and dreary desolation.
Even her spite withered as she sat playing with her tall glass. And as spite chilled, her loneliness
grew.

She knew better than any one else in Harvey--better even than the Nesbits--what Kenyon Adams
really promised in achievement and fame. They knew that he had some European recognition. Margaret
in Europe had been amazed to see how far he was going. In New York and Boston, she knew what
it meant to have her son's music on the best concert programs. Her realization of her loss
increased her loneliness. But regret did not produce remorse. She was always and finally glad
that the door was inexorably sealed upon her secret. She saw only her husband angered by her
son's association with her husband's daughter, and when malice spent itself, she was weary
and lonely and out of humor, and longed to retire to her fortification.

After Captain Morton had bowed himself away from Margaret Van Dorn, he stood at the other end
of the veranda looking down toward the lake. The carpenters were quitting work for the day
on the new bathing pavilion and he saw the tall figure of Grant Adams in the group. He hurried
down the steps near by, and came bustling over to Grant.

"Just the man I want to see! I saw Jap chasing around the golf course with Ruthie and invited
him, but he said your pa wasn't very spry and mightn't be uptown to-morrow, so you just tell
him for me that you and he are to come to my party here next Tuesday night--surprise party
for the girls--going to break something to them they don't know anything about--what say? Tell
your pa that his old army friend is going to send his car--my new car--great, big, busting
gray battleship for your pa--makes Tom's car look like an ash cart. Don't let your pa refuse.
I want to bring you all up here to the party in that car in style--you and Amos and Jap and
Kenyon! eh? Say, Grant--tell me--" he wagged his head at Kenyon and Lila still loitering by
the tree. "What's Kenyon's idea in loafing around so much here in Harvey? He's old enough to
go to work. What say?" Grant tried to get it to the Captain that Kenyon's real job in the world
was composing music, and that sometimes he tired of cities and came down to Harvey to get the
sunshine and prairie grass and the woods and the waters of his childhood into his soul. But
the Captain waved the idea aside, "Nothing in the fiddling business, Grant--two dollars a day
and find yourself, is all the best of 'em make," protested the Captain. "Let him do like I
done--get at something sound and practical early in life and 'y gory, man--look at me. What say?"

Grant did not answer, but when the Captain veered around to the subject of his party, Grant
promised to bring the whole Adams family. A moment later the Captain saw the Sands's motor
car on the road before them, and said:

"Excuse me, Grant--here are the Sandses--I've got to invite them--Hi there, Dan'l, come alongside."
While the Captain was inviting Daniel Sands, the Doctor's electric came purring up the hill
to the club house driven by Laura Van Dorn. Grant was trotting ahead to join the other carpenters
who were going to the street-car station, when Laura passing, hailed him:

"Wait a minute, Grant, till I take this to father, and I'll go with you."

As Laura Van Dorn turned her car around the club house, she stopped it under the veranda overlooking
the golf course and the rolling prairie furrowed by the slowly winding stream. The afternoon
sun slanting upon the landscape brought out all its beauty--its gay greens, its somber, contrasting
browns, and its splashing of color from the fruit trees across the valley that blushed pink
and went white in the first unsure ecstasies of new life. Then she saw Kenyon and Lila slowly
walking up the knoll to the road. The mother noted with quick instinct the way their hands
jostled together as they walked. The look that flashed from their eyes when their hands touched--the
look of proprietorship in each other--told Laura Van Dorn that her life's work with Lila was
finished. The daughter's day of choice had come; and whatever of honesty, whatever of sense,
and sentiment, whatever of courage or conscience the mother had put into the daughter's heart
and mind was ready for its lifelong test. Lila had embarked on her own journey; and motherhood
was ended for Laura Van Dorn.

As she looked at the girl, the mother saw herself, but she was not embittered at the sad ending
of her own journey along the road which her daughter was taking. For years she had accepted
as the fortunes of war, what had come to her with her marriage, and because she had the daughter,
the mother knew that she was gainer after all. For to realize motherhood even with one child,
was to taste the best that life held. So her face reflected, as a cloud reflects the glory
of the dawn, something of the radiance that shone in the two young faces before her; and in
her faith she laid small stress upon the particular one beside her daughter. Not his growing
fame, not his probable good fortune, inspired her satisfaction. When she considered him at
all as her daughter's lover, she only reflected on the fact that all she knew of Kenyon was
honest and frank and kind. Then she dismissed him from her thoughts.

The mother standing on the hillock looking at the youth and maiden sauntering toward her, felt
the serene reliance in the order of things that one has who knows that the worst life can do
to a brave, wise, kind heart, is not bad. For she had felt the ruthless wrenches of the senseless
wheels of fate upon her own flesh. Yet she had come from the wheels bruised, and in agony,
but not broken, not beaten. Her peace of mind was not passive. It amounted to a militant pride
in the strength and beauty of the soul she had equipped for the voyage. Laura Van Dorn was
sure of Lila and was happy. Her eyes filled with grateful tears as she looked down upon her
daughter.

Her father, toddling ahead of Mrs. Nesbit a hundred paces, reached the car first. She nodded
at the young people trudging up the slope. "Yes," said the Doctor, "we have been watching them
for half an hour. Seems like the voice of the turtle is heard in the land."

The daughter alighted from the runabout, her father got in and waited for his wife. The three
turned their backs on the approaching lovers and pretended not to see them. As Laura walked
around the corner of the house, she found Grant waiting for her at the car station, and the
two having missed the car that the other carpenters had taken, stood under the shed waiting.

"Well--Laura," he asked, "are you leaving the idle rich for the worthy poor?" She laughed and
explained:

"The electric was for father and mother, and so long as I have to go down to my girls' class
in South Harvey this evening for their picnic, I'm going to ride in your car, if you don't mind?"

The street car came wailing down on them and when they had taken a rear seat on the trailer
together, Grant began: "I'm glad you've come just now--just to-night. I've been anxious to
see you. I've got some things to talk over--mighty big things--for me. In the first place--"

"In the first place and before I forget it, let me tell you the good news. A telegram has just
come from the capital to father, saying that the State supreme court had upheld his labor bill--his
and your bill that went through the referendum.

"'Referendum J.' probably was the judge who wrote the opinion," said Grant grimly. He took
off his hat, and the cooling breeze of the late afternoon played with his hair, without fluttering
the curly, wiry red poll, turning light yellow with the years. "Well, whoever influenced the
court--I'm glad that's over. The men have been grumbling for a year and more because we couldn't
get the benefits of the law. But their suits are pending--and now they ought to have their money."

As the car whined along through the prairie streets, Grant, who had started to speak twice,
at last said abruptly, "I've got to cut loose." He turned around so that his eyes could meet
hers and went on: "Your father and George Brotherton and a lot of our people seem to think
that we can patch things up--I mean this miserable profit system. They think by paying the
workmen for accidents and with eight hours, a living wage, and all that sort of thing, we can
work out the salvation of labor. I used to think that too; but it won't do, Laura--I've gone
clean to the end of that road, and there's nothing in it. And I'm going to cut loose. That's
what I want to see you about. There's nothing in this step-at-a-time business. I'm for the
revolution!"

She showed clearly that she was surprised, and he seemed to find some opposition in her countenance,
for he hurried on: "The Kingdom--I mean the Democracy of labor--is at hand; the day is at its
dawn. I want to throw my weight for the coming of the Democracy."

His voice was full of emotion as he cried:

"Laura--Laura, I know what you think; you want me to wait; you want me to help on the miserable
patchwork job of repairing the profit system. But I tell you--I'm for the revolution, and with
all the love in my heart--I'm going to throw myself into it!"

No one sat in the seat before them, as they whirled through the lanes leading to town, and
he rested his head in his hand and put his elbow on the forward seat.

"Well, what do you think of it?" he asked, looking anxiously into her troubled face. "I have
been feeling strongly now for a month--waiting to see you--also waiting to be dead sure of
myself. Now I am sure!" The mad light in his eye and the zealot's enthusiasm flaming in his
battered face, made the woman pause a moment before she replied:

"Well," she smiled as she spoke, "don't you think you are rather rushing me off my feet? I've
seen you coming up to it for some time--but I didn't know you were so far along with your conviction."

She paused and then: "Of course, Grant, the Socialists--I mean the revolutionary group--even
the direct action people--have their proper place in the scheme of things--but, Grant--" she
looked earnestly at him with an anxious face, "they are the scouts--the pioneers ahead of the
main body of the troops! And, Grant," she spoke sadly, "that's a hard place--can't you find
enough fighting back with the main body of the troops--back with the army?"

He beat the seat with his iron claw impatiently and cried: "No--no--I'm without baggage or
equipment. I'm traveling light. I must go forward. They need me there. I must go where the
real danger is. I must go to point the way."

"But what is the way, Grant--what is it? You don't know--any more than we do--what is beyond
the next decade's fight! What is the way you are going to point out so fine and gay--what is
it?" she cried.

"I don't know," he answered doggedly. "I only know I must go. The scouts never know where they
are going. Every great movement has its men who set out blindly, full of faith, full of courage,
full of joy, happy to fail even in showing what is not the way--if they cannot find the path.
I must go," he cried passionately, "with those who leave their homes to mark the trail--perhaps
a guide forward, perhaps as a warning away--but still to serve. I'm going out to preach the
revolution for I know that the day of the Democracy of labor is at hand! It is all but dawning."

She saw the exultation upon him that hallowed his seamed features and she could not speak.
But when she got herself in hand she said calmly: "But, Grant--that's stuff and nonsense--there
is no revolution. There can be no Democracy of labor, so long as labor is what it is. We all
want to help labor--we know that it needs help. But there can be no Democracy of labor until
labor finds itself; until it gets capacity for handling big affairs, until it sees more clearly
what is true and what is false. Just now labor is awakening, is growing conscious--a little--but,
Grant, come now, my good friend, listen, be sensible, get down to earth. Can't you see your
fine pioneering and your grand scouting won't help--not now?"

"And can't you understand," he replied almost angrily, "that unless I or some one else who
can talk to these people does go out and preach a definite ideal, a realizable hope--even though
it may not be realized, even though it may not take definite shape--they will never wake up?
Can't you see, girl, that when labor is ready for the revolution--it won't need the revolution?
Can't you see that unless we preach the revolution, they will never be ready for it? When the
workers can stand together, can feel class consciousness and strike altogether, can develop
organizing capacity enough to organize, to run their own affairs--then the need for class consciousness
will pass, and the demand for the revolution will be over? Can't you see that I must go out
blindly and cry discontent to these people?"

She smiled and shook her head and answered, "I don't know, Grant--I don't know."

They were coming into town, and every few blocks the car was taking on new passengers. She
spoke low and almost whispered when she answered:

"I only know that I believe in you--you are my faith; you are my social gospel." She paused,
hesitated, flushed slightly, and said, "Where you go I shall go, and your people shall be my
people! Only do--Oh, do consider this well before you take the final step."

"Laura, I must go," he returned stubbornly. "I am going to preach the revolution of love--the
Democracy of labor founded on the theory that the Holy Ghost is in every heart--poor as well
as rich--rich as well as poor. I'm not going to preach against the rich--but against the system
that makes a few men rich without much regard to their talent, at the expense of all the rest,
without much regard to their talents."

The woman looked at him as he turned his blue eyes upon her in a kind of delirium of conviction.
He hurried on as their car rattled through the town:

"We must free master as well as slave. For while there is slavery--while the profit system
exists--the mind of the slave and the mind of the master will be cursed with it. There can
be no love, no justice between slave and master--only deceit and violence on each side, and
I'm going out to preach the revolution--to call for the end to a system that keeps love out
of the world."

"Well, then, Grant," said the woman as the car jangled its way down Market Street, "hurrah
for the revolution."

She smiled up at him, and they rode without speaking until they reached South Harvey. He left
her at the door of her kindergarten, and a group of young girls, waiting for her, surrounded her.

When he reached his office, he found Violet Hogan working at her desk.

"You'll find all your mail opened, and I've noted the things that have been attended to," she
said, as she turned to him. "I'm due over to the girls' class with Miss Laura--I'm helping
her to-night with her picnic."

Grant nodded, and fell to his work. Violet went on:

"The letters for your signature are here on my desk. Money seems to be coming in. New local
showing up down in Magnus--from the tile works." She rose, put on her coat and hat, and said
as she stood in the door, "To-morrow will be your day in--won't it?" He nodded at his work,
and she called out, "Well,--bye, bye--I'll be in about noon."

Daylight faded and he turned on the electric above his desk and was going over his work, making
notations on letters for Violet, when he heard a footstep on the stairs. He recognized the
familiar step of Henry Fenn.

"Come in--come in, Henry," cried Grant.

Fenn appeared, saw Grant at his work, slipped into a chair, and said:

"Now go right on--don't mind me, young man." Fenn pulled a newspaper from his cheap neat coat,
and sat reading it, under a light that he made for himself at Violet's desk. The light fell
on his thin whitening hair--still coarse, and close cropped. In his clean, washed-out face
there was the faded glow of the man who had been the rising young attorney thirty years before.
Grant knew that Fenn did not expect the work to stop, so he went on with it. "I'm going to
supper about eight o'clock," said Grant, and asked: "Will that be all right?"

"Don't mind me," returned Fenn, and smiled with a dim reflection of the old incandescence of
his youth.

Fenn's hands trembled a little, but his eyes were steady and his voice clear. His clothes were
shabby but decent, and his whole appearance was that of one who is making it a point to keep
up. When Grant had finished his correspondence, and was sealing up his letters, Fenn lent a
hand and began:

"Well, Grant, I'm in trouble--Oh, it's not that," he laughed as Grant looked quickly into the
clean, alert old face. "That's not bothered me for--Oh, for two years now. But it's Violet--she
wants me to marry her." He blurted it out as if it had been pent in, and was hard to hold.

"Why--well--what makes you--well, has she proposed, Henry?" asked the younger man.

"Naw--of course not," answered Fenn. "Boy, you don't know anything about women."

Fenn shook his head knowingly, and winked one eye slowly. "Children--she's set the children
on me. You know, Grant--" he turned his smile on with what candlepower he could muster, "that's
my other weakness--children. And they're the nicest children in the world. But I can't--I tell
you, man, I can't," protested Mr. Fenn, as if he believed Grant in league with the woman to
kidnap him.

"Well, then, don't," said Grant, rising and gathering up his mail.

"But how can I help it?" Fenn cried helplessly. "What can a man do? Those kids need a father.
I need a family--I've always needed a family--but I don't want Violet--nor any one else." Grant
towed him along to the restaurant, and they sat alone. After Grant had ordered his supper he
asked, "Henry--why can't you marry Violet? She's a sensible, honest woman--she's got over her
foolishness; what's wrong with her?"

"Why, of course, she is a good woman. If you'd see her chasing out nights--picking up girls,
mothering 'em, loving 'em, working with 'em--she knows their language; she can talk to 'em
so they get it. And I've known her time and again to get scent of a new girl over there at
Bessie Wilson's and go after her and pull her out and start her right again. I tell you, Grant,
Violet has her weaknesses--as to hair ribbons and shirtwaists and frills for the kids--but
she's got a heart, Grant--a mighty big heart."

"Then why not marry her?" persisted Grant.

"That's just it," answered Fenn.

He looked hopelessly at Grant and finally said as he reached his hands across the table and
grasped Grant's big flinty paw, "Grant--let me tell you something--it's Margaret. I'm a fool--a
motley fool i' the forest, Grant, but I can't help it; I can't help it," he cried. "So long
as she lives--she may need me. I don't trust that damn scoundrel, Grant. She may need me, and
I stand ready to go to hell itself with her if I live a thousand years. It's not that I want
her any more; but, Grant--maybe you know her; maybe you understand. She used to hate you for
some reason, and maybe that will help you to know how I feel. But--I know I'm weak--God knows
I'm putty in my soul. And I'm ashamed. But I mustn't get married. It wouldn't be fair. It wouldn't
be square to Violet, nor the kids, nor to any one. So long as Margaret is on this earth--it's
my job to stand guard and wait till she needs me."

He turned a troubled, heartbroken face up to the younger man and concluded, "I know she despises
me--that she loathes me. But I can't help it, Grant--and I came to you to kind of help me with
Violet. It wouldn't be right to--well, to let this thing go on." He heaved a deep sigh, then
he added as he fumbled with the red tablecloth, "What a fool a man is--Lord, what a fool!"

In the end, Grant had to agree to let Violet know, by some round about procedure devised by
Mr. Fenn's legal mind, that he was not a marriageable person. At the same time, Grant had to
agree not to frighten away the Hogan children.

The next morning as Grant and his father rode from their home into town, Grant told his father
of the invitation to the Captain's party.

"If your mother could have lived just to see the Captain on his grand plutocratic spree, Grant--"
said his father. He did not finish the sentence, but cracked the lines on the old mare's back
and looked at the sky. He turned his white beard and gentle eyes upon his son and said, "There
was a time last night, before you came in, when I thought I had her. Some one was greatly interested
in you and some new project you have in mind. Emerson thinks well of it," said Amos, "though,"
he added, "Emerson thinks it won't amount to much--in practical immediate results. But I think,
Grant, now of course, I can't be sure," the father rubbed his jaw and shook a meditative head,
"it certainly did seem to me mother was there for a time. Something kept bothering Emerson--calling
Grantie--the way she used to--all the time he was talking!"

The father let Grant out of the buggy at the Vanderbilt House in South Harvey, and the old
mare and her driver jogged up town to the Tribune office. There he creaked out of the buggy
and went to his work. It was nine o'clock before the Captain came capering in, and the two
old codgers in their seventies went into the plot of the surprise party with the enthusiasm
of boys.

After the Captain had explained the purpose of the surprise, Amos Adams sat with his hands
on his knees and smiled. "Well--well, Ezry--I didn't realize it. Time certainly does fly. And
it's all right," he added, "I'm glad you're going to do it. She certainly will approve it.
And the girls--" the old man chuckled, "you surely will settle them for good and all."

He laughed a little treble laugh, cracked and yet gleeful. "Nice girls--all of 'em. But Grant
says Jap's a kind of shining around your Ruth--that's the singing one, isn't it? Well, I suppose,
Ezry, either of 'em might do worse. Of course, this singing one doesn't remember her mother
much, so I suppose she won't be much affected by your surprise?" He asked a question, but after
his manner went on, "Well, maybe it was Jap and Ruth that was bothering Mary last night. I
kind of thought someway, for the first time maybe I'd get her. But nothing much came of it,"
he said sadly. "It's funny about the way I've never been able to get her direct, when every
one else comes--isn't it?"

The Captain was in no humor for occult things, so he cut in with: "Now listen here, Amos--what
do you think of me asking Mrs. Herdicker to sit at one end of the table, eh? Of course I know
what the girls will think--but then," he winked with immense slyness, "that's all right. I
was talking to her about it, and she's going to have a brand new dress--somepin swell--eh?
By the jumping John Rogers, Amos--there's a woman--eh?"

And tightening up his necktie--a scarlet creation of much pride--he pulled his hat over his
eyes, as one who has great affairs under it, and marched double-quick out of the office.

You may be sure that some kind friend told the Morton girls of what was in store for them,
the kind friend being Mr. George Brotherton, who being thoroughly married, regarded any secret
from his wife in the light of a real infidelity. So he told her all that he and Market Street
knew. Now the news of the party--a party in whose preparations they were to have no share,
roused in the Misses Morton, and their married sister, jointly and severally, that devil of
suspicion which always tormented their dreams.

"And, Emma," gasped Martha, when Emma came over for her daily visit, "just listen! Mrs. Herdicker
is having the grandest dress made for the party! She told the girls in the store she had twenty-seven
dollars' worth of jet on it--just jet alone." Here the handsome Miss Morton turned pale with
the gravity of the news. "She told the girls to-day, this very afternoon, that she was going
to take the three o'clock morning train right after the party for New York to do her fall buying.
Fall buying, indeed! Fall buying," the handsome Miss Morton's voice thickened and she cried,
"just because papa's got a little money, she thinks--"

But what she thought Miss Morton never said, for Mrs. Brotherton, still familiar with the gossip
of the schoolhouse, cut in to say: "And, Martha, what do you think those Copini children say?
They say father's got their father's orchestra to practice all the old sentimental music you
ever heard of--'Silver Threads Among the Gold,' and 'Do You Love Me, Molly Darling,' and 'Lorena,'
and 'Robin Adair,'--and oh," cried Mrs. Brotherton, shaking a hopeless head, "I don't know
what other silly things."

"And yes, girls," exclaimed the youngest Miss Morton flippantly, "he's sent around to the Music
School for Miss Howe to come and sing 'O Promise Me'!"

"The idea!" cried the new Mrs. Brotherton.

"Why, the very idea!" broke out the handsome Miss Morton, sitting by the dining-room table.

"The idea!" echoed the youngest Miss Morton, putting away her music roll, and adding in gasping
excitement: "And that isn't the worst. He sent word for her to sing it just after the band
had finished playing the wedding march!"

Now terror came into the house of Morton, and when the tailor's boy brought home a package,
the daughters tore it open ruthlessly, and discovered--as they sat limply with it spread out
in its pristine beauty on the sofa before them--a white broadcloth dinner suit--with a watered
silk vest. Half an hour later, when a pleated dress shirt with pearl buttons came, it found
three daughters sitting with tight lips waiting for their father--and six tigers' eyes glaring
hungrily at the door through which he was expected. At six o'clock, when they heard his nimble
step on the porch, they looked at one another in fear, and as he burst into the room, each
looked decisively at the other as indicating a command to begin.

He came in enveloping them in one all-encompassing hug and cried:

"Well 'y gory, girls, you certainly are the three graces, the three fates, and the world, the
flesh and the devil all in one--what say?"

But the Morton daughters were not to be silenced. Ruth took in a deep breath and began:

"Well, now see here, father, do you know what people are saying about--"

"Of course--I was just coming to that, Ruthie," answered the Captain. "Amos Adams he says,
'Well, Cap,' say he, 'I was talking to Cleopatra and she says Queen Victoria had a readin'
to the effect that there was a boy named Amos Ezra Morton Adams over on one of the stars in
the southwest corner of the milky way that would be busting into this part of the universe
in about three years, more or less'--what say?"

The old man laughed and Ruth flushed red, and ran away. The Captain saw his suit lying on the sofa.

"Somepin new--" interjected the Captain. "Thought I'd kind o' bloom out; sort o' to let folks
know that the old man had a little kick in him yet--eh? And now, girls--listen; let's all go
out to the Country Club for dinner to-night, and I'll put on my new suit and you kind of rig
up in your best, and we'll make what George calls a killing--what say?" He put his hands in
his pockets and looked critically at his new clothes. The flight of Ruth had quieted Emma,
but Martha came swooping down on him with "Now, father--look here--about that Country Club party--"

The Captain shot a swift glance at Martha, and saw Emma looking at him from the kitchen door.

"What party?" he exclaimed. "Can't I ask my girls out for a little innocent dinner without
its being called a party--eh? Now, you girls get your things on and come on. As for me, the
limousine will be at the door at eight!"

He disappeared up the stairs and in the Morton household, two young women, woeful and heavy
hearted, went about their toilets, while in the Brotherton establishment, one large fat man
in suspenders felt the rush of sudden tears on his shirt front and marveled at the ways of
the sex. When the Mortons were in the midst of their moist and lugubrious task, the thin, cracked
little voice of the Captain called out:

"Girls--before you go, don't forget to put that cold beef on and stew it to-night for hash
in the morning--eh?"

It was a beautiful party that Captain Morton gave at the Country Club house that evening. And
at the end of a most gorgeously elaborate dinner, wherein were dishes whose very names the
Captain did not know, he rose among his guests seated at the U-shaped table in the big dining
room with the heavy brown beams in the ceiling, a little old man by his big chair, which stood
beside a chair unoccupied.

"Friends," he said, "when a man gets on in his seventies, at that uncertain time, when he does
not know whether to be ashamed of his years or proud of his age," he smiled at Daniel Sands,
who clicked his false-teeth in appreciation of the phrase, "it would seem that thoughts of
what the poet calls 'the livelier iris' on the 'burnished dove' would not inconvenience him
to any great extent--eh? At seventy-five a young fellow's fancy ought to be pretty well done
lightly turning to thoughts of love--what say? But by cracky--they don't."

He paused. The Morton girls in shame looked at their plates. "So, I just thought I'd have this
little party to tell you about it. I wanted to surprise the girls." There was only a faint
clapping of hands; for tears in the eyes of the three Morton daughters discouraged merriment.

"A man, as I was saying, never gets too old--never gets too crabbed, for what my friend Amos's
friend Emerson calls 'a ruddy drop of manly blood'--eh? So, when that 'ruddy drop of manly
blood' comes a surging up in me, I says I'll just about have a party for that drop of manly
blood! I'm going to tell you all about it. There's a woman in my mind--a very beautiful woman;
for years--a feller just as well breakdown and confess--eh?--well for years she's been in my
mind pretty much all the time--particularly since Ruthie there was a baby and left alorn and
alone--as you may say--eh? And so," he reached down and grasped a goblet of water firmly, and
held it before him, "and so," he repeated, and his old eyes glistened and his voice broke,
"as it was just fifty years ago to-night that heaven opened and let her come to me, before
I marched off to war--so," he hurried along, "I give you this toast--the vacant chair--may
it always, always, always be filled in my heart of hearts!"

He could not drink, but sank with his head on his arms, and when they had ceased clapping their
hands, the old man looked up, signaled to the orchestra, and cried in a tight, cracked voice,
"Now, dern ye--begin yer fiddlin'!"

Whereupon the three Morton daughters wept and the old ladies gathered about them and wept,
and Mrs. Hilda Herdicker's ton of jet heaved as in a tidal wave, and the old men dried their
eyes, and only Lila Van Dorn and Kenyon Adams, holding hands under the table, really knew what
it was all about.

Now they have capered through these pages of this chapter--all of the people in this story
in their love affairs. Hand in hand, they have come to the footlights, hand in hand they have
walked before us. We have seen that love is a passion with many sides. It varies with each
soul. In youth, in maturity, in courtship, in marriage, in widowhood, in innocence, and in
the wisdom of serpents, love reflects the soul it shines on. For love is youth in the heart--youth
that always beckons, that always shapes our visions. Love ever sheens and shimmers brightly
from within us; but what it shows to the world--that is vastly different with each of us. For
that is the shadow of his inmost being. For instance, the issue of the Tribune that contained
the account of the Captain's party also contained this item, which Daniel Sands had kept out
of every other paper in town:

    "Mortimer Sands, son of D. Sands of the Traders' Bank, has
    returned from Arizona, where he has been seeking health. He is
    hopeful of ultimate recovery."

Another item of interest appeared in the same issue of the paper. It related that T. Van Dorn,
former Judge of the District Court, is in Washington, D. C., on legal business.

The Adams family item, which the paper never failed to contain, was this:

    "K. Adams will leave next week for New York, where his new
    opera, 'Rachel,' will have its first appearance next autumn. He
    will be missed in our midst."

And for a paper with no subscribers and no patronage, it is curious to note that the Tribune
carried the news above mentioned to all of Harvey, and all of Harvey discussed the news. Not
that the town did not know more or less of the facts as hereinabove related; but when a fact
is read in print it becomes something different from a fact. It becomes a public matter, an
episode in the history of the world.

In the same issue of the paper was a statement from Grant Adams that he had decided to throw
his life with the Socialists and with that group known as the revolutionary Socialists. Grant
was enough of a personage, and the declaration was short enough and interesting enough, to
give it a place in the newspapers of the country for a day. In the State where he lived, the
statement created some comment--mostly adverse to Dr. Nesbit, whose political association with
Grant Adams had linked the Doctor's name with Grant's. Being out of power, Dr. Nesbit felt
these flings. So it happened that when, the Sunday following the announcement, Grant came with
his father and Kenyon in the rattling old buggy up to the Nesbit home on Elm Street, Amos Adams
found a rollicking, frivolous, mischievous host--but Grant Adams found a natty, testy, sardonic
old man, who made no secret of his ill-humor.

Kenyon found Lila, and the two with their music indoors made a background for the talk on the
veranda. Nathan Perry, who came up for a pill or a powder for one of his flock, sat for a time
on the veranda steps. For all his frivoling with the elder Adams, Nathan could see by the way
the loose, wrinkled skin on the Doctor's face kept twitching when Grant spoke, that the old
man had something on his mind.

"Grant," cried the Doctor, in his excited treble, "do you realize what an ornate, unnecessary,
unmitigated conspicuous, and elaborate jack you've made of yourself? Do you--young man? Well,
you have. Your revolution--your revolution!" shrilled the old man. "Damn sight of revolution
you'll kick up charging over the country with your water-tank patriots--your--your box-car
statesmen--now, won't you?"

"Here--Doctor,--come--be--"

But the Doctor would not let Grant talk. The chirrup of the shrill old voice bore in upon the
younger man's protest with, "Now, you let me say my say. The world's moving along--moving pretty
fast and generally to one end, and that end is to put food in the bellies, clothes on the back,
and brains in the head of the working man. The whole trend of legislation all over the world
has gone that way. Hell's afire, Grant--what more do you want? We've given you the inheritance
tax and the income tax and direct legislation to manipulate it, and, by Ned, instead of staying
with the game and helping us work these things out in wise administration, you fly the coop,
and go squawking over the country with your revolution and leave me--damn it, Grant," piped
the little, high voice, sputtering with rage, "you leave me--with my linen pants on a clothes-line
four miles from home!"

Then slowly the little lines began to break in his loose skin. A faint smile, then a grin and
then a laugh, spread over the old face, and he wiped his watering eyes as he shook his head
mournfully.

Grant was gathering himself to reply when Nate Perry rasped in with his high-keyed Yankee voice:
"I guess that about covers my views, Grant--if any one should ask you."

The crusader rose in Grant: "It's you men who have no sense," he cried. "You think because
I declare war on the profit system that I propose to sail out and overturn it with a few bombs
over night. Look here, men; what I propose to do is to demonstrate right here in the Wahoo
Valley, where there are all sorts of laboring people, skilled, unskilled, continuous, overpaid
and underpaid, foreign and American--utterly unlike, incoherent, racially and industrially--that
they have in them capacities for organizing; unused abilities, untried talents that will make
them worthy to take a higher place in the economic scale than they now have. If I can amalgamate
them, if I can weld them into a consistent, coherent labor mass--the Irish, the Slav, the Jews,
the Italians, the Poles, the French, the Dutch, the Letts, and the Mexicans--put to some purpose
the love of the poor for the poor, so that it will count industrially, you can't stop the revolution."
He was wagging his head, waving his stump of an arm and his face showed the temperamental excitement
that was in him.

"Go ahead, Grant," said Perry. "Play out all your line--show us your game."

"Well, then--here's my game. For five years we've been collecting a district strike fund--all
our own, that doesn't belong to any other organization or federation anywhere. It's ours here
in the Wahoo. It's independent of any state or national control. I've collected it. It's been
paid because these men here in the Valley have faith in me. We have practically never spent
a penny of it. There are about ten thousand workers in the Valley--some, like the glassblowers,
are the aristocracy of labor; others, like the breaker boys, are at the bottom of the scale.
But we've kept wages up, kept conditions as high as they are anywhere in the country--and we've
done it without strikes. They have faith in me. So we've assessed them according to their wages,
and we have on hand, with assessments and interest, over a third of a million dollars."

He looked at Perry, and nodded his head at the Doctor. "You fellows think I'm a cream-puff
reformer. I'm not. Now, then--I've talked it over with our board--we are going to invest that
money in land up and down the Valley--put the women and children and old men on it--in tents--during
the growing season, and cultivate that land in three-acre tracts intensively. Our Belgian glassblowers
and smelter men have sent for their gardeners to teach us. Now it's merely a question of getting
the land and doing the preliminary organization. We want to get as much land as we can. Now,
there's my game. With that kind of a layout we can win any strike we call. And we can prove
to the world that labor has the cohesive coöperating faculty required to manage the factories--to
take a larger share of the income of industry, if you please. That's my revolution, gentlemen.
And it's going to begin right here in the Wahoo Valley."

"Well," returned Nate Perry, "your revolution looks interesting. It's got some new gears, at
least."

"Go it while you're young," piped the Doctor. "In just about eighteen months, you will be coming
to me to go on your bond--to keep out of jail. I've seen new-fangled revolutions peter out before."

"Just the same," replied Grant, "I've pinned my faith to these men and women. They are now
working in fear of poverty. Give them hope of better things instead of fear and they will develop
out of poverty, just as the middle class came out under the same stimulus."

"I don't know anything about that," interrupted Perry, "but I do know that I could take that
money and put three thousand families to work on the land in the Wahoo Valley and develop the
best labor in the country."

He laughed, and Grant gazed, almost flared, so eager was his look, at Perry for a moment, and
said: "When the day of the democracy of labor comes--and it will come and come soon--men like
you will take leadership."

There was more high talk, and Nathan Perry went home with his pill.

When he was gone, the music from indoors came to the three men. "That's from his new opera,
father," said Grant, as his attention was attracted to the violin and piano.

"Good Lord," exclaimed the Doctor, "I've heard so much of that opera that I caught myself prescribing
a bar from the opening chorus for the grip the other day!"

The two elder men looked at each other, and the Doctor said, "Well, Amos--that's mostly why
I asked you to come up to-day. It wasn't for the society of your amateur revolutionist--you
may be sure of that."

The Doctor tempered his words with a smile, but they had pricks, and Grant winced. "I suppose
we may as well consider Lila and Kenyon as before the house?"

"Kenyon came to me last night," said Grant, "wanting to know whether he should come to father
first, or go to Dr. Nesbit, or--well, he wondered if it would be necessary to talk with Lila's
own father." All the grimness in Grant's countenance melted as he spoke of Kenyon and the battered
features softened.

"And that is what I wish to talk about, Grant," said the Doctor gently. "They don't know who
Kenyon is--I mean, they don't know about his parentage." Grant looked at the floor. Slowly
as the old shame revived in him, its flush rose from his neck to his face and met his tousled
hair. The two old men looked seriously at one another. The Doctor emphasized the solemnity
of the occasion by lighting a pipe. 

The earth, that is sufficient, I do not want the constellations any nearer, I know they are very
well where they are, I know they suffice for those who belong to them.

(Still here I carry my old delicious burdens, I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me
wherever I go, I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them, I am fill'd with them, and
I will fill them in return.)

II

You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all that is here, I believe that
much unseen is also here.

Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial, The black with his woolly head,
the felon, the diseas'd, the illiterate person, are not denied; The birth, the hasting after
the physician, the beggar's tramp, the drunkard's stagger, the laughing party of mechanics, The
escap'd youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop, the eloping couple. The early market-man,
the hearse, the moving of furniture into the town, the return back from the town, They pass, I also
pass, anything passes, none can be interdicted, None but are accepted, none but shall be dear
to me. I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.

You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges! You ferries! you planks and posts
of wharves! you timber-lin'd sides! you distant ships! You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd façades!
you roofs! You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards! You windows whose transparent
shells might expose so much! You doors and ascending steps! you arches! You gray stones of
interminable pavements! you trodden crossings! From all that has touch'd you I believe you have
imparted to yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me, From the living and the dead you
have peopled your impassive surfaces, and the spirits thereof would
be evident and amicable with me.

O highway I travel, do you say to me, Do not leave me? Do you say, Venture not--if you leave
me you are lost? Do you say, I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied, adhere
to me?

O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love
you, You express me better than I can express myself, You shall be
more to me than my poem.

I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open air, and all free poems also, I think I could
stop here myself and do miracles, I think whatever I shall meet on
the road I shall like, and whoever beholds me shall like me.

I think whoever I see must be happy.

I am larger, better than I thought, I did not know I held so much goodness.

VI

Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me, Now if a thousand beautiful
forms of women appear'd it would not astonish me.

Here a great personal deed has room (Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of
men, Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument
against it).

Here is the test of wisdom, Wisdom is not finally tested in schools, Wisdom cannot be pass'd
from one having it to another not having it, Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of
proof, is its own proof, Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content, Is the
certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence
of things; Something there is in the float of the sight of things
that provokes it out of the soul.

Now I reëxamine philosophies and religions, They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove
at all under the spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents. Here is realization,
Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him, The past,
the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you are vacant
of them.

Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion'd, it is apropos; Do you know what it is as
you pass to be loved by strangers? Do you know the talk of those
turning eye-balls?

(I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always drop fruit as I pass.)
What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers? What with some driver as I ride on the
seat by his side? What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by and
pause? What gives me to be free to a woman's and man's good-will?
what gives them to be free to mine?

VIII

The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness, I think it
pervades the open air, waiting at all times, Now it flows unto us,
we are rightly charged.

Here rises the fluid and attaching character, The fluid and attaching character is the freshness
and sweetness of man and woman (The herbs of the morning sprout no
fresher and sweeter every day out of the roots of themselves, than
it sprouts fresh and sweet continually out of itself).

Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the love of young and old, From
it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty and attainments, Toward it heaves the shuddering,
longing ache of contact.

IX

Allons! whoever you are, come travel with me! Traveling with me you find what never tires. From
your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests.

The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer.

Allons! yet take warning! He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance, None may
come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health, Come not here if you have already
spent the best of yourself, Only those may come who come in sweet
and determin'd bodies, No diseas'd person, no rum-drinker or venereal
taint is permitted here.

XIII

Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless, To undergo much, tramps of days, rests
of nights, To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights they tend to,
Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys, To see nothing
anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it, To conceive no time,
however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it, To look up
or down no road but it stretches and waits for you, however long but
it stretches and waits for you, To see no being, not God's or any,
but you also go thither, To see no possession but you may possess
it, enjoying all without labor or purchase, abstracting the feast
yet not abstracting one particle of it, To take the best of the farmer's
farm and the rich man's elegant villa, and the chaste blessings of
the well-married couple, and the fruits of orchards and flowers of
gardens, To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass
through, To carry buildings and streets with you afterward where-ever
you go, To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter
them, to gather the love out of their hearts, To take your lovers
on the road with you, for all that you leave them behind you, To know
the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for traveling
souls.

Forever alive, forever forward, Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled,
mad, turbulent, feeble, dissatisfied, Desperate, proud, fond, sick,
accepted by men, rejected by men, They go! they go!

I know that they go, but I know not where they go, But I know that they go toward the best--toward
something great.

Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen! It is useless to protest, I know all
and expose it.

Behold through you as bad as the rest, Through the laughter, dancing,
dining, supping of people, Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside
of those wash'd and trimm'd faces, Behold a secret silent loathing
and despair.

No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession, Another self, a duplicate of every
one, skulking and hiding it goes, Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite
and bland in the parlors, In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly, Home
to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom, everywhere,
Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the
breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones, Under the broadcloth and
gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers, Keeping fair with
the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself, Speaking of anything
else but never of itself.

XIV

Allons! through struggles and wars! The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.

Have the past struggles succeeded? What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature?

My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion, He going with me must go well arm'd,
He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies, desertions.

XV

Allons! the road is before us! It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be
not detain'd! Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the
book on the shelf unopen'd! Let the tools remain in the workshop!
let the money remain unearn'd! Let the school stand! mind not the
cry of the teacher!

Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the
court, and the judge expound the law.

Camerado, I give you my hand! I give you my love more precious than money, I give you myself before
preaching or law; Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me? Shall we stick
by each other as long as we live?

CROSSING BROOKLYN FERRY

I

Flood-tide below me!

II

The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day, The simple, compact, well-join'd
scheme, myself disintegrated, everyone disintegrated yet part of the scheme, The similitudes of
the past and those of the future, The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings,
on the walk in the street and the passage over the river, The current
rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away, The others that
are to follow me, the ties between me and them, The certainty of others,
the life, love, sight, hearing of others.

IV

These and all else were to me the same as they are to you, I loved
well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river, The men
and women I saw were all near to me, Others the same--others who look
back on me because I look'd forward to them (The time will come, though
I stop here to-day and to-night).

V

What is it then between us? What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?

Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not, I too lived, Brooklyn
of ample hills was mine, I too walk'd the streets of Manhattan Island, and bathed in the waters
around it, I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within
me, In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,
In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon
me, I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,
I too had receiv'd identity by my body, That I was I knew was of my
body, and what I should be I knew I should be of my body.

VI

It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall, The dark threw its patches down upon me also,
The best I had done seem'd to me blank and suspicious, My great thoughts as I supposed them,
were they not in reality meagre? Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil, I am he
who knew what it was to be evil, I too knitted the old knot of contrariety, Blabb'd, blush'd, resented,
lied, stole, grudg'd, Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak, Was wayward, vain,
greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant, The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me,
The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting,
Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these
wanting, Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest, Was
call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as they
saw me approaching or passing, Felt their arms on my neck as I stood,
or the negligent leaning of their flesh against me as I sat, Saw many
I lov'd in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet never
told them a word, Liv'd the same life with the rest, the same old
laughing, gnawing, sleeping, Play'd the part that still looks back
on the actor or actress, The same old rôle, the rôle that is what
we make it, as great as we like, Or as small as we like, or both great
and small.

VII

Closer yet I approach you, What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my
stores in advance, I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were born.

Who was to know what should come home to me? Who knows but I am enjoying
this?

Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you now, for all you cannot see
me?

VIII

    Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than mast-hemm'd
    Manhattan? River and sunset and scallop-edg'd waves of flood-tide?

The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the twilight,
and the belated lighter?

What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I love call me promptly and
loudly by my nighest name as I approach? What is more subtle than this which ties me to the
woman or man that looks in my face? Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into
you?

We understand then, do we not? What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not accepted? What
the study could not teach--what the preaching could not accomplish is accomplish'd, is it not?

IX

Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide! Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg'd
waves! Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the men and women generations
after me! Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers! Stand up, tall masts of
Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn! Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions
and answers! Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution! Gaze, loving and thirsting
eyes, in the house or street or public assembly! Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically
call me by my nighest name!

Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress! Play the old rôle, the
rôle that is great or small according as one makes it!

Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be looking upon you; Be firm,
rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet haste with
the hasting current; Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in
large circles high in the air; Receive the summer sky, you water,
and faithfully hold it till all downcast eyes have time to take it
from you!

Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or anyone's
head, in the sunlit water!

Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail'd schooners, sloops, lighters! Flaunt away,
flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at sunset!

Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at nightfall! cast red and yellow
light over the tops of the houses!

Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are, You necessary
film, continue to envelop the soul, About my body for me, and your
body for you, be hung our divinest aromas, Thrive, cities--bring your
freight, bring your shows, ample and sufficient rivers, Expand, being
than which none else is perhaps more spiritual, Keep your places,
objects than which none else is more lasting.

You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers, We
receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward,
Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves
from us, We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently
within us, We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in
you also, You furnish your parts toward eternity, Great or small,
you furnish your parts toward the soul.

A SONG OF JOYS

O to make the most jubilant song! Full of music--full of manhood, womanhood, infancy! Full
of common employments--full of grain and trees.

O for the voices of animals--O for the swiftness and balance of fishes!

O for the dropping of raindrops in a song! O for the sunshine and motion of waves in a song!

O
for the joy of my spirit--it is uncaged--it darts like lightning! It is not enough to have this
globe or a certain time, I will have thousands of globes and all
time.

O the engineer's joys! to go with a locomotive! To hear the hiss
of steam, the merry shriek, the steam-whistle, the laughing locomotive!
To push with resistless way and speed off in the distance.

O the
gleesome saunter over fields and hillsides! The leaves and flowers
of the commonest weeds, the moist fresh stillness of the woods, The
exquisite smell of the earth at daybreak, and all through the forenoon.

O
the horseman's and horsewoman's joys! The saddle, the gallop, the
pressure upon the seat, the cool gurgling by the ears and hair.

O
the fireman's joys! I hear the alarm at dead of night, I hear bells,
shouts! I pass the crowd, I run! The sight of the flames maddens me
with pleasure.

O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering
in the arena in perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to
meet his opponent. O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which
only the human soul is capable of generating and emitting in steady
and limitless floods.

O the mother's joys! The watching, the endurance,
the precious love, the anguish, the patiently yielded life.

O the
joy of increase, growth, recuperation, The joy of soothing and pacifying,
the joy of concord and harmony.

O to go back to the place where I
was born, To hear the birds sing once more, To ramble about the house
and barn and over the fields once more, And through the orchard and
along the old lanes once more.

O to have been brought up on bays,
lagoons, creeks, or along the coast, To continue and be employ'd there
all my life, The briny and damp smell, the shore, the salt weeds exposed
at low water, The work of fishermen, the work of the eel-fisher and
clam-fisher; I come with my clam-rake and spade, I come with my eel-spear.
Is the tide out? I join the group of clam-diggers on the flats, I
laugh and work with them, I joke at my work like a mettlesome young
man; In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on
foot on the ice--I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice, Behold
me well-clothed going gayly or returning in the afternoon, my brood
of tough boys accompanying me, My brood of grown and part-grown boys,
who love to be with no one else so well as they love to be with me. He was deeply embarrassed, and
his embarrassment seemed to accentuate a kind of caste difference between them.

"Yes, Grant," said Mrs. Nesbit, "of course, we know about Lila and Kenyon. Nothing in the world
could please us more than to see them happy together."

"I know, ma'am," returned Grant, twirling his chair nervously. "That's just the trouble. Maybe
they can't be happy together."

"Why, Grant," exclaimed Laura, "what's to hinder?"

"Stuff!" sniffed Mrs. Nesbit.

He looked up then, and the two women could see that he flinched.

"Well,--I don't know how to say it, but you must know it." He stopped, and they saw anguish
in his face. "But I--Laura," he turned to the younger woman and made a pitiful gesture with
his whole hand, "do you remember back when you were a girl away at school and I stopped writing
to you?"

"Yes, Grant," replied Laura, "so well--so well, and you never would say--"

"Because I had no right to," he cut in, "it was not my secret--to tell--then."

Mrs. Nesbit sat impatiently on her chair edge, as one waiting for a foolish formality to pass.
She looked at the clumsy, bulky figure of a man in his ill-fitting Sunday clothes, and obviously
was rather irritated at his ill-timed interjection of his own childhood affair into an entirely
simple problem of true love running smoothly. But her daughter, seeing the anguish in the man's
twisted face, was stricken with a terror in her heart. Laura knew that no light emotion had
grappled him, and when her mother said, "Well?" sharply, the daughter rose and went to him,
touching his hand gently that had been gripping the chair-back. She said, "Yes, Grant, but
why do you have to tell it now?"

"Because," he answered passionately, "you should know, and Lila should know and your mother
should know. Your father and I and my father all think so."

Mrs. Nesbit sat back further in her chair. Her face showed anxiety. She looked at the two others
and when Laura's eyes met her mother's, there was a warning in the daughter's glance which
kept her mother silent.

"Grant," said Laura, as she stood beside the gaunt figure, on which a mantle of shame seemed
to be falling, "there is nothing in the world that should be hard for you to tell me--or mother."

"It isn't you," he returned, and then lifting his face and trying to catch the elder woman's
eyes, he said slowly:

"Mrs. Nesbit--I'm Kenyon's father."

He caught Laura's hand in his own, and held her from stepping back. Laura did not speak. Mrs.
Nesbit gazed blankly at the two and in the silence the little mantel clock ticked into their
consciousnesses. Finally the elder woman, who had grown white as some old suspicion or fatal
recollection flashed through her mind, asked in an unsteady voice: "And his mother?"

"His mother was Margaret Müller, Mrs. Nesbit," answered the man.

Then anger glowed in the white face as Mrs. Nesbit rose and stepped toward the downcast man.
"Do you mean to tell me you--" She did not finish, but began again, not noticing that the door
behind her had let in her husband: "Do you mean to say that you have let me go on all these
years nursing that--that, that--creature's child and--"

"Yes, my dear," said the Doctor, touching her arm, and taking her hand, "I have." She turned
on her husband her startled, hurt face and exclaimed, "And you, Jim--you too--you too?"

"What else could I do in honor, my dear? And it has been for the best."

"No," she cried angrily; "no, see what you have brought to us, Jim--that hussy's--her, why,
her very--"

The years had told upon Doctor Nesbit. He could not rise to the struggle as he could have risen
a decade before. His hands were shaking and his voice broke as he replied: "Yes, my dear--I
know--I know. But while she bore him, we have formed him." To her darkening face he repeated:
"You have formed him--and made him--you and the Adamses--with your love. And love," his soft,
high voice was tender as he concluded, "love purges everything--doesn't it, Bedelia?"

"Yes, father,--love is enough. Oh, Grant, Grant--it doesn't matter--not to me. Poor--poor Margaret,
what she has lost--what she has lost!" said the younger woman, as she stood close to Grant
and looked deeply into his anguished face. Mrs. Nesbit stood wet-eyed, and spent of her wrath,
looking at the three before her.

"O God--my God, forgive me--but I can't--Oh, Laura--Jim--I can't, I can't, not that woman's--not
her--her--" She stopped and cried miserably, "You all know what he is, and whose he is." Again
she stopped and looked beseechingly around. "Oh, you won't let Lila--she wouldn't do that--not
take that woman's--that woman who disgraced Lila's mother--Lila must not take her child--Oh,
Jim, you won't let that--"

As she spoke Mrs. Nesbit sank to a sofa near the door, and turned her face to the pillow. The
three who watched her turned blank, inquiring faces to one another.

"Perhaps," the Doctor began hesitatingly and impotently, "Lila should--"

"What does she know--what can a child of twenty know," answered the grandmother from her pillow,
"of the taint of that blood, of the devil she will transmit? Why, Jim--Oh, Jim--Lila's not
old enough to decide. She mustn't--she mustn't--we mustn't let her." Mrs. Nesbit raised her
body and asked as one who grasps a shadow, "Won't you ask her to wait--to wait until she can
understand?"

A question passed from face to face among those who stood beside the elder woman, and Dr. Nesbit
answered it. Strength--the power that came from a habit of forty years of dominating situations--came
to him and he stepped to his wife's side. The two stood together, facing the younger pair.
The Doctor spoke, not as an arbiter, but as an advocate:

"Laura, your mother has her right to be considered here. All three of you; Kenyon himself,
and you and Lila--she has reared. She has made you all what you are. Her wishes must be regarded
now." Mrs. Nesbit rose while the Doctor was speaking. He took her hand as was his wont and
turned to her, saying: "Mother, how will this do: Let's do nothing now, not to-day at any rate.
You must all adjust yourselves to the facts that reveal this new relation before you can make
an honest decision. When we have done that, let Laura and her mother tell Lila the truth, and
let each tell the child exactly how she feels; and then, if you can bring yourself to it, leave
it to her; if she will wait for a time until she understands her grandmother's point of view--very
well. If not--"

"If not, mother, Lila's decision must stand." This came from Laura, who stepped over and kissed
her mother's hand. The father looked tenderly at his daughter and shook his head as he answered
softly: "If not--no, I shall stand with mother--she has her right--the realest right of all!"

And so it came to pass that the course of true love in the hearts of Lila Van Dorn and Kenyon
Adams had its first sharp turning. And all the world was overclouded for two souls. But they
were only two souls and the world is full of light. And the light falls upon men and women
without much respect for class or station, for good deeds or bad deeds, for the weak or for
the strong, for saints or sinners. For know well, truly beloved, that chance and circumstance
fall out of the great machine of life upon us, hodge podge and helter skelter; good is not
rewarded by prizes from the wheel of fortune nor bad punished by its calamities. Only as our
hearts react on life, do we get happiness or misery, not from the events that follow the procession
of the days.

Now for a moment let us peep through the clouds that lowered over the young souls aforesaid.
Clouds in youth are vastly black; but they are never thick. And peering through those clouds,
one may see the lovers, groping in the umbrage. It does not matter much to us, and far less
does it matter to them how they have made their farewell meeting. It is night and they are
coming from Captain Morton's.

Hand in hand they skip across the lawn, and soon are hidden in the veranda. They sit arm in
arm, on a swinging porch chair, and have no great need for words. "What is it--what is the
reason?" asked the youth.

"Well, dear"--it is an adventure to say the word out loud after whispering it for so many days--"dear,"
she repeated, and feels the pressure of his arm as she speaks, "it's something about you!"

"But what?" he persisted.

"We don't know now," she returns. "And really what does it matter, only we can't hurt grandma,
and it won't be for long. It can't be for long, and then--"

"We don't care now,--not to-night, do we?" She lifts her head from his shoulder, and puts up
her lips for the answer. It is all new--every thrill of the new-found joy of one another's
being is strange; every touch of the hands, of cheeks, every pressure of arms--all are gloriously
beautiful.

Once in life may human beings know the joy these lovers knew that night. The angels lend it
once and then, if we are good, they let us keep it in our memories always. If not, then God
sends His infinite pity instead. Nothing in the store suited him; he found Miss Calvin's high
façade of hair too rococo for the attenuated lines of gray and lavender and heliotrope that
had replaced the angular effects in red and black and green and brown of former years. He had
asked her to tone it down to make it match the long-necked gray jars and soft copper vases
that adorned the gray burlapped Serenity, and she had appeared with it slopping over her ears,
"as per yours of even date!" And still he paced the deck.

He picked up Zola's "Fecundité," which he had taken from stock; tried to read it; put it down;
sent for "Tom Sawyer"; got up, went after Dickens's "Christmas Books," and put them down; peeped
into "Little Women," and watched the trade, as Miss Calvin handled it, occasionally dropping
his book for a customer; hunted for "The Three Bears," which he found in large type with gorgeous
pictures, read it, and decided that it was real literature.

Amos Adams came drifting in to borrow a book. He moved slowly, a sort of gray wraith almost
discarnate and apart from things of the earth. Brotherton, looking at the old man, felt a candor
one might have in addressing a state of mind. So the big voice spoke gently:

"Here, Mr. Adams," called Brotherton. "Won't you come back here and talk to me?" But the shopkeeper
felt that he should put the elder man at his ease, so he added: "You're a wise guy, as the
Latin fathers used to say. Anyway, if Jasper ever gets to a point where he thinks marriage
will pay six per cent. over and above losses, you may be a kind of step-uncle-in-law of mine.
Tell me, Mr. Adams--what about children--do they pay? You know, I've always wanted children.
But now--well, you see, I never thought but that people just kind of picked 'em off the bushes
as you do huckleberries. I'm getting so that I can't look at a great crowd of people without
thinking of the loneliness, suffering and self-denial that it cost to bring all of them into
the world. Good Lord, man, I don't want lots of children--not now. And yet, children--children--why,
if we could open a can and have 'em as we do most things, from sardines to grand opera, I'd
like hundreds of them. Yet, I dunno," Mr. Brotherton wagged a thoughtful head.

But Amos Adams rejoined: "Ah, yes, George, but when you think of what it means for two people
to bring a child into the world--what the journey means--the slow, inexorable journey into
the valley of the shadow means for them, close together; what tenderness springs up; what sacrifices
come forth; what firm knitting of lives; what new kind of love is bred--you are inclined to
think maybe Providence knew what it was about when it brought children into life by the cruel
path."

Mr. Brotherton nodded a sympathetic head.

"Let me tell you something, George," continued Amos. "It's through their hope of bettering
the children that Grant has moved his people in the Valley out on the little garden plots. When
we see a constant increase in the number of persons or things in an undeviating ratio, with the
aid of mathematics we can pass back to the first of the series, to the first man living at
the base of the human series. Ever remember that there can not be a series without a unit lying
at its base.

Why do the life-long deaf never talk? You answer: All Adam's children
learn to talk by hearing others talk, and as those deaf ones never
heard, so they never learned to talk. Very well. It's perfectly splendid to see the way a common fatherhood between him
and the men is making a brotherhood. Why, man," cried Amos, "it refreshes one's faith like
a tragedy."

"Hello, Aunt Avey," piped the cheery voice of the little old Doctor, as he came toddling through
the front door. "It's a boy--Joe Calvin the Third." The Doctor came back to the desk where
Amos was standing and took a chair, and as Amos drifted out of the store as impersonally as
he came, the Doctor began to grin.

"We were just talking of children," said Brotherton with studied casualness. "You know, Doctor,"
Brotherton smiled abashed, "I've always thought I'd like lots of children. But now--"

"I see 'em come, and I see 'em go every day. I'm kind of getting used to death, George. But
the miracle of birth grows stranger and stranger."

"So young Joe Calvin's a proud parent, is he? Boy, you say?"

"Boy," chuckled the Doctor, "and old Joe's out there having a nervous breakdown. They've had
ten births in the Calvin family. I've attended all of 'em, and this is the first time old Joe's
ever been allowed in the house. To-day the old lady's out there with a towel around her head,
practically having that baby herself. The poor daughter-in-law hasn't seen it. You'd think
she was only invited in as a sort of paying guest. And old lady Calvin comes in every few minutes
and delivers homilies on the joys of large families!"

The Doctor laughed until his blue old eyes watered, and he chirped when he had his laugh out:
"How soon we forget! Which, I presume, is one of God's semi-precious blessings!"

When the Doctor went out, Brotherton found the store deserted, except for Miss Calvin, who
was in front. To-day this meeting has, by a common wish, been so arranged that those two nations
should, in the persons of their men of science, draw as near together
as they can, with nothing but the narrow streak of the Channel between
them, in order that they may take counsel together on matters in which
they have one interest and a common hope.

May we not look upon this brotherly meeting as one of many signs that science, though she
works in a silent manner and in ways unseen by many, is steadily
making for peace?

Looking back, then, in this last year of the eighteen hundreds, on the century which is drawing to
a close, while we may see in the history of scientific inquiry much which, telling the man of science
of his shortcomings and his weakness, bids him be humble, we also
see much, perhaps more, which gives him hope.

 Yet I brought Lila out of it, and I thank
God for her, and I don't mind the price--not now." She turned to look at Mr. Brotherton inquiringly
as she said: "But what I come in to talk to you about, George, was Grant. Have you noticed
in the last few months--that growing--well--it's more than enthusiasm, George; it's a fanaticism.
Since he has been working on the garden plan--Grant has been getting wilder and wilder in his
talk about the Democracy of labor. Have you noticed it--or am I oversensitive?"

Brotherton, poking idly in the fire, did not answer at once. At length he said:

"Grant's a zealot. He's full of this prisms, prunes and peace idea, this sweetness and light
revolution, this notion of hitching their hop-dreams to these three-acre plots, and preaching
non-resistance. It's coming a little fast for me, Laura--just a shade too many at times. But,
on the other hand--there's Nate Perry. He's as cold-blooded a Yankee as ever swindled a father--and
he's helping with the scheme. He's--"

"He has no faith in the Democracy of Labor. He hoots," interrupted Laura. "What he's doing
is working for a more efficient lot of laboring men, so that when the time comes when the unions
shall ask and get more definite control of the factories and mines, in the way of wage-setting,
and price-making, they will bring some sense with their control. He's merely looking after
himself--in the last analysis; but Grant's going mad. George, he actually believes that when
this thing wins here in the Valley--the peaceful strike, the rise of labor, and the theory
of non-resistance--he's going over the world, and in a few years will have labor emancipated.
Have you heard him--that is, recently?"

"Well, yes, a week or so ago," answered Brotherton, "and he was going it at a pretty fair clip
for a minute then. Well, say--I mean--what should we do?" he asked, drumming with the poker
on the hearth. "Laura," Brotherton ran his eyes from the poker until they met her frank, gray
eyes, "Grant would listen to you before he would listen to any one else on earth or in Heaven--I'm
sure of that."

"Then what shall we do?" she asked. "We mustn't let him wreck himself--and all these people?
What ought I--"

A shadow fell across the door, and in another moment there stood in the opening of the alcove
the tall, lean figure of Thomas Van Dorn.

When Laura was gone, Van Dorn, after more or less polite circumlocution, began to unfold a
plan of Market Street to buy the Daily Times and bring Jared Thurston back to Harvey to run
it in the interests of the property owners in the town and in the Valley. Incidentally he had
come to warn George on behalf of Market Street that he was harboring Grant Adams, contrary
to the judgment of Market Street. But George Brotherton's heart was far from Market Street;
it was out on the hill with Emma, his wife, and his mouth spoke from the place of his treasure.

"Tom--tell me, as between man and man, what do you think of children? You're sort of in the
outer room of the Blue Lodge of grandfatherdom, with Lila and Kenyon getting ready for the
preacher, and you ought to know, Tom--honest, man, how about it?"

A wave of self-pity enveloped the Judge. His voice broke as he answered: "George, I haven't
any little girl--she never even has spoken to me about this affair that the whole town knows
about. Oh, I haven't any child at all."

He looked a miserable moment at Brotherton, perhaps reviewing the years which they had lived
and grown from youth to middle age together and growled: "Not a thing--not a damned thing in
it--George, in all this forty years of fighting to keep ahead of the undertaker! Not a God
damned thing!" And so he left the Sweet Serenity of Books and Wall Paper and went back to the
treadmill of life, spitting ashes from his gray lips!

And then Daniel Sands toddled in to get the five-cent cigars which he had bought for a generation--one
at a time every day, and Brotherton came to Daniel with his problem.

The old man, whose palsied head forever was denying something, as if he had the assessor always
in his mind, shut his rheumy eyes and answered: "My children--bauch--" He all but spat upon
their names. "Morty--moons around reading Socialist books, with a cold in his throat and dishwater
in his brains. And the other, she's married a dirty traitor and stands by him against her own
flesh and blood. Ba-a-a-ch!" He showed his blue, old mouth, and cried:

"I married four women to give those children a home--and what thanks do I get? Ingrates--one
a milk-sop--God, if he'd only be a Socialist and get out and throw dynamite; but he won't;
he won't do a thing but sit around drooling about social justice when I want to eat my meals
in peace. And he goes coughing all day and night, and grunting, and now he's wearing a pointed
beard--he says it's for his throat, but I know--it's because he thinks it's romantic. And that
Anne--why, she's worse," but he did not finish the sentence. His old head wagged violently.
Evidently another assessor had suddenly pounced in upon his imagination. For he shuffled into
the street.

Mr. Brotherton sat by the fire, leaning forward, with his fingers locked between his knees.
The warning against Grant Adams that Tom Van Dorn had given him had impressed him. He knew
Market Street was against Grant Adams. But he did not realize that Market Street's attitude
was only a reflex of the stir in the Valley. All Market streets over the earth feel more or
less acutely changes which portend in the workshops, often before those changes come. We are
indeed "members one of another," and the very aspirations of those who dream of better things
register in the latent fears of those who live on trade. We are so closely compact in our organization
that a man may not even hope without crowding his neighbor. And in that little section of the
great world which men knew as Market Street in Harvey, the surest evidence of the changing
attitude of the men in the Valley toward their work, was found not in the crowds that gathered
in Belgian Hall week after week to hear Grant Adams, not in the war-chest which was filling
to overflowing, not in the gardens checkered upon the hillsides, but rather in the uneasiness
of Market Street. The reactions were different in Market Street and in the Valley; but it was
one vision rising in the same body, each part responding according to its own impulses. Of
course Market Street has its side, and George Brotherton was not blind to it. Sitting by his
fire that raw March day, he realized that Market Street was never a crusader, and why. He could
see that the men from whom the storekeepers bought goods on ninety days' time, 3 per cent.
off for cash, were not crusaders. When a man turned up among them with a six-months' crusade
for an evanescent millennium, flickering just a few years ahead, the wholesalers of the city
and the retailers of Market Street nervously began thumbing over their rapidly accumulating
"bills payable" and began using crisp, scratchy language toward the crusader. 

What then? Pears and cakes are good for something; and because you, unluckily, have an eye or
nose too keen, why need you spoil the comfort which the rest of us find in them?

I knew a humorist who, in a good deal of rattle, had a grain or two of sense. He shocked the company
by maintaining that the attributes of God were two--power and risibility; and that it was the duty
of every pious man to keep up the comedy. And I have known gentlemen of great stake in the community,
but whose sympathies were cold,--presidents of colleges, and governors,
and senators,--who held themselves bound to sign every temperance
pledge, and act with Bible societies, and missions, and peacemakers,
and cry, Hist-a-boy! to every good dog.

We must not carry comity too far, but we all have kind impulses in this direction. When the
boys come into my yard for leave to gather horse-chestnuts, I own I enter into Nature's game,
and affect to grant the permission reluctantly, fearing that any
moment they will find out the imposture of that showy chaff.

But this tenderness is quite unnecessary; the enchantments are laid on very thick. Their young
life is thatched with them.

We are not very much to blame for our bad marriages. We find a delight in the beauty and happiness
of children that makes the heart too big for the body. In the worst-assorted connections there
is ever some mixture of true marriage. Teague and his jade get some just relations of mutual
respect, kindly observation, and fostering of each other, learn something, and would carry themselves
wiselier, if they were now to begin.

'Tis fine for us to point at one or another fine madman, as if there were any exempts. The scholar
in his library is none. I, who have all my life heard any number of orations and debates, read
poems and miscellaneous books, conversed with many geniuses, am still the victim of any new
page; and, if Marmaduke, or Hugh, or Moosehead, or any other, invent a new style or mythology,
I fancy that the world will be all brave and right if dressed in these colors, which I had not thought
of. Then at once I will daub with this new paint: but it will not stick. 'Tis like the cement
which the peddler sells at the door; he makes broken crockery hold with it, but you can never
buy of him a bit of the cement which will make it hold when he is gone.

Men who make themselves felt in the world avail themselves of a certain fate in their constitution,
which they know how to use. But they never deeply interest us, unless they lift a corner of
the curtain, or betray never so slightly their penetration of what is behind it. 'Tis the
charm of practical men, that outside of their practicality are a certain poetry and play, as
if they led the good horse Power by the bridle, and preferred to
walk, though they can ride so fiercely.

Bonaparte is intellectual, as well as Cæsar; and the best soldiers, sea-captains, and railway men
have a gentleness, when off duty; a good-natured admission that there
are illusions, and who shall say that he is not their sport?

We stigmatize the cast-iron fellows, who cannot so detach themselves, as "dragon-ridden,"
"thunder-stricken," and fools of fate, with whatever powers endowed.

Since our tuition is through emblems and indirections, 'tis well to know that there is method
in it, a fixed scale, and rank above rank in the phantasms. We begin low with coarse masks, and
rise to the most subtle and beautiful. The red men told Columbus, "they had an herb which took
away fatigue"; but he found the illusion of "arriving from the east
at the Indies" more composing to his lofty spirit than any tobacco.
Is not our faith in the impenetrability of matter more sedative than
narcotics? I tell you, George," said Grant, and
the tremor of emotion strained his voice as he spoke, "it won't be long until we'll have a
partnership in that trocha, just as we'll have an interest in every hammer and bolt, and ledge
and vein in the Valley. It's coming, and coming fast--the Democracy of Labor. I have faith,
the men and women have faith--all over the Valley. We've found the right way--the way of peace.
When labor has proved its efficiency--"

"Ah--you're crazy, Grant," snapped the Captain. "This class of people down here--these ignorant
foreigners--why, they couldn't run a peanut stand--eh?"

Dick Bowman and his son came up, and not knowing a discussion was in the wind, Dick shook hands
around. And after the Captain had taken his uptown car, Grant stood apart, lost in thought,
but Dick said: "Well, Benny, we got here in time for the car!" Then craning his long neck,
the father laughed: "Ben, here's a laboring man and his shift goes on at one--so he's in a
hurry, but we'll make it."

"Dick," began Brotherton, looking at the thin shadow of a man who was hardly Brotherton's elder
by half a dozen years. "Dick, you're a kind of expert father, you and Joe Calvin, and to-day
Joe's a granddaddy--tell me about the kiddies--are they worth it?"

Bowman threw his head back and craned his long neck. "Not for us--not for us poor--maybe for
you people here," said Bowman, who paused and counted on his fingers: "Eight born, three dead--that's
too many. Joe Calvin, he's raised all his and they're doing fairly well. That's his girl in
here--ain't it?" Bowman sighed. "Her and my Jean played together back in their little days;
before we moved to South Harvey." He lowered his voice.

"George, mother hasn't heard from Jean for going on two year, now. She went off with a fellow;
told us she married him--she was just a child--but had been working around in the factories--and,
well, I don't say so, but I guess she just has got where she's ashamed to write--maybe."

His voice rose in anger as he cried: "Why didn't she have a show, like this girl of Joe's?
He's no better than I. And you know my wife--well, she's no Mrs. Joe Calvin--she's been as
happy about 'em when they came as if they were princes of the blood." He stopped.

"Then there's Mugs--I dunno, George,--it seems like we tried with Mugs, but all them saloons
and--well, the gambling and the women under his nose from the time he was ten years old--well,
I can't make him work. Little Jack is steady enough for a boy of twenty--he's in the Company
mines, and we've put Ben in this year. He is twelve--though, for Heaven's sake, don't go blabbing
it; he's supposed to be fourteen. And little Betty, she's in school yet. I don't know how she'll
turn out. No, George," he went on, "children for us poor, children's a mighty risky, uncertain
crop. But," he smiled reflectively, "I'm right here to tell you they're lots of fun as little
shavers--growing up. Why, George, you ought to hear Benny sing. Them Copinis of the Hot Dog
found he had a voice, and they've taught him some dago songs." Ben was a bright-faced boy of
twelve--big for his age, with snappy, brown eyes and apples of cheeks and curly hair. He slipped
away to look into a store window, leaving the two men alone. Mr. Brotherton was in a mellow
mood. He put his great paw on the small man's shoulder and said huskily:

"Say, Dick, honest, I'd rather have just one boy like that than the whole damn Valley--that's
right!"

The car came bowling up and the South Harvey people boarded it. Grant Adams rode down into
the Valley with great dreams in his soul. He talked little to the Bowmans, but looked out of
the window and saw the dawn of another day. It is the curse of dreamers that they believe that
when they are convinced of a truth, they who have pursued it, who have suffered for it, who
have been exalted by it, they have only to pass out their truth to the world to remake the
universe. But the world is made over only when the common mind sees the truth, and the common
heart feels it. So the history of reform is a history of disappointment. The reform works,
of course. But in working it does only the one little trick it is intended to do, and the long
chain of incidental blessings which should follow, which the reformers feel must inevitably
follow, wait for other reformers to bring them into being. So there is always plenty of work
for the social tinker, and no one man ever built a millennium. For God is ever jealous for
our progeny, and leaves an unfinished job always on the work bench of the world.

Grant Adams believed that he had a mission to bring labor into its own. The coming of the Democracy
of Labor was a real democracy to him--no mere shibboleth. He looks and looks, and thinks these
birds are older than himself, for he remembers having seen them at the moment of the first consciousness.
The question possible came up, Whence came they, and all the other things which I now see and
hear?
 It seemed to him that when he could bring the conditions
that were starting in Harvey, to every great industrial center, one great job in the world
would be done forever.

So he drummed his iron claw on the seat before him, put his hard hand upon his rough face,
and smiled in the joy of his high faith.

Dick Bowman and his boy left Grant at the car. He waved his claw at little Ben when they parted,
and sighed as he saw the little fellow scampering to shaft No. 3 of the Wahoo Fuel Company's
mines. It is not a patch, but rather an universal tincture, with which I am stained. I know no
repentance, superficial, half-way, and ceremonious; it must sting me all over before I can
call it so, and must prick my bowels as deeply and universally as God sees into me.
 They passed down the
switch into the yards, and Grant heard a brakeman say:

"That Frisco car there has a broken brake--watch out for her."

And a switchman reply:

"Yes--I know it. I tried to get the yardmaster not to send her down. But we'll do what we can."

The brakeman on the car signaled for the engineer to pull the other cars away, and leave the
Frisco car at the top of a slight grade, to be shoved down by the men when another car was
needed at the loading chute. Grant walked toward the loading chute, and a roar from the falling
coal filled his ears. He saw little Ben under a car throwing back the coal falling from the
faulty chute on to the ground.

Through the roar Grant heard a yell as from a man in terror. He looked back of him and saw
the Frisco car coming down the grade as if shot from a monster catapult!

"The boy--the boy--!" he heard the man on the car shriek. 'Tis a counterpart of various and changeable
accidents, and of irresolute imaginations, and, as it falls out, sometimes contrary: whether it
be that I am then another self, or that I take subjects by other
circumstances and considerations: so it is that I may peradventure
contradict myself, but, as Demades said, I never contradict the truth.

Could my soul once take footing, I would not essay but resolve: but it is always learning
and making trial.


As Grant ran, tears fell in the little, coal-stained face, and made white splotches on the
child's cheeks. Lida Bowman, his mother, all that time sat in the hall of the hospital outside
the door of his room. The stream of sorrow that winds through a hospital passed before her
unheeded. Her husband came, sat with her silently for a while, went, and came again, many times.
But she did not go. In the morning of the second day as she stood peering through the door
crack at the child she saw his little body move in a deep sigh, and saw his black eyes open
for a second and close as he smiled. Dr. Nesbit, who stood beside her, grasped her hand and
led her away.

