It became more essential than ever to discover these Bolshevik sympathizers and stamp out their
propaganda. As hanging Jimmie up by the wrists had not brought forth the desired information,
Jimmie was put in solitary confinement on a diet of bread and water, this being another test
of sincerity of conscience. For the conscience a diet of white flour and water may be all right,
but Jimmie soon found that it is very bad indeed for the intestinal tract and the blood-stream--being,
in truth, far worse than a diet of water alone. The story of every individual's past life, relations,
friends, regiment, and soldier experience had been told again and again, until the repetition
was wearisome. The cool nights following the hot days were favorable to little gossiping seances
like the yarn-spinning watches of sailors on pleasant nights. Our squad, though its stock of stories
was worn threadbare, was fortunate enough to have a sweet singer
in Israel "Nosey"

Payne--of whose tunefulness we never tired. It
was necessary that all prisoners should be bathed; which was interpreted by some guards to
mean that they should have a stream of icy water turned on them, and be forced to stand under
it. Because Jimmie's arms were too badly injured for him to scrub himself, Connor seized a
rough brush and salt, and rubbed off strips of his skin. When Jimmy wriggled away, they followed
him with the hose; when he screamed, they turned it into his mouth and nose; when he fell down,
they let the cold water run over him for ten or fifteen minutes.

Jimmie had had a good deal of harsh treatment in the course of his outcast life, but never
so closely concentrated in point of time. His spirit remained unbroken, but his body gave way,
and then his mind began to give also. He fell a victim to delusions; the nightmares which haunted
his sleep lay siege to his waking hours also, and he thought he was being tortured at times
when he was just hanging by his chains. Until at last Perkins, listening through the door,
heard strange cries and grunts, beast-like noises, barkings, and growlings. There they dug a little
hole to lie in, and put in a layer of pine leaves.

Between them they had an overcoat and a blanket.

At night they lay upon the coat and covered themselves with the blanket.

By day the blanket served as a tent.

The hardships and annoyances that we endured made everybody else cross and irritable. At times
it seemed impossible to say or listen to pleasant words, and nobody was ever allowed to go any length
of time spoiling for a fight. That
was really serious, so they sent for the prison-surgeon, who had to make but a brief inspection
to convince himself that Jimmie Higgins was a raving madman. Jimmie fancied himself some kind
of fur-bearing animal, and he was in a trap, and was trying to gnaw off his foot so as to escape.
He snapped his teeth at everyone who came near him; he had to be knocked senseless before a
straight-jacket could be got on him.

VI

And so it was that Jimmie Higgins at last made his escape from his tormentors. Jimmie doesn't
know anything about the Russian Jew, Kalenkin, any more; he could not tell the secret if he
wanted to, so they have given up testing his conscience, and they treat him kindly, and have
succeeded in persuading him that he is out of the trap. Every day there came something to build up
the hopes that exchange was near at hand--every day brought something to extinguish the hopes of
the preceding one. We took these varying phases according to our several temperaments.
 He is no longer one of those who "look before and after
and pine for what is not". He is a "good doggie", and when you pat him on the head he rubs
against you and whines affectionately.

