See what one can accustom himself to.--The reflection that he must some day be taken apart
like an engine or a clock, or like a house whose owner is gone, and worked up into arches and
pyramids and hideous frescoes, did not distress this monk in the least.  I thought he even
looked as if he were thinking, with complacent vanity, that his own skull would look well on
top of the heap and his own ribs add a charm to the frescoes which possibly they lacked at present.

Here and there, in ornamental alcoves, stretched upon beds of bones, lay dead and dried-up
monks, with lank frames dressed in the black robes one sees ordinarily upon priests.  We examined
one closely.  The skinny hands were clasped upon the breast; two lustreless tufts of hair stuck
to the skull; the skin was brown and sunken; it stretched tightly over the cheek bones and
made them stand out sharply; the crisp dead eyes were deep in the sockets; the nostrils were
painfully prominent, the end of the nose being gone; the lips had shriveled away from the yellow
teeth: and brought down to us through the circling years, and petrified there, was a weird
laugh a full century old!

It was the jolliest laugh, but yet the most dreadful, that one can imagine.  Surely, I thought,
it must have been a most extraordinary joke this veteran produced with his latest breath, that
he has not got done laughing at it yet.  At this moment I saw that the old instinct was strong
upon the boys, and I said we had better hurry to St. Peter's. They were trying to keep from
asking, "Is--is he dead?"

It makes me dizzy, to think of the Vatican--of its wilderness of statues, paintings, and curiosities
of every description and every age.  The "old masters" (especially in sculpture,) fairly swarm,
there.  I can not write about the Vatican.  I think I shall never remember any thing I saw
there distinctly but the mummies, and the Transfiguration, by Raphael, and some other things
it is not necessary to mention now.  I shall remember the Transfiguration partly because it
was placed in a room almost by itself; partly because it is acknowledged by all to be the first
oil painting in the world; and partly because it was wonderfully beautiful.  The colors are
fresh and rich, the "expression," I am told, is fine, the "feeling" is lively, the "tone" is
good, the "depth" is profound, and the width is about four and a half feet, I should judge.
It is a picture that really holds one's attention; its beauty is fascinating.  It is fine enough
to be a Renaissance.  A remark I made a while ago suggests a thought--and a hope.  Is it not
possible that the reason I find such charms in this picture is because it is out of the crazy
chaos of the galleries?  If some of the others were set apart, might not they be beautiful?
If this were set in the midst of the tempest of pictures one finds in the vast galleries of
the Roman palaces, would I think it so handsome?  If, up to this time, I had seen only one
"old master" in each palace, instead of acres and acres of walls and ceilings fairly papered
with them, might I not have a more civilized opinion of the old masters than I have now?  I
think so.  When I was a school-boy and was to have a new knife, I could not make up my mind
as to which was the prettiest in the show-case, and I did not think any of them were particularly
pretty; and so I chose with a heavy heart.  But when I looked at my purchase, at home, where
no glittering blades came into competition with it, I was astonished to see how handsome it
was.  To this day my new hats look better out of the shop than they did in it with other new
hats.  It begins to dawn upon me, now, that possibly, what I have been taking for uniform ugliness
in the galleries may be uniform beauty after all.  I honestly hope it is, to others, but certainly
it is not to me.  Perhaps the reason I used to enjoy going to the Academy of Fine Arts in New
York was because there were but a few hundred paintings in it, and it did not surfeit me to
go through the list.  I suppose the Academy was bacon and beans in the Forty-Mile Desert, and
a European gallery is a state dinner of thirteen courses.  One leaves no sign after him of
the one dish, but the thirteen frighten away his appetite and give him no satisfaction.

There is one thing I am certain of, though.  With all the Michael Angelos, the Raphaels, the
Guidos and the other old masters, the sublime history of Rome remains unpainted!  They painted
Virgins enough, and popes enough and saintly scarecrows enough, to people Paradise, almost,
and these things are all they did paint.  "Nero fiddling o'er burning Rome," the assassination
of Caesar, the stirring spectacle of a hundred thousand people bending forward with rapt interest,
in the coliseum, to see two skillful gladiators hacking away each others' lives, a tiger springing
upon a kneeling martyr--these and a thousand other matters which we read of with a living interest,
must be sought for only in books--not among the rubbish left by the old masters--who are no
more, I have the satisfaction of informing the public.

They did paint, and they did carve in marble, one historical scene, and one only, (of any great
historical consequence.) And what was it and why did they choose it, particularly?  It was
the Rape of the Sabines, and they chose it for the legs and busts.

I like to look at statues, however, and I like to look at pictures, also --even of monks looking
up in sacred ecstacy, and monks looking down in meditation, and monks skirmishing for something
to eat--and therefore I drop ill nature to thank the papal government for so jealously guarding
and so industriously gathering up these things; and for permitting me, a stranger and not an
entirely friendly one, to roam at will and unmolested among them, charging me nothing, and
only requiring that I shall behave myself simply as well as I ought to behave in any other
man's house.  I thank the Holy Father right heartily, and I wish him long life and plenty of
happiness.

The Popes have long been the patrons and preservers of art, just as our new, practical Republic
is the encourager and upholder of mechanics.  In their Vatican is stored up all that is curious
and beautiful in art; in our Patent Office is hoarded all that is curious or useful in mechanics.
When a man invents a new style of horse-collar or discovers a new and superior method of telegraphing,
our government issues a patent to him that is worth a fortune; when a man digs up an ancient
statue in the Campagna, the Pope gives him a fortune in gold coin.  We can make something of
a guess at a man's character by the style of nose he carries on his face.  The Vatican and
the Patent Office are governmental noses, and they bear a deal of character about them.

