ROMANCE OF THE RABBIT

By

FRANCIS JAMMES

Authorized Translation from the French by Gladys Edgerton

1920

INTRODUCTION

The simple and bucolic art of Francis Jammes has grown to maturity in the solitude of the little
town of Orthez at the foot of the Pyrenees, far from the clamor and complexities of literary
Paris. In the preface to an early work of his he has given the key of his artistic faith: "My
God, You have called me among men. Behold I am here. I suffer and I love. I have spoken with
the voice which you have given me. I have written with the words which You have taught my mother
and my father and which they transmitted to me. I am passing along the road like a laden ass
of which the children make mock and which lowers the head. I shall go where You wish, when
You wish."

And this is the way he has gone without faltering or ever turning aside to become identified
with this school or that. It is this simple faith which has given to Francis Jammes his distinction
and uniqueness among the poets of contemporary France, and won for him the admiration of all
classes. There is probably no other French poet who can evoke so perfectly the spirit of the
landscape of rural France. He delights to commune with the wild flowers, the crystal spring,
and the friendly fire. Through his eyes we see the country of the singing harvest where the
poplars sway beside the ditches and the fall of the looms of the weavers fills the silence.
The poet apprehends in things a soul which others cannot perceive.

His gift of sympathy with the poor and the simple is infinite. He is full of pity and tenderness
and enfolds in his heart and in his poetry, saint and sinner, man and beast, all that which
is animate and inanimate. He is passionately religious with a profound and humble faith, but
it has nothing in common with the sumptuous and decorative neo-catholicism of men like Huysmans
or Paul Claudel. Rather one must seek his origins in the child-like faith of Saint Francis
of Assisi and the lyrical metaphysics of Pascal.

Those of a higher sophistication and a greater worldliness may smile at the artlessness, and,
if one will, naivété of a man like Jammes. It is true that his art is limited, and that if
one reads too much at one time there is a note of monotony and a certain paucity of phrase,
but who is the writer of whom this is not equally true? The quality of beauty, sincerity, and
a large serenity are in his work, and how grateful are these permanencies amid the shrilling
noises of the countless conflicting creeds and dogmas, and amid the poses and vanities which
so fill the world of contemporary literature and art!

As far as the record goes the outward life of Francis Jammes has been uneventful. In a remarkable
poem, "A Francis Jammes," his friend and fellow-poet, Charles Guérin, has drawn an unforgetable
picture of this Christian Virgil in his village home. The ivy clings about his house like a
beard, and before it is a shadowy fire, ever young and fresh, like the poet's heart, in spite
of wind and winters and sorrows. The low walls of the court are gilded with moss. From the
window one sees the cottages and fields, the horizon and the snows.

Jammes was born at Tournay in the department of Hautes Pyrénées on December 2, 1863, and spent
most of his life in this region. He was educated at Pau and Bordeaux, and later spent a short
time in a law office. Early in the nineties he wrote his first volumes, slender plaquettes
with the brief title "Vers." It is interesting that one of these was dedicated to that strange
English genius, Hubert Crackanthorpe, the author of "Wreckage" and "Sentimental Studies." This
dedication, and the curious orthography (the book was set up in a provincial printery) led
a reviewer in the Mercure de France into an amusing error, in that he suggested that the book
had been written by an Englishman whose name, correctly spelled, should perhaps be Francis James.

Since then his life has been wholly devoted to literature and he has published a considerable
number of volumes of poetry and prose which by their very titles give a clue to the spirit
pervading the author's work. Among the more important of these are: De l'Angelus de l'Aube
à l'Angelus du Soir, Le Deuil des Primevères, Pomme d'Anis ou l'Histoire d'une Jeune Fille
Infirme, Clairières dans le Ciel, a number of series of Géorgiques Chrétienne, etc.

The present volume consists of a translation of Le Roman du Lièvre, one of the most delightful
of Francis Jammes' earlier books. In it he tells of Rabbit's joys and fears, of his life on
this earth, of the pilgrimage to paradise with St. Francis and his animal companions, and of
his death. This book was published in 1903, and has run through many editions in France. A
number of characteristic short tales and impressions of Jammes' same creative period have been
added.

To turn a work so delicate and full of elusiveness as Jammes' from one language into another
is not an easy task, but it has been a labor of love. The translator hopes that she has accomplished
this without too great a loss to the spirit of the original.

G.E.

ROMANCE OF THE RABBIT

BOOK I

Amid the thyme and dew of Jean de la Fontaine Rabbit heard the hunt and clambered up the path
of soft clay. He was afraid of his shadow, and the heather fled behind his swift course. Blue
steeples rose from valley to valley as he descended and mounted again. His bounds curved the
grass where hung the drops of dew, and he became brother to the larks in this swift flight.
He flew over the county roads, and hesitated at a sign-board before he followed the country-road,
which led from the blinding sunlight and the noise of the cross-roads and then lost itself
in the dark, silent moss.

That day he had almost run into the twelfth milestone between Castétis and Balansun, because
his eyes in which fear dwells are set on the side of his head. Abruptly he stopped. His cleft
upper lip trembled imperceptibly, and disclosed his long incisor teeth. Then his stubble-colored
legs which were his traveling boots with their worn and broken claws extended. And he bounded
over the hedge, rolled up like a ball, with his ears flat on his back.

And again he climbed uphill for a considerable time, while the dogs, having lost his scent,
were filled with disappointment, and then, he again ran downhill until he reached the road
to Sauvejunte, where he saw a horse and a covered cart approaching. In the distance, on this
road, there were clouds of dust as in Blue Beard when Sister Anne is asked: "Sister Anne, Sister
Anne, do you see anything coming?" This pale dryness, how magnificent it was, and how filled
it was with the bitter fragrance of mint! It was not long before the horse stood in front of
Rabbit.

It was a sorry nag and dragged a two wheeled cart and was unable to move except in a jerky
sort of gallop. Every leap made its disjointed skeleton quiver and jolted its harness and made
its earth-colored mane fly in the air, shiny and greenish, like the beard of an ancient mariner.
Wearily as though they were paving-stones the animal lifted its hoofs which were swollen like
tumors. Rabbit was frightened by this great animated machine which moved with so loud a noise.
He bounded away and continued his flight over the meadows, with his nose toward the Pyrenees,
his tail toward the lowlands, his right eye toward the rising sun, his left toward the village
of Mesplède.

Finally he crouched down in the stubble, quite near a quail which was sleeping in the manner
of chickens half-buried in the dust, and overcome by the heat was sweating off its fat through
its feathers.

The morning was sparkling in the south. The blue sky grew pale under the heat, and became pearl-gray.
A hawk in seemingly effortless flight was soaring, and describing larger and larger circles
as it rose. At a distance of several hundred yards lay the peacock-blue, shimmering surface
of a river, and lazily carried onward the mirrored reflection of the alders; from their viscous
leaves exuded a bitter perfume, and their intense blackness cut sharply the pale luminousness
of the water. Near the dam fish glided past in swarms. An angelus beat against the torrid whiteness
of a church-steeple with its blue wing, and Rabbit's noonday rest began.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stayed in this stubble until evening, motionless, only troubled somewhat by a cloud of mosquitoes
quivering like a road in the sun. Then at dusk he made two bounds forward softly and two more
to the left and to the right.

It was the beginning of the night. He went forward toward the river where on the spindles of
the reeds hung in the moonlight a weave of silver mists.

Rabbit sat down in the midst of the blossoming grass. He was happy that at that hour all sounds
were harmonious, and that one hardly knew whether the calls were those of quails or of crystal
springs.

Were all human beings dead? There was one watching at some distance; he was making movements
above the water, and noiselessly withdrawing his dripping and shimmering net. But only the
heart of the waters was troubled, Rabbit's remained calm.

And, lo, between the angelicas something that looked like a ball bit by bit came into view.
It was his best-beloved approaching. Rabbit ran toward her until they met deep in the blue
aftercrop of grass. Their little noses touched. And for a moment in the midst of the wild sorrel,
they exchanged kisses. They played. Then slowly, side by side, guided by hunger, they set out
for a small farm lying low in the shadow. In the poor vegetable garden into which they penetrated
there were crisp cabbages and spicy thyme. Nearby the stable was breathing; the pig protruded
its mobile snout, sniffing, under the door of its sty.

Thus the night passed in eating and amatory sport. Little by little the darkness stirred beneath
the dawn. Shining spots appeared in the distance. Everything began to quiver. An absurd cock,
perched on the chicken-house, rent the silence. He crowed as if possessed, and clapped applause
for himself with the stumps of his wings.

Rabbit and his wife went their separate ways at the threshold of the hedge of thorns and roses.
Crystal-like, as it were, a village emerged from the mist, and in a field dogs with their tails
as stiff as cables were busy trying to disentangle the loops so skillfully described by the
charming couple amid the mint and blades of grass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rabbit took refuge in a marl-pit over which mulberries arched, and there he stayed crouching
with his eyes wide-open until evening. Here he sat like a king beneath the ogive of the branches;
a shower of rain had adorned them with pale-blue pearls. There he finally fell asleep. But
his dream was unquiet, not like that which should come from the calm sleep of the sultry summer's
afternoon. His was not the profound sleep of the lizard which hardly stirs when dreaming the
dream of ancient walls; his was not the comfortable noonday sleep of the badger who sits in
his dark earthen burrow and enjoys the coolness.

The slightest sound spoke to him of danger, the danger that lies in all things whether they
move or fall or strike. A shadow moved unexpectedly. Was it an enemy approaching? He knew that
happiness can be found in a place of refuge only when everything remains exactly the same this
moment, as it was the moment before. Hence came his love of order, that is to say his immobility.

Why should a leaf stir on the eglantine in the blue calm of an idle day? When the shadows of
a copse move so slowly, that it seems they are trying to stop the passage of the hours, why
should they suddenly stir? Why was there this crowd of men who, not far from his retreat, were
gathering the ears of maize in which the sun threaded pale beads of light? His eyelids had
no lashes, and so could not bear the palpitating and dazzling light of noondays. And this alone
was sufficient reason why he knew that danger lurked if he should approach those who unblinded
could look into the white flames of husbandry.

There was nothing outside to lure him before the time came when he would go out of his own
accord. His wisdom was in harmony with things. His life was a work of music to him, and each
discordant note warned him to be cautious. He did not confuse the voice of the pack of hounds
with the distant sound of bells, or the gesture of a man with that of a waving tree, or the
detonation of a gun with a clap of thunder, or the latter with the rumbling of carts, or the
cry of the hawk with the steam-whistle of threshing-machines. Thus there was an entire language,
whose words he knew to be his enemies.

Who can say from what source Rabbit obtained this prudence and this wisdom? No one can explain
these things, or tell whence or how they have come to him. Their origin is lost in the night
of time where everything is all confused and one.

Did he, perhaps, come out of Noah's ark on Mount Ararat at the time when the dove, which retains
the sound of great waters in its cooing, brought the olive-branch, the sign that the great
wave was subsiding? Or had he been created, such as he is, with his short tail, his stubbly
hide, his cleft lip, his floppy ear, and his trodden-down heel? Did God, the Eternal, set him
all ready-made beneath the laurels of Paradise?

Lying crouched beneath a rosebush he had, perhaps, seen Eve, and watched her when she had wandered
amid the irises, displaying the grace of her brown legs like a prancing young horse, and extending
her golden breasts before the mystic pomegranates. Or was he at first nothing but an incandescent
mist? Had he already lived in the heart of the porphyries? Had he, incombustible, escaped from
their boiling lava, in order to inhabit each in turn the cell of granite and of the alga before
he dared show his nose to the world? Did he owe his pitch-black eyes to the molten jet, his
fur to the clayey ooze, his soft ears to the sea-wrack, his ardent blood to the liquid fire?

...His origins mattered little to him at this moment; he was resting peacefully in his marl-pit.
It was in a sultry August toward the end of a heavy afternoon. The sky was of the deep-blue
color of a plum, puffed out here and there, as if ready to burst upon the plain.

Soon the rain began to patter on the leaves of the brake. Faster and faster came the drumming
of the long rods of rain. But Rabbit was not afraid, because the rain fell in accordance with
a rhythm which was very familiar to him. And besides the rain did not strike him for it had
not yet been able to pierce the thick vault of green above him. A single drop only fell to
the bottom of the marl-pit, and splashed and always fell again at the same place.

So there was nothing in this concert to trouble the heart of Rabbit. He was quite familiar
with the song in which the tears of the rain form the strophes, and he knew that neither dog,
nor man, nor fox, nor hawk had any part in it. The sky was like a harp on which the silver
strings of the streaming rain were strung from above down to the earth. And down here below
every single thing made this harp resound in its own peculiar fashion, and in turn it again
took up its own melody. Under the green fingers of the leaves the crystal strings sounded faint
and hollow. It was as though it were the voice of the soul of the mists.

The clay under their touch sobbed like an adolescent girl into whom the south wind has long
blown inquietude. There where the clay was thirstiest and driest was heard a continual sound
as of drinking, the panting of burning lips which yielded to the fullness of the storm.

The night which followed the storm was serene. The downfall of rain had almost evaporated.
On the green meadow where Rabbit was in the habit of meeting his beloved, nothing was left
of the storm, except ball-like masses of mist. It looked as though they were paradisiacal cotton-plants
whose downy whiteness was bursting beneath the flood of moonlight. Along the steep banks of
the river the thickets, heavy with rain, stood in rows like pilgrims bowed down under the weight
of their wallets and leather-bottles. Peace reigned. It was as though an angel had rested his
forehead in a hand. Dawn shivering with cold was awaiting her sister the day, and the bowed-down
leaves of grass prayed to the dawn.

And suddenly Rabbit crouching in the midst of his meadow saw a man approaching, and he wasn't
in the least afraid of him. For the first time since the beginning of things, since man had
set traps and snares the instinct of flight became extinguished in the timid soul of Rabbit.

The man, who approached, was dressed like the trunk of a tree in winter when it is clothed
in the rough fustian of moss. He wore a cowl on his head and sandals on his feet. He carried
no stick. His hands were clasped inside the sleeves of his robe, and a cord served as girdle.
He kept his bony face turned toward the moon, and the moon was less pale than it. One could
clearly distinguish his eagle's nose and his deep eyes, which were like those of asses, and
his black beard on which tufts of lamb's wool had been left by the thickets.

Two doves accompanied him. They flitted from branch to branch in the sweetness of the night.
The tender beat of their wings was like the fallen petals of a flower, and as if these were
striving to re-unite again and expand once more into a blossom.

Three poor dogs that wore spiked collars and wagged their tails preceded the man, and an ancient
wolf was licking the hem of his garment. A ewe and her lamb, bleating, uncertain, and enraptured,
pressed forward amid the crocuses and trod upon their emerald, while three hawks began to play
with the two doves. A timid night-bird whistled with joy amid the acorns. Then it spread its
wings and overtook the hawks and the doves, the lamb and the ewe, the dogs, the wolf, and the man.

And the man approached Rabbit and said to him:

"I am Francis. I love thee and I greet thee, Oh thou, my brother. I greet thee in the name
of the sky which mirrors the waters and the sparkling stones, in the name of the wild sorrel,
the bark of the trees and the seeds which are thy sustenance. Come with these sinless ones
who accompany me and cling to my foot-steps with the faith of the ivy which clasps the tree
without considering that soon, perhaps, the woodcutter will come. Oh Rabbit, I bring to thee
the Faith which we share one in another, the Faith which is life itself, all that of which
we are ignorant, but in which we nevertheless believe. Oh dear and kindly Rabbit, thou gentle
wanderer, wilt thou follow our Faith?"

And while Francis was speaking the beasts remained quite silent; they lay flat on the ground
or perched in the twigs, and had complete faith in these words which they did not understand.

Rabbit alone, his eyes wide-open, now seemed uneasy because of the sound of this voice. He
stood with one ear forward and the other back as if uncertain whether to take flight or whether
to stay.

When Francis saw this he gathered a handful of grass from the meadow, and held it out to Rabbit,
and now he followed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

From that night they remained together.

No one could harm them, because their Faith protected them. Whenever Francis and his friends
stopped in a village square where people were dancing to the drone of a bagpipe at the evening
hour when the young elms were softly shading into the night and the girls were gaily raising
their glasses to the evening wind at the dark tables before the inns, a circle formed about
them. And the young men with their bows or cross-bows never dreamed of killing Rabbit. His
tranquil manner so astounded them, that they would have deemed it a barbarous deed had they
abused the faith of this poor creature, which he so trustfully placed beneath their very feet.
They thought Francis was a man skilled in the taming of animals, and sometimes they opened
their barns to him for the night, and gave him alms with which he bought food for his creatures,
for each one that which it liked best.

And besides they easily found enough to live on, for the autumn through which they were wending
was generous and the granaries were bulging. They were allowed to glean in the fields of maize
and to have a share in the vintage and the songs which rose in the setting sun. Fair-haired
girls held the grapes against their luminous breasts. Their raised elbows gleamed. Above the
blue shadows of the chestnut trees shooting stars glided peacefully. The velvet of the heather
was growing thicker. The sighing of dresses could be heard in the depth of the avenues.

They saw the sea before them, hung in space, and the sloping sails, and white sands flecked
by the shadows of tamarisks, strawberry-trees, and pines. They passed through laughing meadows,
where the mountain torrent, born of the pure whiteness of the snows, had become a brook, but
still glistened, filled with memories of the shimmering antimony and glaciers.

Even when the hunting-horn sounded Rabbit remained quite without fear among his companions.
They watched over him and he watched over them. One day a pack of hounds drew near to him,
but fled again when they saw the wolf. Another time a cat crept close to the doves, but took
flight before the three dogs with their spiked collars, and a ferret who lay in wait for the
lamb had to seek a hiding-place from the birds of prey. Rabbit, himself, frightened away the
swallows who attacked the owl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rabbit became specially attached to one of the three dogs with spiked collars. She was a spaniel,
of kind disposition, and compact build. She had a stubby tail, pendant ears, and twisted paws.
She was easy to get on with and polite. She had been born in a pig-pen at a cobbler's who went
hunting on Sundays. When her master died, and no one wanted to give her shelter, she ran about
in the fields where she met Francis.

Rabbit always walked by her side, and when she slept her muzzle lay upon him and he too fell
asleep. All of them always had their noonday sleep, and under the dull fire of the sun it was
filled with dreams.

Then Francis saw again the Paradise from which he had come. It seemed to him as if he were
passing through the great open gate into the wonderful street on which stood the houses of
the Elect. They were low huts, each like the other, in a luminous shadow which caused tears
of joy to rise in the eyes. From the interior of these huts might be caught the gleam of a
carpenter's plane, a hammer, or a file. The work that is sublime continues here; for, when
God asked those who had come to him what reward they desired for their work on earth, they
always wished to go on with that which had helped them to gain Heaven. And then suddenly their
humble crafts became filled with a sort of mystery. Artisans appeared at their thresholds where
tables were set for the evening meal. One heard the cheery burble of celestial wells. And in
the open squares angels that had a semblance to fishing-boats, bowed down in the blessedness
of the twilight.

But the animals in their dreams saw neither the earth nor Paradise as we know them and see
them. They dreamed of endless plains where their senses became confused. It was like a dense
fog in them. To Rabbit the baying of the hounds became all blended into one thing with the
heat of the sun, sharp detonations, the feeling of wet paws, the vertigo of flight, with fright,
with the smell of the clay, and the sparkle of the brook, with the waving to and fro of wild
carrots and the crackling of maize, with the moonshine and the joyous emotion of seeing his
mate appearing amid the fragrant meadow-sweet.

Behind their closed eyelids they all saw moving like mirrored reflections the courses of their
lives. The doves, however, protected their nimble and restless, little heads from the sun;
they sought for their Paradise beneath the shadow of their wings.

BOOK II

When winter came Francis said to his friends:

"Blessings upon you for you are of God. But in my heart I am uneasy for the cry of the geese
that are flying southward tells that a famine is near at hand, and that it is not in the purposes
of Heaven to make the earth kind for you. Praised be the hidden designs of the Lord!"

The country around them, in fact, became a barren waste. The sky let drip a yellow light from
its sack-like clouds bulging with snow. All the fruits of the hedges had withered, and all
those of the orchards were dead. And the seeds had left their husks to enter into the bosom
of the earth.

..."Praised be the hidden designs of the Lord," said Francis. "Perhaps it is His wish that
you leave me, and each of you go your own way in quest of nourishment. Therefore separate from
me since I cannot go with each one of you, if your instincts lead you to different lands. For
you are living and have need of nourishment, while I am risen from the dead and am here by
the grace of God, free from all corporeal needs, a spirit as it were who had the privilege
of guiding you to this day. But whatever knowledge I have is growing less, and I no longer
know how to provide for you. If you wish to leave me, let the tongue of each be loosed, and
freely let each speak."

The first to speak was the Wolf.

He raised his muzzle toward Francis. His shaggy tail was swept by the wind. He coughed. Misery
had long been his garb. His wretched fur made him seem like a dethroned king. He hesitated,
and cast his eye upon each one of his companions in turn. At last his voice came from his throat,
hoarse like that of the eternal snow. And when he opened his jaws one could measure his endless
privations by the length of his teeth. And his expression was so wild that one could not tell
whether he was about to bite his master or to caress him.

He said:

"Oh honey without sting! Oh brother of the poor! Oh Son of God! How could even I leave you?
My life was evil, and you have filled it with joy. During the nights it was my fate to lie
in wait listening to the breath of the dogs, the herdsmen, and the fires, until the right moment
came to bury my fangs in the throat of sleeping lambs. You taught me, Oh Blessed One, the sweetness
of orchards. And even at this moment when my belly was hollow with hunger for flesh, it was
your love for me that nourished me. Often, indeed, my hunger has been a joy to me when I could
place my head on your sandal for I suffer this hunger that I may follow you, and gladly I would
die for your love."

And the doves cooed.

They stopped in their shivering flight together among the branches of a barren tree. They could
not make up their minds to speak. Each moment it seemed as though they were about to begin,
when in sudden fright they again filled the listening forest with their sobbing white caresses.
They trembled like young girls who mingle their tears and their arms. They spoke together as
if they had but a single voice:

"Oh Francis, you are more lovely than the light of the glow-worm gleaming in the moss, gentler
than the brook which sings to us while we hang our warm nest in the fragrant shade of the young
poplars. What matter that the hoarfrost and famine would banish us from your side and drive
us far away to more fruitful lands? For your sake we will love hoarfrost and famine. For the
sake of your love we will give up the things we crave. And if we must die of the cold, Oh our
Master, it will be with heart against heart."

And one of the dogs with the spiked collars advanced. It was the spaniel, Rabbit's friend.
Like the wolf she had already suffered bitterly with hunger and her teeth chattered. Her ears
were wrinkled even when she raised them, and her straggly tail which looked like tufts of cotton
she held out rigid and motionless. Her eyes of the color of yellow raspberries were fixed on
Francis with the ardor of absolute Faith. And her two companions, who trustfully were getting
ready to listen to her, lowered their heads in sign of their ignorance and goodwill. They were
shepherd dogs, who had never heard anything but the sob of the sheep-bells, the bleating of
the flocks and the lash-like crack of the lightning on the summits, and, proud and happy, they
waited while the little spaniel bore witness.

She took a step forward. But not a sound came from her throat. She licked the hand of Francis,
and then lay down at his feet.

And the ewe bleated.

Her bleats were so full of sadness that it seemed as if she were already exhaling her soul
toward death at the very thought of leaving Francis. As she stood there in silence, her lamb,
seized by some strange melancholy, was suddenly heard, crying like a child.

And the ewe spoke:

"Neither the placidity of grassy meadows toned down by the mists of the dawn, nor the sweet
woods of the mountains dotted by the fog with the pearls of its silvery sweat, nor the beds
of straw of the smoke-filled cabins, are in any way comparable to the pasture-grounds of your
heart. Rather than leave you we should prefer the bloody and loathful slaughter-house, and
the rocking of the cart on which we are carried thither with our legs tied and our flanks and
cheeks on the boards. Oh Francis, it would be like unto death to us to lose you, for we love you."

And while the sheep spoke the owl and the hawks, perched near one another, remained motionless,
their eyes full of anguish and their wings pressed close to their sides lest they fly away.

The last one to speak was Rabbit.

Clothed in his fur of the color of stubble and earth he seemed like a god of the fields. In
the midst of the wintry waste he was like a clod of earth of the summer time. He made one think
of a road-mender or a rural postman. Tucked up in the windings of his flapping ears he carried
with himself the agitation of all sounds. One of the ears, extended toward the ground, listened
to the crackling of the frost, while the other, open to the distance, gathered in the blows
of an axe with which the dead forest resounded.

"Surely, Oh Francis," he said, "I can be satisfied with the mossgrown bark which has grown
tender beneath the caress of the snows and which wintry dawns have made fragrant. More than
once have I satisfied my hunger with it during these disastrous days when the briars have turned
into rose-colored crystals, and when the agile wagtail utters its shrill cry toward the larvae
which its beak can no longer reach beneath the ice along the banks. I shall continue to gnaw
these barks. For, Oh Francis, I do not wish to die with these gentle friends who are in their
agony, but rather I wish to live beside you and obtain my sustenance from the bitter fiber
of the trees."

       *       *       *       *       *

Therefore because the country of each of them was a different land where each could dwell only
by himself, Rabbit's companions chose not to separate, but to die together in this land harrowed
by winter.

One evening the doves which had become like dead leaves fell from the branch on which they
were perched, and the wolf closed his eyes on life, his muzzle resting on the sandal of Francis.
For two days his neck had been so weak that it could no longer support his head, and his spine
had become like the branch of a bramble bespattered with mud, shivering in the wind. His master
kissed him on the forehead.

Then the lamb, the sheep-dogs, the hawks, the owl, and the ewe gave up their souls, and finally
also the little spaniel whom Rabbit in vain had sought to keep warm. She passed away wagging
her tail, and it grieved stubble-colored Rabbit so much that it took until the following day
before he could touch the bark of the oaks again. 

       Astronomy and astrology being among the oldest sciences, the moon
early became known as "the Measurer," her varied motions, her influence
upon the tides, her connection with the generative functions, all
giving her a high place in the secret sciences.

While in a planetary sense the Queen of Sheba has in a manner been identified with the moon,
as Sabs, she was also connected with the sun, the same as Solomon
and the serpent.

When Moses lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness it was
specifically a part of sun worship.

The golden calf of Aaron was more closely connected with moon worship, although the serpentine path
of both these bodies in the heavens identified each with the serpent.

The occult knowledge which the Jews possessed in regard to those planets was borrowed by them from
Egypt, where for many ages the sun and the moon had been studied
in connection with their movements in the zodiac.

In that country these serpentine movements were symbolized by the uroeus, or asp, worn upon the
crown above the head of every Pharaoh. So closely was the Jewish religion connected with worship
of the planetary bodies that Moses is said to have disappeared upon Mount Nebo, a word which
shows the mountain to have been sacred to the moon; while Elijah ascending in a chariot of fire
is a record of sun worship. When the famous woman astronomer and astrologer, Queen of Sheba, visited
the symbolic King Solomon, it was for the purpose of proving him with hard planetary questions
and thus learning the depth of his astronomical and his astrological knowledge, which, thanks
to the planetary worship of the Jews, she found equal to her own.

We are further told that Solomon, not content with a princess from the royal house of Pharaoh
as wife, married seven hundred wives, all princesses, besides taking to himself three hundred
concubines. It is upon teachings of the Old Testament, and especially from this statement in regard
to Solomon, that the Mormons of Utah largely base their polygamous
doctrines, the revelations of Joseph Smith being upon the Solomon
line.

       Yet the Mormons have advanced in their treatment of women from the
time of Solomon.

While the revelations of Joseph Smith commended plural marriages, the system and the name of
concubinage was entirely omitted, each woman thus taken being endowed with the name of "wife."

The
polygamy of New York, of Chicago, of London, of Paris, of Vienna
and of other parts of the Christian world, like that of Solomon's
three hundred, is a system of concubinage in which the woman possesses
no legal rights, the mistress neither being recognized as wife, nor
her children as legitimate; whereas Mormon polygamy grants Mormon
respect to the second, the third, and to all subsequent wives.

The senility of old men is well illustrated in the case of Solomon,
despite Biblical reference to his great wisdom, as we learn that when
he became "old" he was led away by "strange" women, worshiping strange
gods to whom he erected temples and offered sacrifices.

To those who believe in the doctrine of re-incarnation, and who look
upon the Bible as an occult work written in symbolic language, Solomon's
reputed "wives" and "concubines" are regarded as symbolic of his incarnations,
the wives representing good incarnations and the concubines evil ones.

M. J. G.

1 Kings xvii.

8 And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,

9 Arise, get thee
to Zarephath, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow there
to sustain thee.

       

12 And she said, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse;
and I am gathering sticks, that I may dress it for me and my son,
that we may eat it, and die.

13 And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little
cake first, and after make for thee and for thy son.

14 For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall
the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth.

15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did
eat many days.

16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail.

17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman
fell sick; and there was no breath left in him.

18 And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto
me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?

19 And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he carried him up and laid him upon his own bed.

20
And he cried unto the Lord and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow
by slaying her son?

21 And be stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said,
O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again.

24

And the woman said, Now I know that thou art a man of God.

The history of Elijah the prophet begins somewhat abruptly, without
any mention of father, of family or of country.

He seems, as it were, suddenly to drop from the clouds. He does not come with glad tidings of joy
to the people; but with prophecies of a prolonged famine, in which there shall be neither rain nor
dew to moisten the earth, until King Ahab and his people repent of
their sins.

       Elijah himself was fed by ravens in a miraculous manner, and later
by a poor widow who had only just enough in her larder to furnish
one meal for herself and her son.

Here are a series of complications enough to stagger the faith of the strongest believer in the
supernatural.

But the poor widow meets him at the gates of the city as directed by the Lord, improvises bread
and water, takes him to her home and for two years treats him with all the kindness and the
attention which she would naturally give to one of her own kinsmen. "Oh! woman, great is thy
faith," exclaimed the prophet. Women are so easily deluded that most of the miracles of the
Bible are performed for their benefit; and, as in the case of the witch of Endor, she occasionally
performs some herself.

The widow believed that Elijah was "a man of God," and that she could
do whatever he ordered; that she could get water, though there had
been a drought for a long time; that although she had only a handful
of meal and a little cruse of oil, yet they would increase day by day.

"Never did corn or olives in the growing," says Bishop Hall, "increase as did that of the widow
in the using." During the two years in which she entertained the prophet, she enjoyed peace and
prosperity; but when she supposed that her son was dead, her faith
wavered; and she deplored her kindness to the prophet, and reproved
him for bringing sorrow upon her household.

However, as the prophet was able to restore him to life, her faith was restored also.

This is the first record which we have of the restoration of the dead
to life in the Bible; and it is the first also of any one ascending
into heaven "in a chariot of fire with horses of fire."

Probably Elijah knew how to construct a balloon. Much of the ascending and the descending of
seers, of angels and of prophets which astonished the ignorant was
accomplished in balloons--a lost art for many centuries.

No doubt that the poor widow, when she saw Elijah ascend, thought that he went straight to
heaven, though in all probability he landed at twilight in some retired corn field or olive
grove, at some distance from the point where his ascent took place.

The question is often asked where the ravens got the cooked meat and bread for the prophet. Knowing
their impelling instinct to steal, the Creator felt safe in trusting his prophet to their care,
and they proved themselves worthy his confidence.

Their rookeries were near the cave where Elijah was sequestered. Having keen olfactories, they
smelt the cooking of dainty viands from afar. Guided by this sense, they perched on a fence
near by where they could watch the movements of the cook, and when
her back was turned they flew in and seized the little birds and soft
shell crabs and carried them to Elijah, halting by the way only long
enough to satisfy their own imperative hunger.

Jezebel was Elijah's greatest enemy; yet the Lord bade him hide in
her country by the brook Cherith, that he might have plenty of water.

The Lord hid him so that the people should not besiege him to shorten the drought. So he was entirely
alone with the ravens, and had all his time for prayer and contemplation. When removed from
the care of the ravens, the Lord did not send him to the rich and
the prosperous, but to a poor widow, who, believing him a man of God,
ministered to his necessities.

       She did not suggest that he was a stranger to her and that water
cost money, but hastened to do whatever he ordered.

She had her recompense in the restoration of her son to life. In the prophet's struggle with
God for this blessing to the widow, the man appears to greater advantage than does the Master.

It
appears from the reports in our metropolitan journals that a railroad
is now about to be built from Tor to the summit of Mount Sinai.

The mountain is only accessible on one side. A depot, it is said, will be erected near the
spot where a stone cross was placed by the Russian Empress Helena, and where, according to
tradition, Moses stood when receiving the commandments. The railroad will also pass the cave
in which the prophet Elijah remained in hiding while fleeing from
the priest of Baal.

1 Kings xxi.

4 And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth had spoken
to him.

6 And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard
for money; and he answered, I will not.

7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and
let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth. And then carry him out, and
stone him, that he may die.

11 And the men of his city did as Jezebel had sent unto them. Then they carried him forth and
stoned him with stones, that he died.

14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is dead.

15 And it came to pass, when Jezebel beard that Naboth was dead, she said to Ahab, Arise, take
possession of the vineyard.

Jezebel, the daughter of the king of the Zidonians and the wife of Ahab, is generally referred
to as the most wicked and cruel woman on record; and her name is the synonym of all that is
evil. She came honestly by these characteristics, if it is true "that evil communications corrupt
good manners," as her husband Ahab was the most wicked of all the kings of Israel. And yet he
does not seem to have been a man of much fortitude; for in a slight disappointment in the purchase
of land he comes home in a hopeless mood, throws himself on his bed and turns his face to the
wall. According to the text, Jezebel was equal to the occasion. She not only infused new life
into Ahab, but got possession of the desired land, though in a most
infamous manner.

The false prophetess spoken of in Rev. ii., 20, is called Jezebel. She was a devout adherent
and worshiper of Baal and influenced Ahab to follow strange gods. He reigned twenty-two years
without one worthy action to gild his memory. Jezebel's death, like her life, was a tragedy
of evil.

E. C. S.

       

All we know about Jezebel is told us by a rival religionist, who hated
her as the Pope of Rome hated Martin Luther, or as an American A.
P. A. now hates a Roman Catholic.

Nevertheless, even the Jewish historian, evidently biassed against Jezebel by his theological prejudices
as he is, does not give any facts whatever which warrant the assertion that Jezebel was any
more satanic than the ancient Israelitish gentleman, to whom her theological views were opposed.
Of course we, at this stage of scientific thought, know that Jezebel's religion was not an admirable
one. Strangely enough, for a religion, it actually made her intolerant! But to Jezebel it was
a truth, for which she battled as bravely as Elijah did for what
he imagined to be eternal verity.

The facts, admitted even by the historian who hated her, prove that, notwithstanding her unfortunate
and childish conception of theology, Jezebel was a brave, fearless, generous woman, so wholly
devoted to her own husband that even wrong seemed justifiable to her, if she could thereby
make him happy. (In that respect she seems to have entirely fulfilled the Southern Methodist's
ideal of the pattern wife absorbed in her husband.) Four hundred of the preachers of her own
faith were fed at her table (what a pity we have not their opinion
of their benefactor!).

Elijah was the preacher of a new and rival religion, which Jezebel, naturally, regarded with
that same abhorrence which the established always feel for the innovating. To her, Elijahism
doubtless appeared as did Christianity to the Jews, Lutheranism to the Pope, or John Wesleyism
to the Church of England; but in the days of the Israelites the world
had not developed that sweet patience with heresy which animates the
Andover theologians of our time, and Jezebel had as little forbearance
with Elijah as had Torquemada with the Jews or Elizabeth with the
Puritans.

Yet, to do Jezebel justice, we must ask ourselves, how did the assumedly good Elijah proceed in order
to persuade her of the superiority of his truth?

It is painful to have to relate that that much overestimated "man of God" invited four hundred
and fifty of Jezebel's preachers to an open air exhibition of miracles, but, not satisfied with
gaining a victory over them in this display, he pursued his defeated rivals in religion, shouting,
"Let not one of them escape!" and thus roused the thoughtless mob of lookers-on to slaughter
the whole four hundred and fifty in cold blood! Jezebel had signalized her advent as queen by
slaying Israelitish preachers in order to put her own preachers in
office.

Elijah promptly retaliated at his earliest opportunity.

It seems to me that it would puzzle a disinterested person to decide which of those savage deeds
was more "satanic" than the other, and to imagine why Jezebel is now dragged forth to "shake her
gory locks" as a frightful example to the American women who ask for recognized right to self-government.
I submit, that if Jezebel is a disgrace to womankind, our dear brethren
at any rate have not much cause to be proud of Elijah, so, possibly,
we might strike a truce over the character of these two long-buried
worthies.

It may be well, though, to note here that the now most offensive epithet which the English translators
attached to Jezebel's name, originally signified nothing more than that she was consecrated to
the worship of a religion, rival to that which ancient Israel assumed to be "the only true
one."

E. B. D.

CHAPTER III.

       

2 Kings iv.

2 And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what hast thou in the house? And
she said, Thine handmaid hath not anything save a pot of oil.

3 Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors,

4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door and shalt pour out into all those vessels,
and thou shalt set aside that which is full.

5 So she shut the door and poured out.

6 And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son, Bring me yet
a vessel.

The first Book of Kings had an illustrious beginning in the glories
of the kingdom of Israel when it was entirely under King David and
in the beginning of the reign of Solomon; but the second book has
a melancholy outlook in the desolation and division of the kingdom
of Israel and of Judea.

Then Elijah and Elisha, their prophets, instructed the princes and the people in all that would
come to pass, the captivity of the ten tribes, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the good reigns
of Josiah and of Hezekiah.

This book contains the mention of four women, but only in a perfunctory manner, more to exhibit
the accomplishments of the prophet Elisha than his beneficiaries.

He raises the dead, surpasses our Standard Oil Company in the production of that valuable article
of commerce, cures one man of leprosy and cruelly fastens the disease on his servant for being
guilty of a pardonable prevarication. Only one of the women mentioned has a name. One is the
widow of a prophet, whom Elisha helps to pay off all her debts; for another he intercedes with
the Lord to give her a son; another, is the little captive maid of
the tribe of Israel; and the last a wicked queen, Athaliah, who sought
to kill the heir apparent.

She rivalled Jezebel in her evil propensities and suffered the same tragic death.

As the historian proceeds from book to book less is said of the mothers of the various tribes,
unless some deed of darkness is called for, that the men would fain avoid, then some Jezebel is
resurrected for that purpose. They are seldom required to rise to a higher moral altitude than
the men of the tribe, and are sometimes permitted to fall below it.

2 Kings iv.

9 And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this
is a holy man of God.

       

10 Let us make a little chamber on the wall. And she came and stood before him. And he said, Thou
shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid.

17 And the woman bare a son.

18 And when the child was grown, he went out to his father to the reapers.

19 And said, My head, my head!

24 And she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive; slack not thy riding, except I bid
thee.

25 So she went unto the man of God to Mount Carmel.

32 And when Elisha was come into the house, behold the child was dead.

33 He went in and shut the door and prayed unto the Lord. In his travels about the country he
often passed the city of Shunem, where he heard of a great woman
who was very hospitable and had a rich husband.

She had often noticed the prophet passing by; and knowing that he was a godly man, and that he
could be better entertained at her house than elsewhere, she proposed
to her husband to invite him there.

       So they arranged an apartment for him in a quiet part of the house
that he might have opportunities for worship and contemplation.

After spending much time under her roof, he naturally desired to make some recompense. So he asked
her if there was anything that he could do for her at court, any favor which she desired of the
king. But she said "no," as she had all the blessings which she desired, except, as they had
great wealth and no children to inherit it, she would like a son. She had probably heard of
all that the Lord had done in that line for Sarah and Rebecca and the wives of Manoah and Elkanah;
so she was not much surprised when the prophet suggested such a contingency; and she bare a son.

In
due time, when the son was grown, he was taken suddenly ill and died. The mother supposed
that, as by a miracle he was brought into life, the prophet might
raise him from the dead.

       Accordingly, she harnessed her mule and hastened to the prophet,
who promptly returned with her and restored him to life.

She was a very discreet and judicious woman and her husband had always entrusted everything
to her management. She was devout and conscientious and greatly enjoyed the godly conversation of
the prophet. She was known in the city as a great and good woman. Though we find here and there
among the women of the Bible some exceptionally evil minded, yet
the wise and virtuous predominate, and, fortunately for the race,
this is the case in the American Republic to-day.

Naaman, a Syrian general and prime minister, was a great man in a
great place. He was happy, too, in that he had been serviceable to
his country and honored by his prince. But alas! he was a leper. It
was generally supposed that this was an affliction for evil doing,
but Naaman was an exceptionally perfect man.

A little maid from Israel
had been carried captive into Syria and fortunately was taken into
the family of the great general, as an attendant on his wife. While
making the wife's toilet they no doubt chatted quite freely of what
was going on in the outside world. So the little maid, sympathizing
with her master in his affliction, told the wife there was a prophet
in Israel who could cure him of his leprosy. Her earnestness roused
him and his wife to make the experiment. But after loading his white
mules with many valuable gifts, and taking a great retinue of soldiers
to dazzle the prophet with Syrian magnificence, the prophet did not
deign to meet him, but sent word to him to bathe in the river Jordan.
Even a letter from the king did not ensure a personal interview. So
the general, with all his pomp, went off in great wrath. "Are not,"
said he, "the rivers of Damascus, Abana and Pharpar, greater than
the Jordan? Cannot all the skill in Syria accomplish as much as the
prophet in Israel?" However, the little maid urged him to try the
river Jordan, as he was near that point, so he did and was healed.

2
Kings viii.

Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored
to life, saying, sojourn wheresoever thou canst for a famine shall
come upon the land seven years.

In due time her husband died; and
there was a famine; and she went for a season to the land of the Philistines;
and when she returned she could not recover her possessions. Then
Elisha befriended her and appealed to the king; and she was reinstated
in her own home.

Elisha was very democratic. He had his servant sleep
in his own chamber and consulted him in regard to many important matters.
Gehazi never forgot his place but once, when he ran after the great
Syrian general to ask for the valuable presents which the prophet
had declined. Both Elijah and Elisha preferred to do their missionary
work among the common people, finding them more teachable and superstitious.
Especially is this true of woman at all periods. In great revival
seasons in our own day, one will always see a dozen women on the anxious
seat to one man, and the same at the communion table.

2 Kings xi.

3
And he was with her hid in the house of the Lord six years. And Athaliah
did reign over the land.

14 And hen she looked, behold, the king
stood by a pillar; and she rent her clothes and cried, Treason, treason.

20
And they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king's house.

21
Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.

Never was royal
blood more profusely shed, and never a meaner ambition than to destroy
a reigning family in order to be the last occupant on the throne.
The daughter of a king, the wife of a king, and the mother of a king,
should have had some mercy on her family descendants. Personal ambition
can never compensate for the loss of the love and companionship of
kindred. Oh
harvester of the second crop, for what do you search so restlessly here where there is no more
restlessness, and where never more will you feel the hunting-dogs' breath on your poor skin?"

"Oh my friend," answered he, "what am I seeking? I am seeking my God. As long as you were my
God on earth I felt at peace. But in this Paradise where I have lost my way, because your presence
is no longer with me, Oh divine brother of the beast, my soul feels suffocated for I do not
find my God."

"Do you think, then," said Francis, "that God abandons rabbits, and that they alone of the
whole world have no title to Paradise?"

"No," Rabbit replied, "I have given no thought to such things. I would have followed you because
I came to know you as intimately as the earthly hedge on which the lambs hung the warm flakes
of snow with which I used to line and keep warm my nest. Vainly I have sought throughout these
heavenly meadows this God of whom you are speaking. But while my companions discovered Him
at once and found their Paradise, I lost my way. From the day when you left us and from the
instant that I gained Heaven, my childish and untamed heart has beaten with homesickness for
the earth.

"Oh Francis, Oh my friend, Oh you in whom alone I have faith, give back to me my earth. I feel
that I am not at home here. Give back to me my furrows full of mud, give back to me my clayey
paths. Give back to me my native valley where the horns of the hunters make the mists stir.
Give back to me the wagon-track on the roadway from which I heard sound the packs of hounds
with their hanging ears, like an angelus. Give back to me my timidity. Give back to me my fright.
Give back to me the agitation that I felt when suddenly a shot swept the fragrant mint beneath
my bounds, or when amid the bushes of wild quince my nose touched the cold copper of a snare.
Give back to me the dawn upon the waters from which the skillful fisherman withdraws his lines
heavy with eels. Give back to me the blue gleaning under the moon, and my timid and clandestine
loves amid the wild sorrel, where I could no longer distinguish the rosy tongue of my beloved
from the dew-laden petal of the eglantine which had fallen upon the grass. Give back to me
my weakness, oh thou, my dear heart. And go, and say unto God, that I can no longer live with Him."

"Oh Rabbit," Francis answered, "my friend, gentle and suspicious like a peasant, Oh Rabbit
of little faith, you blaspheme. If you have not known how to find your God it is because in
order to find this God, you would have had to die like your companions."

"But if I die, what will become of me?" cried he with the hide of the color of stubble.

And Francis said:

"If you die you will become your Paradise."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus talking they reached the edge of the Paradise of beasts. There the Paradise of men began.
Rabbit turned his head, and read at the top of a sign-post on a plate of blue cast-iron where
an arrow indicated the direction

Castétis to Balansun--5 M.

The day was so hot that the letters of the inscription seemed to quiver in the dull light of
summer.

And Rabbit saw a horse and a covered cart approaching.

       *       *       *       *       *

This doubt was a leaden grain of shot which had just passed through the nape of his neck behind
his long ears into his brain. A veil of blood more beautiful than the glowing autumn floated
before his eyes in which the shadows of eternity rose. He cried out. The fingers of a huntsman
pinioned his throat, strangled him, suffocated him. His heart-beat grew weaker and weaker;
this heart which used to flutter like the pale wild rose in the wind dissolving at the morning
hour when the hedge softly caresses the lambs. An instant he remained motionless, hollow-flanked
and drawn-out like Death itself in the grasp of his murderer. Then poor old Rabbit leaped up.
He clawed in vain for the ground which he could no longer reach because the man did not let
go of him. Rabbit passed away drop by drop.

Suddenly his hair stood erect, and he became like unto the stubble of summer where he formerly
dwelled beside his sister, the quail, and the poppy, his brother; and like unto the clayey
earth which had wetted his beggar's paws; and like unto the gray-brown color with which September
days clothe the hill whose shape he had assumed; like unto the rough cloth of Francis; like
unto the wagon-track on the roadway from which he heard the packs of hounds with hanging ears,
singing like the angelus; like unto the barren rock which the wild thyme loves. In his look
where now floated a mist of bluish night there was something like unto the blessed meadow where
the heart of his beloved awaited him at the heart of the wild sorrel. The tears which he shed
were like unto the fountain of the seraphs at which sat the old fisher of eels repairing his
lines. He was like unto life, like unto death, like unto himself, like unto his Paradise.

END OF THE ROMANCE OF THE RABBIT

TALES

PARADISE

The poet looked at his friends, his relatives, the priest, the doctor, and the little dog,
who were in the room. Then he died. Some one wrote his name and age on a piece of paper. He
was twenty-eight years.

As they kissed his forehead his friends and relatives found that he was cold, but he could
not feel their lips because he was in heaven. And he did not ask as he had done when he was
on earth, whether heaven was like this or like that. Since he was there, he had no need of
anything else.

His mother and father, whether or not they had died before him, came to meet him. They did
not weep any more than he, for the three had really never been separated.

His mother said to him:

"Put out the wine to cool, we are about to dine with the Bon Dieu under the green arbor of
the Garden of Paradise."

His father said to him:

"Go down and cull of the fruits. There is none that is poisonous. The trees will offer them
to you of their own accord, without sufferance either to their leaves or their branches, for
they are inexhaustible."

The poet was filled with joy in being able to obey his parents. When he had returned from the
orchard and submerged the bottles of wine in the water, he saw his old dog. It too had died
before him, and it came gently running toward him, wagging its tail. It licked his hands, and
he patted it. Beside it were all the animals he had loved best while on earth: a little red
cat, two little gray cats, two little white cats, a bullfinch, and two goldfish.

Then he saw that the table was set and about it were seated the Bon Dieu, his father and mother,
and a lovely young girl whom he had loved here-below on earth. She had followed him to heaven
even though she was not dead.

He saw that the Garden of Paradise was none other than that of his own birthplace here on earth,
in the high reaches of the Pyrenees, all filled with lilies and pomegranates and cabbages.

The Bon Dieu had laid his hat and stick on the ground. He was garbed like the poor on the great
highways, those who have only a morsel of bread in their wallet, and whom the magistrates arrest
at the town gates, and throw into prison, since they know not how to write their name. His
beard and hair were white like the great light of day, and his eyes profound and black like
the night. He spoke, and his voice was very soft:

"Let the angels come and minister unto us, for to serve is their happiness."

Then from all corners of the heavenly orchard legions were seen to hasten. They were the faithful
servitors who here on earth had loved the poet and his family. Old Jean was there, he who was
drowned while saving a little boy, old Marie who had fallen dead under a sunstroke, and lame
Pierre was there and Jeanne and still another Jeanne.

Then the poet rose to do them honor, and said unto them:

"Sit down in my place, it is meet that you should be near God."

And God smiled because he knew in advance what their answer would be.

"Our happiness is service. This puts us close to God. Do you not serve your father and mother?
Do they not serve Him who serves us?"

And suddenly he saw that the table had grown larger and that new guests were seated about it.
They were the father and mother of his mother and father, and the generations that had gone
before them.

Evening fell. The older of the people slumbered. Love held the poet and his sweetheart.

CHARITY CHILDREN

One day the souls of the charity children cried out to God. It was on a stormy evening when
their fevers and wounds made them suffer more than ever. They lay white with grief in their
rows of beds, above which ignoble science had hung the placards of their maladies.

They were sad, very sad, for it was a day of festival. Their tiny arms were stretched out on
the coverlets, and with their transparent hands they touched the meager toys that pious grand
ladies had brought them. They did not even know what to do with these playthings. A President
of the Republic had visited them, but they had not understood what it meant.

Their souls cried out toward God. They said:

"We are the daughters of misery, of scrofula, and of syphilis. We are the daughters of daughters
of shame."

"I," said one, "was dragged out of a cesspool where in her distraction my mother, the servant
of an inn, had thrown me." Another said: "I was born of a child with an enormous head that
had a red gap in the forehead. My father killed my mother, and he killed himself."

Still others said:

"We are the survivors of abortions and infanticides. Our mothers are on the lists. Our fathers,
cigar in mouth, saunter smiling amid the tumult of business and the markets. We are born like
kings with a crown on our heads, a crown of red rash."

And God, hearing their cry, came down toward these souls. He entered the hospital of more than
human sorrows. At his approach the fumes rose from the medicaments which the good sisters had
prepared, as though from censers by the side of the child martyrs, who sat up in their narrow
cots like white, weary flowers.

The sovereign Master said to them:

"Here I am. I heard your call, and am waiting to condemn those that caused you to be born.
What torment do you implore for them?"

Then the souls of the children sang like the bindweed of the hedges.

They sang:

"Glory to God! Glory to God! Pardon those who gave us birth. Lead us some day to Heaven by
their side."

THE PIPE

Once upon a time there was a young man who had a new pipe. He was smoking peacefully in the
shade of an arbor hung with blue grapes. His wife was young and pretty; she had rolled up her
sleeves as far as her elbows and was drawing water from the well. The wooden bucket bounded
against the edge, and shed tears like a rainbow. The young man was happy smoking his pipe,
because he saw the birds flying hither and thither, because his dear old mother was still among
the living, because his old father was hale, and because he loved with all his heart his young
wife, and was proud of her lithesomeness and her firm and smooth breasts that were like two
ripe apples.

The young man, as I have said, was smoking a new pipe.

His mother fell very ill. They had to operate, and it made her cry out aloud, until after thirty-four
days of horrible suffering she died. His father, who was always so hale, was talking one day
with a workman at the door of the little village church, which was undergoing repair, when
a stone became detached from the arch and crushed his head. The devoted son wept for these,
his best and oldest friends, and, at night, he sobbed in the arms of his pretty wife.

The young man, as I have said, was smoking a new pipe.

But I have forgotten to say that he had an old spaniel of whom he was very fond and whose name
was Thomas.

A very great illness had fallen on Thomas, since the good mother's and the good father's deaths.
When he was called he could barely drag himself along by the paws of his fore-legs.

One day a man of the world took residence in the little village where the young man was smoking
a new pipe. He wore decorations and was distinguished and spoke with an agreeable accent. They
became acquainted, and once, when the young man still smoking his new pipe entered his house
unexpectedly, he found this fine fellow abed with his pretty wife whose firm and smooth breasts
were like two ripe apples.

The young man said nothing. He placed a poor old collar around the neck of Thomas, and with
a line which his mother had once used to hang clothes upon, he dragged him along to a huge
town, where the two dwelled together in sorrow and want.

The young man had now become an old man, but he was still smoking his new pipe which too had
become old.

One evening Thomas died. People came from the police department, and carried off his carcass
somewhere.

The old man was now all alone with his old pipe. A great cold fell upon him and a terrible
trembling. And he knew that his time had come, and that he never would be able to smoke again.
So from the wretched bag which he once had brought with him from his home, he took a sad old
hat, and in this he wrapped his pipe.

Then he threw a cape, greenish with age, about his feverish shoulders, and dragged himself
painfully to a little square near by, taking care that no policeman should see him. He knelt
down, and dug in the earth with his finger nails, and devoutly buried his old pipe underneath
a tuft of flowers. Then he returned to his dwelling-place and died.

MAL DE VIVRE

A poet, Laurent Laurini by name, was sick unto death with the illness, called weariness of
life. It is a terrible malady, and those who have fallen prey to it are unable to look upon
men, animals, and things without frightful suffering. Great scruples poison his heart.

The poet went away from the town where he dwelled. He sought out the fields to gaze at the
trees and the corn and the waters, to listen to the quails that sing like fountains and to
the falling of the weavers' looms and the hum of the telegraph wires. These things and these
sounds saddened him.

The gentlest thoughts were bitterness to him. And when he picked a little flower in order to
escape his terrible malady, he wept because he had plucked it.

He entered a village on an evening sweet with the perfume of pears. It was a beautiful village
like those he had often described in his books. There was a town square, a church, a cemetery,
gardens, a smithy, and a dark inn. Blue smoke rose from it, and within was the sheen of glasses.
There was also a stream which wound in and out under the wild nut-trees.

The poet with his sick heart sat down mournfully on a stone. He was thinking of the torment
he was enduring, of his old mother crying because of his absence, of the women who had deceived
him, and he had homesickness for the time of his first communion.

"My heart," he thought, "my sad heart cannot change."

Suddenly he saw a young peasant-girl near by gathering her geese under the stars. She said to him:

"Why do you weep?"

He answered:

"My soul was hurt in falling upon the earth. I cannot be cured because my heart is too heavy."

"Will you have mine?" she said. "It is light. I will take yours and carry it easily. Am I not
accustomed to burdens?"

He gave her his heart and took hers. Immediately they smiled at each other and hand in hand
they followed the pathway.

The geese went in front of them like bits of the moon.

       *       *       *       *       *

She said to him:

"I know that you are wise, and that I cannot know what you know. But I know that I love you.
You are from elsewhere, and you must have been born in a wonderful cradle like that I once
saw in a cart. It belonged to rich people. Your mother must speak beautifully. I love you.
You must have loved women with very white faces, and I must seem ugly and black to you. I was
not born in a wonderful cradle. I was born in the wheat of the fields at harvest time. They
have told me this, and also that my mother and I and a little lamb to which a ewe had given
birth on that same day were carried home on an ass. Rich people have horses."

He said to her:

"I know that you are simple, and that I cannot be like you. But I know that I love you. You
are from here, and you must have been rocked in a basket placed on a black chair like that
which I have seen in a picture. I love you. Your mother must spin linen. You must have danced
under the trees with strong handsome laughing boys. I must seem sick and sad to you. I was
not born in the fields at harvest time. We were born in a beautiful room, I and a little twin
sister who died at birth. My mother was sick. Poor people are strong."

Then they embraced more closely on the bed where they lay together.

She said to him:

"I have your heart."

He said to her:

"I have your heart."

       *       *       *       *       *

They had a sweet little boy.

And the poet, feeling that the illness which had so weighed upon him had fled, said to his wife:

"My mother does not know what has become of me. My heart is wrung with that thought. Let me
go to the town, my beloved, and tell her that I am happy and that I have a son."

She smiled at him, knowing that his heart was hers, and said:

"Go."

And he went back by the way he had come.

He was soon at the gates of the town in front of a magnificent residence. There was laughter
and chatter within for they were giving a feast, one to which the poor were not invited. The
poet recognized the house, as that of an old friend of his, a rich and celebrated artist. He
stopped to listen to the conversation before the latticed gate of the park through which fountains
and statues could be seen. He recognized the voice of a woman. She was beautiful, and once
had broken his boyish heart. She was saying:

"Do you remember the great poet, Laurent Laurini?...They say he has made a mésalliance, and
has married a cowherd...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tears rose to his eyes, and he continued his way through the streets of the town until he came
to the house where he was born. The paving-stones replied softly to the words of his tired
steps. He pushed open his door and entered. And his old dog, faithful and gentle as ever, ran
limpingly to meet him; it barked with joy, and licked his hand. He saw that since his departure
the poor beast had had some sort of stroke or paralysis, for time and trouble afflict the bodies
of animals as well.

Laurent Laurini mounted the stairs, keeping close to the bannisters, and he was deeply moved,
when he saw the old cat turn around, arch her back, raise her tail, and rub against the steps.
On the landing the clock struck, as if in gratitude.

He entered her room gently. He saw his mother on her knees praying. She was saying:

"Dear God, I pray unto Thee, that my son may still be among the living. Oh my God, he has suffered
much...Where is he? Forgive me for this that I have given him birth. Forgive him for this that
he is causing me to die."

Then he knelt down beside her, laying his young lips on her poor gray hair, and said:

"Come with me. I am healed. I know a land where there are trees and corn and waters, where
quails sing, where the looms of the weavers fall, where the telegraph wires hum, where a poor
woman dwells who holds my heart, and where your grandson is playing."

THE TRAMWAY

Once upon a time there was a very industrious workman who had a good wife and a charming little
daughter. They lived in a great city.

It was the father's birthday and to celebrate it they bought beautiful white salad and a chicken
made for roasting. Every one was happy that Sunday morning, even the little cat that looked
slyly at the fowl, saying to herself: "I shall have good bones to pick."

After they had eaten breakfast, the father said:

"We are going to be extravagant for once, and ride in a tram to the suburbs."

They went out.

They had many times seen well-dressed men and beautiful ladies give a signal to the driver
of the tram, who immediately stopped his horses to permit them to get on.

The honest workman was carrying his little girl. His wife and he stopped at a street-corner.

A tram, shiny with paint, came toward them, almost empty. And they felt a great joy when they
thought of how they were going to enter it for four sous apiece. And the honest workman signaled
to the conductor to stop the horses. But he seeing they were poor simple people looked at them
disdainfully, and would not halt his vehicle.

ABSENCE

At eighteen Pierre left the home in the country where he had been born.

At the very moment when he left, his old mother was ill in bed in the blue room, where there
were the daguerreotype of his father and peacock-feathers in a vase and a clock representing
Paul and Virginia. Its hands pointed to the hour of three.

In the courtyard under the fig-tree his grandfather was resting.

In the garden his fiancée stood among roses and gleaming pear-trees.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pierre went to earn his living in a country where there were negroes and parrots and india-rubber
trees and molasses and fevers and snakes.

He dwelled there thirty years.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the very moment when he returned to the home in the country where he had been born, the
blue room had faded to white, his mother was reposing in the bosom of heaven, the picture of
his father was no longer there, the peacock-feathers and the vase had disappeared. Some sort
of object stood in the clock's place.

In the courtyard under the fig-tree where his grandfather, who had long since died, had been
accustomed to rest, there were broken plates and a poor sick chicken.

In the garden of roses and gleaming pear-trees where his fiancée had stood, there was an old woman.

The story does not tell who she was.

THE HIGHWAY OF LIFE

One day a poet sat down at a table to write a story. Not a single idea would come to him, but
nevertheless he was happy, because the sun shone on a geranium on the window-sill, and because
a gnat flew about in the blue of the open window.

Suddenly his life appeared before him like a great white road. It began in a dark grove where
there were laughing waters, and ended at a quiet grave overgrown with brambles, nettles, and
soapwort.

In the dark grove he found the guardian-angel of his childhood. He had the golden wings of
a wasp, fair hair, and a face as calm as the water of a well on a summer's day.

The guardian-angel said to the poet:

"Do you remember when you were a child? You came here with your father and mother who were
going fishing. The field near by was warm and covered with flowers and grasshoppers. The grasshoppers
looked like broken blades of moving grass. Do you wish to see this place again, my friend?"

The poet answered: "Yes."

So they went together as far as the blue river over which there were the blue sky and the dark
nut-trees.

"Behold your childhood," said the angel.

The poet looked at the water and wept and said:

"I no longer see the reflection of the beloved faces of my mother and father. They used to
sit on the bank. They were calm, good, and happy. I had on a white pinafore which was always
getting dirty, and mamma cleaned it with her handkerchief. Dear angel, tell me what has become
of the reflections of their beloved faces? I no longer see them. I no longer see them."

At that moment a cluster of wild nuts dropped from a hazel-tree and floated down the stream
of water.

And the angel said to the poet:

"The reflection of your father and mother went on with the stream of water like those nuts.
For everything obeys the current, substance as well as shadow. The image of your beloved parents
is merged in the water and what remains is called memory. Recollect and pray. And you will
find the dearly loved images again."

And as an azure kingfisher darted above the reeds, the poet cried:

"Dear angel! Do I not see the color of my mother's eyes in the wings of that bird?"

And the divine spirit answered:

"It is as you have said. But look again."

From the top of a tree where a turtle-dove had built her nest a downy white feather fell soaring
and eddying to the water.

And the poet cried:

"Dear angel! Is not this white down, my mother's gentle purity?"

And the divine spirit answered:

"It is as you have said."

A light breeze ruffled the water and made the leaves rustle.

The poet asked:

"Is not that the grave sweet voice of my father?"

And the spirit answered:

"It is as you have said."

Then they walked along the road which left the grove and followed the river. And soon under
the glare of the sun the road became white, very white. It was like the linen at Holy Communion.
To the right and left hidden springs tinkled like pious bells. And the angel said:

"Do you recognize this part of your life?"

"This is the day of my first communion," answered the poet. "I remember the church and the
happy faces of my mother and grandmother. I was happy and sad at the same time. With what fervor
I knelt! Thrills ran through my hair. That evening at family supper they kissed me and said:
'He was the most beautiful.'"

And in recalling this the poet burst into sobs. And as he wept he became as beautiful as on
the day of the blessed ceremony. His tears flowed through his hands like holy water.

And they went on along the road.

The day waned a little. The supple poplars swayed gently along the ditches. At a distance one
of them in the center of a field looked like a tall young girl. The sky tinted it so delicately
that it was pale and blue like the temple of a virgin.

And the poet dreamed of the first woman he had loved.

And his guardian-angel said to him:

"This love was so pure and so sad that it did not offend me."

And as they walked along, the shade was sweet. Lambs passed by. And seeing the sadness of the
poet the divine spirit had on his lips a smile, grave and gentle like that of a dying mother.
And the trembling of his golden wings pursued the whispers of the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon the stars were lighted in the silence.

And the sky resembled a father's bed surrounded by wax tapers and dumb sorrows. And the night
seemed like a great widow kneeling upon the earth.

"Do you recognize this?" asked the angel.

The poet made no answer but knelt down.

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally they reached the end of the road near the small quiet grave overgrown with brambles,
nettles, and soapwort.

And the angel said to the poet:

"I wished to show you your way. Here you will sleep, not far from the waters. Every day they
will bring you the image of your memories: the azure of the kingfisher like your mother's eyes,
the down of the turtle-dove like her sweetness, the echo of the leaves like the grave calm
voice of your father, the reflected brightness of the road white as your first communion, and
the form of your beloved supple as a poplar.

"At last the waters will bring you the great luminous Night."

INTELLIGENCE

One day the books which contained the wisdom of men disappeared by enchantment.

Then the great scholars assembled: those who were engaged in mathematics, in physics, in chemistry,
in astronomy, in poetry, in history, and in other arts and letters.

They held counsel and said:

"We are the custodians of human genius. We will recall the noblest inventions of the wisest
of men and the greatest of poets and have them graven in immortal marble. They will represent
only the supreme summits of achievement since the beginning of the world. Pascal shall be entitled
to but one thought, Newton to but one star, Darwin to but one insect, Galileo to but one grain
of dust, Tolstoi to but one charity, Heinrich Heine to but one verse, Shakespeare to but one
cry, Wagner to but one note...."

Then as the scholars summoned their thoughts to recall the masterpieces indispensable to the
salvation of man, they realized with terror that their brains were void.

THE TWO GREAT ACTRESSES

I wish I could find new words to depict the gentleness of a little prostitute whom we met one
evening in the center of a large, almost deserted square. The little prostitute was wearing
wretched boots that were too large and soaked up the water. She had a parasol covered like
an umbrella, and a little straw hat, the lining of which surely bore the words: Dernière mode.

She had a weak little voice, and she was intelligent. She was recovering, as the expression
goes, from pleurisy. Moreover, she had the air of being as frail morally as physically.

I encountered her many times, after ten o'clock, when she was weary with seeking, often in
vain, for any first-comer who would go with her.

She sat down on a bench in the shadows, beside me, and rested her poor pale head against me.

I knew that when she did this it was somewhat with the feeling of slight consolation, like
that of a poor animal when it no longer feels itself abused. I was held by an infinite pity
for this friend. I knew that she looked at her trade as an important task, however ungrateful
it was. For a long time she waited thus for the train to the suburb where she lived.

One evening she asked if she might go with me to the end of the street.

We came to a great lighted square where there was a large theater. On one of the pillars of
this edifice was a brilliant, gilded poster. It represented Sarah Bernhardt in the costume
of Tosca, I believe. She wore a stiff rich robe and held a palm in her hand. And I called to
mind the things I had been told of this famous woman: her caprices that were immediately obeyed,
her extravagances, her coffin, her pride.

I felt the poor little sufferer trembling at my side. She saw this barbarous idol rise up and
throw unconsciously upon her the splattering flood of her golden ornaments.

And I had a desire to cry out with grief at this meeting face to face of the two. And I said
to myself:

"They are both born of woman. One holds a palm, and the other an old umbrella so shabby that
she does not dare to open it before me.

"The one trails an admiring throng at her feet, and the other tatters of leather. The one sells
her sorrow for the weight of gold and not a sob comes from her mouth that does not have the
clinking sound of gold. Not a single sob of the other is heard."

And something cried aloud within me:

"The one is a human actress. She is applauded because she is of the same clay as those who
listen to her. And they have need of the lie on which the most beautiful roles are builded.

"But the other, she is an actress of God. She plays a part so great and so sorrowful that she
has not found one man who understands her and who is rich enough to pay her.

"And the great actress has never attained, even in her most beautiful roles, the true genius
of sorrow which makes the little prostitute rest her forehead upon me."

THE GOODNESS OF GOD

She was a dainty and delicate little creature who worked in a shop. She was, perhaps, not very
intelligent, but she had soft, black eyes. They looked at you a little sadly, and then drooped.
You felt that she was affectionate and commonplace with that tender commonplaceness, which
real poets understand, and which is the absence of hate.

You knew that she was as simple as the modest room in which she lived alone with her little
cat that some one had given her. Every morning before she went to the shop, she left for her
a little bit of milk in a bowl.

And like her gentle mistress the little cat had sad, kind eyes. She warmed herself on the window-sill
in the sun beside a pot of basil. Sometimes she licked her little paw, and used it as a brush
on the short fur of her head. Sometimes she played with a mouse.

One day the cat and the mistress both found themselves pregnant, the one by a handsome fellow
who deserted her, and the other by a beautiful tom-cat who also went his way.

But there was this difference. The poor girl became ill, very ill, and passed her days sobbing.
The little cat made for herself a kind of joyous cradling-place in the sun where it shone upon
her white, drolly inflated abdomen.

The cat's lover had come later than the girl's. So things happened that they were both confined
at the same time.

One day the little working-girl received a letter from the handsome fellow who had deserted
her. He sent her twenty-five francs, and spoke of his generosity to her. She bought charcoal,
a burner, and a sou's worth of matches. Then she killed herself.

When she had entered heaven, which a young priest had at first tried to prevent, the dainty
and delicate creature trembled because that she was pregnant and that the Bon Dieu would condemn
her.

But the Bon Dieu said to her:

"My dear young friend, I have made ready for you a charming room. Go there for your confinement.
Everything ends happily in heaven and you will not die. I love little children and suffer them
to come unto me."

And when she entered the little room which had been made ready for her in the great Hospital
of Divine Mercy, she saw that God had arranged a surprise for her. There in a box lay the cat
she loved, and there was also a pot of basil on the window-sill. She lay down.

She had a pretty, little, golden-haired daughter, and the cat had four sweet, delightfully
black kittens.

THE LITTLE NEGRESS

Sometimes my imagination is fascinated by the yellowing of old ocean charts, and in my feverish
brain I hear the roaring of monsoons. What then? Must I, in order to have an interest in this
present life, exhume that which, perhaps, I led before my birth, between two black suns?

It was a vague region, abounding in stars and in the diffused sobbing of an ocean. There was
a scratching at my door, and I said, "Come in."

A young negress in a loose blue loincloth, reaching halfway down her thighs, entered. She crouched
down on the ground, and held out her thin clasped hands toward me. And I saw that her bare
arms were covered with the blows of a lash.

"Who did this to you, Assumption?" I asked.

She did not answer, but all her limbs trembled, for she did not understand, and wondered, perhaps,
whether I too was about to inflict some brutality upon her.

Gently I removed her garment, and saw that her back also was wounded. I washed it. But she,
frightened by such kindness, fled for refuge under the table of my cabin. My eyes filled with
tears. I tried to call her back. But her glance, like that of a beaten dog, shrank from me.
I had a few potatoes, and a little butter. I mashed them to a pulp with a wooden spoon, and
placed it in a bowl at some distance from the crouching Assumption. Then I lighted my pipe.

At the end of an hour the poor creature began to move. She put one arm forward, then the other,
and then a knee. I thought she was directing her attention toward the food in order to eat.
But to my astonishment, I saw her crawl on hands and knees toward a corner of the room, where
I had left a few flowers lying. She rose up quickly, and with a sudden movement seized them.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was perhaps a hundred and fifty years after this adventure occurred, that I met Assumption
again. At least I was convinced that it was she. It was in Bordeaux at the Restaurant du Pérou.
She was drying the glass of a gloomy student who had not found it clean enough.

THE PARADISE OF BEASTS

Once on a rainy midnight a poor old horse, harnessed to a cab, was drowsing in front of a dingy
restaurant from whence came the laughter of women and young people.

And the poor spiritless animal with drooping head and shaking limbs made a sorry spectacle,
as he stood there waiting the pleasure of the roisterers, that would at last permit him to
go home to his reeking stable.

Half asleep, the horse heard the coarse jokes of these men and women. He had long since grown
painfully accustomed to it. His poor brain understood that there was no difference between
the monotonous unchanging screech of a turning wheel and the shrill voice of a prostitute.

And this evening he dreamed vaguely of the time when he had been a little colt that had gamboled
on a smooth field, quite pink amid the green grass, and how his mother had given him to suck.

Suddenly he fell stone dead on the slippery pavement.

He reached the gate of heaven. A great scholar, who was waiting for St. Peter to come and open
the gate, said to the horse:

"What are you doing here? You have no right to enter heaven. I have the right because I was
born of a woman."

And the poor horse answered:

"My mother was a gentle mare. She died in her old age with her blood sucked out by leeches.
I have come to ask the Bon Dieu if she is here."

Then the gate of Heaven was opened to the two who knocked upon it, and the Paradise of animals
appeared.

And the old horse recognized his mother, and she recognized him.

She greeted him by neighing. And when they were both in the great heavenly meadow the horse
was filled with joy in finding again his old companions in misery and in seeing them happy forever.

There were some who had drawn stones along the slippery pavements of cities, and they had been
beaten with whips, and had finally fallen under the weight of the wagons. There were some who
with bandaged eyes had turned the merry-go-rounds ten hours a day. There were mares killed
in bullfights before the eyes of young girls, who, rosy with joy, watched the intestines of
these unhappy beasts sweep the hot sand of the arena. There were many more, and then still more.

And they all grazed eternally in the great plain of divine tranquillity.

Moreover, the other animals were happy here also.

The cats, mysterious and delicate, did not even obey the Bon Dieu who smiled upon them. They
played with the end of a string patting it lightly with an important air, out of which they
made a sort of mystery.

The good mother-dogs spent their time nursing their little ones. The fish swam about without
fear of the fisherman. The birds flew without dread of the hunter. And everything was like this.

There were no men in this Paradise.

OF CHARITY TOWARD BEASTS

There is in the look of beasts a profound light and gentle sorrow, which fills me with such
understanding that my soul opens like a hospice to all the sorrows of animals.

They are forever in my heart, as when I see a tired horse, his nose drooping to the ground,
asleep in the nocturnal rain, before a café; or the agony of a cat crushed beneath a carriage;
or a wounded sparrow who has found refuge in a hole in a wall. Were it not for the feeling
that it is undignified for a man, I would kneel before such patience and such torments, for
I seem to see a halo around the heads of these mournful creatures, a real halo, as large as
the universe, placed there by God Himself.

Yesterday I was at a fair, and watched the merry-go-round. There was an ass among the wooden
animals. The sight of it almost made me weep, because I was reminded of those living martyrs,
its brothers.

I wanted to pray, and to say to it: "Little ass, you are my brother. They say that you are
stupid, because you are incapable of doing evil. You go your slow pace, and seem to think as
you walk: 'See! I cannot go any faster...The poor make use of me, because they need not give
me much to eat.' Little ass, the goad pricks you. Then you go a little faster, but not a great
deal. You cannot go very fast...Sometimes you fall. Then they beat you, and pull at the rein
fastened to the bit in your mouth. They pull so hard that your lips are drawn back showing
your poor, yellow teeth which browse on miseries."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the same fair I heard the shrilling of a bagpipe. F. asked me: "Doesn't it remind you of
African music?"--"Yes," I answered, "at Touggart the bagpipes have the same nasal note. It
must be an Arab who is playing."--"Let us go into the booth," he said...Dromedaries were on
exhibition there.

A dozen little camels, crowded like sardines in a can, were stupidly going round and round
in a sort of trench. These creatures which I have seen in the Sahara undulant like waves with
only God and Death surrounding them, I now saw here, Oh sorrow of my heart! They went round
and round again in that narrow space. The anguish which passed from them to me filled me as
with nausea toward man. They went on and on, always on, proud as poor swans, hallowed as it
were by their desolation. They were covered with grotesque trappings, and the butt of dancing
women. They raised their poor verminous necks toward God, and toward the miraculous leaves
of some imaginary oasis.

Ah! what a prostitution of God's creatures. Farther along there were rabbits in a cage. Then
came goldfish, that were offered as prizes of a lottery. They swam about in blown glass bowls,
the necks of which were so narrow that F. said to me: "How did they get in?"--"By squeezing
them a little," I answered. Still farther on were living chickens, also lottery prizes, spun
around in a whirligig. In the center a Tittle milk-fed pig, mad with fear, was crouching flat
on his stomach.

Hens and pullets, overcome by vertigo, squawked and pecked frantically at one another. My companion
called my attention to dead, plucked chickens hanging beside their living sisters.

My heart swells at these memories. An infinite pity overcomes me.

Oh poet, receive these poor suffering beasts into your soul. Let them warm themselves, and
live there in eternal joy.

Preach the simple word which bestows kindness on the ignorant.

OF THINGS*

*Some of the instances here are purely imaginary. I invented them so that I might more deeply
penetrate into the heart of these things.

I enter a great square of stirring shadow. Here close beside a red and black candle a man is
driving nails into a shoe. Two children stretch their hands toward the hearth. A blackbird
sleeps in its wicker cage. Water is boiling in the smoky earthenware pot from which rises a
disagreeable soupy smell which mingles with that of tanner's bark and leather. A crouching
dog gazes fixedly into the coals.

There is such an air of gentle peace about these souls and these obscure things that I do not
ask whether they have any reason for being other than this very peace, nor whether I read a
special charm into their humility.

The God of the poor watches over them, the simple God in whom I believe. It is He who makes
an ear of grain grow from a seed; it is He who separates water from earth, earth from air,
air from fire, fire from night; it is He who blows the breath of life into the body; it is
He who fashions the leaves one by one. We do not know how this is done, but we have faith in
it as in the work of a perfect workman.

I contemplate without desiring to understand, and thus God reveals Himself to me. In the house
of this cobbler my eyes open as simply as those of his dog. Then I see, I see in truth that
which few can see--the essence of things, as, for example, the devotion of the smoky flame
without which the hammer of the workman could not be a bread-winner.

Most of the time we regard things in a heedless fashion. But they are like us, sorrowful or
happy. When I notice a diseased ear of wheat among healthy ears, and see the livid stain on
its grains I have a quick intuitive understanding of the suffering of this particular thing.
Within myself I feel the pain of those plant-cells; I realize their agony in growing in this
infected spot without crushing one another. I am filled with a desire to tear up my handkerchief,
and bandage this ear of wheat. But I feel that there is no remedy for a single ear of wheat,
and that humanly it would be an act of folly to attempt this cure. Such things are not done,
yet no one pays any special attention if I take care of a bird or a grasshopper. Nevertheless
I am certain that these grains suffer, because I feel their suffering.

A beautiful rose on the other hand imparts to me its joy in life. One feels that it is perfectly
happy swaying on its stem, for does not everybody say simply, "It is a pity to cut it," and
thus affirm and preserve the happiness of this flower?

       *       *       *       *       *

I recall very distinctly the time when it was first revealed to me that things suffered. It
happened when I was three years old. In my native hamlet a little boy, while playing, fell
on a piece of broken glass, and died of the wound.

A few days later I went to the child's home. His mother was crying in the kitchen. On the mantelpiece
stood a poor little toy. I recall perfectly that it was a small tin or leaden horse, attached
to a little tin barrel on wheels.

His mother said to me: "That is my poor little Louis's wagon. He is dead. Would you like to
have it?"

Then a flood of tenderness filled my heart. I felt that this thing had lost its friend, its
master, and that it was suffering. I accepted the plaything, and overcome with pity I sobbed
as I carried it home. I recall very well that I was too young to realize either the death of
the little boy or the sorrow of his mother. I pitied only that leaden animal which seemed heart-broken
to me as it stood on the mantelpiece forever idle and bereaved of the master it loved. I remember
all this as if it had happened yesterday, and I am sure that I had no desire to possess this
toy for my own amusement. This is absolutely true, for when I came home, with my eyes full
of tears, I confided the little horse and barrel to my mother. She has forgotten the whole
incident.

The belief that things are endowed with life exists among children, animals, and simple people.

I have seen children attribute the characteristics of a living being to a piece of rough wood
or to a stone. They brought it handfuls of grass, and were absolutely sure that the wood or
stone had eaten it when, as a matter of fact, I had carried it off without their noticing it.

Animals do not differentiate the quality of an action. I have seen cats scratch at something
too hot for them for a long time. In this act on the part of the animal there is an idea of
fighting something which can yield or perhaps die.

I think it is only an education, born of false vanity, that has robbed man of such beliefs.
I myself see no essential difference between the thought of a child who gives food to a piece
of wood and the meaning of some of the libations in primitive religions. Do we not attribute
to trees an attachment to us stronger than life itself when we believe that one planted on
the birthday of a child that sickens and dies will wither and dry up at the same time?

I have known things in pain. I have known some which are dead. The sad clothes of our departed
wear out quickly. They are often impregnated with the same disease as those who wore them.
They are one with them.

I have often considered objects which were wasting away. Their disintegration is identical
with our own. They have their decay, their ruptures, their tumors, their madnesses. A piece
of furniture gnawed by worms, a gun with a broken trigger, a warped drawer, or the soul of
a violin suddenly out of tune, such are the ills which move me.

When we become attached to things why do we believe that love is in us alone, and afterwards
regard it as something external to us? Who can prove that things are incapable of affection,
or who can demonstrate their unconsciousness? Was not that sculptor right who was buried holding
in his hand a lump of the same clay that had obeyed his dream? Did it not have the devotion
of a faithful servant; did it not have a quality which we should admire all the more, because
it had the virtue of devoting itself in silence, without selfish interest, and with the passiveness
of faith?

Is there not something sublime and radiant in the thing that acts toward man, even as man acts
toward God? Does the poet know any more what impulse he obeys, than does the clay? From the
moment when they have both proved their inspiration, I believe equally in their consciousness,
and I love both with the same love.

The sadness which disengages from things that have fallen into disuse is infinite. In the attic
of this house whose inhabitants I did not know, a little girl's dress and her doll lie desolate.
And here is an iron-pointed staff which once bit into the earth of the green hills, and a sunbonnet
now barely visible in the dim light from the garret-window. They have been abandoned since
many years, and I am wholly certain that they would be happy again to enjoy, the one the freshness
of the moss, and the other the summer sky.

Things tenderly cared for show their gratitude to us, and are ever ready to offer us their
soul when once we have refreshed it. They are like those roses of the desert which expand infinitely
when a little water brings back to their memory the azure of lost wells.

In my modest drawing-room there is a child's chair. My father played with it during his passage
from Guadeloupe to France when he was seven years old. He remembered distinctly that he sat
on it in the ship's saloon, and looked at pictures which the captain lent him. The island wood
of which it was made must have been stout for it withstood the games of a little boy. The piece
of furniture had drifted into my home, and slept there almost forgotten. Its soul too had been
asleep for many long years, because the child who had cherished it was no more, and no other
children had come to perch upon it like birds.

But recently the house was made merry by my little niece who was just seven. On my work-table
she had found an old book with plates of flowers. When I entered the room I found her sitting
on the little chair in the lamplight, looking at the charming pictures, just as once a long
time ago her grandfather had done. And I was deeply touched. And I said to myself that this
little girl alone had been able to make live again the soul of the chair, and that the gentle
soul of the chair had bewitched the candor of the child. There was between her and this object
a mysterious affinity. The one could not help but go to the other, and it could be awakened
by her alone.

Things are gentle. They never do harm voluntarily. They are the sisters of the spirits. They
protect us, and we let our thoughts rest upon them. Our thoughts need them for resting-places
as perfumes need the flowers.

The prisoner, whom no human soul can any longer console, must feel tenderly toward his pallet
and his earthen jug. When everything has been refused him by his fellows his obscure bed gives
him sleep and his jug quenches his thirst. And even if it separates him from all the world
without, the very barrenness of his walls stands between him and his executioners. The child
who has been punished loves the pillow on which he cries; for when every one of an evening
has hurt and scolded him, he finds consolation in the soul of the silent down. It is like a
friend who remains silent in order to calm a friend.

But it is not only out of the silence of things that is born their sympathy for us. They have
secret harmonies. Sometimes they weep in the forest which René fills with his tempestuous soul;
and sometimes they sing on the lake where another poet dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are hours and seasons when certain of these accords are most to the fore, when one hears
best the thousand voices of things. Two or three times in my life I have been present at the
awakening of this mysterious world. At the end of August toward midnight, when the day has
been hot, an indistinct murmur rises about the kneeling villages. It is neither the sound of
rivers, nor of springs, nor of the wind, nor of animals cropping the grass, nor of cattle rubbing
their chains against the cribs, nor of uneasy watchdogs, nor of birds, nor of the falling of
the looms of the weavers. The chords are as sweet to the ear, as the glow of dawn is sweet
to the eye. There is stirring a boundless and peaceful world in which the blades of grass lean
toward one another till morning, and the dew rustles imperceptibly, and the seeds at each moment's
beat raise the whole surface of the plain. It is the soul alone which can apprehend these other
souls, this flower-dust joy of the corollas, these calls, and these silences that create the
divine Unknown. It is as if one were suddenly transported to a strange country where one is
enchanted by langorous words, even though one does not understand very clearly their meaning.

Nevertheless I penetrate more deeply into the meaning whispered by these things than into that
hidden in an idiom with which I am unfamiliar. I feel that I understand and that it would not
require a very great effort to translate the thought of these obscure souls, and to note in
a concrete fashion some of their manifestations. Perhaps poetry sometimes actually does this.
It has happened that mentally I have answered this indistinct murmur, just as I have succeeded
by my silence in answering distinctly a sweetheart's questions.

But this language of things is not wholly auditory. It is made up of other symbols also, which
are faintly traced on our souls. The impression is still too faint, but, perhaps, it will be
stronger when we are better prepared to receive God.

It is objects which have been my consolation in the grievous events of my life. At such moments
some thing will catch my eye particularly. I who know not how to make my soul bow before men
have prostrated it before things. A radiance emanates from them which may be outside the memories
that I attach to them, and it is like a thrill of love. I have felt them. I feel them now living
around me. They are part of my obscure realm. I feel a responsibility toward them like that
of an elder brother. At this instant while I am writing I feel the souls of these divine sisters
leaning upon me with love and trust. This chair, this chest of drawers, this pen exist as I
do. They touch me, and I feel prostrated before them. I have their faith ... I have their faith,
which is beyond all systems, beyond all explanations, beyond all intelligence. They give me
a conviction such as no genius could give me. Every system is vain, every explanation erroneous,
the moment I feel living in my heart the knowledge of these souls.

When I entered this cobbler's home I knew at once that I was welcome. Without a word I sat
down before the hearth near the children and the dog and I opened my soul to the thousand shadowy
voices of things.

In this communion the falling of a half charred twig, the grating of the poker with which the
fire was stirred, the blow of the hammer, the flickering of the candle, the creak of the dog's
collar, the round bulging spot of blackness which was the sleeping blackbird, the singing of
the cover of the pot, all combined to form a sacred language easier for me to understand than
the speech of most men. These noises and these colors are only the gestures and expressions
of objects, just as the voice or the glance are among our means of expression and gesture.

I felt that a brotherhood united me to these humble things, and I knew it was childish to classify
the kingdoms of nature when there is but one kingdom of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

Can we say that things never exhibit to us manifestations of their sympathy? The tool grows
rusty when it no longer serves the hand of the workman, even as the workman when he abandons
the tool.

I knew an old smith. He was gay in the time of his strength, and the sky entered his dark smithy
through the radiant noondays. The joyous anvil answered the hammer. And the hammer was the
heart of the anvil beating with the heart of the craftsman. When night fell the smithy was
lighted by its single light, the glance of the eyes of the burning coal which flamed under
the leather bellows. A divine love united the soul of this man to the soul of these things.
And when on the Lord's days the smith retired into pious contemplation, the forge which had
been cleaned the night before prayed also in silence.

The smith was my friend. At his dim threshold I often questioned him, and the whole smithy
always answered me. The sparks laughed in the coal, and syllables of metal fashioned a mysterious
and profound language which moved me like the words of duty. And I experienced there almost
the same feelings as in the home of the humble cobbler.

One day the smith fell ill. His breath grew short, and I noticed that now when he pulled the
chain of the bellows, formerly so powerful, it also gasped and gradually caught the sickness
of its master. The man's heart beat with sudden jumps, and I heard plainly that the hammer
struck the iron irregularly as he brandished it above the anvil. And in the same degree as
the light in the eyes of the man faded, the flame of the hearth grew dim. In the evenings it
wavered more and more, and there were long intervals when the light vanished on the walls and
ceiling.

One day while at work the man felt his extremities turn to ice. In the evening he died. I entered
the smithy. It was cold as a body deprived of life. One small ember glowed alone under the
chimney, humble and watching, like the praying women that I found later beside the death-bed.

Three months later I went into the abandoned workshop to help evaluate his small amount of
property. Everything was damp and black as in a vault. The leather of the bellows was filled
with holes where it had rotted. When we tried to pull the chain it came loose from the wood.
And the simple people who were making the appraisal with me declared:

"This forge and these hammers are worn out. They ended their life with the master."

Then I was moved, because I understood the mysterious meaning of these words.

TO STONES

Brilliant sisters of the torrents that I find on the shore of the Alpine lake: you are the
stones loved by the rainbow and the azure cold, on you falls the white salt which is licked
up by the lambs, you are mirrors whose light is iridescent as the pigeon's breast, you have
more eyes than the peacock, you are crystallized by fire and your veins of snow have become
eternal, you have been the companions of primordial cataclysms, you were washed by the sea
and then rocked by it until the dove from the ark cooed with love at sight of you....

The gleaming grain of your flesh at times has the blue-veined whiteness of a child's wrist,
at times it has the golden coppery hue of the thigh of a heavy and beautiful woman, sometimes
it is silvered with mica like a cheek in the sunlight, sometimes it is brown like the complexion
of those in whom the dead blondness of tobacco is blended with the gold of the mandarin orange.

You are stones that have been broken by the heart of the torrent, you have been dashed against
each other and have been tossed about amid the daphnes of the ravine, you have been whipped
by hailstorms and tempest, buried under the avalanche, uncovered by the sun, loosened by the
feet of the chamois, you are cold and beautiful but above all else you are pure.

I know little of your sisters of the Indies: either of her whose transparency rivals water
gushing from marble, or of her who makes me dream of the clear meadows of my native valley,
or of her who is a drop of frozen blood, or of her who resembles the solid sun.

I prefer you to them, even though you are less precious. Sometimes you support the beams of
thatched roofs while you gaze at the star-dotted sky, sometimes it is on you that the sheep-dog
stretches himself as he mournfully guards his flock.

At the heart of the ether where you rest upon the summits may you continue to receive the nourishment
with which your peaceful kingdom is endowed, may the light bathe your cells which are still
unrecognized, may buoyant flakes and curves steep them, may they resound to the vibration of
the winds, may they receive at last that harmonious manna which stilled the hunger of Mary
Magdalene in the grotto.

Around you will bloom your sweethearts, the purest flowers of the world, but they are already
less chaste than you for they have a perfume of snow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Poor gray sisters of the brook that I find on the plain, you are tarnished stones, on you falls
the shower of rain that the sparrow may drink, you are struck by the foot of the she-ass, you
are the guardians that form the inclosures of miserable gardens, it is you who are the concave
threshold and the stone at the edge of the well worn smooth by the chain of the bucket, you
are servants, poor things become shiny like the blades of implements of husbandry, you are
heated in the hearth of the poor to warm the feet of old women, you are hollowed out for mean
needs and become the humble table for the dog and the sow, you are pierced so that the singing
harvest may be ground beneath the millstone, you are cut, you are taken, you are tossed aside,
on you the wanderer will sleep, Oh, you under whom I shall sleep....

You have not guarded your independence like your alpine companions. But, Oh my friends, I do
not despise you for that. You are beautiful like the things which are in the shadow.

NOTES

Then, behold me on my return to this old parlor where I look upon the least object with tenderness.
This shawl belonged to my paternal grandmother whom I never knew and who rests amid flowers
in a humble cemetery of the Antilles. May the humming-birds glitter and cry above her deserted
grave, and the tobacco-plants with their rosy bells delight her memory ... I have never seen
the portrait which represents her. But I know she had a reputation for goodness and beauty.
I have read admirable letters that she wrote from there to my father when he was a child. He
had been brought back to France to be educated here, and had remained here.

How often have I dreamed of reviving this past. How beautiful it would be if God gave us, once
a year, the festival of seeing our dear departed return. I love to imagine it as occurring
on Twelfth Night during a season of snow. The modest dining-room would be opened at the stroke
of eight, and seated about the enlarged table, adorned with Christmas roses, I would find all
those for whom my soul mourns beneath the cheery light of the lamps.

It seems to me that this meeting would be entirely natural with little of the uncanny, and
not at all like a fairy tale. My paternal grandfather, the doctor of medicine who died at Guadeloupe,
would occupy the place of honor, and about his shoulders would be a little traveling cloak
on which grains of frost were shining. His steely blue eyes behind the enormous gold-rimmed
spectacles, which he wore and which my mother uses to-day, would make him appear as he was,
at the same time severe and good. In a grave and melodious voice he would speak of the Great
Crossing, of the wind of the Eternal Ocean, of earthquakes in unexplored countries, of shipwrecked
men whom he had saved.

And all would listen; and, death being eternal, it would be wonderful to see each one again
at the particular age which we with singular obstinacy always attribute to our dear departed.

The cousins from Saint-Pierre-de-la-Martinique, there were four of them I believe, would not
be more than eighteen years old, and would be dressed in white muslin gowns. They would laugh
at some cake that had not come out right. And my great aunts who were Huguenots, rigid but
happy, with long chains of gold about their necks, would interpret the revelations of the Prophets
to one another. And five and seventy years would quaver in each of their cracked voices. And
my maternal grandsire at nineteen, with the green coat of a romantic student, all....

But the dream fades and the wind weeps.

       *       *       *       *       *

In moss full of sunshine and transparent as an alga or an emerald, I have covered the roots
of these first daisies of January. They and the rare periwinkles and the furze are the only
flowers of this season. It is too much love doubtless which fills them. They must be born in
spite of the ice. The white little bands of their flower-heads are tinged with violet at the
ends, and surround the flowers which are greenish yellow like the under side of an old mushroom.
The muddy roots feel the plowed fields. I have been so cruel as to pluck these flowers and
now they are wretched; they are as wounded as animals could be; and see how, slowly as if they
were moved by a terrible fear, the petals of the flowers curve in to cover and protect the
sheathes of the minute corollas that I can no longer see. Tenderly I try to raise these petals,
but they resist me and I only succeed in murdering the plant. Fool! Why could I not let these
flowers live on the edge of their ditch? There they would have felt the fresh shrivelling of
drinking in the sun, a bird would have touched them lightly, the proboscis of the mosquitoes
would have sucked up their pollen, and they would have died gently by the side of their friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stars of winter are beautiful when they are dusted on the slate-colored sky, and when in
the hazy blue depth they light up the shreds of clouds. I passed through the little town at
six o'clock, when the candles behind the window-panes make square shadows move within the shops
and shine upon the reddish mud of the pavements. A dog trots by sniffing under the doorways.
A wagon whose oxen have slipped makes a grating noise. A lantern flickers, a voice is heard.
The angles of the roofs are clear-cut. The rest is consumed by the darkness. Here and there,
still, at great distances, a window of smoky rose, and I am at the top of the slope.

At the left an enormous star trembles. It seems to breathe and its rays alternately elongate
and withdraw again. Its white fire appears to flow. I look upon the constellations, behind
which there are other spaces of constellations, which hide still more constellations, until
the glance is lost in luminous embers like those of a hearth.

I am in no wise troubled by these stars. I do not see in them worlds infinitely great or small
according to the one with which we compare them. They are in my thoughts, such as I see them:
the largest like hummingbirds the smallest like wasps. The space which separates them one from
another does not seem any greater than the pace with which I measure the road. It is simply
the sky of January above a little town.

       *       *       *       *       *

A peasant-woman has sold me some mushrooms. They are very rare nowadays. Their odor captures
me, and I dream of the edges of the meadows, of the elves who, according to Shakespeare, make
the mushrooms grow beneath the spell of the moon. They have been moistened by the melting frost,
and fine and long grasses have become attached to their humidity. They bear within them the
quivering mist of the nights. The first, they came forth from the earth under their umbels
of ivory to find out whether the feet of the hedge were still surrounded by moss. They must
have been deceived. They could not have seen the periwinkles or the violets, but only the irritating
and fine gray rain in the gray sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

Often I have visualized Heaven for myself. That of my childhood was the hut an old man had
built at the top of a climbing road. This hut was called Paradise. My father brought me there
at the hour when the dark mist of the hills became gilded like a church. I expected, at the
end of each walk, to find God seated in the sun which seemed to sleep at the summit of the
stony pathway. Was I mistaken?

It is less easy for me to imagine the Catholic Paradise: the harps of azure, the rosy snow
of legions in the pure rainbows. I still cling to my first vision, but since I have known love
I have added to the divine kingdom a warm, sloping lawn in front of the old man's hut. On it
a young girl gathers herbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have simultaneously the soul of a faun and the soul of an adolescent. And the emotion which
I feel on looking upon a woman is quite contrary to that which I feel on gazing at a young
girl. If one could make one's self understood by the aid of fruits and flowers, I would offer
to the first burning peaches, the rosy blossoms of the belladonna, heavy roses; to the second,
cherries, raspberries, the blossoms of the wild quince, eglantine, and honeysuckle. I find
it difficult to have any feeling which is not accompanied by the image of a flower or a fruit.
When I think of Martha, I dream of gentians. With Lucy I associate the white anemones of Japan,
and with Marie the lilies of Solomon; with another a citron which should be transparent.

To the first meeting that a sweetheart has granted me, I have brought a spray of gladiolus
whose throats have the rosy hue of an apricot. We placed them on the window during the night
when I forgot them to remember only my love. To-day I would forget my loved one, to recall
only the gladiolus.

My memory is therefore, if I may so express it, vegetal. Trees as well as flowers and fruits
symbolize for me beings and emotions. Plants as well as animals and stones filled my childhood
with a mysterious charm. When I was four years old I remained rapt in contemplation of the
broken stones of the mountain, lying in heaps along the roads. When struck they gave forth
fire in the twilight. When rubbed against one another they felt the burning heat. I gathered
pieces of marble from among them which seemed heavy with a water they had concealed within
themselves. The mica of the granite held my curiosity in a way which nothing could satisfy.
I felt that there was something that no one could tell me--the life of the stones.

At the same age I was scolded because I carried away the artificial beetles from a hat of my
mother. I had the passion of collecting animals, I felt toward them so great a love that I
wept if I thought them unhappy. And I still endure a deep anguish when I remember the little
nightingales which some one gave me and which pined away in the dining-room. Still at the same
age, in order to make me go to sleep, they had to place not far from me a bottle containing
a tree-frog. I knew that here was a faithful friend who would protect me against robbers. The
first time that I saw a stag-beetle, I was so overcome by the beauty of its horns that the
longing to possess one became an actual torment.

The passion for plants did not develop until later, about the age of nine years, and I did
not really begin to understand their life until about the age of fifteen. I remember the circumstances
under which it happened. It was in summer, one Thursday, on a scorching afternoon. I was passing
through the botanical garden of a great city with my mother. A white sun, dense blue shadows,
and perfumes so heavy that one could almost feel them cling, made of this half desert spot
a kingdom whose portal I crossed at last.

In the tepid and reddish-brown water of the ponds plants vegetated; some were leathery and
gray, and others long, soft, and transparent. But from the very heart of these poor and sad
algae there rose into the very blue of the sky itself, green lance-like stalks whose rose and
white umbels challenged the ardent day with their grace; water-lilies slept on their leaves
as in a trustful afternoon sleep.

To the plants of the water, the plants of the earth answered. I recall an alley where students,
a handkerchief about the neck, were as if buried beneath the beauty of the leaves. It was the
alley of the umbelliferae. The fennel and the ferula raised their crowns upon their stems with
glistening sheaths. The perfumes spoke to each other in the silence. And one felt that a silent
understanding went from plant to plant, and that over this isolated realm there hovered something
like resignation.

Since then I have understood the flowers and that their families belonged together and have
a natural affinity, and are not merely divided into classes as an aid to our slow memories.
Toward what solution do these geometries in action, which are plants, progress? I do not know.
But there is a fascinating mystery in considering that even as species correspond to certain
geological periods and thus group their sympathies, even so to-day they group themselves according
to the seasons. What correspondence is there between the character of the shivering and snowy
liliaceous plants of winter and the purple solanaceous plants of autumn? And then there are
still other delightful dispositions which are due far less to the artifice of man than to the
consent of certain species to regard others as their friends and not to pine away beside them.
How sweet is the village garden where the gleaming lily, like those gods who often visit the
humble, lives amid the cabbages, the blue leek, and the scallions, which boil in the black
pot of the poor! How I love the peasant gardens at noonday when the mournful blue shadow of
the vegetables sleeps in the white squares of granular earth, when the cock calls the silence,
and when the buzzard, slanting and wheeling, makes the scuttling hen cluck! There are the flowers
of simple loves, the flowers of the young wife who will dry the blue lavender to scent her
coarse sheets. And in this garden grows also the flower of the rondel--the humble gilliflower
with its simple perfume. There is also the faithful box, each leaf of which is a small mirror
of azure, and the hollyhock in which the sweet and pure flame of melancholy corollas burns;
they are the flowers of religion vowed to silence and austerity.

And I love also the flora of the meadows: the meadow-sweet swayed by the breezes, rocked by
the murmur of the brook. Its perfumed crown is adorned like the water-beetles, more iridescent
than the throats of humming-birds.

It is the beloved of the greensward, the bride of the grassy borders.

But it is in the deep recesses of old deserted parks that the plants are most mysterious. There
dwell those which we call old flowers, such as the ground-lilac, the belladonna-amaryllis,
the crown-imperial. Elsewhere they would die. Here they persist, guarded by the favor of the
age-old trees, strange trees, the names of which have disappeared. And these affected and distinguished
blossoms raise their swaying heads only when, murmuring across the liquadambars and the maples,
the wind moans like Chateaubriand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The very mournfulness of the little town is pleasing to me; I love its streets of dark shops,
the worn thresholds, and the gardens. In the fine season they seem to float against a background
of blue mist which is a confusion of hollyhocks, glycins, trellises; or again they seem patchy
as the skin of asses, with drying rags above the hedges of battered boxwood. The tanner's brook
drifts by with the pale mother-of-pearl of the sky, and reflects sharply the rooftops amid
the slimy plants; the mountain torrent, which hollows the rocks, gleams, twines and flows away.

The little place is charming when the grasshopper shrills in the summer's elms and the autumn
wind scours it, or when the rains streak it. There is a little public garden that Bernardin
de Saint Pierre would have loved; in May the night there is dense, blue, and soft in the chestnut-trees.

For years I have lived here, whence my grandfather and a great uncle departed toward the flower-covered
Antilles. They listened to the roaring of the sea; robes of muslin glided upon the verandas,
and they died perhaps looking back with regret on these streets, these shops, these thresholds,
these gardens, this brook, and this mountain torrent.

When I go to my little farm I say to myself that this is where they once were. They brought
their luncheon in a little basket, and one of them carried a guitar. And young girls surely
followed swiftly. Song stirred among the damp hedgerows. An unutterable love frightened the
birds, the mulberries were green. They kept time as they walked. A young girl's cry stirred
the air, a big hat turned the corner of the road, a clear laugh rose from the rain-torn eglantines;
then hearts beat when, in the bright dog-days, the black barns softened the clucking of the
hens under the scarlet sky of the south.

...This guitar or another I heard in the courtyard of my Huguenot great-aunts, one summer's
evening when I was four years old. The courtyard slept in the white twilight, the roofs shed
an unimaginable tenderness upon the climbing rosebushes and the bright paving-stones. Some
one sitting on a beam was making merry at the expense of my childhood and my white apron. My
great uncle sang some melody from the capital. I can see him again, standing upright with his
head thrown back. The air trembled softly. At the end of a roulade he made an exaggerated and
charming bow.

I bless you, oh humble town where I am not understood, where I shelter my pride, my suffering,
and my joy, where I have hardly any other distraction than that of listening to the barking
of my old dog and watching the faces of the poor. But I reach the hillside where the prickly
furze is spread, and in musing upon my difficulties I am filled with a beneficent gentleness.
To-day it is no longer the coarse and disdainful laugh of the public, nor the terrible doubt
of everything, which disturbs me. The laugh of my detractors has grown wearied, and I have
become indifferent to what I am. Yet I have become grave toward myself and others. It is with
an apprehensive joy that I regard the heedlessness of the happy. I have learned what misery
may spring from love, what blindness is born of a glance. And it is because of what I have
suffered that I would bestow a sad and slow caress on those who have not yet known anything
but happiness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The open door, the blue sky, the watering of the grass and the gilliflowers, and the hyacinths,
and a single bird which chirps, and my dogs stretched on the ground and the rosebushes with
their thick stems, the verdure of the lilacs, and a clock that is striking, a wasp which flies
straight and marks the meadow with the lines of its golden vibration, and stops, hesitates,
sets off again, is silent and buzzes....

Hearts and choirs of primroses in the moist, shadowy mosses of the woods; long threads of rose
and blue dew floating and swinging and suspended--from what?--in the immaterial morning; tree-frogs
with golden eye-lids and white throbbing throats; furze whose perfume of faded peach and rose
follows along the roads, already torrid....

Iris, cries of jays, turtledoves, mountains of blue snow which are rocks of azure, green fields
laid out in squares, brook rolling a golden pebble in the silence; first foliage of the waters,
icy trembling of the body beside the springs when the sun lies burning on your hands....

       *       *       *       *       *

Slender alders; fiery marshes where toward noonday puffing out their throat, the hoarse gray
frogs climb up on the coriaceous plants, while slowly from the deep of the shady and gilded
mire rises a bubble....

Dry and twisted vines; swarms of insects from the blossoms of rosy peach-trees, in slanting
flight into the azure; pear-trees and roses of Bengal....

       *       *       *       *       *

Setting of the cherry sun; nocturnal snow of a fruit-tree; green and transparent shadowing
of the lanes; summit of little hills at seven o'clock where the trees are like sponges which
little by little blend into the severity of the uniform curve which swells and rises sharply.

Starless night; violet night in which the white sandals of a beloved pagan can hardly be distinguished,
and dense bristling of slender, dry trees; pallor of a limestone slope, and water in which
something casts two long and deep shadows....

Night; fire; lines of shadow blended with shadows of lines; fire; humid thickness of fields;
fire; crimsoning and reddening of clouds; poplars; whiteness which must be a village. Water
again, water, and shadows of water....

A wagon passes. The lantern lights up only the rear of the horse, all else is night. When I
was a child it was this which astonished me--this light which was quenched again. Another wagon...One
sees only the rosy bust of a girl. It slips into the night....

       *       *       *       *       *

I return from a journey. The recollection of a maroon reflection of a boat in the canal, the
color of gray fish, makes my memory quiver. I dream of white tulips.

I have returned at night. The croaking of frogs has greeted me from the depths of the damp
meadow. My heart, do not burst!... Do not burst like the lilacs of the flower-garden whose
fragrance I alone have touched....

Will hope be born again? I am afraid. Is this one more disillusion?

The wasp has hummed. I love none but the violet lilacs, I love none but the blue violets. It
is Sunday, and I hear in the depths of my soul the droning of the harmoniums of poor churches.

My life, behold my life, ardent and sad like a flame which burns through too warm a summer
night beside the open window. The smaller figures in the niches are Moses and David and St.
Peter and St. Paul.

       Above are nine angels, bearing the various emblems of our Lord's
Passion.

This reredos was unveiled with much pomp and ceremony in 1873, and
recently has been profusely gilded.

Nevertheless, lilacs, you are dear to me since childhood. Then I thought your clusters were
the beautiful polished images of a box of toys.

And you, oh lilacs, have also haunted an orchard which I knew well in my youth. In this orchard
there were hedge-hogs. They glided along old beams. How innocent and gentle the hedge-hogs
are in spite of their quills! I remember my emotion one winter's evening, when I found one
of them at the threshold of the kitchen; it had taken flight from the snow, and was poking
its little nose into the refuse left there....

       *       *       *       *       *

I love the creatures of the night, the screech-owls with their graceful flight, the bats, the
badgers, all the timid beasts which glide through the air or in the grass and of which we know
so little. What festivals do they hold amid the plants, their sisters?

At the hour when man is at rest, the rabbits, silvered by the dew, bound over the mint of the
furrow and hold their conventicles; the frogs croak in the marsh and make it ripple; the glowworms
filter their soft and humid yellow light; the mole bores the meadow; the nightingale sobs like
a fountain; the owl utters sad laughter as if it too, however timidly, were trying to have
a share in the joy of God. 

These have generally been left unchanged: Wurzburg / Würzburg Rudesheim / Rüdesheim Muller
/ Müller (also Siligmüller / -muller) Three occurrences of “Moët” were printed without dieresis.
It has been silently supplied.

