"CALCUTTA, 14th Dec. 1803.--We some time ago engaged in an undertaking, of which we intended
to say nothing until it was accomplished; but an unforeseen providence made it necessary for
us to disclose it.  It is as follows: About a year and a half ago, some attempts were made
to engage Mr. Gilchrist in the translation of the Scriptures into the Hindostani language.
By something or other it was put by.  The Persian was also at the same time much talked of,
but given up, or rather not engaged in.  At this time several considerations prevailed on us
to set ourselves silently upon a translation into these languages.  We accordingly hired two
moonshees to assist us in it, and each of us took our share; Brother Marshman took Matthew
and Luke; Brother Ward, Mark and John; and myself the remaining part of the New Testament into
Hindostani. 

Ali Pasha, who fought like a lion irritated with three hundred Janissaries, fell at last a musket
ball that struck his forehead.

Arrojáronse about it the Spaniards, and one soldier cut off his head,
and the tip of a pica put it, as bloody and horrible script victory
sign.

Large number of ships and burned and sank infidels with terrifying
havoc on the airwaves.

Much of the infidel army had been captured, and the rest fled head
to Levante.

- Victory, victory! - Sounded everywhere.

It is no longer heard the roar of artillery formidable.

Smoke rose slowly and dissipated in the air.

Two hundred ships lost twenty-four Muslims.

One hundred and thirty were in the hands of the victors, and the rest
drowned in the sea or burned as fire.

Twenty-five thousand Turks were killed and more than five thousand,
captives were.

They found themselves imprisoned in the galleys, one hundred and seventeen dead and two hundred
heavy artillery fifty children, and twelve thousand Christian captives
freed.

But this great victory was achieved but a large dung, that were lost fifteen galleys, eight
thousand valiant died: of these, two thousand Spanish, the pope eight, and the rest of Venice Genoa
and Malta.

The Mediterranean was free.

Christian maidens and their banks do not have to fear the excursions
of the pirates not be sold in the harems of the infidels.

And could stand on those banks.

The Turkish Janissaries were no longer invincible, nor broken his
powerful fleet, Europe might threaten the power of the Turk.

Cervantes
is rightly proud of having found in that day and memorabilísima the
glorious wounds that she had received.

So they returned to the Spanish
ships to Naples and Sicily.

He left the hospital galley Marquesa
Messina their wounded, among them Miguel Cervantes, who healed at
last, but maimed his left hand, so when death opened to him the age
of glory, the pair was called the prince of wits Spanish, also llamósele
Manco de Lepanto.

FIN

POSTSCRIPT

I seem to hear you say, kind readers
who have arrived here: How, author, and leave us your grace and half
honey, without saying what was Cervantes, Margarita and even Florela?

To
which the author replies:

- Gentle reader, if this episode in the
life of Miguel de Cervantes you been pleased, and many others, what
I see by the sale of copies, to tell other episodes prométote the
life of the hero, and then maybe go for a light that was Margaret,
and still which was Florela. Meanwhile, VALE.  The knowledge of four words in five enables him to read with pleasure,
and renders the acquisition of the few new words, as well as the idiomatic expressions, a matter
of delight rather than of labour.  Thus the Ooriya, though possessing a separate grammar and
character, is so much like the Bengali in the very expression that a Bengali pundit is almost
equal to the correction of an Orissa proof sheet; and the first time that I read a page of
Goojarati the meaning appeared so obvious as to render it unnecessary to ask the pundit questions."

The mechanical apparatus of types, paper, and printing seem to have been provided by the same
providential foresight as the intellectual and the spiritual.  We have seen how, when he was
far enough advanced in his translation, Carey amid the swamps of Dinapoor looked to England
for press, type, paper, and printer.  He got the last, William Ward, a man of his own selection,
worthy to be his colleague.  But he had hardly despatched his letter when he found or made
all the rest in Bengal itself.  It was from the old press bought in Calcutta, set up in Mudnabati,
and removed to Serampore, that the first edition of the Bengali New Testament was printed.
The few rare and venerable copies have now a peculiar bibliographic interest; the type and
the paper alike are coarse and blurred.

Sir Charles Wilkins, the Caxton of India, had with his own hands cut the punches and cast the
types from which Halhed's Bengali grammar was printed at Hoogli in 1778.  He taught the art
to a native blacksmith, Panchanan, who went to Serampore in search of work just when Carey
was in despair for a fount of the sacred Devanagari type for his Sanskirt grammar, and for
founts of the other languages besides Bengali which had never been printed.  They thus tell
the story in a Memoir Relative to the Translations, published in 1807:--

"It will be obvious that in the present state of things in India it was in many instances necessary
to cast new founts of types in several of these languages.  Happily for us and India at large
Wilkins had led the way in this department; and by persevering industry, the value of which
can scarcely be appreciated, under the greatest disadvantages with respect to materials and
workmen, had brought the Bengali to a high degree of perfection.  Soon after our settling at
Serampore the providence of God brought to us the very artist who had wrought with Wilkins
in that work, and in a great measure imbibed his ideas.  By his assistance we erected a letter-foundry;
and although he is now dead, he had so fully communicated his art to a number of others, that
they carry forward the work of type-casting, and even of cutting the matrices, with a degree
of accuracy which would not disgrace European artists.  These have cast for us two or three
founts of Bengali; and we are now employing them in casting a fount on a construction which
bids fair to diminish the expense of paper, and the size of the book at least one-fourth, without
affecting the legibility of the character. Of the Devanagari character we have also cast an
entire new fount, which is esteemed the most beautiful of the kind in India.  It consists of
nearly 1000 different combinations of characters, so that the expense of cutting the patterns
only amounted to 1500 rupees, exclusive of metal and casting.

"In the Orissa we have been compelled also to cast a new fount of types, as none before existed
in that character.  The fount consists of about 300 separate combinations, and the whole expense
of cutting and casting has amounted to at least 1000 rupees.  The character, though distinct,
is of a moderate size, and will comprise the whole New Testament in about 700 pages octavo,
which is about a fourth less than the Bengali.  Although in the Mahratta country the Devanagari
character is well known to men of education, yet a character is current among the men of business
which is much smaller, and varies considerably in form from the Nagari, though the number and
power of the letters nearly correspond. * * * * *

The great railway line which leads from Orleans to Paris, Bordeaux, starts in the neighborhood
Chartrons, and after crossing beautiful countryside of vineyards, cereals, etc.., following the
banks of the Garonne, turns to the north, through the beautiful Dordogne river (which gets
its name to a department), then short of Cubzac, whose bridge is an admirable work, and town of
that name is divided into two lines. The one on the right, tour Perigueux, Limoges, Châteauroux
and Orleans to Paris.

The left, which should I follow Angouleme tour (Angoulême), Poitiers, Tours, Blois and Orleans.

I
lacked the time to dwell on each of those cities, uninteresting moreover, if not his point
of historical and monumental. So I confine myself can indicate very shallow, the only being
given to the speed of the train, which runs within 14 hours the way
indicated, through 74 stations.

Via the tunnels are very numerous and the landscape is generally beautiful and lively on all in the
wonderful valley of the Loire (Loire) and small basins of some tributaries. It is an immense
succession of low hills and plains very uneven, with large forests, mainly vineyards and cereals (wheat,
barley, rye, oats, etc.), and wherever the culture is wonderful, but less careful than in England,
the lodges are numerous; is given to a people at every step, the horizon is almost unlimited
field inflections are less pronounced, and there are many ancient
castles and palaces of modern field as busy and happy during the summer
and fall.

Angouleme (the homeland of the great novelist Ravaillac and Balzac) is the capital of the department
The Charente (Charente), which has about 390.000 inhabitants. Its territory is remarkably mountain,
reaching up to him, to the east, the spurs of the mountains of Auvergne,
which separate the Loire valley of the Garonne and give rise to the
valleys of the Dordogne intermediaries and the Charente.  Carey used to preserve his most valuable manuscripts
by writing on arsenicated paper, which became of a hideous yellow colour, though it is to this
alone we owe the preservation in the library of Serampore College of five colossal volumes
of his polyglot dictionary prepared for the Bible translation work.  Many and long were the
experiments of the missionaries to solve the paper difficulty, ending in the erection of a
tread-mill on which relays of forty natives reduced the raw material in the paper-engine, until
one was accidentally killed.

The enterprise of Mr. William Jones, who first worked the Raneegunj coal-field, suggested the
remedy in the employment of a steam-engine. One of twelve-horse power was ordered from Messrs.
Thwaites and Rothwell of Bolton.  This was the first ever erected in India, and it was a purely
missionary locomotive.  The "machine of fire," as they called it, brought crowds of natives
to the mission, whose curiosity tried the patience of the engineman imported to work it; while
many a European who had never seen machinery driven by steam came to study and to copy it.
The date was the 27th of March 1820, when "the engine went in reality this day."  From that
time till 1865 Serampore became the one source of supply for local as distinguished from imported
and purely native hand-made paper.  Even the cartridges of Mutiny notoriety in 1857 were from
this factory, though it had long ceased to be connected with the mission.

Dr. Carey thus took stock of the translating enterprise in a letter to Dr. Ryland:--

"22nd January 1808.--Last year may be reckoned among the most important which this mission
has seen--not for the numbers converted among the natives, for they have been fewer than in
some preceding years, but for the gracious care which God has exercised towards us. We have
been enabled to carry on the translation and printing of the Word of God in several languages.
The printing is now going on in six and the translation into six more.  The Bengali is all
printed except from Judges vii. to the end of Esther; Sanskrit New Testament to Acts xxvii.;
Orissa to John xxi.; Mahratta, second edition, to the end of Matthew; Hindostani (new version)
to Mark v., and Matthew is begun in Goojarati.  The translation is nearly carried on to the
end of John in Chinese, Telinga Kurnata, and the language of the Seeks.  It is carried on to
a pretty large extent in Persian and begun in Burman. He was of middle age, between thirty-five to forty, not bad looking,
pleasant, smiling face, the color brown, sharp factions subtle smile, the look rebuscona, and
do not mean the body lived and shaving razor, entertaining their leisure during the day with the tap of
a vihuela Moorish left him by his father, fed up used by their grandparents, and a nightingale
singing the happy songs of the earth, and which he composed, for what was a very good grace
to gossip gossips of neighborhood, and outside of it, sold unguents and potions, and read the
fate, and brought to all outstanding duped his lips and came to fame as Warlock and Sorcerer
Mr. Vivaise-thousand-years, more than once the Inquisition had gotten into his affairs, and
there were those who remembered seeing him with miter and sambenito, dressed him in a auto de
fe.

It was not known if he was Christian or Jew or Moor, but he escaped so well that bad of their efforts
with the Inquisition and justice, and continued shaving and shearing, strumming and singing, making
their potions and their witchcraft industry, and esteemed and beloved by the neighborhood and
beyond.

He was not known to you live a thousand-year-girl or a relative of some kind, or defect repair
was, lived alone, in peace and grace of God, as he said, not what the spells attaching and unguents,
which he refused, and so our guy went by without growing or decreasing,
and always happy and content, and a pilgrim such as health, he said
that in every day of his life he had hurt or a fingernail.

Justice had ever entrecogido night prowling dark places with a naked sword under the coat, over
three feet (which he had bought in his youth for twenty coppers on the Trail), and for this,
and some thefts that had been blamed bad testimony, fulling had more than three times the back,
leading a donkey and accompanied, for the edification of the people, so the city's busiest,
things All that said you live-thousand-years, fell over and had to throw it in the face, when
had not had to do it with their backs. Buscábanle ladies, maidens solicitábanle that they need
to marry; servíanse him, as secretary, girls to whom they interfered to write the black of the eyes,
and he was finally the comfort of the beautiful, the joy of the suitors, the board of rogues,
and fits all. Lunch, ate and dinner for ten coppers her neighbor's aunt trifles, took down their
basins, and removed their shutters to sunsets, and closing the night out without anyone felt,
would where no one knew, and returned home without the neighbors could learn when their return.

By
the time that this true story begins in the street of Sierpes not
away from the store's rapist, an empty house, big and beautiful, with
stone weapons on the frontispiece of the experts whose weapons Velasco
drew the name of Llanes, and I did many long years since I was busy,
because of public fame said he had duende.

  I intend always to give the
etymology of the Sanskrit term, so that that of the terms deduced from it in the cognate languages
will be evident.  This work will be great, and it is doubtful whether I shall live to complete
it; but I mean to begin to arrange the materials, which I have been some years collecting for
this purpose, as soon as my Bengali dictionary is finished.  Should I live to accomplish this,
and the translations in hand, I think I can then say, 'Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart
in peace.'"

The ardent scholar had twenty-three years of toil before him in this happy work.  But he did
not know this, while each year the labour increased, and the apprehension grew that he and
his colleagues might at any time be removed without leaving a trained successor. They naturally
looked first to the sons of the mission for translators as they had already done for preachers.

To Dr. Carey personally, however, the education of a young missionary specially fitted to be
his successor, as translator and editor of the translations, was even more important.  Such
a man was found in William Yates, born in 1792, and in the county, Leicestershire, in which
Carey brought the Baptist mission to the birth.  Yates was in his early years also a shoemaker,
and member of Carey's old church in Harvey Lane, when under the great Robert Hall, who said
to the youth's father, "Your son, sir, will be a great scholar and a good preacher, and he
is a holy young man."  In 1814 he became the last of the young missionaries devoted to the
cause by Fuller, soon to pass away, Ryland, and Hall. Yates had not been many months at Serampore
when, with the approval of his brethren, Carey wrote to Fuller, on 17th May 1815:--"I am much
inclined to associate him with myself in the translations.  My labour is greater than at any
former period.  We have now translations of the Bible going forward in twenty-seven languages,
all of which are in the press except two or three.  The labour of correcting and revising all
of them lies on me."  By September we find Yates writing:--"Dr. Carey sends all the Bengali
proofs to me to review.  I read them over, and if there is anything I do not understand, or
think to be wrong, I mark it. We then converse over it, and if it is wrong, he alters it; but
if not, he shows me the reason why it is right, and thus will initiate me into the languages
as fast as I can learn them.  He wishes me to begin the Hindi very soon.  Since I have been
here I have read three volumes in Bengali, and they have but six of consequence in prose. 
There are abundance in Sanskrit." "Dr. Carey has treated me with the greatest affection and
kindness, and told me he will give me every information he can, and do anything in his power
to promote my happiness."  What Baruch was to the prophet Jeremiah, that Yates might have been
to Carey, who went so far in urging him to remain for life in Serampore as to say, "if he did
not accept the service it would be, in his judgment, acting against Providence, and the blessing
of God was not to be expected."  Yates threw in his lot with the younger men who, in Calcutta
after Fuller's death, began the Society's as distinct from the Serampore mission. And I come to lose, aunt Trifles,
but that you gain a half thousand ducats, which it has given me to serve you don Baltasar de Peralta.
And look at them here in good pieces of eight of the Emperor's stamp.

And Mr. Vivaise-thousand-years produced a mesh bag of green silk,
with rich gold pins, and so crowded, that almost burst.

- Half'm
going to tell, - continued Vivaise-thousand-years, running the stock
pins and driving out to touch the doubloons to not sound - so you
can not tell me, if you you lose, that you get lost for my benefit
and not yours.

And know, Aunt trifles, that good property that you take has nothing to do with what has to
be paid to the brave that Don Baltasar de Peralta, to safeguard and secure the coup, have to
go house beautiful widow nor to be given to those with a wheelchair waiting at hand my pen to
put in it to Dona Guiomar, covered her mouth and tied, and because you seek to these good people,
that you you have more knowledge than I, who know no more than bald and people of nothingness,
very good for bullying language and no value to reach fact, these riches I give unto you that
I well know that a dozen men of mind and fists are needed, you will find the medium rodeo,
and already having that seek, for I see that you are going keeping these blessed doubloons,
I tell you not to walk on little promise, and what they ask for their pain and the danger they
are going to get to my house and I walk whatever will need, and not reposemos, the nights are
short, and twelve are thrown immediately above. So, tell me as you please, and if it proves you
do not do what he asks, tornadme those doubloons and go to another part of me where they are more
willing to help.

The soul had been before Aunt trifles that the doubloons, which had already buried in the bearing
deep pocket beneath the skirt

.
  It was this edition which immediately led to
Carey's appointment to the College of Fort William, and it was that appointment which placed
Carey in a position, philological and financial, to give the Bible to the peoples of the farther
East in their own tongue.

Some loving memories cluster round the first Bengali version of the New Testament which it
is well to collect.  On Tuesday, 18th March 1800, Ward's journal[19] records: "Brother Carey
took an impression at the press of the first page in Matthew."  The translator was himself
the pressman.  As soon as the whole of this Gospel was ready, 500 copies of it were struck
off for immediate circulation, "which we considered of importance as containing a complete
life of the Redeemer."  Four days after an advertisement in the official Calcutta Gazette,
announcing that the missionaries had established a press at Serampore and were printing the
Bible in Bengali, roused Lord Wellesley, who had fettered the press in British India.  Mr.
Brown was able to inform the Governor-General that this very Serampore press had refused to
print a political attack on the English Government, and that it was intended for the spiritual
instruction only of the natives.  This called forth the assurance from that liberal statesman
that he was personally favourable to the conversion of the heathen.  When he was further told
that such an Oriental press would be invaluable to the College of Fort William, he not only
withdrew his opposition but made Carey first teacher of Bengali.  It was on the 7th February
1801 that the last sheet with the final corrections was put into Carey's hands.  When a volume
had been bound it was reverently offered to God by being placed on the Communion-table of the
chapel, and the mission families and the new-made converts gathered around it with solemn thanksgiving
to God led by Krishna Pal. Carey preached from the words (Col. iii. 11) "Let the Word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom."  The centenary was celebrated in Calcutta in 1901, under
Dr. Rouse, whose fine scholarship had just revised the translation.

